The principal raw material used in making paper, cellulose fiber, is derived chiefly from the wood of trees, although other plant residues such as rice straw, kenaf, and bagasse are sources of fiber. Several pulping processes ranging from mechanical to chemical, through chemimechanical, are used to separate fibers in wood to produce virgin pulp (see During the paper-recycling process, cellulose fibers are separated from recovered (waste) papers and reused to manufacture new products. In 1998, the world production of pulp and paper was estimated to be 288 million tonnes of which 130 million tonnes, or 45% of the total, was produced from recycled fiber ( The Paper Stock Institute of the Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries (ISRI) publishes a list of more than 50 recovered paper grades. Each grade has its own characteristics related to fiber species, the original pulping process, brightness, contaminant content, degree of converting, etc. In general, these grades can be segregated into four main categories:  corrugated or boxboard; mixed papers; newspapers; and high grades. The recycling process changes the properties of the fiber so that it performs differently compared to virgin fiber. Additives, coatings, and inks used to increase the value and performance of the paper or board product can cause problems during the recycling process, and must be removed during the recycling operations. The value of the recovered paper or board is a function of how difficult it will be to defiber, the degree of contamination, and the requirements to restore the fiber characteristics necessary to produce paper meeting the required specifications. Approximately one-half of the paper recovered in the USA in 1998 was old corrugated containers (OCC) ( OCC quality varies depending on the source. In the USA, a large percentage of corrugated containers have virgin fiber, usually unbleached softwood kraft, in the liner. Softwood kraft fibers are desirable due to their strength properties. In the USA, liner containing up to 20% recycled fiber is still classified as virgin. When a high proportion of recycled fiber is used, the liner may be termed test, jute, or bogus liner. The use of recycled fibers in the production of liner grades does not permit the stringent control of the fiber types as in the virgin grade. Since there are differences in the distribution of long and short fibers in recycled grades, the characteristics such as strength properties seldom match those of the virgin grade ( A requirement of fibers used in corrugating medium is stiffness, which gives the medium its crush resistance. Virgin medium is usually produced from hardwood fibers pulped by one of several processes including neutral sulfite semi-chemical and alkali carbonate process (see Recovered OCC are used in the manufacture of solid folding boxboard. The application of fractionating permits the separation the recycled pulp into a long- and a short-fiber fraction, each of which can be directed to the desired end use. Short fibers, which tend to be stiffer, are used in the top ply to provide good printing characteristics. The longer fibers, which provide better strength and runnability, may be used in the filler plies. Other uses for OCC include use in absorbent grades such as industrial toweling and in packaging papers such as grocery bags and industrial wrappers. This category includes old newspapers (ONP) collected from residences, offices, and other sources. In the USA, approximately two-thirds of the newspapers printed are now being recovered. In 1998, 7.9 million tonnes of ONP were recovered, or nearly twice the recovery rate in 1989. About 60% of all ONP recovered are recycled domestically to manufacture new newsprint or recycled paperboard. In paperboard, ONP serves as filler. ONP have a high percentage of mechanical fiber, which includes groundwood and thermomechanical pulp. Chemical fiber such as kraft may comprise up to 30% by weight, and is added to improve strength properties of the paper. Other constituents may include additives such as starch, inorganic fillers, and dyes for color control. Inorganic filler content (ash) may range from 3% to 12% by weight. Newspapers are printed by letterpress, offset, and flexographic processes, and the ink content in printed newspapers comprises 1–2% by weight. When recycled to produce new newsprint, ONP are processed through a sequence of deinking steps. While there are several variations in the deinking process, the common unit processes consist of: pulping; screening; cleaning; flotation; washing; dispersion; bleaching; and water clarification. A typical deinking system is shown in Deinking technology for recycling ONP is well established; however, there have been distinct differences in the approaches developed in Europe and Asia compared with North America. Dispersed-air flotation deinking was traditionally applied in Europe and Asia, whereas in North America washing was the primary deinking process ( In mills deinking with flotation, ONP are commonly blended in a 70:30 ratio with old magazines (OMG). The presence of OMG in the furnish aids in flotation due to the high filler content (clay and/or calcium carbonate), which may stabilize the foam. OMG also enhance the product brightness and strength owing to the presence of bleached chemical fibers. Deinking chemicals such as fatty acid soap, sodium silicate, chelants, and caustic are added to the pulp to aid in ink detergency. Soap promotes ink particle attachment to air bubbles by making the ink more hydrophobic, and it promotes a stable foam, allowing the flotated ink to be removed from the process before the bubble breaks ( These grades are usually processed by a deinking operation. High grades are primarily printed and unprinted white papers collected from converting operations, printing plants, and offices. These grades are versatile raw materials, and have been recycled to make a range of products, from tissue to recycled paperboard to printing and writing papers. Demand for some grades is high, for example pulp substitutes; however, the potential for growth of some high grades is limited since virtually all sources have been exploited. Additional supplies of mixed and sorted office papers will be generated through expanded office paper recovery programs. Unlike the preceding categories, mixed paper grades are not segregated. The category “mixed papers” comprises several types of paper commingled together. As a result, the fiber is more heterogeneous, filler content is variable, and contamination levels are higher. However, demand for mixed papers is increasing as the more valuable grades reach the limit of recovery, and as recycling technology advances. Mixed papers are generally substituted for other grades such as ONP and OCC in containerboard. In 1998, 3% of OCC usage was replaced by residential mixed paper, with the level expected to increase to 7% in the year 2000 ( The recycling of recovered paper involves several unit processes that separate the paper-making fibers from contaminants that may detract from the appearance or strength properties of the final product. Contaminants include sand, staples, wood, inks, plastics, adhesives, coatings, and inorganic fillers. The number and sophistication of the unit processes increases as the requirements for cleanliness and brightness in the final product increase. The primary purpose of pulping is to defiber the paper into its constituent fibers without significantly degrading contaminants. Important parameters in pulping include stock consistency, temperature, pulping intensity, pH, and pulper configuration ( Pulping is accomplished through three basic mechanisms (  wetting the paper to the desired consistency; circulation to either return the material to a high shear zone or to promote fiber to fiber friction; and attrition by which flakes are torn apart in a high shear zone. Pulpers are characterized by their operating mode, whether batch or continuous, geometry, rotor type, operating consistency, and accessories. They can be broadly classified as either vat type or drum type. A typical vat-type pulper is shown in The drum-type pulper consists of a rotating vessel through which the recovered paper tumbles and is defibered as it is transported along the length of the drum ( Many modern pulpers are fitted with ancillary equipment that removes trash and contaminants before they are broken down into small pieces. This equipment includes the ragger to remove wires and rope-like contaminants, junk tower, for larger trash, and the secondary pulper. The secondary pulper, or detrasher, which receives a small side stream from the main pulper, consists of a dual-chamber device in which the rejects chamber and the accepts chamber are separated by an extraction grate, a perforated plate. The rotor wipes the extraction plate to keep it free of contaminant build-up during the passage of accepted fiber. Pulpers are operated in one of two modes: batch or continuous. In batch pulping, paper stock, water, steam, and chemicals, if necessary, are charged to the pulper, and the entire mixture is processed for a set amount of time before it is dumped to a receiving chest. Batch pulping is more commonly used in deinking where high consistency is desired and when the residence time in the pulper must be controlled to ensure sufficient detachment of ink from the fibers. Continuous pulpers are fed with recovered paper and water on a continuous basis while defibered materials pass out of the pulper through an extraction plate. The residence time of the material in the pulper is a function of the feed rate, size of the pulper tub, and the opening size of the holes in the extraction plate. Generally operating at 4–8% consistency, this mode of pulping is used where high production is desired, and is commonly used in OCC-processing systems. Screens are able to separate a multicomponent flow into two fractions on the basis of differences in morphology or shape. Screening is the most common separation process used in recycled fiber systems. While screening is most commonly associated with the separation of contaminants from fiber, several applications are based on screening or barrier separation technology ( The object of contaminant screening is to remove nonfibrous contaminants while minimizing the loss of fiber. Pressure screens are the most commonly used devices for this purpose although some gravity screens are operating in tailing systems. The pressure screen consists of a cylinder with either perforated holes or fine slots which is attended by a rotating hydrofoil or other rotating element providing alternating pressure or vacuum pulses to the screening surface to keep it from plugging or blinding with debris or fiber. The materials that pass through the screen openings, considered accepts, are sent forward in the system, while the materials that are blocked at the openings are rejected and are either reprocessed in another area of the system or discarded. Coarse screens, generally positioned early in the system, process relatively contaminated stock and has perforated cylinders. Perforations are usually 1.38mm or larger. Fines screens, with slotted cylinders, are positioned after coarse screens, where they are more effective in removing small contaminants. The slot opening width of fine screens ranges from 0.10mm to 0.60mm. Fractionating screens separate the stock into a long-fiber fraction and a short-fiber fraction. These devices normally use holes in the range 1.3–2.0mm and operate in the consistency range 2–4% ( When used for washing pulp, a fabric is used to retain fibers while allowing the fines, ash, and ink to pass with water through the fabric. Traditionally, sidehill screens and deckers were used. However, in the mid-1980s more aggressive washers, which minimize the formation of a mat on the fabric, were developed ( The function of dewatering screens is to maximize the removal of water from stock while minimizing the loss of solids. Disk filters are used for low-consistency applications, while belt presses, screw presses, and twin-wire presses are used at high consistency. Cleaners or hydrocyclones remove contaminants from pulp based on the density difference between the contaminant and water. These devices consist of conical or cylindrical–conical pressure vessel into which pulp is fed tangentially at the large diameter end ( Cleaners are classified as high, medium, or low density depending upon the density and size of the contaminants being removed. A high-density cleaner, with a diameter ranging from 15cm to 50cm, is used to remove tramp metal, paper clips, and staples, and is usually positioned immediately following the pulper. As the cleaner diameter decreases, its efficiency in removing small-sized contaminants increases. For practical and economic reasons, the 75mm diameter cyclone is the smallest cleaner used in the paper industry. Reverse cleaners and through-flow cleaners are designed to remove light-weight contaminants such as wax, polystyrene, and stickies. Reverse cleaners are so named because the accepts stream is collected at the cleaner apex while the rejects exit at the overflow. In the through-flow cleaner, accepts and rejects exit at the same end of the cleaner, with accepts near the cleaner wall separated from the rejects by a central tube near the core of the cleaner. Continuous centrifuges had been used in the 1920s and 1930s to remove sand from pulp, but were discontinued after the development of hydrocyclones. A centrifuge of more modern design, the Gyroclean, developed by Centre Technique du Papier, Grenoble, France, consists of a drum that rotates at 1200–1500rpm ( In grades that are destined to be recycled into printing and writing grades, tissue, etc., deinking is applied to remove ink from the pulp. The deinking process begins in the pulper, where fiber-to-fiber rubbing and added chemicals for detergency detach ink from the fiber surface. Processes present in the system for removing ink from pulp include cleaners, washers, froth flotation, and, to a certain extent, screens. Kneading and dispersers are used to disintegrate residual ink into particle sizes too small to be seen by the naked eye. The goal of deinking is to provide the conditions in the pulper that will advance the detachment of ink from fiber, and then in subsequent equipment separate the detached ink from the pulp. Chemicals are commonly used to enhance deinking. Sodium hydroxide is used to adjust the pH. Surfactants affect detergency and dispersed ink particle size, critical for effective ink removal in the processes following pulping. In the pulper, the mechanisms of ink detachment include (  surfactant-promoted solubilization of ink into the aqueous pulping medium; surfactant-promoted wettability alteration of cellulose surfaces promoting ink detachment and emulsification; cellulose fiber swelling, promoted by high pH, to reduce ink adhesion to fiber; and fiber-to-fiber rubbing promoted by mechanical agitation. Inks differ in surface chemistry and composition ( Washing is effective for removing dispersed ink, fines, and filler particles of less than 15μm. Washing devices function in a manner similar to a laundry process whereby finely dispersed particles are transported away from the pulp with the filtrate as the pulp thickens on a mesh or wire. The formation of a fiber mat during washing can reduce the removal efficiency of fine particles, therefore highly turbulent washers tend to be more efficient, but at the sacrifice of lower yields, i.e., greater fines and/or fiber losses ( Originating in the mining industry for enrichment of ores, the flotation process developed in Europe for deinking has gained importance in North America. In this process, hydrophobic particles such as ink and small contaminants attach to air bubbles injected into the pulp and get carried upward to the froth while fibers remain in the bulk. The particles are separated from the pulp by removing the froth from the surface of the pulp. Surfactants are commonly used to enhance the hydrophobicity of the particles and to improve the stability of the froth. The optimum consistency range of froth flotation is 0.6–1.0%, and particles in the size range 25–300μm can be removed by the process. Several factors influence the effectiveness of flotation units in removing ink particles from pulp. These include water hardness, temperature, ink particle size, ink particle chemistry, air bubble diameter, hydraulic flow patterns, air-to-stock ratio, and the froth removal system ( Kneading and dispersion devices mechanically treat the pulp to reduce visible particles such as ink to subvisible sizes. In disk dispersion, pulp at high consistency is forced between two parallel disks, one stationary, and one rotating at 1200–1800rpm. The disks are separated by an adjustable, narrow gap. Under the conditions of high shear and friction within the zone between the disks, ink and contaminant particles are reduced in size ( Kneading, also referred to as low-speed dispersion, imparts relatively longer mechanical treatment to the pulp with a moderate shearing effect. In principle, the kneader consists of a shaft, to which are affixed several rows of fingers, slowly turning within a stator wall on which other fingers are attached. Pulp is fed by a screw conveyor into the narrow passage between the rotating shaft and stator where it is subjected to rubbing action. A discharge door controls the pressure on the pulp and the volume of pulp in the device. Double-shaft kneaders have two counter-rotating shafts, turning at different rates. Dispersers have been used to mix bleaching chemicals into the pulp. Located near the end to the process, dispersers can disintegrate the remaining contaminants which are then removed from the pulp by a post dispersion washing or flotation step. The reasons for bleaching recycled fibers include color stripping, delignification, and brightening of fibers ( The bleaching agents can be categorized as nondegrading reagents and degrading agents. The nondegrading reagents such as hydrogen peroxide reduce color bodies (chromophores) in pulp by oxidizing carbonyl groups, while FAS and hydrosulfite reduce the quinone structures ( The degrading agents which include oxygen, ozone, and the chlorine-containing compounds such as hypochlorite are used primarily for bleaching chemical pulps and act by destroying the phenolic groups and the carbon–carbon double bonds. In recycled pulps containing higher amounts of mechanical fibers, the degrading agents tend to reduce the yield and yellow the pulp due to the fragmentation and/or modification of the lignin. Dyes pose a special problem since, with the exception of ozone, no single bleaching agent is effective in destroying the broad range of dyes found in recovered papers ( Microbial enzymes such as xylanases and ligninases can improve lignin and chromophore removal, thereby facilitating bleaching in subsequent processes. When followed by peroxide bleaching, enzyme pretreated pulps show higher levels of brightness and cleanliness than conventionally deinked pulps ( Three main application points for bleaching agents include the pulper, bleach tower, and disperser/kneader. Hydrogen peroxide is commonly used with chelants and/or sodium silicate directly in the pulper to increase the brightness of mechanical grades such as ONP/OMG. In bleach towers, bleaching chemicals are mixed with pulp, and the mixture is allowed to remain for an extended time period, usually 0.5–1.5h. This longer residence time permits the completion of the bleaching reaction. Dispersers and kneaders are used in bleaching since they commonly operate at elevated temperatures which drives the bleaching reaction, and they promote excellent mixing of the chemical with the pulp. Following the disperser or kneader there may be a chest in which the bleaching reaction is allowed to proceed. Commonly, bleaching sequences comprised of two or more bleach stages, each using a different bleaching reagent, may be used to maximize the brightness increase and color removal from the recovered fiber. For example, an oxidative stage using hydrogen peroxide bleaching may be followed by a reductive stage using sodium hydrosulfite. Considerable quantities of water are used for dilution, conveying, and washing during the processing of recovered fiber. Processes that enable the reuse of water are important from an environmental and financial standpoint. Water clarification is the unit operation which removes the bulk of suspended and dissolved solids from the water, thus making it possible to reuse it in the system (Hsu and Pandolfo 1998). By reusing clarified process water both the volume of effluent discharged to the waste-water treatment plant and the amount of incoming fresh water that must be treated are reduced. For example, a deinking stock preparation system will require 12–33m Several techniques for clarifying process water are practiced. Some of these include sedimentation, dissolved-air flotation (DAF), and filtration. In the sedimentation process, process water is held in a clarifier tank under quiescent conditions for an extended period. Solids separate from the liquid due to differences in density, interfacial tension, degree of hydrophobicity, or a combination of these factors. The net result is for the solids to either sink to the bottom or float to the top of the clarifier, where they are removed. In the DAF process, very fine air bubbles are introduced into the clarifier to provide buoyancy to the solids. Prior to introduction into the clarifier, a small portion of clarified water is pressurized and semisaturated with air. When this water is released into the clarifier, the dissolved air leaves solution and forms very small bubbles (0.01–0.1mm in diameter) which attach to the flocculated solids. The solids containing air bubbles become buoyant and are carried to the surface of the clarifier, where they are skimmed from the tank. In a subsequent process, the solids are dewatered for disposal. DAF has the advantage of requiring low residence time (3–8min) compared with sedimentation clarification, and it is able to separate solids with a fairly broad range of densities. Filtration technology includes drum filters, which remove larger suspended solids such as fibers and fiber fines, and membrane filtration including reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, and ultrafiltration. Ultrafiltration, effective on particles down to 0.005–0.13μm in diameter, is being considered for the removal of flexographic inks from ONP deinking process water ( Contamination from adhesives, called stickies by paper-makers because they adhere to papermachine felts and wires and cause operating problems and product quality defects, are a major problem during both the processing of recovered paper and paper-making operations ( Stickies have been classified based on their behavior and size. The reason for categorizing stickies is because methods for removal of the different types are different, and the strategies for minimizing their impacts on paper-making are different ( Strategies to control stickies during the recycling process include: (i) selecting recovered paper with lower concentrations of stickies and monitoring quality; (ii) keeping pulping conditions mild in order to minimize degradation of adhesives; and (iii) use of slotted screens, flotation cells, and reverse cleaners to remove macro stickies ( The suitability of fibers for recycling is a function of the origins and past treatments to which the paper product has been subjected. The manner in which the wood was pulped, the paper-making process, the printing and converting method, the consumption and collection history, and the manner in which the paper will be recycled all affect the quality of the recycled fiber ( Refined chemical pulps behave differently from mechanical pulps upon recycling. When pressed and dried, the lumen and fibrils of chemical pulps collapse. During the rewetting in recycling, the degree of fiber swelling and fibrillation decreases due to a phenomenon referred to as hornification. Because the recycled chemical fibers are less flexible, physical properties that rely on bonding such as tensile, burst and density, decrease while tear and stiffness increase ( Several strategies are available for increasing the potential of recycled fibers for paper-making ( During the recycling process, fibers are separated from recovered paper and reused in the manufacture of new products. The practice of recycling paper is expected to grow as the worldwide demand for fiber increases. The percentage of recovered paper used in the production of paper and paperboard was approximately 45% in 1998. Recycled fiber processing begins with pulping, during which the recovered paper is defibered. In subsequent steps, which include cleaning and screening, contaminants are removed. Depending upon the final product requirements, flotation and washing may be used to remove ink from the pulp. Bleaching is applied to remove color and increase the brightness of the fibers. The use of recycled fibers in making paper and board poses an interesting challenge from the perspective of overall economics, removal of contaminants, and strength properties of the recycled product. 