The fluid dynamic behavior of feeding gas (TiCl4) in an annular channel affects the combination of O2 and TiCl4 in an oxidation reactor, a key piece of equipment in titanium pigment production. The numerical procedure was validated by a 3-dimensional gas flow in the annular channel. Applying the validated model, the flow characteristics of TiCl4 in the oxidation reactor with a tangential inlet were simulated and characterized. The flow distribution with five rectifying rings of different structure was simulated and analyzed. The results showed that the rectifying ring improved the distribution uniformity of the pressure and outlet velocity. Compared to the original case without a rectifying ring, the non-uniformity of the pressure and outlet velocity could be reduced by up to 91% and 69% respectively. The rectifying ring #5, which can be installed and adjusted easily, is more effective in realizing even distribution. In addition, installation of the rectifying ring effectively reduced the circulating flow in an annular channel as well as the total energy loss.Titanium pigment is an important inorganic pigment; it is non-toxic, has the best whiteness, a high refractive index, covering power and brightness The TiCl Singh and Raman Researchers obtained many interesting results focused on gas flow in the feeding torus over the past years. However, there is ambiguity regarding the appropriate momentum ratio, crossing angle and jet ring opening position. In order to obtain the optimum gas mixing conditions and reveal the flow hydrodynamics in the feeding torus, a CFD simulation of turbulent feeding gas flow for the production of titanium pigment in the chloride process was performed. Based on the verified numerical model, the characteristics of velocity and pressure distribution in the feeding torus are analyzed. The flow distributions with five different rectifying rings have been achieved. The present investigation considers the production of titanium pigment in a lab scale oxidation reactor. The geometry and input conditions are representative of industrial conditions for the chloride process. The structure of the distributor with different rectifying rings was developed. The inner diameters of the TiCl The flow of TiCl TiCl Inlet boundary: A simple velocity inlet was chosen, allowing specification of velocity, hydraulic diameter and turbulent intensity. Uniform velocity and temperature profiles were specified at the inlet. The inlet velocity varied from 10 to 30 Outlet boundary: The pressure-outlet boundary condition defined in Fluent was selected. The commercial ANSYS Fluent 14.5.0 was used to solve the governing equations. Pressure–velocity coupling was achieved using the SIMPLEC algorithm for the steady state solution method. The default relaxation factors of Fluent were used. The standard discretization scheme was chosen to solve the pressure equation, whereas the second order upwind schemes were used to solve the momentum, turbulent kinetic energy and turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate equations. The Realizable In order to verify the model validity, the geometry and input conditions were identical with the geometric size of the experimental reactor in the open literature In order to verify the model, the calculated results and the experimental data of the velocity distribution at the radii of 175 However, the total pressure may decrease, which causes gas density decrease, with the action of reactor wall resistant loss because the reactor wall resistance affects energy loss more strongly than converging flow. According to Eq.  In order to investigate the change of velocity in the inner and outer channels in detail, the velocity distribution at different radial positions, with and without the rectifying ring, was plotted, as shown in Comparison between The uniformity of the pressure distribution is important for jet holes to realize an equal distribution. In order for the simulation results to be applicable to the distributor with radial jet injection in crossflow, the dimensionless pressure of gas flow in the annular channel is defined as  By setting up the rectifying ring, the pressure distribution in the outer channel at a radius of 120 In The pressure distribution curves with different rectifying rings are all smoother than those of curves without rectifying rings, as shown in In order to more accurately describe the effects of the above five different rectifying rings on the flow uniform distribution, the non-uniformity of the pressure and outlet velocity is defined as There are five kinds of rectifying rings with all the other identical structures, as shown in It is noted that the better production can be obtained under the conditions of uniform gas mixing, which shows that the uniform pressure distribution is a prerequisite in the inner channel. It is evident in The gas velocity and pressure changes in the annular channel of the distributor are nonlinear. The rectifying ring can reduce the non-uniformity in the annular channel to achieve flow uniform distribution. However, this will increase the flow resistance and the energy consumption. The total pressure loss is the pressure drop from the TiCl Three-dimensional CFD was used to study TiCl The present CFD model for the gas flow of TiCl The distribution uniformity of the pressure and outlet velocity was significantly improved by setting up a rectifying ring. Compared to the case without the rectifying ring, the non-uniformity of the pressure and outlet velocity can be reduced by up to 91% and 69% respectively. The rectifying ring in Case #5, which can be installed and adjusted easily, is more conducive to realize equal distribution. The turbulent kinetic energy loss will decrease since the circulating flow in the annular channel can be effectively reduced by installing a rectifying ring. This will reduce the resistance loss in the annular channel and the total energy loss, which is enough to compensate for the energy consumption of the rectifying ring.