Cu-1 wt%Al2O3 composite powder, prepared by mechanical milling and consolidated by spark plasma sintering to have about 98–99% of theoretical density, were characterized by scanning electron microscope, focused ion beam microscope, X-ray diffraction, nanoindentation and transmission electron microscope. The mechanically milled powders, upon consolidation, exhibited a finer grain size of 2 μm. Tensile deformation behavior of this composite, at ambient temperature but over the strain rates of 10−4 s−1 to 5 × 10−2 s−1, exhibited typical manifestations of dynamic strain ageing in the form of serrations and negative strain rate dependence of flow stress. The yield and ultimate tensile strengths, and so also the elongation decrease gradually with increase in strain rate. Such variation was also shown by nanoindentation hardness as a function of loading rate over 1–100 mN/s. The observed results are explained by the dislocation structure evolved from its interaction with Al2O3 dispersoids and impurity atoms like Fe, C and O coming from the powder processing.Copper is extensively used because of its high electrical and thermal conductivity. However, copper requires considerable improvement in mechanical strength so as to satisfy the design requirements for high-temperature applications. High-temperature strength of metal/alloys can be improved by a low fraction (0.02–0.05) of ceramic dispersoids, such as alumina Several methods have been developed to synthesize Cu–Al Experimental procedures including physical and mechanical characterization techniques used for powders and for the consolidated samples are described below. The processing of Cu-1 wt%Al To prepare bulk Cu-1 wt%Al Phase composition of the nano alumina powder and also the consolidated samples were analyzed by X-ray diffractometer (D8-Advance, Bruker's, Germany) using Cu K The total oxygen content in the consolidated sample was determined by using (Model: TC436, Leco, USA) oxygen/nitrogen determinator. From the total oxygen content, the percentage of oxygen contributions coming from the Al Tensile specimens of dimensions shown in Strain rate was calculated by dividing the crosshead speed with gage length. Each stress–strain curve given here is a representative of 3–4 tests. To evaluate the substructural evolution by TEM, the specially designed tensile samples having 4 mm gage width and 16 mm gage length were machined and deformed to obtain 3 mm diameter disks. Nanoindentation tests were carried out using Nanotest System (MicroMaterials Ltd, Wrexham, UK). In all tests, diamond Berkovich tip was used. A maximum load of 2.5 mN was applied for testing. Tests were carried out at a constant loading rate from 1 to 100 mN/s and a constant unloading rate of 0.5 mN/s. For each loading rate, a minimum of 5 tests were performed and an average value is reported. The standard deviations are shown here as error bars for each test result. SEM image of the nano alumina powder used in the present investigation is shown in The particle size and morphology were analyzed using SEM for various milling times. The sintered sample was found to have a relative density of 98.8 ± 0.4% as measured by Archimedes principle. The XRD patterns of SPS900 and the ECP sintered samples are shown in A typical focused ion beam scanning electron microscope (FIB–SEM) image of the composite is shown in True stress–true strain curves obtained at different initial strain rates ( Separate SPS900 sample was metallographically polished by standard procedure to measure the variation in hardness with loading rate using nano-indentation. The effect similar to the variation in stress with strain rate ( One salient feature of An attempt was made to relate the SRS at fracture ( In order to understand the dislocation structure during DSA, the TEM samples upon deformation to yield point (plastic strain of 0.002), plastic strains of 0.0035, 0.035 and that after failure at plastic strain of 0.075 at a strain rate of 5 × 10 The stress–strain curves of fine grained Cu–Al In the present work, the serrations might result from discontinuous pinning and unpinning of dislocations by the impurity atoms (C and O). In DSA, strain results from the glide of dislocations and mass transfer of solute atoms. However, these two move discontinuously, and a resistance to movement of dislocations is provided by the accumulation of the latter to dislocation site. This atmosphere of solute atoms is torn off only on the increment of stress, and the dislocation can thus move further. This process of pinning and unpinning of dislocations occurs sequentially to give rise to serrations in flow stress. A possible reason for the decrease in flow stress and elongation with increase in strain rate at RT is given here. A given strain (ε) takes longer time (t) to be attained at lower strain rate The presence of GBs, twins, dispersoids, precipitates (from Fe and probably its oxides in the presence of O In spite of such mild serrations as described above, there exists definite negative SRS and its effect on decreasing flow stress and elongation with increasing strain rate. This could be due to dislocation dynamics during DSA, whereby the applied strain rate and elongation are accomplished by mutual changes in dislocation density and slip length. In the present composite, while various types of obstacles to dislocations pre-exist as discussed above, the roles played by them might not remain the same but could as well change as the source of dislocations. This could, in turn, favor the probability of occurrence of dynamic recovery (DRV) more than expected. Under such a probability of interchanging roles, the dislocations may not contribute to strain and strain rate by simple Orowan relationship Presented below is some thought of looking at the role of impurity atoms and their interactions with static GBs and particles, along with the mobile and immobile dislocations as they evolve during DSA. To our knowledge, no attempt appears in the literature to relate the roles of such multiple obstacles except the concurrent analysis of mobile and forest dislocations It may be concluded that the fine grained Cu-1 wt%Al The authors are grateful to Director,