Bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP 7), also termed osteogenic protein 1, a member of the transforming growth-factor superfamily, was examined for its efficacy in inducing reparative dentinogenesis in the exposed pulps of rat molars. To determine if the reaction was dose-dependent, collagen pellets containing 1, 3 or 10μg of recombinant BMP 7 were inserted in intentionally perforated pulps (10–12 pulps per group) in the deepest part of half-moon class V-like cavities cut in the mesial aspect of upper first molars. As controls, the collagen carrier (CC group) alone and calcium hydroxide (Ca group) were used as capping agents. All cavities were then restored with a glass-ionomer cement. Half of the animals were killed after 8 days and the other half after 28 days, by intracardiac perfusion of fixative. The molars were processed for histological evaluation by light microscopy. No difference in effect could be detected between the three concentrations of BMP 7 groups at either time interval. After 8 days, all groups showed varying inflammation, from mild of severe, and the Ca group demonstrated early formation of a reparative dentine bridge. At 28 days the CC group displayed irregular osteodentine formation, leaving some unmineralized areas at the exposure site and interglobular unmineralized areas containing pulp remnants. In the Ca-treated pulps, the initial formation of thick reparative osteodentine bridges that sealed more or less completely the pulp perforation was followed, in the deeper part, by irregular tubular dentine. In most BMP 7-treated specimens, the initial inflammation has resolved at 8 days and at 28 days heterogeneous mineralization or osteodentine filled the mesial coronal pulp. They also had complete filling of the radicular pulp by homogenous mineralization in the mesial root; this reaction was found in 11 teeth in the BMP 7 group, one tooth in the CC group an none of the Ca group. These results emphasize the biological differences the coronal and radicular parts of the pulp, and the potential of bioactive molecules such as BMP 7 to provide an a alternative conventional endodontic treatments.For >50 years, research in pulp biology has aimed to maintain tooth vitality after the dental pulp is damage by either mechanical trauma or chronic irritation ( Although the mechanisms of reparative dentine formation are not yet completely elucidated, the processes begin with neovascularization, proliferation, migration, and differentiation of precursor cells residing in the pulp into odontoblast- or osteoblast-like cells ( Bone morphogenetic proteins are osteogenic proteins, originally identified as the active components within osteoinductive extracts derived from bone, that are able to stimulate osteoblast differentiation and bone formation at ectopic sites ( Several bone morphogenetic proteins have been used experimentally, with the aim of inducing reparative dentinogenesis in the dental pulp ( Our objective now was first to evaluate the ability of BMP 7 to induce reparative dentinogenesis in the dental pulp of rat upper first molars ( Fifty-eight healthy non-carious upper first molars form 29 Sprague–Dawley rats (aged 6 weeks) were used for this investigation. The animals were sedated by intraperitoneal injection of chloral hydrate (400 The 58 cavities were prepared and the treatment as follows. Thirty-four pulps were treated with one of three concentrations of recombinant human BMP 7: 2.5, 7.5 and 25 Because of its inherent antimicrobial, adhesive properties and its ease of use, a glass-ionomer cement was used as a final restorative material ( After 8 and 28 days, the rats were anaesthetized and killed by intracardiac perfusion of paraformaldehyde/glutaraldehyde solution buffered with sodium cacodylate 0.1 The specimens obtained after treatment with carrier alone, calcium hydroxide and three concentration of BMP 7, 8 and 28 days after implantation, were then compared. The grading criteria are summarized in Eight days after implantation, four of the pulps containing the collagen carrier alone displayed mild inflammation, one moderate inflammation and one severe inflammation with abscess formation in the mesial pulp ( Twenty-eight days after implantation, inflammatory processes persisted in all collagen carrier-implanted pulps. Moderate inflammation was seen in four pulps and another displayed a severe inflammation, with abscess formation. Nodules (calcospherites) of osteodentine were seen in the depth of the mesial part of the pulp, and not adjacent to exposure site ( At 8 days mild to moderate inflammations was seen in most pulps, but one exhibited severe inflammation. The capped pulp showed a superficial band of unidentified material at the exposure site, and newly recruited cells along this band ( Inflammation persisted at day 28, and was even more severe. In all cases, a reparative dentine bridge had formed ( At 8 days, no difference was detected between the pulps implanted with the tree concentrations of BMP 7 per collagen carrier. Mild inflammation was observed in the pulps with small exposures ( At 28 days, there was no clear difference in the pulp response between the 1, 3 and 10 At the coronal level, heterogeneous mineralized substance was seen, which filled the mesial part of the pulp chamber. Some pulp remnants persisted ( At the radicular level, all specimens demonstrated active dentinogenesis leading either to complete root-canal obliteration in 11 pulps out of 16 ( Dental pulp can be stimulated by many biological molecules and produce an extracellular matrix that undergoes mineralization ( In addition, out data provide evidence that the rat molar is an acceptable model for the evaluation in vivo of the effects of bioactive molecules on the dental pulp. Using the same protocol, we have demonstrated the superiority of bone sialoprotein in producing an effective reparative dentine in comparison with the sham-, carrier- and Ca(OH) Rat molars provide a convenient model for studying pulp biology, especially when freshly exposed pulp is capped with various materials biological molecules, as has been shown in several previous studies ( In the sham group previously reported ( In contrast with the sham and carrier groups, reparative dentine totally occluding more or less the entire pulpal wound was seen invariably in the BMP 7 and Ca(OH) In all Ca(OH) Ca(OH) The nature of the mineralized matrix formed in the presence of BMP 7 in the pulp is similar to that described in studies carried out on other species ( At day 8 in the BMP 7 specimens, we invariably observed newly recruited pulpal cells aligning toward the exposure site this might result from the chemotactic property of BMP 7, shared with other members of the TGF-β superfamily ( No difference was detectable between the three concentrations of BMP 7 used in this study. When used in the rate subcutaneous model, osteogenic protein 1 was shown to be dose-dependent ( At day 28, a porous and heterogeneous osteodentine, formation in the coronal pulp resulted from BMP 7 implantation. The reaction in the rat is very similar to that reported in monkeys or miniature swine ( Using the same protocol after implantation of bone sialoprotein, the newly formed mineralized material was more homogeneous and apparently, dentine-like ( It is not known if differences in cell lineage are responsible for the differentiation of odontoblast- or osteoblast-like cells. It is well established that colonies of cells emerging early from human pulp explants mineralize after 30 days of culture ( The ability of bone morphogenetic proteins to be chemotactis or mitogenic depends not only on the cell types ( Another interesting feature was the homogeneous mineralized filling induced by BMP 7 in the radicular part of the pulp, with a calciotraumatic line demarcating the existing dentine from the new reparative dentine. Such root filling is similar to the extensive osteodentine formation reported after direct pulp capping in the monkey ( The fact that BMP 7 stimulates the formation of reparative dentine in the coronal and radicular part of the pulp has clinical implications. In the coronal part, such a mineralized barrier would prevent bacterial colonization as well as the diffusion of cytotoxic free monomers released from resins and resin-enriched glass-ionomer cements, leading to the subsequent alteration of the remaining part of the pulp. Alternatively, BMP 7 might be used as a powerful substitute for root canal treatment. Such biological tools may prevent the potential failures of endodontic treatment. Other bone morphogenetic proteins and biological molecules may have similar mechanisms and, therefore, produce the same effect. They now require evaluation within this context. The question of the reaction of the inflamed pulp, which in contrast to the non-inflamed pulp failed to mineralize ( This study also supports the proposal that substantial differences exist between the coronal and radicular parts of the pulp. In molars, the pulp located in the crown results from the development of a mesenchymal tissue enriched in neural crest-derived cells. This part, surrounded during odontogenesis by an enamel organ, is clearly influenced by the diffusion of amelogenins toward the odontoblasts and pulp cells ( To conclude, after implantation of BMP 7 in the pulp, osteodentine was formed in the coronal part of the tooth. In addition, unexpected effects were observed in the radicular pulp. A dense and homogeneous mineralization was seen beneath a calciotraumatic line. These reactions were apparently not dose-dependent, which suggests that switch-on signals are rapidly saturated. These findings open the gates to substitutes for endodontic treatments. We need, however, further clarification on the mechanisms of cell recruitment and on the switch-off signal, if any. This research was conducted in the Laboratory ‘Biologie et Physiopathologie Crânio-Faciales’, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentine, Université René Descartes- Paris V, France. Ngampis Six was supported by the Staff Exchange Program, Ministry of Universities, Thailand. We would like to thank Dr. Bruce Rutherford, CRS&E University Michigan Ann Arbor, USA, for supplying us with recombinant human BMP 7/collagen carrier and for the fruitful discussions. We also wish to thank Dr. Bruno Palmier for assistance in animal preparation during the operative procedures and Jean-Marie Legrand during histological procedures. We thank l’Institut Français pour la Recherche Odontologique (IFRO) for the grant provided to support this project.