The recovery of precious metals can be successfully managed from waste which is considered to be secondary sources of raw material. Waste derived from jewelry activity falls in this category, and represents an essential component of precious metals. The most important metals in the jewelry sector are gold (Au) and silver (Ag). As a result of workmanship, the thin metals, jewel parts and metallic powders are generated and the dust produced from jewelry workshops is of great importance. This paper describes the concentration and recovery of Au and Ag from floor sweeping waste at jewelry workshops by physical (shaking table, multi gravity separator (MGS), Knelson and Falcon concentrators) and physicochemical methods (froth flotation). Experimental results demonstrated that the gravity beneficiation methods were effective for eliminating much of the waste matrix. A heavy fraction with 701 g/t Au and 6017 g/t Ag content was obtained from a feed assaying 183 g/t Au and 1835 g/t Ag by shaking table separator. For enhanced beneficiation, the middling’s from tabling were subjected to centrifugal separator and Ag grade increased from 848 g/t to 7812 g/t. Au and Ag fractions discharged in tailings from gravity and centrifugal separations were successfully concentrated using froth flotation and led to a total recovery around 92% both for Au and Ag.Precious metals play an important role in modern society and linked to developments in technology. Jewelry production is one of the main uses of gold & silver and apart from all other applications, they are primarily used on their own or in the form of various alloys for jewelry manufacturing. To increase gold’s durability other precious metals such as platinum, silver, niobium etc. are alloyed with gold and this also changes the color and properties of it. Another significant sector of gold & silver is electronics. Modern electronics need the use of noble metals, especially in the areas of information processing, telecommunications, and military and space electronics and etc ( Low grade/secondary noble metals have recently increased the interests on recovery, recycling and refining of precious metals because of the growing demand for high purity precious metals to be used in high-tech applications ( In jewelry workshops where jewelry is measured, finished, cleaned and polished, the waste is collected, then transferred for the final treatment. This procedure causes poor recovery, mainly because of the lack of chemical and morphological knowledge of the waste composition ( Recovery of precious metals from wastes is very different from commercial mining operations because the chemical composition of the waste normally varies widely. Much of the scrap generated in production can be recycled, but contaminated scrap and other wastes need to be collected and refined again. High-grade (>20% gold) scraps and wastes such as old pots, bench sweepings, sands yielding from sandblasting machine, sink muds, muds pouring from polishing machines, carpets, door mats, old aprons, swabs, brooms, consumed and expendable molds are classified as combustible and non-combustible, and re-melted (smelted) in a graphite crucible with an appropriate flux material in order to remove impurities such as dirt, oxides, refractory abrasives. Typical flux composition contains 4% soda ash (sodium carbonate), %4 borax (pentahydrate), %5 barium nitrate, and %4 fluorspar (calcium fluoride). The viscosity should be low and the melt must be kept hot during 30 min and then the slag is pushed away from the cast bar ( Low-grade wastes include floor sweepings, polishing dusts, spent plating solutions, rags and tissues and plated base metals. Under controlled conditions, floor sweepings, rags and tissues which contain low amount of gold are incinerated slowly during 24 h. This prevents fine particles from escaping with flue gas. The ashes are milled, screened, sampled and mixed with flux material in 5:7. Then it is fluxed and smelted during 2–3 h before pouring and casting as with the same method for high-grade material. Cyanide is used for refining and the pregnant solution is treated with fine zinc or aluminum powder to precipitate the precious metals. The precipitated metals are then filtered off, washed and dried, and added to the high-grade waste, whose treatment was described above ( Recovery of noble metals from jewelry waste is not a new concept and has been described in the literature by some investigators ( Another important stage of metal production involves the smelting of ore or concentrate. In large and small scale refineries cupellation process is mostly used and accepted. It involves the addition of lead to the unrefined gold material. Melting conditions are very important in terms of product quality. The waste is heated in air to around 1000–1100 °C until the gold-bearing metal dissolves in the lead. All base metals and lead are oxidized and form a lead oxide slag. As a result of this process, two phases are formed such as slag and metal. The valuable components of the material are enriched in molten phase, whereas the tailings and other impurities are discarded in slag phase. Gold-silver bullion that also contain platinum group metals (PGMs) are left behind and further refining steps are necessary to get pure gold. The drawbacks of pyrometallurgical process are the generation of hazardous gases and effluents which cause atmospheric pollution and the loss of metallic values in slag material. As well known, physical and physicochemical processes are performed to increase the content of valuable materials and finally the separated valuable fraction is purified using chemical/metallurgical processing for the industrial use. The main objective of physical separation methods is to obtain the nonmetallic materials with minimal loss of metallic values. Low capital and operating costs increase the attraction of gravity methods. By producing a pre-concentrate before the final treatment the negative effects of the hydrometallurgical or pyro metallurgical processes as mentioned above can be diminished ( Jewelry sweeping wastes are very special and other than usual with its high Au&Ag contents. Moreover, they are less studied in literature and produced in very small quantities compared to primary resources. Therefore, in the present study, the separation of Au&Ag metals from this special waste material was carried out by classic, effective and well known mineral processing methods. Physical and physicochemical methods applied in this context are not the final treatment and the main aim of this work is to design a process and obtain a pre-concentrate prior to hydro/pyro metallurgical processes. For this purpose, Au&Ag metals were quantified by inductively coupled plasma atomic absorption spectroscopy (ICP-AAS) after aqua regia digestion. The characterization of representative sample was examined by scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) methods. Finally, wet tabling, centrifugal separation and flotation methods were applied to separate valuable metals from non-metallic fraction. Approximately 200 kg of floor sweeping waste ( Physical separation experiments were carried out by means of gravity equipment’s such as shaking table and centrifugal concentrators (Knelson, Falcon and MGS) ( Different types of centrifugal separators have been under development approximately for 20 years. The high recovery of gold with centrifugal separators took the attention on pre-concentration prior to flotation or cyanide leaching. As a centrifugal separator, MGS, rotates at different speeds (90–250 rpm) and enable to produce 5–15 G-force (gravity force) on the drum surfaces. A scraper assembly is mounted within each drum on a separate concentric shaft, driven slightly faster than the drum but in the same direction. This scrapes the settled solids up the slope of the drum, during which time they are subjected to counter-current washing before being discharged as concentrate at the open, outer, narrow end of the drum. The material with smaller specific gravity along with the majority of the washing water flows downstream to discharge as tailings via slots at the inner end of each drum. In multi-gravity separation experiments, −0.053 fraction that generated from classification studies and ground below 150 µm sample were used. Falcon concentrator aims to recover of very fine particles by applying high centrifugal force. The feed moves toward rotor perpendicularly and the batch is rotated by rotor. The liner of bowl is smooth unlike Knelson concentrator. Falcon concentrator used in beneficiation studies can accelerate up to 300 times G-force. There are some stratification areas during the operation of centrifuge. Heavy particles stick to bowl liner. On the other hand, the light particles cross over from the heavy ones. Knelson concentrators are similar with Falcon concentrators, in terms of structure of body. It differs from Falcon in some ways such as, operation type, rotation speed and bowl type. Type of operation is batch which means the feed and discharge are not at same time. The rotation speed of the rotor is less when compared to Falcon. Therefore, the gravitational force of Knelson used in experimental studies can reach 80 times of the gravity. Bowl liner of this machine has some rings to trap the heavy particles easily. The middlings from the first gravity enrichment process were targeted to Falcon and Knelson in order to enhance the concentration of metallic fraction. Froth flotation technique is beneficial for recovering metallic values at fine fraction. It is frequently used to remove very fine particles that formerly had gone to waste in gravity concentration plants. Therefore, to capture metallic values and decrease the metal loss of the process the tailings fractions obtained from gravity concentration tests were combined and subjected to froth flotation separation. Flotation experiments were conducted in a self-aerated Denver flotation machine, equipped with a 1.5-L cell ( The sample was ground below 50 µm by disc-milling (for pulverization) and the characterization of jewelry waste was investigated by XRD studies. As seen from The sections and phases of the particle given in The screen analysis results presented a bimodal distribution. It means that +6 (19% wt.) and −0.053 mm (%29.1 wt) are the dominant particle size ranges. It was observed that +6 mm was composed of mainly copper wires, iron scraps, glass and other contaminants. This fraction was crushed below 2 mm by roll crusher for identification of metal contents. Some non-breakable metallic parts has remained above of the screen. A representative sample was carefully taken and sent to chemical analyses. Au&Ag contents and distributions in different fractions are expressed in Separation by size was successfully adapted to jewelry waste using a screen with the aperture size of 6 mm. In this way, 19% wt. of the total feed which mainly contain copper wires, iron scraps, glass, organics and other contaminants was discarded with 10 g/t Au and 26 g/t Ag. Thus the precious metal contents of the material to be fed to gravity concentration process has been increased to 183 g/t and 1835 g/t from the feed assaying 149 g/t and 1482 g/t, respectively. The −6+2 mm material which was about 11.1% of the total feed and contained 24 g/t Au and 1502 g/t Ag was crushed below 2 mm using a roll crusher, classified into other fractions below 2 mm and subjected to shaking table and MGS tests. Generally, in gravity separation techniques, the narrow range of fractions increase the separation efficiency. The size control of feeds before gravity process is needed in order to reduce the negative effect on the size and make the relative motion of the particle specific gravity dependent. Regarding the fact that wet shaking table separation was adapted for concentrating metals into different size fractions (−2 + 1, −1 + 0.5, −0.5 + 0.212, −0.212 + 0.053 mm). Finally, three products (heavy, middling and light) were generated by adjusting two splitters. The shaking table variables are adjusted as water addition of 10 L/min, stroke frequency of 300 #/min, stroke length of 2 mm, lateral angle of 3° and feed rate of 30 kg/hour. Using −0.053 mm fraction, MGS experiments were performed in two stages by adjusting 260 rpm and 200 rpm rotational speed, respectively. The optimized parameters for MGS experiments are solids ratio of 20%, washing water of 3.5 L/min., incline of 4°, feed rate of 2 L/min, and amplitude of 15 mm. After the enrichment, the obtained products were dried, weighted and comminuted in a disc-milling equipment for identification of metal contents. Finally, the content and recovery were calculated using the obtained data. The results of gravity separation of the metallic components from jewelry waste at different fractions and as combined are given in As clearly seen in It can be seen from It can be easily noticed from The experimental results from MGS concentration present that Au and Ag content in the concentrate increased to 562 g/t and 5862 g/t and the recoveries were calculated as 36.2% and 39.6%, respectively. As compared to the previous enrichment test, where below 53 µm particles were used, Au&Ag contents and recoveries decreased and a tailing containing 125 g/t Au and 1127 g/t Ag was discarded. In order to obtain a product with higher Au and Ag contents, Knelson concentrator, which can apply higher gravity force, was used. The experiments were performed in four enrichment stages. Solids ratio and the feed speed were kept constant as 10% and 80 G, respectively. Washing water was adjusted as 0.5; 1; 2; 5 psi in order to produce a final heavy product with high Au and Ag content. The flowsheet of Knelson tests is shown in The results from Knelson experiments showed that the contents of Au and Ag in concentrate increased to 848 and 7812 g/t and the recovery of Au and Ag were calculated as 74.9% and 71.5%, respectively. As compared to the MGS test results, the recoveries of Au and Ag were enhanced by 39% and 30%, respectively. Moreover, the precious metal contents of light product dramatically decreased to 51 g/t Au and 558 g/t Ag. In order to obtain a product with high Au and Ag contents, Falcon concentrator, which has higher gravity force, was adapted. The experiments were performed in three stages. Solids ratio and the feed speed were adjusted similar to Knelson tests’. The main variable for this concentrator is G force and three different rotation speeds such as 100, 200, 300G were used. At the first step 300G was successfully applied and a product named as Light 1 was obtained. By decreasing G force to 200, Light 2 product was produced. Finally, a heavy and a middling was obtained by adapting 100G rotation speed. The results are shown in A tailing product with the amount of 89.9% was taken with 102 g/t Au and 896 g/t Ag contents. The elongated shape Au and Ag particles were dragged away with the help of water given sidewalls of the cone. Thus, 54.4% of Au and 49.6% of Ag was lost in tailings. On the other hand, a heavy product was produced with similar Au and Ag contents as in Knelson experiments. However, the recovery rate of Au and Ag is found very low due to the loss of these precious metals in tailings. The centrifugal tests revealed that applying centrifugal force had a positive effect on metal recoveries to some extent ( Further, the surface shapes of the metals have a significant role in the gravity separation. Since gold and silver have easy shapeable feature, these metals gained a flat type structure after jewelry workmanship and milling (see Regarding the fact that the light products from gravity and centrifugal separation experiments contain considerable amount of Au and Ag they were combined and fed to flotation tests. After combination of tailings from gravity and centrifugal tests a flotation feed containing 58 g/t Au and 801 g/t Ag was subjected to flotation experiments. In the experimental studies, the optimum pH, collector type and amount were determined. It is well know that pH has an important role for changing surface characteristics of particles in a medium. As preliminary flotation experiments, the effects of pH with different values (6.5, 8.5, and 10.8) were investigated using ground light fraction (−150 µm) from gravity separation. Because the representative sample contains high amount of calcite and magnesite the natural pH of the solution was found to be 10.8. It means that the slurry is highly basic. In the flotation experiments, H The results in  According to the previous experiments, the optimum pH value was found as 6.5. In this series of experiment, it was aimed to improve the recovery by increasing the reagent dosage. For this reason, Aerophine 3418A and Aero 242 concentrations were increased and added to slurry as six (600 g/t) and eight (800 g/t) aforementioned stages. The other flotation conditions were kept same as previous test and the results are illustrated in It is clear from In order to investigate the effect of different type collector, the flotation experiments were conducted with 600 g/t of GoldMax 900 and 600 g/t of Aerophine 3418A under the optimum flotation conditions. Because Aero 242 have frother ability the previous experiments has been done without a frother addition. However, in these tests, 30 g/t of MIBC was used as a frother. As clearly seen in After characterization and beneficiation studies a flowsheet is designed for recovering precious metals from floor sweeping wastes ( In order to obtain a concentrate with high precious metal content and to increase the overall recovery the middling fractions from tabling stage were subjected to centrifugal separator. A heavy product containing 848 g/t Au and 7812 g/t Ag was successfully obtained using the Knelson concentrator. Light products from Knelson and primary gravity enrichment tests were combined and enriched in froth flotation and especially, in terms of recovery, good results were obtained. When three concentrates (shaking table-MGS, Knelson and flotation) are combined a final concentrate assaying 571 g/t Au and 5707 g/t Ag was produced with 91.8% and 92.0% recovery, respectively ( As alone wet shaking table concentration was found not suitable for beneficiation of gold and silver particles from jewelry waste. In tabling, the chance of settling of small size Au&Ag particles is very poor and they are washed off by the flowing water to the tailing. However, it is very effective as a pre-concentrator in order to separate the coarser valuable metallic fractions especially before the flotation. In this manner, coarser Au&Ag particles that are not efficiently transported to the bubble zone can be recovered efficiently by gravity separation. By producing very high G forces, centrifugal separators allowed to concentrate fine size precious metals that cannot be previously recovered by shaking table. In this study, all of gravity and centrifugal enrichment tests (shaking table, MGS and Knelson) were done using wet method. The tailings from these stages were beneficiated using froth flotation and a clean tailing containing small amount of precious metals was provided. Because the waste matrix is composed of very soft material the grinding operation was easily managed. Approximately 57% of the feed is discharged from system as a flotation tailing and the major challenge of the proposed method is the dewatering of this kind of waste material. The concentrates from gravity, centrifugal and flotation need also dewatering/drying before hydro/pyro metallurgical processes. In spite of these adversities, the findings from this study might present an effective way to obtain a pre-concentrate with significantly high metal contents and recoveries. The authors believe that physical and physicochemical beneficiation techniques as a prior to metallurgical process could be an optional route for production a concentrate from jewelry wastes. The work presented in this paper is supported by