Up to 10 properties of joints can be recorded in the field, yet only two (dip and dip direction) are commonly used to identify joint sets. This paper investigates some of the shortcomings of commonly employed methods for joint set clustering, based on an analysis of synthetic and field data. First, eight synthetic joint sets were generated using a normal distribution of joint orientations. Each joint was defined in terms of four properties (dip, dip direction, infilling material and infilling percentage). A Parzen classifier was used to confirm the importance of using all the joint properties in identifying the joint sets. To investigate the generalization ability of this approach, the analysis was extended to 178 joints measured in the field, with seven properties available for each joint. Joints were clustered based on rose diagrams, stereonets, and K-means clustering methods, yielding three, five, and seven joint sets, respectively. Calculation of the coefficient of variation and principal component analysis (PCA) of joint properties resulted in an improvement in clustering, provided that a large number of joint properties are considered.One of the essential steps during the early stages of field investigations in most geological, mining, geotechnical, and petroleum exploration projects is to undertake a survey of joints, for which one of the aims is to distinguish different joint sets. The dip and dip direction are the most common geometrical properties employed in joint clustering, with clusters of joints being displayed graphically on rose diagrams and stereonets. Individual rose diagrams enable just one joint property (i.e., dip direction or strike) to be plotted, whereas two joint properties (dip and dip direction or strike) can be shown on a stereonet. Rose diagrams and stereonets are interpreted visually, meaning that the interpretation may be subjective, depending on the interpreter's experience. The shortcomings of rose diagrams and stereonets can be better understood when we consider that on some occasions it is necessary to consider more than two properties of joints for clustering (e.g., two joints with similar dip and dip direction, but different apertures, have contrasting effects on fluid flow). Of course it should be mentioned that from an engineering viewpoint, the most important attribute is 3-D orientation which answers the question "Is failure kinematically possible?". It should also be noted that clustering is not practiced only for failure analysis. This could well be used to identify the direction at which a drilled well trajectory experiences minimum intersection with the natural fractures, or formations’ interbeds. Again, from an engineering perspective, it is very likely that interfaces are studied in terms of their different properties. Would all fracture planes have similar strength or roughness, or will they differ significantly from each other? Further joint properties such as roughness, hardness, aperture, and infilling can give indication of frictional strength of the discontinuity. Clustering based on continuity (although extremely difficult), can give indication of cohesive strength of the discontinuity. Consequently, it has been argued that clustering using two properties is not always sufficient and can lead to misleading results ( Multiple joint properties can be utilized in modern clustering approaches. One of the early attempts in this regard characterized the geometry of rock joints based on joint system models (  In the present paper, a Parzen classifier is adopted to classify eight synthetically generated joint sets. Subsequently, a K-means clustering approach is applied to the clustering of real joint set data. The aim of this investigation is to assess the importance of using all measurable joint properties when identifying joint sets. In undertaking any system of classification, classes are employed that contain members defined in terms of their properties. The aim is to determine whether new, undefined members belong to any of the primary classes. In clustering, data are also defined based on their properties; however, the number of classes and the dependency of data on the classes remain unknown. The aim of clustering is to determine the optimum number of classes and the optimum distribution of the data among the classes. Parzen and K-means are examples of classification and clustering techniques, respectively, and each are considered below. The steps involved in the Parzen classification algorithm are as follows ( Normalize the data via the following equation: where Fix a hyper space at the centre of Calculate the volume of the hyper-space as follows: where Find the number of training data in various classes in hyper-space. Calculate the function where  Repeat the above steps for the entire test data (test data must be selected randomly). Optimizing the size of the hyper-space is necessary to achieve the greatest accuracy in the Parzen algorithm. Among the various techniques developed to simplify computation and accelerate convergence, we considered one elementary, approximate method. K-means clustering (KMC) is one of the most widely used clustering methods. In this approach, the number of joint sets (K) is known, and the algorithm is used to optimize the assignment of joints to each of K sets. To optimize the number of joint sets (K), the algorithm is applied again, after changing the putative number of joint sets. The KMC algorithm involves the following steps ( Normalize the data using Eq. Randomly distribute the joints into K putative joint sets, which results in a primary clustering. Calculate the mean vector where Calculate the distances between a randomly chosen joint Move the joint to the joint set for which the mean vector distance to the joint is minimized. Repeat the above steps for all joints. Calculate the cost function ( Repeat the above algorithm to minimize The process stops when the rate of reduction in The optimum number of clusters (K) is selected based on the concept of cluster validity ( The numerator in Eq. Eight synthetic joint sets were generated, each including 200 joints, and four properties (dip, dip direction, infilling material, and infilling percentage) were assigned to each joint. The different classes of infilling material and infilling percentage are listed in   A combined analysis of We investigated the capability of a Parzen classifier in discriminating the eight synthetic joint sets using different sets of properties. The classifier was trained using 70% of the joints in each joint set (selected randomly) and tested using the remaining 30% of the joints. The results of such classification methods are generally presented using a confusion matrix. The value of each element in the matrix shows how effectively the data in each decided class (shown in columns) are assigned to the actual class (shown in rows). A class is perfectly classified if the diagonal element corresponding to that class is equal to 1, which means that other elements in that row become zero (i.e. the accuracy of classification is 100%). The ideal classification occurs when the corresponding confusion matrix is a unit matrix (i.e., the matrix trace is equal to the number of classes, As mentioned in The classification was first performed in 4D space using all the joint properties. It was then repeated in 3D space using the properties of dip, dip direction, and one of infilling percentage or infilling material. Classifications using dip and dip direction (in 2D space) and dip direction (in 1D space) were carried out to investigate the capabilities of the stereonet and rose diagram in joint set classification, respectively. The results of classification using the Parzen algorithm are shown in We assessed the performance of K-means clustering (KMC) using real data. In this section, the importance of using various joint properties is investigated in terms of clustering the joint sets in real space. In this analysis, we consider seven properties (dip, dip direction, continuity, ends, roughness, hardness, and aperture) are defined in   Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to investigate the importance of the coefficient of various linear components of joint properties in joint set clustering. Seven principal components (PCs) were created, corresponding to the seven joint properties considered in the analysis ( We applied the KMC algorithm to the real data. For each of various putative joint sets ( Given that it is impossible to visualize the discrimination of seven joint sets in 7D-space, The dip and dip direction of joints in sets i and ii are similar ( In terms of engineering applications, these properties could significantly influence the design process of the Seymareh Dam. The possibility of shear sliding along the joint surfaces is one of the major concerns arising from these structures; as such sliding could lead to instability of the dam abutments, reservoir slopes, access tunnels, etc. The roughness of the joint surface has a strong influence on the sliding potential; therefore, it must be considered when instability parameters are estimated ( Although up to 10 joint properties are generally recorded during joint surveys, only 1 or 2 (i.e., dip and dip direction) are conventionally used for joint clustering when the data are plotted on a rose diagram or stereonet. In this paper, we argued that to achieve a more accurate clustering for geological or engineering applications, additional properties of joints should be considered. This expanded approach results in the identification of joint sets in We thank the Mahab Ghods Company of Iran, especially Mr Solgi, for kindly providing data for analysis. We thank Dr. R. Freij-Ayoub and Dr. B. Ciftci for critical reviews of the manuscript.