The effects of applied loads and abrasive sizes on the wear of a 2.9% carbon and 19.9% chromium martensitic white cast iron were investigated. Abrasive wear tests using a pin test on silica and garnet papers (ASTM G132) were carried out using three different abrasive average sizes: 67μm, 149μm and 177μm and two applied normal load: 5N and 10N. A modified rubber wheel abrasion test (ASTM G65) was carried out using three abrasive average sizes - 90μm, 115μm and 170μm quartz sand - and three applied normal loads: 44N, 80N and 130N. The abrasive shape and the wear surface of the specimens were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The worn surfaces topography was obtained with a Taylor Hobson 3-D surface analyser. In the pin test with silica paper, a change in the magnitude of the volume loss was observed as a result of increasing the applied load from 5N to 10N. In the rubber wheel abrasion tests the mass loss increased with the increase of particle size until a critical particle size was reached. In general, the mass loss increased with the increase of the applied load and the abrasive size. For the lower load and the smallest abrasive size wear grooves were observed only in the martensitic matrix while the carbides remained intact. With higher loads and larger abrasives, scratching was observed also in the carbides. A wear map is proposed with a ‘wear rate’ parameter developed in this work plotted against abrasive sizes.The microstructures of high chromium cast irons (HCCI) are composed by particles of a hard phase – eutectic M Wear tests are frequently used do select the best material for each application, but the wear resistance of HCCIs may present large variations depending both of the many possibilities of combinations and properties of their main constituents and of the test parameters, such as load and abrasive size The results suggest that it is necessary to know the materials wear behavior in a large range of conditions to have criteria for the choice of tests that can be correlated with practical applications. Possibly, the choice should be made with the test conditions that cause the surface damages similar to those damages observed in the practical cases. Mapping a large range of conditions concerning abrasive types and sizes, loads and testing arrangements effects can be an efficient tool to guide the selection of test parameters aiming to different applications. In 1988, Hokkirigawa and Kato constructed an abrasion wear map related the wear mechanisms and abrasive degree of penetration (Dp) In the present paper, one HHCI, taken as a model of heterogeneous wear resistant material, was tested in two different configurations – rubber wheel (ASTM G65 A HCCI with the final composition shown in The cast blocks were heat treated according to the following program: annealing for 2 The microstructure of the cast iron is presented in Test pieces for the rubber wheel wear tests were extracted from the blocks by means of wire EDM as rectangular plates with the dimensions 76x25x9 mm. The surface of each test piece was machined by lubricated 0.02 Pins for the pin on abrasive paper wear tests were extracted from the blocks by means of penetration EDM with dimensions of 6 Worn surfaces topography and rugosity (Sq) were determined using a Taylor Hobson tridimensional surface analyser, model Talysurf CLI 1000a. The surface of the test pieces had an average roughness of Sq=0.30 After the wear tests, the worn surfaces were observed using a Zeiss scanning electron microscope (SEM). Tests were performed according to the procedure A of the ASTM G65 standard Series of tests were conducted using the normal loads of 44 N, 80 N and 130 N and various abrasive sizes. The different abrasive sizes were obtained as follows. An initial batch of silica sand with grain size less than 300 μm was sieved according to the procedures of SAE J444 standard A roundness factor for abrasive grains (  Test pieces were weighed before and after each wear test using an electronic balance with 10 The pin on abrasive paper tests were performed according to the ASTM G132 standard The microhardness of garnet and silica particles were measured in grains removed from the abrasive papers using a Vickers indenter with 300 gf load during 20 s. The pins were weighed before and after each wear test using an electronic balance with 10  For the higher load the behavior is opposite to the observed for lower loads. In this case, a much larger increase in the wear rate is observed when the grain size varies from 115 to 170 μm. This behavior can be understood observing The variation of the roughness parameter Sq with the various test conditions is shown in  The wear rates calculated for the pin on abrasive paper tests for the various testing conditions are presented in For the abrasives with grain sizes of 149 to 177 µm, the wear rates increased by factors of 2.5 to 3 when the load increased from 5 to 10 N. It is interesting to note that for the finer abrasive, with grain size 67 µm, there is no apparent effect of the load in the range 5 to 10 N, and there is no influence of the nature of the abrasive. Analyzing the graph of roughness, in  The scratches (presents in SEM images:  The HCCI wear map in The rubber wheel test resulted in lower wear rates with a difference of more than two orders of magnitude compared with the results of the pin on abrasive paper test for the coarser abrasive. Misra and Finnie Another observation that can be made is the change of one order of magnitude in the wear factor with the increase of the abrasive size for the pin on abrasive paper test, an effect not observed with the same intensity in the results of the rubber wheel test.  A wear map was built for a martensitic high chromium cast iron, summarizing wear rates and wear mechanisms resulting from different testing methods and conditions. In both type of wear tests, increases in the abrasive grain size and in the test load caused increases in the wear rates. There is a tendency to increase the roughness factor Sq of the worn surfaces as the abrasive size increases, agreeing with the tendencies of the wear rates. In the rubber wheel tests, the wear was restricted mainly to the cast iron matrix for the lower loads and smaller abrasives, with the carbides remaining intact. Scratching of the carbides was observed only when combining the highest load and the largest abrasive. Comparing the two tests, the wear rates were 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher for the pin on abrasive paper, depending on the abrasive grain size. The effect of increasing the abrasive grain size was much more intense for the pin on abrasive paper than for the rubber wheel test. The authors acknowledge to