The flotation characteristics and kinetics of fine wolframite from Shizhuyuan Mine, Hunan, China were studied. Coarse and middle particles entered the concentrate easily. However, because of the reduction of middle particles as carriers and the poor collision and attachment between fine particles and air bubbles, it was difficult to float fine particles. A new kinetic model was proposed and compared with four common kinetic models, including a classical first-order model, a modified first-order model, a first-order kinetic model with a rectangular distribution of floatabilities and a second-order kinetic model with a rectangular distribution of floatabilities. The kinetic model evaluation showed that the author's model fitted the experimental data best. The new model was applied to industrial data in a dressing plant to verify its reliability, and a better imitative effect was obtained compared with other models investigated. The modified first-order model agreed well with experimental and industrial data. The optimum flotation kinetic equations of fine wolframite in the laboratory and dressing plant were ε
                     =87.26−31.74e
                     −3.446t
                     
                     −55.51e
                     −0.879t
                      and ε
                     =85.76−44.67e
                     −2.052t
                     
                     −41.09e
                     −0.434t
                     , respectively.In general, wolframite is recovered by gravity methods as long as the particle size is sufficiently large. However, because wolframite ores are brittle, they are easily over-crushed and over-ground in the crushing and grinding processes. In most cases, wolframite ore exists in a fine state. The recovery of tungsten from fine wolframite as recovered by gravity methods was below 45% Flotation as a physical-chemical process is used extensively in mineral processing to separate finely ground valuable minerals from a mixture in a pulp Many new flotation technologies have been proposed in recent years. Lu et al. (1994) used polyacrylic acid as a flocculant to study the flocculation behaviors of fine wolframite; intermediate molecular weight polyacrylic acid showed the best flocculation effect A review of this literature indicates that virtually no data were reported on flotation characteristics and kinetics of fine wolframite. This work aims to study the kinetics of fine wolframite on the foundation of flotation characteristics of fine wolframite. Sample were from Shizhuyuan Mine, Hunan, China, and were ground to − Flotation tests were conducted on a hanging trough flotation cell. Samples (1000 The rougher, cleaner and scavenging operations included four, seven and seven flotation cells, respectively. The concentrate grade from every flotation cell is shown in The particle size composition of wolframite is presented in The effect of flotation time on concentrate particle size composition was investigated and the results are shown in Kinetic models of flotation have been applied widely based on an analogy with the homogeneous chemical kinetics where According to the flotation characteristics of fine wolframite obtained in Because so Eq. where Four common first- and second-order flotation kinetics models in Eqs. where The effect of flotation time on cumulative recovery is shown in  Industrial data were obtained from Hunan Shizhuyuan dressing plant, and are presented in Because the modified first-order model (Model 4) assumes that the flotation rate constant changes, it also agrees well with the industrial data, except for model 5. However, it did not allow for the maximum recovery to be fitted. Because of different rate constants for easy- and difficult-floating wolframite, the classical first-order model (Model 1) was inappropriate for fine wolframite flotation. The rectangular distribution of floatabilities (Models 2 and 3) was not suitable for fine wolframite flotation. The flotation characteristics of fine wolframite were investigated. Based on this investigation, a new kinetic model was proposed. This model was compared with a classical first-order model, a modified first-order model, a first-order kinetic model with a rectangular distribution of floatabilities and a second-order kinetic model with a rectangular distribution of floatabilities. The main conclusions can be summarized as follows: As the flotation time increased, coarse and middle particles could enter the concentrate easily. However, because of a reduction in middle particles as carriers and the poor collision and attachment between the fine particles and air bubbles, fine particles that entered the concentrate decreased. The new kinetic model was An evaluation of kinetic models showed that the model deduced by the author fitted the experimental and industrial data best. The modified first-order model also agreed well with the experimental and industrial data. The optimum flotation kinetic equations of fine wolframite in the laboratory and dressing plant were This work was financially supported by the