The objective of the experimental work described in this paper is the study of the separation of PS (polystyrene) from PET (polyethylene terephthalate) and PVC (polyvinyl chloride) from drop-off points using a fluidized bed separator. This is a low-cost process commonly used in the hydro-classification of mineral ores. Firstly, experimental tests were carried out with artificial granulated samples with different grain sizes, types and sources of plastic (“separability tests”). The particle settling velocities were determined under different operating conditions. Then, based on the results, the laboratory tests continued with real mixtures of waste plastics (“separation tests”) and the efficiency of the process was evaluated. From a PET-rich mixture, a concentrate of PS with a 75% grade in PS was produced while the underflow was quite clear from PS (grade less than 0.5% in PS).In Portugal, post-consumer packages represent almost 40% of the total domestic waste, making them an important source for the recycled materials market ( The recycling of materials requires the separation of the different materials. In Portugal, packaging wastes are disposed by citizens at drop-off points after being separated at home according to pre-defined sets of materials. Paper packages are placed in the paper and cardboard container (blue container), while glass vessels are placed in the glass container (green container). Packages made of different types of plastic are collected together with metals in the same container (yellow container). Municipal solid waste recovery and treatment systems are responsible for the waste collection and separation ( The contents of the containers are transported separately to sorting centers where the objects are separated (see Currently, the separation of metals is efficiently conducted mechanically using magnetic separation for ferrous metals and electromagnetic separation (Foucault currents) for non-ferrous metals. The separation of the different polymers by type is almost always mandatory because contamination in the recycling of one type of plastic by another type can cause serious processing problems. For example, the presence of PVC in the PET extrusion process is harmful to the equipment, due to the presence of chlorine, and lowers the product quality, namely colour and viscosity ( In Portugal, the plastics used in packaging are mainly polyolefins, such as polyethylene, polypropylene and their copolymers, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), rigid and expanded polystyrene (PS) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC). The separation of low density materials, such as polyethylene and polypropylene, from the other plastics is not usually a problem, being currently separated by an air current. The similarities in physical properties, such as specific gravity, make the automatic separation of some polymers a challenging task (see An example of plastic packaging recycling is the case of PET. PET recycling plants receive a bulk load of PET packaging mostly constituted by bottles, ideally, free from PVC or other materials packaging items. Commonly, plant feed is washed and extra stages of optical and/or manual sorting are used to eliminate items made of other materials. PET bottles, in general, contain parts, like caps and labels, made of other materials like polyolefins or paper. They are typically shredded and immersed in water where polyolefin particles float while particles of plastics with specific gravity higher than water sink. It should be emphasized that, due to the high hydrophobicity (or low surface wettability) of plastics, even plastics denser than water can float if air bubbles are present. Usually, an anti-frothing agent and other reagents must be used to prevent the flotation of denser particles and special care must be taken as well with the equipment design, namely residence time and operational conditions. If appropriate conditions are guaranteed, for a typical mixture of polyolefins, PET, PVC and PS, the material that sinks is composed of PET, PVC and PS particles. The research on adequate and low-cost technologies that can be applied to the separation of different polymers is being made by several teams worldwide. Gravity separation, electrostatic separation and froth flotation have been studied. However, the separation of PS from PET and PVC has not yet been addressed by many authors. Recently, In the present paper, the experimental work carried out to study the separability of PS from PET and PVC in tap water, using a fluidized bed separator, is described. This study is part of a wider study of the team in the search for a low-cost method to separate the different polymers received at drop-off points. This study is included in the project “ In mineral processing, the suitability of the application of gravity concentration processes to the separation of a particular set of minerals is generally evaluated by the use of a parameter, the “concentration criteria” According to this criterion, for instance, the separation should be easy for CC The application of this criteria to mixtures of PS, PET and PVC, by direct use of the densities included in However, this criterion should be considered only as a guideline because, besides specific gravity and size, other factors such as particle shape can have a strong effect on the separation. Among the multiple separation methods and devices used in classification and gravity concentration, the hydraulic or fluidized bed classification is the simplest and theoretically most efficient one (  In the present case, the upward velocity must be determined in order that the PS particles are carried upwards, to the “overflow”, and PET and PVC particles settle, becoming part of the “underflow”. Various authors have worked on the theory of sedimentation and fluidization (for a concise analysis see, for example, In the case under study, it should be taken into account that the process feed is heterogeneous even within the particles of a specific plastic, because: The density of one type of plastic can vary, within limits, depending on the additives that are present and on the origin of the particle (e.g., bottles, boxes, trays). Moreover, the additives can change the chemical properties of particles and, consequently, the surface chemical properties, with possible modification of contact angle/hydrophobicity. Even when coming from the same object, two particles within the same size fraction can have a different shape. For example, the thickness of a bottle is not uniform (the neck and the bottom are thinner than the body of the bottle). The particle “history”, namely contact with contaminants, can play an important role in the separation because the contaminants can affect the physical and chemical properties of the surface and, therefore, the particle settling behaviour, due to changes in the contact angle. In a first phase, experimental tests (“separability tests”) were carried out to determine the settling velocity of particles of the three types of plastic for different upward stream velocities. Two particle size intervals were tested. To evaluate if the “origin” and “history” of the particles influenced the results, samples of particles of the same plastic but with different origin were composed. The particles of each plastic were continuously introduced into the device and the settling velocities were determined. Based on the results obtained in the first phase, the laboratory tests continued with real mixtures of waste plastics (“separation tests”). In these tests, the equipment was continuously operated for 20 The laboratory-scale fluidized bed device used in the study was constructed specifically for this study (see The lower density particles rise to the “overflow” launder on the top of the device. The denser particles are discharged through an outlet at the bottom of the column. As mentioned before, the composition of the material from the drop-off points is a mixture of plastics from different sources. The same type of plastic can have different characteristics, such as concentration and type of additives, depending on the origin or manufacturer. Furthermore, particles of one type of plastic, coming from the same object, can have a different shape. To evaluate if these characteristics affect the behaviour of the particles, different plastics coming from different sources were tested in the “separability tests”. The study was conducted with samples of granulated virgin (non-used) packages of PET, PVC and PS (subscript For the “separation tests”, a representative sample was collected by Tratolixo at the drop-off points. It was then taken to Selenis Ambiente where it was washed and shredded and the polypropylene and polyethylene particles were separated by immersion in water. The resulting mixture of PET, PVC and PS was then classified by screening into six size fractions. Three size fractions represent more than 90% of the mixture. These were used in the experimental work. The coarser fraction (5.6–8 The performance of the process was assessed by calculating the recovery (%) and grade (%) of each polymer in each process product. After each experiment the products were dried, weighed and analysed ( Each one of the “separability tests” was carried out with just one type of plastic classified in a closed size interval. The tests were performed with six types of plastics and two different size fractions. Three hydraulic water flow rates were used. Plastic types: PET Size fractions: 2–4 Hydraulic water superficial velocity: 47, 79 and 141 Each test was repeated 10 times. The high values of the variation coefficients show that there are variables beside density and grain size that affect the settling rate of particles. In the case of virgin plastics, probably the most important variable is particle shape. This agrees with the conclusions of  It was observed that PVC particles are faster to settle than PET ones although they have the same density. This was attributed mainly to the difference in particle shape as PVC particles were visually found to be more spherical than PET ones. This different behaviour of both types of plastic indicates that a significant proportion of PET can be potentially separated from PVC through gravity separation processes. The results of tests made with different size fractions (see  The results obtained lead to the conclusion that the process is driven to a great extent by plastic density and, probably, by particle shape. From As mentioned before, the “separation tests” were carried out with “real mixtures” of the granulated waste plastics. The “separability study” showed that the utilization of a hydraulic water velocity higher than 79 Firstly, three sets of tests were carried out, one with the hydraulic water velocity lower than 79 This process is continuously operated; therefore, it is possible that small air bubbles are generated and introduced with the feed. As the plastics are highly hydrophobic, the particles, unselectively, adhere to the air bubbles rising to the top of the device. For the same reason, if not well wet, particles stick together, forming aggregates of mixed plastics. To prevent these occurrences, some tests were performed where the mixture of plastics, before being fed to the elutriator, was conditioned with chemical reagents. Tests were made with three reagents: (1) an anti-frother agent, from (2) MS4, from (3) CaLS, from The first two reagents are commonly used in the recycling industry in the separation of PET from polyolephines, MS4 being the commercial name of a reagent used as a depressor of PET, to reduce the wettability of this plastic. CaLS is commonly used in the separation of plastics by froth flotation (see, for example, The results depicted in The results, presented in The experimental work reported in this paper was carried out to evaluate the possibility of separation of PS from PET and PVC, from shredded packaging waste, by fluidization. Firstly, the most adequate upward flow velocity was determined. It was observed that the particle shape and surface wetting/hydrophobicity of plastics affect the behaviour of particles. The study followed with the separation of real wastes collected at the drop-off points. In the size range 2–4 It was shown that it is possible to decrease the contamination level of PS in the PET product, below Portuguese recycling industry specifications, through a simple and low-cost process. It is also possible to produce a concentrate of PS in the overflow. Depending on the desired purity of the PS product (in Portugal there are no specifications for such a product), one or more cleaning stages must be added. The authors acknowledge Sociedade Ponto Verde for the financial support of the study included in SEMEC project, Tratolixo for the sample collection, Selenis–Ambiente for the sample preparation, and PIEP (Department of Polymers of Minho University) for the products analysis and density measurements.