UAVs have been used in engineering for at least two decades, mainly focusing on structural health monitoring, geological surveys and site inspections, especially at cases where a rapid assessment is required, for example after a natural disaster. While there is a wide range of recognition algorithms for the automatic identification of structural damage, structural geological features etc. from the acquired images, the parameters affecting the resolution of these images are often overlooked. As a result, the UAV technology is not used at its full potential and at times, it is even regarded as leading to poor outcomes. This paper discusses the main parameters affecting the resolution of the images acquired by a UAV. We present a case study of the structural geological mapping of a coastal area carried out using two types of UAVs: a fixed wing and a hexacopter. A comparison between the structural geological maps based on the orthophotos and one produced using conventional techniques shows that the level of detail is the same and the time spent is at least 5 times less when using a UAV. The fixed wing is faster and therefore, can cover large areas while the copter gives better resolution images as it can fly at lower heights. The latter is cost and time effective only if it is used for surveys limited to small areas. The characterization of some structural geological features has not been possible based solely on the orthophotos. We show that in order to achieve the desired accuracy, a ground sample distance of at least half that value is required. We discuss technical aspects, such as the effect of topography and UAV orientation on the overlap value, the camera calibration, number of control points and lighting conditions, that should be taken into account prior to flying a UAV and provide recommendations on how to obtain optimum results, i.e. orthophotos that suit the needs of the project.Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) allow for the effective monitoring of large areas of land and existing infrastructure within a very short time compared to conventional techniques, a favourable characteristic, especially at cases where urgent intervention is required, e.g. when a natural disaster occurs, e.g. a rock slide ( UAVs have significantly developed during the last decades. They operate remotely in the form of small platforms carrying cameras and, for the majority of applications, are available as small or micro aircrafts or Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) copters with four (quadcopters), six (hexacopters) or more propellers ( With the ever increasing use of UAVs there have been a number of studies focusing on the efficiency of UAVs in geotechnical, geological and other engineering applications. Engineering geology mapping surveys include detailed mapping of the outcrop, annotation of all features, names, dips and strikes that allow for the characterization of the site. UAVs can produce a very detailed image of the outcrop (e.g. Based on the reviewed literature, there are no easily accessible guidelines available regarding the choice of some of the parameters that greatly affect the quality of photos and consequently the orthomosaic obtained from a UAV e.g. overlap between photos, flight height, light conditions, specifications of the lens and camera, and weather conditions. As a result, if the user is not experienced or does not have a basic knowledge on surveying and photogrammetry (quite common considering the wide range of UAV user backgrounds), a poor quality orthomosaic is produced on which an automated image algorithm can do little. This frequently leads to the misconception that a poor outcome is always due to limitations of the UAV technology. This paper focuses on the use of UAVs for engineering mapping surveys and makes recommendations on the parameters that should be considered prior to flying a UAV in order to achieve optimum resolution of the obtained images. A case study on the mapping of structural geological features at an outcrop along the coast of South Ayrshire (Scotland) is also presented. There are a number of technical parameters that need to be considered prior to flying a UAV: the required resolution of the orthophotos, the flight height, the overlap between the photos, the lens and camera characteristics. These parameters are important because they, not only affect the resolution of the obtained images, but also the time spent on site and the post-processing time and effort for the production of the point cloud and the orthomosaic. In addition, the resolution of the final orthomosaic significantly affects the amount of information that can be extracted and any results obtained from the use of automatic feature detection algorithms. For engineering geological mapping surveys, a spatial resolution of less than 10 F GSD F P S From eq. However, the GSD and the camera used are not the only parameters that should be considered before choosing the flight height. Other factors to be accounted for are the flight time and the number of images required to cover a specific area. Both depend on the overlap percentage, i.e. the percentage of the same area on the ground covered by adjacent images as shown in. From trigonometry, the Ground distance G Similarly the Ground distance G The flight line spacing F The distance between the images D The number of images per flight line of length L is For example, the Sony A7R camera has a sensor size 39.5 For the Sony A7R camera (mounted on Trimble UX5 HP fixed wing) From When the camera and focal length (lens) do not change, the impact of the flight height on the image resolution, the flight time and number of images is more prominent. As can be seen from These numbers reduce by at least 2 orders of magnitude if the area to be surveyed is smaller as shown in The choice in the range of values used for the flight height in We tested the UAV technology on a project demanding high resolution: the structural geological mapping of a fault zone outcrop in Scotland's south-west coast. The field area is located on Whitehouse Shore, a rocky beach a few miles south of the town of Girvan, South Ayrshire. The outcrop has well exposed sedimentary and structural geological features ( The UX5 HP (fixed wing) and ZX5 (hexacopter) of TRIMBLE were used for the data collection for this case study (Fig. 4inset). Their main technical characteristics are provided in For the field measurements, two flights were planned using the UX5 HP and the ZX5 copter. The field measurements at Whitehouse Shore lasted about four hours including necessary work prior to the flights on the establishment of five control points along the beach. The take off of the UX5 HP took place at a location approximately 500 Using the orthomosaics and software ‘Trimble Business Centre, TBC’, two structural geological maps were produced and presented in Due to the lower flight height and lower speed (3 In an attempt to determine some of the main geometrical characteristics, i.e. width and length, of the structural geological features that were identified in the orthomosaics, we selected a well- defined joint ( This study focused on the optimum use of UAVs for engineering geology projects and presented a structural geological mapping survey as a case study. There are two main advantages for the use of a UAV in engineering geological mapping surveys. First, it requires significantly less time and effort to map an area of the same or even much bigger size compared to commonly used mapping techniques. In this study, we focused on an outcrop along the Whitehouse shore that had been mapped before by The second merit of using a UAV for structural geological mapping is that the produced orthomosaic is georeferenced. Where it lacks is the identification and characterization of some structural geological features. Although in our study it was possible to identify the feature type for most of them, there were some for which visual inspection was necessary and no safe conclusions could be made based only on the image. It should be noted that the amount of information that can be extracted from an image also depends on the camera calibration (as discussed in the following paragraph) and the experience of the observer. A more experienced geologist or engineer would be more likely able to identify more feature types on an image compared to those identified by a less experienced person. This number would differ again if using an automated recognition algorithm. We show that for favourable weather conditions such as those prevailed in our study, the achieved resolution of the orthomosaic depends on the flight height and the sensor size and lens. The flight height is restricted by the type of the UAV, i.e. copter or fixed wing, the aviation regulations and the application itself. As shown in For a flight height of more than 80 The number of ground control points (GCP) can significantly affect the accuracy of the orthomosaic ( GCPs are also used for the calibration of the camera. The calibration of the camera models the lens distortion. In most cases it is also important to calibrate for white balance. The latter does not affect the accuracy of the produced orthomosaic but it affects the true colours of the acquired images, which might be significant for projects related to geological mapping. The calibration of a camera for photogrammetric purposes has been extensively discussed in the international literature, e.g. As with every other technology, UAVs require sensible use. In many cases, the result of a UAV survey reflects user errors. One of the parameters that are controlled by the user and affect the quality of the orthomosaic is the forward and side overlap. The recommended value for the forward and side overlap is at least 80% for mapping surveys that require high accuracy ( The effect of the UAV orientation and how it compromises the overlap value is shown in The wind direction is not the only meteorological factor affecting the quality of a UAV survey. A UAV flight should take place in good light conditions. Although the AutoISO can compensate for unfavourable light conditions, this function might be limited in some cameras. A detailed discussion on poor light conditions during a UAV flight and the resulted artefacts on the acquired images is presented in Another very common misconception is that the accuracy of measurements based on the images acquired by a UAV survey is equal to the value of the GSD. Our case study has shown that this is not true. The GSD value should be at least half the accuracy required by the project in order to minimize the ambiguity introduced by the pixel colourings as shown in A UAV is a tool and as such it should be used for the right application. For mapping/monitoring of small areas, i.e. less than 10,000 UAVs are a promising technology with great potential as a tool in engineering geology projects. As every tool, it requires sensible use and more importantly, a good understanding of the surveying principles involved. This technology has already become the Holy Grail in mapping surveys, in many cases totally replacing terrestrial surveying equipment: its ability to cover large areas in very little time is a highly desirable characteristic in an era where quick and effective intervention has become the norm. As shown from this study, this comes with a cost; high resolution images require more expensive sensors or lower flight heights and computers with high processing capacity to allow for processing of large numbers of images. An engineering approach, such as a compromise between the flight height and the detail that can be derived from the orthomosaics, is required almost at all times, if, for example, cost and time are the driving parameters. Due to the wide availability of UAVs and their ease of use, the number of operators with limited surveying and photogrammetric knowledge is constantly increasing. This study offers comprehensive guidance on the consideration of the main technical parameters in order to utilize UAVs to their maximum potential. The authors would like to thank Survey Solutions Scotland Ltd. for providing access to the UX5-HP and ZX5 for the needs of this study. This work was funded by the