One of the challenges facing additive manufacturing is the current lack of control over the microstructure that forms during the process. Typically, the rapid cooling rates and steep thermal gradients in the melt pool encourages epitaxial columnar grain growth. In this paper the effectiveness of scandium and TiBor® grain refiners in controlling the microstructure during laser melting of aluminium alloys (Al-7Si and 6061) is investigated. Electron Backscatter Diffraction maps show that the addition of both scandium and TiBor® grain refiners were successful in controlling the microstructure of the melt pools for both alloys. The scandium additions resulted in a mixture of fine equiaxed grains and fine-to-moderately sized columnar grains, whereas TiBor® additions resulted in fine homogenous and evenly distributed equiaxed grains. Despite the very high cooling rates the grain refinement principles for laser melting are the same as classical solidification. The results from this study can be used as a basis for further studies on developing customised alloys for Selective Laser Melting (SLM).Selective laser melting (SLM) is an additive manufacturing (AM) technique that uses a laser to systematically build a component layer by layer from 3D CAD data. The laser traces the outline of the component on a powder bed that melts and fuses the particles together to form a solid component. The technology is maturing rapidly and a number of businesses worldwide now offer commercial additive manufacturing services. Furthermore, the ASTM and ISO have recently developed additive manufacturing standards in titanium (Ti-6Al-4 V), nickel and stainless steel alloys. Although this list of alloys is certain to grow, at present, no standards are available relating to the additive manufacture of aluminium alloys. This in part could be related to the lack of research focusing on the development of specific aluminium alloys suited for additive manufacturing. One of the challenges facing additive manufacturing is the current limited control over the microstructure that forms during the process. SLM is characterised by small melt pools undergoing rapid cooling, typically across steep thermal gradients [ Aluminium alloys have been the most widely studied alloy system for grain refinement on account of the significant commercial benefits offered by the refinement of cast aluminium products. Over decades the science of grain refinement has evolved and now a much more comprehensive understanding of the grain refinement mechanisms exists [ Despite the substantial advancements in grain refinement technology of aluminium foundry alloys, little translation has occurred to rapid solidification processes such as AM. Welding typically encounters faster cooling rates than castings and promising results have been achieved through the use of titanium-boride and scandium grain refiners during this process [ The purpose of this paper is to investigate the effectiveness of grain refiners in controlling the primary grain size and morphology during laser melting of aluminium alloys. Custom alloys are first produced via casting and then remelted in a commercial SLM machine across a range of laser scan speeds typically adopted during AM of aluminium components. Thus, although the process studied in this work is not SLM, the cooling rates experienced during single track laser melting is comparable to SLM and will provide new insights into alloy design principles for AM. The purpose of this work is to evaluate titanium-boron and scandium based grain refiners during solidification under cooling conditions typically experienced during SLM. As commercial powders of the desired compositions were unavailable, the alloys in this study were firstly produced by casting and then single tracks were remelted using various laser parameters in an EOSINT M280 SLM (details below). This effectively simulates single layer laser melting at cooling rates similar to those experienced during SLM. Thus, this experimental method is a first step approach which enables non-standard compositions to be easily investigated under cooling rates similar to that during AM. This lays the foundation for future work to investigate promising compositions in AM trials. Two base aluminium alloys were selected. The first alloy, Al-7Si is a popular aluminium foundry alloy known for its very good castability. The response of this alloy (and other silicon containing alloys) to grain refinement during casting at slow cooling rates is widely understood [ The base aluminium alloys used for this study were Al-7Si and 6061. A commercial titanium-boron grain refiner was used (Tibor The alloying components were placed in boron-nitride coated crucibles and preheated in an air furnace above 200 °C to remove all moisture. The crucibles were then transferred and melted in an induction furnace (Inductotherm Powertrak 20-96R). The melt temperature was monitored using a K-type thermocouple and casting occurred once the melt stabilised at 720 °C. A permanent steel mould was used for casting and the cooling rate was approximately 6 °C/sec during solidification. Samples for laser remelting were sectioned from the castings and ground flat using silicon carbide paper. An EOSINT M280 machine was used for remelting experiments. The laser spot size was 100 μm and the laser power was held constant for all scan speeds at 370 W, a power commonly used for SLM of Al alloys [     Despite the extremely high cooling rates of the laser scanning process, the grain refinement conforms to the expectations of traditional castings. The observation that the grain refiners are effective across two alloy systems at various laser scanning speeds and cooling rates is promising for future work to develop new alloys for SLM. Future work should endeavour to develop customised alloys for AM containing grain refiners in order to better control the as-built microstructure. This study investigated the grain morphology and microstructures of laser melted Al-7Si and 6061 aluminium alloys modified with titanium-boron and scandium based-grain refiners. Several laser scanning speeds were selected based on common parameters used during Selective Laser Melting. The following conclusions can be made: Both scandium and TiBor Both grain refiners were more effective for alloy 6061 than alloy Al-7Si and this result can be attributed to the poisoning mechanism of the silicon in Al-7Si. The scandium additions resulted in a mixture of fine crystals and fine-to-moderately sized columnar grains with fine grains prevalent adjacent to the unmelted material and preferentially orientated columnar grains growing towards the centre of the melt pool. TiBor The grain size decreased with increasing laser scan speeds. The results show that despite the high cooling rates, grain refiners are still effective in modifying the microstructure of the alloys and conform to the results of traditional casting. The findings from this study can be used as a basis for further studies on developing customised alloys for AM processes such as SLM. The authorswould like to acknowledge the support of the