Three N,N-substituted pyridine 2-carboxamide ligands, C5H4NCONRR′ (where, R, R′ = iC3H7 (L1
                     ); R, R′ = iC4H9 (L2
                     ); and R = H, R′ = tC4H9 (L3
                     ), as well as their coordination complexes (1–3) of uranyl nitrate have been synthesized. All the ligands and their corresponding complexes were characterized by CHN elemental analysis, infrared (FTIR) and NMR spectroscopy. The crystal structure of the complex 1 shows that the central uranium atom occupies a distorted hexagonal bipyramidal geometry, where the four oxygen atoms of the bidentate nitrate ligands with the oxygen and nitrogen atoms of the ligand L1
                      form the hexagonal plane and two axial oxygen atoms of uranyl occupy the trans axial position. Here, the ligand acts as a bidentate chelating ligand. The preliminary structural analysis of the complex 3 also indicates similar kind of structure as that of the complex 1. Quantum mechanical calculation at DFT level is supportive with the solid state structure obtained from X-ray crystallographic analysis.The separation of the actinides from high level liquid waste generated after spent fuel reprocessing is very challenging In our previous study upon the synthesis and structural characterization of Pd(II) complexes of N,N-substituted picolinamide, we found that with changing the alkyl groups of the picolinamide from isopropyl or isobutyl to tertiary butyl, the coordination nature of picolinamides is completely changed Organic reagents and uranyl nitrate were used as received from commercial sources, and organic solvents were dried and distilled by standard methods. Reactions were performed under dry nitrogen atmosphere unless specified otherwise. Chemical analyses for C, H and N were determined on a ‘Elementar vario EL cube analyzer’. Infrared spectra of the compounds were recorded in attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode using a Bruker Alpha spectrometer. The syntheses of the ligands are already discussed elsewhere At 0 °C, to a solution of 2-pyridine carbonyl chloride (7.10 g, 50 mmol) in dichloromethane (70 mL) was added slowly a solution of diisopropylamine (5.06 g, 50 mmol) and triethylamine (14.0 mL, 100 mmol) in dichloromethane (30 mL). After that, the solution was allowed to bring slowly at room temperature and stirred continuously for overnight. Then the solution was mixed thoroughly with 150 ml of 10% HCl in a separating funnel and the organic layer was separated. After the separation, the organic solution was dried over Na For synthesis of this ligand, same procedure was followed as that of For synthesis of this ligand, same procedure was followed as that of To a solution of N,N-diisopropyl pyridine-2-carboxamide ( This was prepared similar to This was prepared similar to Crystallographic data for In the present work, all the calculations have been performed using the The reaction of 2-pyridinecarbonyl chloride with N,N′-dialkylamines in presence of triethylamine as base in dichloromethane yielded the corresponding pyridine 2-carboxamide ligands ( The reaction of ligands The crystal structure of Solvent extraction is one of the most promising and useful technique in hydrometallurgy for the separation of metal ions from the solution. It employs an organic phase which actually acts as metal binder or extractor and composed of lipophilic organic molecule in some suitable diluent. The identification and characterization of the chemical species involved in the solvent extraction is very much important to further develop the new solvent system with some great advantages. In the present study we showed the complexation properties of three picolinamide based ligands having small alkyl groups (isopropyl, isobutyl, tert-butyl) attached to the amidic N-atom with uranyl nitrate. The information obtained from this study is useful for the separation of U(VI) from aqueous solution where lipophilic picolinamide ligands or similar type of ligands with long chain alkyl groups could be used as metal extractant. From our experiment it can be observed that, the U(VI):ligand stoichoimetry in all the synthesized complexes is 1:1 irrespective to the alkyl groups present in the picolinamide. It is to be also noted that, the initial metal–ligand stoichiometry maintained for all the reaction is 1:2. This clearly indicates in presence of excess amount (which is the more practical condition for solvent extraction) of ligand 1:1 complexes are more stable with respect to the 1:2 complexes. This identification of chemical species during the complexation reaction between U(VI) and picolinamide ligand in presence of nitrate ions is helpful to have idea about the solvent extraction equilibrium. Picolinamide being a bidentate ligand, maintains its bonding with the U(VI) ions through the pyridyl N-atom and amidic O-atom. So, the probable reaction equilibrium between the U(VI) ions and picolinamide in solvent extraction can be written as, To support the experimental results we have theoretically analyzed the structural properties, coordination chemistry as well as thermodynamical stability of the experimentally synthesized compounds Apart from the structural parameters the more negative free energy of formation ( Finally we have calculated the vibrational frequency of C Thus, the theoretical studies clearly show that all the three A series of picolinamide based ligands of the type C Sincere thanks are due to Computer Centre, BARC for providing ANUPAM parallel computational facility. DD would like to acknowledge Dr. Amar Kumar, Laboratory superintendent, WMD, BARC for his continuous support and encouragement for the work. CCDC contains the supplementary crystallographic data for The following are the Supplementary data to this article: