The dilution enthalpies of NiCl2 aqueous solution were experimentally determined from nearly saturated to different molalities at T
                     =(298.15, 308.15 and 318.15)K. Combined with evaluated literature data, an expression of Pitzer–Archer activity coefficient parameters with temperature was deduced based on the Pitzer–Archer model and the basic thermodynamic relation among activity coefficient, enthalpy and heat capacity, which was used to calculate the activity and osmotic coefficients of NiCl2 aqueous solution at a certain range of temperature.Nickel chloride aqueous solution is widely present in hydrometallurgy. The thermodynamic properties, such as osmotic coefficient and activity coefficient of nickel chloride aqueous solution play an essential role in the optimisation and development of nickel metallurgical and plating processes. Meanwhile, it also helps to illustrate the behaviour of the components in the electrolytic solution. The activity coefficient and osmotic coefficient of NiCl However, limited by current measurement techniques and the intrinsic complexity of electrolytic solution systems, most reported osmotic coefficients and activity coefficients are still confined to ambient temperature (e.g. The Pitzer ion-interaction model was widely used for the research of the thermodynamic properties of the electrolyte solution due to its broad applicability and convenience of use since it put forward in 1973 In this paper, the dilution enthalpies of NiCl All chemicals used in this work were of highest purity commercially available and used as received without further purification. The suppliers and purity of these chemicals are given in Stock solutions were prepared by weight dilution of the same stock solution with the degassed, distilled water to the desired initial molality directly, where the molality was adjusted to the additional water from nickel chloride hydrate. Meanwhile, the molality of stock solution was verified gravimetrically with AgNO A C80 heat flow calorimeter (SETARAM Instrumentation) was used to measure the dilution enthalpies of NiCl The C80 calorimeter is made of two identical tubular wells, symmetrically located about centre line in an accurately thermostatted aluminium block. Each well is surrounded by a thermopile, which measures the heat flux between to or from the aluminium block. Two cells, identical in design, are made to fit snugly into the wells, one acts as a sample cell and the other as a reference cell. The reversal cells, used in this study are made of stainless steel with threaded top caps. Each cell could be securely closed and sealed with a nickel ring. The internal volume of both cells was about 8 There are two vessels in each reversal cell. A certain amount of double distilled water was injected in the bottom vessel and stock solution was injected in the upper vessel. During the experiment, the reversal cells inverted back and forth so that the diluted sample and solvent mixed uniformly, then the thermal effects were measured. A stainless steel cover sealed on the upper vessel to avoid water losing. The identical mass with sample cell of double distilled water was injected in the upper and bottom vessel of reference cell to eliminate measurement noise. In order to validate our experimental procedure, the dissolution enthalpies of KCl in water were measured at For a single electrolyte MX, the excess Gibbs free energy can be expressed as: Pitzer–Archer equation for osmotic coefficient of single electrolyte is given in Eq. Definitions of symbols: Similarly, Pitzer–Archer equations for activity coefficient ( Each parameter Assuming that Measurements of the dissolution enthalpies of potassium chloride in water were performed at The dissolution enthalpies of potassium chloride are listed in Dilution enthalpy During the measurement, the temperature of the calorimeter block was measured with a PT100 resistance thermometer. The standard uncertainty of temperature measurement was within 0.01 Then the absolute uncertainly of the calorimeter Thus taking these uncertainties into account, the relative combined standard uncertainty of the dilution enthalpy determination was estimated to be equal to 0.05. Schreiber The thermodynamic results for NiCl If a solution is in isopiestic equilibrium with standard solution, the osmotic coefficient of this solution could be calculated by Eq. The asterisk refers to standard solution. For isopiestic experiments, KCl and NaCl aqueous solutions have been widely used as standards at lower molality, and CaCl Pearce  The apparent molar heat capacity of infinite dilution of NiCl Based on Pitzer–Archer model and the reviewed data, the fitted parameters of Pitzer–Archer equations of activity, enthalpy and heat capacity at Enthalpy data can be used to estimate the effect of temperature on the activity of the electrolyte solution over a narrow temperature range, while heat capacity data used for a larger temperature range ( Taking into account that the heat capacity was measured at The dilution enthalpies of NiCl This work was financially supported by