The capacity of dense medium cyclones is often restricted by the solids-carrying capacity of the underflow, referred to as spigot capacity. Cyclone manufacturers normally recommend the spigot capacity for a cyclone of a particular size; however, it is not clear how these capacities are determined and whether they can be increased. In the literature, spigot capacity has previously been associated with roping flow at the underflow, although this notion has neither been clearly proven nor disproved. Furthermore, the effect of overloading the spigot on the operation of a dense medium cyclone has not been adequately studied.
                  In this study, test-work on a 165mm diameter dense medium cyclone was performed to investigate its spigot overloading behaviour. This work established clearly that spigot capacity was reached at the onset of roping flow, and that there was a critical underflow ore concentration at which roping/spigot overloading occurred. This ore concentration was shown to be a useful tool in anticipating and avoiding spigot overloading. Spigot capacities obtained in this study were higher than those specified in the DSM handbook, indicating that dense medium cyclone could possibly be operated at higher spigot capacities. However, separation efficiencies were not monitored during this investigation.Dense medium cyclones are used extensively in the mineral processing industry to beneficiate diamonds, coal and iron ore amongst others. The separation takes place according to the difference in densities between the minerals. Cyclones have the ability to achieve high capacities, and simultaneously obtain sharp separations and high separation efficiencies. However, this piece of equipment does have a shortcoming in that its capacity is constrained by the solids carrying capacity of the spigot. This is termed the spigot capacity. Once the spigot capacity is exceeded, the separation efficiency of the cyclone suffers and some of the sinks material report to the overflow. In applications whereby relatively large quantities of the feed material exit through the underflow, the spigot acts as a ‘bottleneck’ ( Manufacturers guidelines such as those provided by the original developers of the dense medium cyclone, Dutch State Mines (DSM) in the so-called DSM handbook (   This study aims to investigate the spigot overloading behaviour of the dense medium cyclone, and establish whether the spigot capacity is indeed reached when roping occurs (or not). Furthermore, the spigot capacity specified by DSM was compared to that obtained in this study. Lastly, ways of detecting and identifying spigot overloading within the cyclone were proposed. This paper does not investigate the effect of various variables such as cyclone geometry and operational variables on the spigot overloading behaviour of dense medium cyclones. In addition, changes in the separation efficiency and separation density during the overloading of the spigot were not investigated. Future work will be performed to investigate these issues. Although the authors acknowledge the relevance and importance of this kind of work to other cyclonic devices and applications, this paper will focus mainly on dense medium cyclones. A polyurethane cyclone with an internal body diameter of 165 An aqueous suspension of magnetite particles was used as medium and the magnetite particles were 95%–45 During the test-work silica particles were added into the cyclone in increments until the spigot was overloaded. Spigot overloading was easily recognizable by the change in type of discharge at the spigot, and the presence of silica particles in the overflow. Subsequent to every incremental addition of ore particles, flow-rate measurements were performed at both the overflow and underflow outlets. At least five flow-rates measurements were performed at each outlet per test. This was followed by the taking of simultaneous samples at both outlets to determine the volumetric percentage of ore and medium. Due to the large differences in particle sizes between the magnetite and silica particles, the two could easily be separated out by wet screening to determine the volumetric compositions of the slurry at each outlet. In order to elucidate on the spigot overloading behaviour of the dense medium cyclone, a number of parameters were studied during the transition to overloading. Spigot loading (in l/h of both slurry and ore) and the volumetric % ore concentration in underflow were monitored during the transition. Spigot overloading is often associated with the displacement of sinks particles to the overflow, hence, the amount of silica particles exiting through the overflow were also monitored. Medium behaviour within the cyclone during spigot overloading was also investigated by monitoring the medium flow (at both the overflow and underflow) and the density differential. Three types of discharges were observed at the underflow depending on the ore concentration within the cyclone. At low concentrations a spray discharge was observed at the underflow, as shown in During semi-roping, the flow at the underflow switched continuously between spray and rope discharges; being mostly spray discharge close to about 11% feed ore concentration and predominantly rope discharge at around 21% ( The onset of roping flow was also observed to be the point at which silica particles, which were supposed to exit at the underflow, were displaced to the overflow ( The data points obtained during semi-rope discharge were more erratic than those for spray and rope discharges (  An argument that often arises with regard to anticipating the onset of roping is whether the feed ore concentration (or medium:ore ratio in the feed) could be used to predict the onset of roping. It is the authors’ opinion that the best (and simplest) indicator of the onset of roping is the volumetric underflow ore concentration. This can best be illustrated by considering an example of two hypothetical cyclones of the same dimensions, operating under the same conditions except that cyclone A is fed with silica only, and cyclone B with coal and silica. Assume that both cyclones are operating at a medium density above that of the coal and below that of the silica. If the two cyclones are allowed to reach the roping state, and a figure similar to during roping the volumetric underflow ore concentration for both cyclones should be around 50%, however, the feed concentration for cyclone A at the onset of roping would be less than that of cyclone B because of the coal present in the feed. Ideally all the coal should exit at the overflow. Furthermore, once roping has commenced the underflow concentration remains constant with increasing feed concentration ( It is not clear whether the presence of coal particles in the overflow would change the nature of the relationship between the feed and underflow concentrations as shown in The above expression describes how % The slurry flow-rate at the underflow increased in a similar manner to the ore flow-rate before roping flow commenced at the underflow (  The increase in the ore throughput with increasing feed concentration during spray and semi-rope discharges ( During the transition to roping the medium flow-rate at the underflow dropped abruptly, and this coincided with a drastic rise in the medium flow-rate at the overflow; indicating that the collapse of the air core at the spigot resulted in a transfer of medium from the underflow to the overflow. The steady drop in medium flow-rate at the overflow during roping is a consequence of increased quantities of silica particles that have been displaced to the overflow as shown in Furthermore, there was a transfer of medium from the overflow to the underflow with increasing feed ore concentration before roping commenced ( The above-mentioned transfer of medium from the overflow to the underflow with increased addition of silica particles into the cyclone was further confirmed by the behaviour of the density differential parameter ( Density differential refers to the difference between the underflow and overflow medium densities. The decrease in the differential is a consequence of the dilution of the high-density medium at the underflow by the low-density medium from the overflow that was carried over to the spigot by the ore particles. The actual values of the density differentials shown in  The spigot capacity obtained in this study was slightly higher than that given in the DSM handbook, even though a larger cyclone (of 200 This study has established that the onset of rope discharge at the underflow represents the point at which the spigot capacity of the dense medium cyclone was reached. The type of flow at the spigot was monitored, and related to the spigot loading (and consequently the spigot capacity). During the onset of roping some of the sinks particles, which were supposed to exit at the underflow, were displaced to the overflow, and thus increased the separation density. A critical underflow ore concentration at which spigot overloading occurs has been observed. The quantity of the critical underflow ore concentration observed in this study was about 50% (v/v), and it remained constant with further addition of ore into the cyclone. It has been established that the onset of spigot overloading can be predicted or anticipated by monitoring the volumetric underflow ore concentration. Roping was observed to occur when the underflow concentration exceeded about 31% (v/v%); underflow concentrations between 31% and 50% could not be maintained in this study. Medium flow behaviour within the cyclone has been observed to govern the behaviour of various parameters of importance during the transition to roping, namely: the underflow ore concentration, slurry flow through the outlets, and the density differential. This was especially true at the onset of spigot overloading. The density differential decreased to exceedingly low values during the transition to roping, and this parameter could possibly be useful in detecting and/or avoiding overloading of the spigot. The spigot capacity obtained in this study was slightly higher than that specified by DSM even though a smaller diameter cyclone was used, and it appears that the specified spigot capacities (by cyclone manufacturers) could potentially be increased. The authors would like to thank