The present study is concerned with the extraction behavior and equilibrium of Pd(II) with 2-methyl-8-quinolinol (HMQ) into supercritical fluid CO2 (SF-CO2). Pd(II)–HMQ complex extracted from a weakly acidic solution (pH 2–3) into SF-CO2 was determined to be Pd(MQ)2 on the basis of a slope analysis. The extraction constant K
                     ex,SF (=[Pd(MQ)2]SF[H+]2[Cl−]4[PdCl4
                     2−]−1[HMQ]−2) was determined to be 104.3±0.2 at 8.5 MPa, 45°C and I=0.4 M (H,Na)Cl (1 M=1 mol dm−3). The distribution behavior of HMQ between an aqueous and a SF-CO2 phase was examined so as to discuss quantitatively the extraction equilibrium. The extraction constant (K
                     ex,Cy) of Pd(II) with HMQ into cyclohexane with a similar polarity to SF-CO2 was determined and the K
                     ex,SF was compared with the K
                     ex,Cy. Pd(II) at the concentration range of 10−5–10−4 M in the aqueous solution (pH<3) containing relatively high concentration of chloride ion was found to be extracted efficiently by the SF-CO2 extraction.Solvent extraction is a facile separation technique used for the pre-concentration and separation of metal ions in the fields of analytical chemistry, radiochemistry, and hydrometallurgy. Though most of metal ions with some exceptions are not easily extracted into organic solvents, they can be extracted into an organic phase by forming a non-charged metal complex with chelating ligands. For this purpose, many chelating ligands such as 8-quinolinol derivatives, dithizone, and β-diketones have been used. Since most of the organic solvents used for solvent extraction are toxic, the waste organic solvents must be recovered from the ecological point of view. More recently, a supercritical fluid CO We have previously reported that 2-methyl-8-quinolinol (HMQ) and 2-methyl-5-alkyloxymethyl-8-quinolinol exhibited interesting solvent extraction behaviors toward metal ions such as Al(III) In this work, the extraction equilibrium of Pd(II) between the aqueous and the SF-CO A distribution constant ( HMQ (Kanto Kagaku Co. Ltd.) was recrystallyzed from ethanol and furthermore purified by sublimation. An HMQ stock solution (0.05 M, 1 M=1 mol dm The determination of the distribution constant ( For the determination of the distribution ratio ( Ten milliliter of cyclohexane containing 0.01 M HMQ and 10 ml of the aqueous solution (pH 2–7) were taken into 50-ml vial with a glass stopper. The solutions were thermostated in the water bath at 45 Ten milliliter of the aqueous acidic solution of 1.0×10 Twenty-five milliliter of 6.0×10 The procedure was almost the same as that employed in the previous work The distribution ratio of HMQ between the aqueous and the cyclohexane phases, The activity coefficient of 0.84 was used to calculate the concentration of hydrogen ion from the pH The p A direct measurement of the pH of the aqueous phase under the condition of the SF-CO The The total concentration of Pd(II) in the extraction system examined in this study was fixed at 6.0×10 In order to evaluate the extraction rate of Pd(II), the effect of the extraction time on the extraction efficiency was investigated. In this experiment, the aqueous chloride solution containing 6.0×10 Previously, we reported that Pd(II) reacts with 8-quinolinol derivatives (HA) such as 2-methyl-5-octyloxymethyl-8-quinolinol, Kelex 100, 5-octyloxymethyl-8-quinolinol, and 8-quinolinol to provide the organic solvent extractable Pd(A) The extraction constant is shown by Assuming that the concentration of Pd(MQ) From The concentration of neutral HMQ in the aqueous phase is calculated by, The The log Fundamental results obtained in the present study suggest high feasibility of the separation of Pd(II) on the basis of the SF-CO Pd(II) was extracted from the weakly acidic chloride solution into SF-CO The authors would like to thank Professor H. Imura and S.Y. Choi (Ibaraki University) for their helpful discussion. The present study was partly supported by a Grant-in Aid for scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture in Japan.