Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was (i) to evaluate the gastrointestinal behavior of micro- and nanosized fenofibrate in humans and (ii) to develop a simple yet qualitatively predictive in vitro setup that simulates the observed absorption-determining factors.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Commercially available micro- and nanoparticles of fenofibrate (Lipanthyl® and Lipanthylnano®, respectively) were administered orally to five healthy volunteers in fasting and postprandial conditions. Intraluminal and systemic drug concentrations were determined as reference data for the development of a predictive in vitro setup. To capture the observed solubility/permeability interplay, in vitro dissolution testing was performed in the presence of a permeation bag with sink conditions.
               
                  Results
                  In fasting conditions, intake of nanosized fenofibrate generated increased duodenal concentrations compared to microsized fenofibrate, which was reflected in an improved systemic exposure. In postprandial conditions, duodenal concentrations were greatly enhanced for both formulations, however without an accompanying increase in systemic exposure. It appeared that micellar encapsulation of the highly lipohilic fenofibrate limited its potential to permeate from fed state intestinal fluids. To capture these in vivo observations in an in vitro setup, classic dissolution testing was combined with permeation assessment into a permeation bag with sink conditions. In case of fasting conditions, the dissolution/permeation approach allowed for an improved discriminative power between micro- and nanosized fenofibrate by better simulating the dynamic interplay of dissolution and absorption. In case of postprandial conditions, the observed solubility–permeability interplay could be simulated using the dissolution/permeation approach in combination with biorelevant media (FeSSGFFortimel and FeSSIF-V2) to mimic micellar entrapment and reduced permeation potential of fenofibrate.
               
                  Conclusion
                  For the first time, reduced permeation of a lipophilic drug despite increased intraluminal concentrations, was demonstrated in humans. Dissolution testing using biorelevant media in combination with permeation assessment into a sink permeation bag appeared to be a simple yet pragmatic approach to capture this solubility–permeability interplay in early formulation evaluation.Over the past decades, the number of drug discovery compounds has increased tremendously: advanced technologies (i.e. high throughput screening and combinatorial chemistry) allow screening of a wide range of new molecular entities for their pharmacodynamic activity in the shortest possible time. However, the oral absorption potential of drug candidates selected using these techniques is often compromised by suboptimal biopharmaceutical properties, including low aqueous solubility and poor dissolution kinetics (Biopharmaceutical Classification System 2 and 4) ( In this respect, micro- and nanonization of poorly soluble compounds is an attractive strategy to increase their dissolution rate ( In this study, we used the neutral compound fenofibrate as a model compound. Fenofibrate (logP 5.21) is a typical lipophilic BCS class 2 compound, suffering from a poor aqueous solubility, which results in a low systemic exposure after oral administration. In order to overcome this hurdle, fenofibrate is on the market as micro- and nanoparticles (Lipanthyl® and Lipanthylnano®, respectively). By combining dissolution experiments with physiological-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modelling, Juenemann et al. clearly demonstrated that, in fasting conditions, the higher dissolution rate for the nanosized formulation results in improved systemic exposure compared to the microsized formulation ( Hence, the aim of this study can be subdivided into two major objectives: (i) an in-depth analysis of the gastrointestinal behavior and systemic exposure of micro- and nanosized fenofibrate in fasting and fed conditions in man and (ii) implementing the Fenofibrate was obtained from Indis (Aartselaar, Belgium). Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), methanol (MeOH) and NaH To prepare fasted state simulated intestinal fluid (FaSSIF), containing taurocholate (3 To simulate the gastrointestinal transfer, 50 Duodenal concentrations of fenofibrate along the gastrointestinal tract were monitored in five healthy volunteers (three men, two women; aged between 23 and 25 After an overnight fasting period of at least 12 Fenofibrate was administered as microsized and nanosized formulations in the fasted as well as in the fed state using a cross-over design. In case of fasting conditions, 1 capsule of 200 In order to investigate the free, bioaccessible fraction of fenofibrate in the aspirated human intestinal fluids, a permeation experiment was performed for a selected sample set. The setup for this experiment has been described by To assess the dissolution kinetics for both formulations, a two-step dissolution experiment was performed. In a first step, either 1 tablet Lipanthylnano® (145 To explore the added value of including an absorption compartment, a permeation bag with sink conditions was included in the dissolution setup. After disintegration for 15 In case of postprandial conditions, two sets of experiments were performed, i.e. in the absence or presence of the liquid meal Fortimel Extra®. In the first set of experiments, formulations were allowed to disintegrate in 50 To determine fenofibrate and fenofibric acid concentrations in human and simulated gastrointestinal fluids, an HPLC–UV analysis method was developed. After centrifugation of the aspirated gastrointestinal fluids (20,817 Subsequently, 50 Calibration curves were made in mobile phase based on a stock solution of fenofibrate (80 Before HPLC–UV analysis, fenofibric acid (active metabolite) was extracted from plasma samples. 100 The calibration curve was based on a stock solution of fenofibric acid in acetonitrile. Blank plasma samples were spiked and treated the same way as the samples. Linearity was observed between 158 Data from the  Regardless of formulation or prandial state, no dissolved fenofibrate concentrations were measured in the stomach, possibly due to the minimal amount of bile salts present in the stomach. In fasting conditions, average duodenal concentrations were clearly higher following oral administration of nano- versus microparticles: the average dose-corrected duodenal AUC For all five volunteers, the plasma AUC The intake of a liquid meal significantly increased duodenal fenofibrate concentrations for both formulations: compared to fasting conditions, a 10-fold increase in duodenal AUC The fact that the food effect on intraluminal fenofibrate concentrations cannot be translated into an effect on the systemic performance of these formulations indicates that another mechanism is affecting absorption in postprandial conditions. Different scenarios of food–drug interactions have been described in literature, alternating in a positive versus negative outcome on drug bioavailability (  Nowadays, the optimization of biopharmaceutical tools in order to accurately predict the Although great efforts have recently been made to study the effect of food on intestinal absorption by using Caco-2 cells ( To simulate fasting and fed conditions, dissolution experiments in combination with permeation were performed by making use of FaSSGF and FaSSIF & FeSSGF Considering the apparent solubility of fenofibrate in FaSSIF (26.6 Regarding the fenofibrate concentrations inside the permeation bag after one hour, an approximate two-fold increase in concentration was observed in favor of the nanoparticles, which is in line with the ratio of plasma To simulate formulation performance in postprandial conditions, the same setup was applied, with the exception of using fed state instead of fasted state simulated media. Two sets of experiments were performed to demonstrate if the presence of a liquid meal is required to predict the food effect on fenofibrate absorption. In a first set of experiments, postprandial conditions were simulated without the presence of a liquid meal. Both formulations resided for 15 Inside the dissolution vessel, fenofibrate concentrations from both formulations were strongly increased in fed conditions, in line with the In order to further optimize our setup, Fortimel Extra® was added to FaSSGF in a 1:1 ratio, in order to become FeSSGF These results clearly demonstrate that the use of a liquid meal is critical to simulate the impact of micellar entrapment on postprandial fenofibrate absorption. The formed patterned colloidal species (i.e. micelles, uni- and mulitlamellar vesicles) can upload a high amount of drug, resulting in an increased apparent solubility ( For the first time, this study simultaneously monitored the intraluminal behavior and systemic exposure of micro- and nanosized fenofibrate in man. The results clearly demonstrate that enhancing the concentration of lipophilic drugs in complex intestinal fluids is not always reflected in improved absorption. Especially in postprandial conditions, the encapsulation of a lipophilic drug in micelles and vesicles may limit the drug’s permeation potential despite increasing intraluminal concentrations (solubility–permeability interplay). Whereas a full mechanistic understanding requires an in-depth analysis of the dynamic equilibrium between free and encapsulated drug, we introduced dissolution testing using biorelevant media in combination with permeation assessment into a sink permeation bag as a simple yet pragmatic approach to capture this interplay in early formulation evaluation. This work has received support from (1) the