A wide range of chemical/physical processes can be performed by an ultrasonic desintegrator, such as disruption of cells and bacteria, preparation of emulsions and dispersions, homogenizing of liquids and comminution of crystalline material.
                  The size reduction by ultrasonics in liquid phase of different materials such as cyclo-1,3,5-trimethylene-2,4,6-trinitramine, cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine, 5-nitro-1,2,4-triazol-3-one, hexanitrostilbene (HNS), ammonium nitrate (AN) and sodium chloride (NaCl) was experimentally investigated in batch process. Changes in the mean particle size and particle size distribution during the comminution by ultrasound could be observed. The use of different ultrasonic intensities yields different size reduction results. Induction of ultrasound into a liquid phase was optically investigated in liquids of different viscosity.When carrying out size reduction process for energetic materials, special requirements must be considered. Different characteristics of the materials such as friction and impact sensitivity must be taken into account. Higher sensitive energetic materials such as cyclo-1,3,5-trimethylene-2,4,6-trinitramine, cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine or 5-nitro-1,2,4-triazol-3-one must be comminuted by wet processes, since the continuous phase of the suspension can stabilise the material. It also must be taken into account that dispersions with such highly sensitive materials are detonation or deflagration susceptible with concentrations above 20 wt.% in water. Hence, comminution by ultrasonic in aqueous phase is ideally suited for comminuting energetic materials. Apart from that, the short stay in the comminution zone without any confinement is very advantageous for these sensitive materials. In acoustics, ultrasonic is defined as superaudible frequencies of sound, i.e. acoustic oscillations above 20 kHz ( In contrast to sounds in the audible range, where possible harm by noise has to be taken into account, high ultrasonic powers of up to several kW can be generated, thus enabling the use of power ultrasonic for cleaning, welding and for machining of parts. Common magnetostrictive and piezoelectric transformators are used for generating ultrasonic waves. They transform electronic oscillations into mechanical vibrations of the same frequency, which are then coupled into the medium. There are different ways of applying the energy into the fluid. For example, it can be done by a horn which tips into the fluid, or by the walls of the vessel in which the fluid is situated. In the latter case (e.g. in ultrasonic cleaning baths), ultrasonic is introduced by larger areas, resulting in a lower power intensity. The process of size reduction of solids and emulsions by power ultrasonic utilises the effect of cavitation ( Cavitation can be characterised by the Thoma number ( When dealing with size reduction, ultrasonic power is introduced into a suspension consisting of the material to be comminuted and a carrier fluid. Hence, parameters like energy and intensity of the ultrasonic field are most important. The wave energy per mass, the so-called energy density, is a suitable parameter to compare the efficiency of grinding. Energy density To characterise the ultrasonic introduction into the liquid phase, we further determine the intensity per effective outlet area of the ultrasonic device In most cases, ultrasonic is propagating into the liquid phase in the form of longitudinal waves; transversal waves, implying shearing forces, can only be transmitted in highly viscous liquids. The propagation of both types of waves is never without loss; the amount of sonic energy, which is dissipated into heat by inner friction of the medium, is depending on the medium as well as on amplitude and frequency of the ultrasonic. Usual energy requirement predictions in size reduction are given by: Kick, Bond and Rittinger have defined to the volume decrease (Kick) to the length of the break (Bond) to the area of newly created surface (Rittinger), To compare the different size reduction results, we calculated the energy density in the experiments according to Eq. Size reduction of different energetic materials and of sodium chloride in liquid phase was investigated. All the materials were of crystalline character.  Cyclonite, a colourless crystal, is currently the most important energetic material; its brisant power is due to its high density and high detonation velocity. It is relatively insensitive and very stable as well as insoluble in water.  Octogen is formed as a by-product from the manufacture of cyclonite. It appears in four modifications, of which only the β-modification displays a particularly high density and hence also a particularly fast detonation rate. This material is non-hygroscopic and insoluble in water.  NTO is a white-coloured water-soluble energetic material. It is especially very impact insensitive and thermally stable (  HNS is a yellow-coloured energetic material, which is used as an additive to cast TNT, to improve a fine crystalline structure.  Ammonium nitrate is a colourless crystal. It is hygroscopic and readily soluble in water.  Sodium chloride is a well-known colourless crystal. NTO, AN and NaCl were comminuted in  We used three different ultrasonic power supplies for size reduction (see For comparable feed fraction size distributions, all materials were sieved between 63 and 200 μm.  The particle size distribution was measured by laser light diffraction spectrometry. It is an optical technique that evaluates the scattered light to determine the distribution. The results are given as dispersion coefficient  The materials examined fall into one of two categories with respect to their size reduction behavior when subjected to ultrasound processing. The inorganic materials ammonium nitrate and sodium chloride, with particle sizes ranging from 150 to 200 μm, could not be reduced to smaller size particles at the ultrasound intensities employed in this study. The final particle size for these materials was not significantly smaller than the original particle size. The organic materials, however, exhibited quite different behavior. For these materials, ultrasound processing resulted in a reduction of the mean particle size from In the ultrasound cavitation field, the breakdown of cavitation bubbles during the process creates shear forces within the fluid. In order for the forces imparted during the process to effect size reduction, there must be susceptible points on the solid crystal surfaces, such as topology changes. Unlike HNS, RDX and HMX, sodium chloride has a cubic form with very smooth surfaces. HNS, which in comparison to the other materials can be reduced in size with the smallest energy density, has a needle shaped structure. As a result, the needles can be broken apart lengthwise with only a small energy input. HMX and RDX have an irregular surface structure that makes the particles more susceptible to break up when subjected to shear forces. One thus finds that size reduction via ultrasound is especially effective for particle systems with inhomogeneous topologies and crystal structures with inner and outer defects. Exemplary for the case of comminution of RDX a curve When changing the ultrasonic intensity to 4.8 W/mm  We investigated optically the induction of the ultrasound into liquid phase. Different intensities show different cavitation behavior in the liquid phase. Therefore, also different size reduction characteristic occurs. The bulk viscosity in the suspension stays constant during the experiments as the temperature was kept constant. But by means of the hot spots in the liquid locally, the viscosity does change. Relating to this point further investigation should be carried out. We carried out size reduction experiments for different crystalline materials by ultrasonic in liquid phase. In contrast to ammonium nitrate and sodium chloride, cyclo-1,3,5-trimethylene-2,4,6-trinitramine, cyclotetramethylene tetranitramine, 5-nitro-1,2,4-triazol-3-one as well as hexanitrostilbene could be comminuted in this process. The particle size distribution coefficient increased with increasing comminution time. Optically the different cavitation properties and therefore comminution characteristics of the ultrasonic jet could be shown.