The flocculation of ultrafine (size<10 μm) hydrophobic particles in the presence of a high shear field is known as shear flocculation. Most of the studies carried out to date are related to surface chemistry of the process. However, study of the shear flocculation process using mathematical models is quite limited.
                  The present study uses a lumped population balance model (PBM) to understand the effect of different parameters affecting the kinetics of floc coalescence and breakage processes in shear flocculation. Results show that the flocculation rate decreases with increase in shear rate and the breakage rate is approximately proportional to the 0.70 power of the volume of the floc. High concentrations of sodium oleate reduce the floc strength. Modifiers like sodium carbonate and sodium silicate decrease the flocculation rate.The presence of fines during mineral processing operations decreases the efficiency of the beneficiation processes. Fine particles less than 10 μm, called slimes or ultrafines are difficult to separate The selective separation of slimes is a generic problem in the mineral processing industry, because of dominance of surface effects over the bulk properties in determining the behavior of such particles Froth flotation exploits the inherent or imposed differences in the surface chemistry of the various component minerals. The recovery of the mineral particles decreases dramatically with decrease in particle size  Recent increased interest in the shear flocculation shows its importance Most of the work carried out on shear flocculation till now, is concentrated on surface chemistry The population balance model (PBM) approach is generally used for particulate processes. This approach was introduced by Populations can be approximated by continuous or discrete functions. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Equations and their constraints for both forms of PBM are given in A lumped discrete model is an approximation of the corresponding discrete model in which particles or flocs are grouped into a number of intervals, which can be analysed easily, while giving sufficient information about the particles or flocs. Here, the size range is divided into geometric progression, such that the volume doubles after each interval, i.e., It is necessary to consider both coalescence and breakage processes in the model due to the fact that the high shear rate, which induces coalescence of flocs may also break them. Also, several workers have clearly shown the importance of floc breakage in the flocculation process The lumped population balance model describing a batch and well-mixed flocculation process, considering both coalescence and breakage of flocs can be written as The constraints on the  Beneficiated scheelite from King Island Scheelite (Tasmania, Australia) is used in this study as the surface properties, and the response to shear flocculation have been studied by Electrokinetic study of scheelite in various electrolytes has been reported by Sodium oleate is used as the surfactant because it is used as a collector in the scheelite plant at King Island to recover scheelite by froth flotation. Stock solutions of sodium oleate were prepared by neutralizing a commercial oleic acid (Kitolene), supplied by Unilever Australia (Melbourne, Australia), with sodium hydroxide. A gas–liquid chromotograph analysis of the oleic acid showed that it contains 63% oleic acid and at least 84% of the unsaturated fatty acids, which is far superior to that of 33.5% oleate for a laboratory grade (BDH) sodium oleate reagent  For modelling purposes, the mean shear rate in the stirred tank is obtained from the torque table method A known amount of dry scheelite sample is transferred to a small beaker and distilled water is added. Using a soniprobe (Dawe Instruments, England) the suspension is dispersed for 2 min, with the power output set at 125 W to insure that no clusters are present. The scheelite suspension is transferred to the stirred tank and diluted with distilled water. Requisite amount of the modifier (sodium carbonate, sodium silicate or sodium hexametaphosphate) is added to the suspension and pH adjusted. The suspension is conditioned for 5 min. Sodium oleate of known concentration is then added to the suspension. The concentration of sodium oleate is kept less than the critical micelle concentration of 2.1×10 Samples of the flocculated suspension are carefully withdrawn from the stirred tank at predetermined time intervals using a 5-mm diameter pipette. The size distribution of flocs measured with this instrument can be analysed with two types of sample holders—a flow cell and a stirred cell. While using the flow cell, the floc size distribution changed continuously due to the effect of the pump used to circulate the suspension. Therefore, the stirred cell is used. The sample in this cell is gently mixed by a small magnetic stirrer. Experimental results show that the size distribution of flocs in the stirred cell did not change for a considerable amount of time (30 min). Since each measurement is carried out within a few seconds, no change in the floc size distribution due to stirring in the cell is expected. The computer reports particle size distributions in terms of weight percentages, which must be transformed to a distribution in terms of number percentages for use in the lumped discrete model. Shear flocculation experiments are conducted only in the alkaline medium (at pH 10) based on previous investigations  To predict the floc size distribution, values of A theoretical functional form of the selection function for floc breakage is not available. It is expected that the breakage rate of flocs increases with increase in floc size. Therefore, it is assumed that the selection function is to be of the form The breakage of flocs in the tank involves a large number of breakage events, which can be assumed to be independent of each other and random. Hence, a normal distribution is usually assumed  For a given initial size distribution, the size distribution of the flocculating suspension after a given time can be calculated, if all the parameters of the kernels are known. It is not possible to determine these parameters directly from experimental data. However, these parameters can be estimated from experimentally determined floc size distributions in time, by methods of non-linear least squares curve fitting   Previous studies on floc breakage The dashed curves in As shown in  The This dependence of the selection function on the volume of floc is less than the value observed by According to the shear flocculation mechanism, direct contact between the particles exists, which produces compact flocs  In shear flocculation, it is assumed that all flocs are smaller than the turbulent microscale   The effect of sodium silicate is shown by The good agreement between the experimental data and the values predicted by the model shows that the lumped discrete model can be used to predict the floc size distributions and also to study the kinetics of floc coalescence and breakage in a suspension undergoing shear flocculation. Population balance approach is used to study the effect of variables on the shear flocculation process. Breakage of flocs is also considered in the present study along with coalescence. All conclusions for particular aspects of the work are given in the text, only general conclusions are summarized below. (1) The good agreement between experimental data and simulated data with assumed kernels shows that the lumped model can be used to study the floc size distribution of a flocculating suspensions. (2) The function (3) Flocculation rate is found to decrease with increase in shear rate due to the importance of the breakage process. (4) Simulated results indicate that the selection function can be expressed as a simple power function of floc size and the assumed breakage function is satisfactory to explain the observed experimental data. (5) The breakage rate of flocs generally increases with shear rate. The breakage rate of flocs increases with oleate concentration, indicating that floc strength is reduced by the addition of large amount of oleate. (6) Modifiers like sodium carbonate and sodium silicate decrease the flocculation rate with the effect of sodium silicate being stronger. The effect on parameter Breakage function Collision function (L Impeller diameter (L)  Mean shear rate (T Top size class Coalescence parameters Breakage parameters Total number of daughter particles produced by breakage of size Number of particles with sizes Number of particles in size Number of particles in size class Total number of particles per unit volume of suspension (L Arithmetic mean of observations Power input (M L Selection function (T Time (T) Tank diameter (L Volume (L Total volume of particles per unit volume of suspension Volume of fluid in tank (L Volume (L Impeller blade width (L) Size classes One of the authors, D.P. Patil, is grateful to Monash University for providing financial support during this study.