Frictional behaviour of rocks from the initial stage of loading to final shear displacement along the formed shear plane has been widely investigated in the past. However the effect of sample size on such frictional behaviour has not attracted much attention. This is mainly related to the limitations in rock testing facilities as well as the complex mechanisms involved in sample-size dependent frictional behaviour of rocks.
                  In this study, a suite of advanced triaxial experiments was performed on Gosford sandstone samples at different sizes and confining pressures. The post-peak response of the rock along the formed shear plane has been captured for the analysis with particular interest in sample-size dependency. Several important phenomena have been observed from the results of this study: a) the rate of transition from brittleness to ductility in rock is sample-size dependent where the relatively smaller samples showed faster transition toward ductility at any confining pressure; b) the sample size influences the angle of formed shear band and c) the friction coefficient of the formed shear plane is sample-size dependent where the relatively smaller sample exhibits lower friction coefficient compared to larger samples.
                  We interpret our results in terms of a thermodynamics approach in which the frictional properties for finite deformation are viewed as encompassing a multitude of ephemeral slipping surfaces prior to the formation of the through going fracture. The final fracture itself is seen as a result of the self-organisation of a sufficiently large ensemble of micro-slip surfaces and therefore consistent in terms of the theory of thermodynamics. This assumption vindicates the use of classical rock mechanics experiments to constrain failure of pressure sensitive rocks and the future imaging of these micro-slips opens an exciting path for research in rock failure mechanisms.Triaxial experiments are used to characterize and quantify the mechanical response of materials under simulated in-situ conditions ( Little emphasis however has been placed on the size effect of the triaxial response of the investigated materials. Size effects are particularly pronounced for geological loading conditions where the behaviour of a sample from initial stage of loading to shear displacement along formed shear plane at different confining pressures is of interest. Size effects have been demonstrated under different loading/stress conditions including uniaxial compressive test ( Understanding the mechanisms involved in the transition from brittleness to ductility in sedimentary rocks is a vital aspect of the petroleum geomechanics, in particular reservoir production ( These investigations have proposed some form of descending size effect model for the friction coefficient. However, the studies were restricted to a statistical description and not aimed at gaining insight into the origins of the size effect. Consequently no universal law was derived and the proposed models did not seem to be able to suitably predict the sample-size dependent behaviour of the friction coefficient over the wide range of laboratory scales especially at relatively smaller sizes. A profound knowledge of the sample-size effect is particularly important in petroleum geomechanical projects where relatively small core samples are often retrieved from deep locations and available for the laboratory experiments. In this study, a number of triaxial laboratory experiments were performed on Gosford sandstone samples at three different sample diameters with complete stress-strain behaviour from the initial stage of loading to shear displacement along the formed shear planes. Because of homogeneous porosity structure of Gosford Sandstone and its uniform mechanical response ( The laboratory triaxial experiments were conducted on Gosford sandstone samples with diameters of 25, 50 and 96 mm. Gosford sandstone forms a unit within the massive (290 m thick) Triassic Hawkesbury sandstone of the Sydney Basin ( The Gosford sandstone used in this study was obtained from Gosford Quarry, Somersby, New South Wales, Australia. Samples were carefully selected to be as homogeneous as possible visually with no macro defect with a unified colour. A servo-controlled loading frame system with maximum loading capacity of 300 tonnes was used to perform the triaxial experiments. A GCTS triaxial cell with the maximum axial loading capacity of 200 tonnes and 70 MPa confining pressure was employed ( The deviatoric stress is defined as Examples of one set of conventional triaxial deviatoric stress ( Shear band angles were attained according to the method proposed by  The mean peak and residual deviatoric stresses reported in From this definition, TI approaches one when the sample shows strong brittleness while for highly ductile rock, TI moves towards zero or negative values (with strain hardening). The trends of TI are calculated for three different sizes under different confinements and presented in  As mentioned, above TI was defined by the difference between the peak and residual deviatoric stresses. The peak deviatoric stresses are sample-size dependent with ascending-descending trend ( The sample-size effect on the formation of the shear planes is also a key parameter in triaxial compression testing of geomaterials. The trends of mean shear band angle versus confining pressure for samples having 25, 50 and 96 mm diameter are illustrated in From Efforts have been made in the past to study the sample-size effect on the friction coefficient of fractures and faults and relate it to field settings ( It is known that the formation of the shear bands initiates before reaching the peak deviatoric stress ( It is evident from It was previously mentioned that the effect of size on peak stress and shear plane angle lead to sample-size dependency of the friction coefficients at the peak stress. It was also discussed that the peak stress in particular poses an ascending-descending behaviour ( The theory of thermodynamics allows for the development of a fundamental physics-based averaging technique ( Entropy production is a powerful abstraction tool for quantification and characterization of complex multi-scale processes. It provides a very high level of description by encapsulating not only the conditions of equilibrium of mass and momenta but also the principle of energy conservation. Entropy production can be directly related to the dissipation caused by irreversible processes plus the exchange of entropy with the surroundings. Dissipation is defined by the product of a thermodynamic force (e.g. difference in temperature, pressure, shear stress, chemical potentials, electrical potential, etc) times the thermodynamic flux (change in heat, volumetric strain rate, shear strain rate, chemical species, electrical current, etc). These dissipation processes phenomena are subject to a diffusion transport process that from a macroscopic point of view can often be described empirically by a diffusion equation (Fourier, Darcy, Fick, Ohm etc.). Characterizing the dissipation of a process such as the pressure sensitive yield of Gosford sandstone can be done from two different perspectives ( Classical geomechanical approaches traditionally use an upper bound and thus enforce the principle of maximum dissipation. This represents a restriction of the second law of thermodynamics to the strong form, which can only be applied to the macroscopic limit of material behaviour, if it exists. In other words classical geomechanics approaches assume that the thermodynamic averaging of the considered volume element is large enough and the deformation process has proceeded for a sufficient length of time that it can be considered a time-independent (steady state) process. The upper bound provides a macroscopic perspective of the deformation process. A lower bound of dissipation can be calculated when considering an explicit formulation of micro-processes that can locally under special conditions violate the theory of thermodynamics (i.e. produce negative entropy). In this case statistical mechanics must be used to evaluate the microscopic interactions. When a sufficiently large volume element is considered the theory of finite time thermodynamics can be applied ( When evaluating a dynamic process such as the finite deformation of rock samples the first point to consider is whether the sampling volume considered suffices the minimum requirement to satisfy the theory of thermodynamics. In other words the number of micro-processes over which the thermodynamic averaging is performed must be sufficiently large such that it provides a suitable average of the entropy production of the micro-processes. This entropy production of the micro-processes can be evaluated by multiplying the thermodynamic flux by the thermodynamic force e.g. for the case of size effect on friction, it is the velocity of slip multiplied by the force applied to the slipping surface. We identify two different scales of micro-processes for the frictional deformation of sandstone: the grain-grain contact across a slipping surface and the slipping surface itself. While the multitude of grain-grain contacts in Gosford sandstone most likely warrants the use of a thermodynamic approach (we will come to the scaling length later) the low number of slipping surfaces (usually a single fracture) as the outcome of the experiment does not warrant a thermodynamic approach. This would imply that the outcomes of a rock mechanics experiment, as performed here, are not suitable for the use of classical continuum geomechanics theories as the continuum assumption is only fulfilled for averaging grain-grain contact for frictional behaviour on a pre-cut surface but not for the formation of a few slipping surfaces. The outcomes of the friction experiment performed here would have to be interpreted by statistical mechanics considering the interaction of the few failure surfaces with the testing machine. This would involve a detailed assessment of the elastic energy stored in the testing machine and the sample, the geometry and frictional condition of contact between testing machine and sample, the sample dimensions, aspect ratio, loading rate, confining medium etc. The results of our experiment would be variable and a function of all these statistical mechanics elements and, hence be highly variable for deriving frictional properties for continuum mechanics. The success of continuum rock mechanics and the many practical uses of rock mechanics experiments for field conditions belie the conclusion drawn from this line of arguments. As a way out we postulate here the existence of a thermodynamic continuum leading to the formation of the main fracture(s). The frictional properties for finite deformation of Gosford sandstone could then be estimated using the upper bound approach assuming that the volume element must be large enough to encompass a multitude of ephemeral slipping surfaces (shear bands) prior to the formation of the through going fracture. The final fracture itself is seen as a result of the self-organisation of a sufficiently large ensemble of micro-slip surfaces and therefore consistent in terms of the theory of thermodynamics. Although the existence of multiple slip surfaces is well known by experimentalist, the suggested precursory phenomenon is not well documented. In order to conclusively prove this postulate we would need high-resolution time-lapse deformation experiments done in Synchrotron X-Ray CT to be able to resolve this extremely fast process. Unfortunately such experiments are not yet available. Several attempts however have been made to characterize this phenomenon. For lack of complete laboratory evidence we have to resort to numerical experiments using digital rock equivalents. Particle Flow Code Simulations (PFC) using the statistical mechanics approach of contact laws between grains have clearly shown a precursor phenomenon of coordinated particle movements prior to the emergence of a macroscopic shear band ( A characteristic scaling relationship of multiple slipping surfaces was also observed early on in numerical simulation of frictional deformation of rocks ( For the small length-scale the thickness of a singular shear band in granular materials such as Gosford sandstone was developed by While all Gosford sandstone samples contain many more than 1000 grains and satisfy the thermodynamic upper bound homogenization criterion this may not necessarily be the case for the larger length scale, i.e. the distance between shear bands. This distance can be derived on the basis of a new finite time thermodynamic theory for the deformation of solids ( Of special interest for the distance between the shear bands is this small percentage of volumetric strain, which stems from the propagating pressure (P)-waves that in the stationary limit are called a cnoidal waves ( We proceed by interpreting the size effect of our friction experiment in terms of the upper bound approach. In interpreting the results we use the expectations that for a larger sample size the dissipative property must converge to a lower value when using the upper bound approach as implied by a constant velocity boundary condition. This asymptotic homogenization method is well established in computational characterization of multi-scale systems ( In our experiments, we found an ascending-descending behaviour for the friction coefficient with increasing size. The ascending trend is definitely not what is expected from the upper bound approach and is strongly indicative of the sample being too small to be investigated by the upper bound approach for homogenization. Although the grain-grain contacts should average out in the upper bound approach and give scale invariant friction coefficients we argue that for the smaller samples the distance between the multiple shear bands is not very much smaller than the sample dimension, therefore prohibiting an upper bound approach for the sizes chosen. We conclude that the smaller sizes are unsuitable for the derivation of continuum mechanics properties e.g. where the fractal characteristics have been proposed as active mechanisms for strength ascending behaviour ( The descending trend is, however, consistent with the upper bound approach. Also the fact that the friction coefficients obtained from 50 to 96 mm diameter samples are much closer to each other than that of 25 mm diameter samples at both peak and residual stresses is encouraging. We conclude that the larger sample diameters can be interpreted with the upper bound approach and identify that the uncertainty for the 96 mm diameter sample is much smaller than that of the smaller samples. We also conclude that 96 mm is not a sufficiently large sample for reliable estimation of frictional properties of Gosford sandstone as the descending trend has not yet flattened out however the theory allows us to predict such stage through simulation. A comprehensive sample-size dependent triaxial investigation was conducted on Gosford sandstone. The experiments covered the complete stress-strain behaviour from initial stage of loading to shear displacement along the formed shear plane. From the results of this study, it was shown that the rate of transition from brittle to ductile behaviour at different confining pressures is a function of sample size. Such sample-size dependency exhibits an ascending-descending trend. This sample-size dependency was correlated with the rate of transition from brittleness to ductility of rock. It was also revealed that the shear band angle and friction coefficient of the formed shear planes are sample-size dependent. The finding of this study is aligned with the postulate that the theory of thermodynamics is fulfilled prior to the ultimate failure and therefore vindicates the use of rock mechanics experiments to constrain yield envelopes of pressure sensitive rocks. The interpretation shows that the ascending trend is indicative of the sample being too small to follow the upper bound limit for homogenization. Although the grain-grain contacts should average out in the upper bound approach and give scale invariant friction coefficients we argue that for the smaller samples the distance between the multiple shear bands is not very much smaller than the sample dimension, therefore prohibiting an upper bound approach for relatively small sizes. The descending trend is, however, consistent with the upper bound approach thus the larger sample diameters can be interpreted with the upper bound approach. As a result the uncertainty in measured friction coefficient for the 96 mm diameter sample is much smaller than that of the smaller samples. The final frictional properties of Gosford sandstone can be extracted when the descending trend has flattened out which can be predicted with the proposed theory through simulation. 