Bioleaching studies were conducted to evaluate the extraction of copper from combined flotation concentrate and smelter dust using two different dust-addition strategies, non-fractional (simultaneously with concentrate) and fractional (step-wise dust addition) in stirred tank reactors. The highest copper extraction obtained with the fractional dust addition was up to 94% while extraction using the non-fractional method leveled off at approximately 44%. Thus, an increased copper recovery of about 50% was achieved with the fractional dust-addition method. It seems that the main reason for increased copper recovery using fractional dust addition could be the control and prevention of chalcopyrite passivation (according to SEM/EDS, XRD, and quantitative mineralogy data). This leads to its improved dissolution.Bioleaching of copper and other heavy metals remains a promising technology as compared to other conventional technologies due to its relative simplicity, mild operation conditions, low capital costs, low energy input, relatively unskilled labor and its environmentally friendly nature ( Two reverberatory and converter furnaces at Sarcheshmeh copper complex (south-east of Iran) produce nearly 50 tpd copper dust with about 30% copper content. At present, the dust is recycled to the furnaces, resulting in the reduction of furnace efficiencies and increasing the energy required for smelting. Furthermore, it damages the refractory bricks and imposes a circular load on the furnaces ( The smelter dust of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex mainly consists of decomposed copper sulphide minerals ( According to Copper bioleaching from Sarcheshmeh chalcopyrite concentrate in stirred tank reactors (pulp density of 10% w/v) resulted in maximum copper recovery up to 37% or 65% after 22 days in the presence of mesophilic or moderately thermophilic bacteria, respectively ( Chalcopyrite surface passivation by elemental sulfur, ferric iron precipitates or intermediate copper polysulphides at high solution potentials (>600 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) are thought to be the most important problems in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite using mesophiles ( To overcome these problems, chalcopyrite bioleaching must be conducted at high temperature which greatly improves the reaction kinetics, and reduces the residence time ( Mixed moderately thermophilic cultures have shown higher ability for chalcopyrite bioleaching than mesophiles ( The objective of this study is to evaluate bioleaching process for copper recovery from mixed samples containing 50% metallurgical dusts and 50% flotation concentrate using moderately thermophilic bacteria. A representative copper sulphide flotation concentrate, obtained from Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine (Kerman, Iran) was used in all experiments. Results of chemical and mineralogical analyses of the concentrate are presented in For a period of one month, several samples were taken from the dust collectors of reverberatory and converter furnaces. The samples were mixed according to their production ratio, 60% of reverberatory and 40% of converter furnaces dust. Chemical and mineralogical compositions of the pre-leached dust are shown in Mineralogical characterization of the concentrate, dust, and bioleaching residues was performed by scanning electron microscope (SEM)-based image analyses equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray microanalyzer (EDAX) (Cam-Scan MV 2300), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Additionally, model samples of the concentrate, dust, and solid residues of bioleaching tests were analyzed using quantitative mineralogical observations. Mixed culture used throughout this study consisted of moderately thermoacidophilic, iron and sulfur oxidizing bacteria. The culture mainly contained strains of Bacteria were inoculated into 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 5% (w/v) concentrate and 200 ml iron-free 9 K growth medium ( Bacterial population density was determined by direct counting using a Thoma chamber with an optical-microscope (Zeiss-Axioskop 40). To ensure the reliability of the process, all analytical measurements were carried out in duplicate for each sample. The concentration of total iron and copper in the leach solutions was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Varian 220). Preliminary bioleaching tests performed during this research work showed that moderately thermophilic bacteria were able to adapt readily to flotation concentrate (10% (w/v) pulp density, pH = 1.5) in 3 l stirred tank reactor, and reached around ∼10 The test works were carried out in batch operated 3-l glass reactors with defined temperatures by an outer jacket through which water circulated. Variable speed mixers (SS20 and SS30 Stuart scientific overhead stirrer, BIBBY, UK) with stainless steel shafts and two impellers were employed to provide constant stirring at approximately 300 rpm. One 4-blade flat-blade and one 3-blade pitch blade impeller were used. Air was injected directly to the bottom of the reactor just below the impellers at 1.5 l min The pH of the solutions were examined by a pH meter (MP120 model, Mettler Toledo Company, Switzerland), and bacterial growth was monitored periodically by measuring oxidation reduction potential (ORP vs. Ag/AgCl electrode) using a pH/Eh meter (826pH mobile model, Metrohm Company, Switzerland) for ferrous iron and sulfur oxidation ability.  Initial non-fractional tests (data not shown) showed that operation in this method was not sufficient to achieve an acceptable degree and rate of Cu extraction. Two tank bioleaching strategies were compared in an effort to obtain an acceptable degree and rate of copper extraction. In this regard, after 23 days of the fractional batch bioleach test in STR, about 94% Cu extraction (29.48 g l In copper recovery from combined flotation concentrate and smelter dust, further complexities may probably arise when different minerals are galvanically coupled ( Under the conditions created in the non-fractional dust-addition method, bacteria accelerate, through an indirect mechanism, the galvanic conversion of sulphides with a lower rest potential: by oxidizing the ferrous ion to ferric ion, thus regenerating the oxidizing agent, or by solubilizing the elemental sulfur formed on the mineral, improving the kinetics of the process. Two decades ago, Therefore, another reason for lower copper recovery from combined flotation concentrate and smelter dust in non-fractional mode could be related to electrochemical passivation of the chalcopyrite surfaces by the secondary copper sulphides in the smelter dust. In the fractional dust-addition method, it is possible that galvanic contact between chalcopyrite and secondary sulphides (Cu The pH profiles for both processes are presented in Comparison of the redox profile ( Also, the salient point in the ORP data ( From a practical point of view, it is more interesting to consider dissolution rates ( In summary, it could be concluded that the higher the bacterial growth and activity (fractional dust addition), the higher the expected Fe X-ray patterns of the residues obtained from the fractional and non-fractional dust-addition tests were compared with those of the original materials ( In order to confirm that the fractional dust-addition method had the capability to extract copper from the combined materials, the bioleaching residues were analyzed by XRD ( According to quantitative mineralogy observations of the solid residue of the fractional dust-addition test, secondary sulphides almost completely dissolved and very small amounts of chalcopyrite (CuFeS To scrutinize the difference between the step-wised fractional and non-fractional dust-addition strategies, the morphology and mineralogy of the bioleaching residues were examined using SEM photographs ( High variations in composition of the residues of the different dust-addition tests were detected during the study. Finally, besides S°, jarosite precipitates were identified by XRD and EDS as the main reaction products ( The EDS microanalysis of the concentrate is shown in The EDS microanalysis reveals relatively large amounts of Cu element in the residue of the non-fractional test, whereas there are minor amounts of copper element in the residue of the fractional test ( The toxic elements of arsenic and lead were not detected by XRD and EDS in the solid residues ( Compared to the non-fractional dust-addition method, the use of the fractional dust-addition method increased copper recovery by 50%. At optimum condition around 94% (29.48 g l Also, the cell concentrations in the fractional dust-addition reactor increased by nearly 10 The various contributions to this work by members of the R&D Division of the National Iranian Copper Industries Company are gratefully acknowledged.