The preparation of manganese(IV) oxide from a Moroccan pyrolusite mine waste was studied. A sample of mine waste containing about 35% Mn was leached with 6.36 M HCl at 70 °C for 1 h with 98% leaching efficiency. The resulting solution was conditioned at pH 5 and sodium hypochlorite was added to obtain various oxide phases (Mn2O3, MnO2). Finally the oxides were transmuted by addition of nitric acid to obtain the α-MnO2, nH2O phase with 97% purity.The IMINI mine, like majority of its counterpart old mines in Morocco, operates with unsophisticated techniques that result in under-exploitation of the deposit. A mineralogical study shows that this mine waste is composed primarily of manganese oxides (pyrolusite, psilomelane, hollandite…) with a low content of iron oxide. There are many physical, chemical and physico-chemical techniques that have been developed and used for the enrichment of deposit. The traditional methods of enrichment consist of reducing the pyrolusite (β-MnO The precipitation of MnO Our present technique consists of carrying out direct leaching by hydrochloric acid followed by chemical oxidation with the sodium hypochlorite after conditioning the pH with caustic soda (NaOH). Finally, the manganese oxides formed undergo transmutation in nitric acid solution. During the leaching stage, the oxidation of chloride ion produces chlorine. This is then paddled in sodium hydroxide solution (NaOH) and the hypochlorite formed can be used for the oxidation of Mn(II) in the leach solution. The efficiency of leaching, as well as that of oxidation, is controlled by several parameters; the most important being the acid concentration, temperature and the amount of oxidant. The mining tailings, which are the object of this study, result from half a century of mining and exploitation. After treatment, generally based on physical separation, thousands of tonnes of mineral waste have been deposited near the mine site with an average composition described in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) determination of the structures present in the product was carried out by an X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer with a vertical configuration using a power of 45 kV and a current of 40 mA. The solid products were dried at 105 °C for 24 h before each analysis. The XRD analysis of the raw product is shown on Complete elemental analysis was determined by an XRF spectrometer AXIOS (PAN analytical) operating at 60 kV, with a tube current up to 125 mA and a power of 3 kW. Elemental analysis of the manganese through the three stages of preparation was carried out using a colorimeter (Jenway PCO 10). This technique uses potassium periodate as an oxidant in sulphuric acid to oxidize Mn(II) to Mn(VII). The chosen acid leach solution was mixed and equilibrated in a flask with the solids of particular size and solid/liquid ratio at a controlled temperature for 1 h. The solution was filtered to separate silica and then diluted 5/2 times. A small volume (100 mL) was agitated with a few mL of sulphuric acid to eliminate lead and barium in the form of insoluble salts (PbSO  The leaching of pyrolusite (MnO The parameters which govern this Reaction Four samples of different sizes were prepared and successively leached with 5.7 M HCl at 70 °C with a solid/liquid ratio of 90 g/L for 1 h. Results show that the rate of reduction of the Mn(IV) minerals was inversely proportional to the grain size, indicating a surface diffusion controlled reaction rate. The highest extraction (86%) was recorded starting from grain size of 125 µm. Various acid concentrations were prepared (4.4 to 7.7 M) in order to study the effect of the acid concentration on the leaching efficiency. The results presented in To determine the required temperature, several experiments were carried out at different temperatures. The extraction of reduced Mn(II) rises from 80% at 50 °C to 99.5% at 90 °C. At higher temperatures, losses due to evaporation of HCl vapours were noted which obstruct the recovery of chlorine gas. The optimum temperature for leaching was therefore fixed at 70 °C. Under the above optimum condition, various solid/liquid ratios were examined in a constant volume of acid. With 85 g/L, the 6.4 M acid solution completely dissolved the manganese oxide contained in the sample. However, for economic reasons, the optimum ratio was fixed at 90 g/L which gave 98% recovery efficiency. The reaction kinetics was also investigated over different intervals of time as shown in  The suspension obtained from leaching was filtered and diluted 5/2 times before adding sulphuric acid to eliminate barium and lead present in the sample. Sodium hypochlorite (bleach) was the preferred oxidant as it is cheap. The principal parameters which governed the oxidation stage were: pH, Mn/ClO ratio and the temperature whilst time and stirring were kept unchanged during these experiments. The present experiment proceeded after conditioning the solution at different pH (ranging from pH 1 to 12.5). The principal objective was to attain maximum oxidation of Mn(II) with the minimum co-precipitation. The other parameters: Mn/ClO ratio (0.81 mol/mol) and temperature (25 °C) were held constant. It was found that at pH A series of oxidation experiments were carried out on the conditioned solution at pH 5 and 25 °C with different quantities of oxidant to determine the minimum quantity required to maximise the oxidation of Mn(II). The results given in With the 0.6 mol/mol ratio, a purple colour characteristic of MnO Tests were carried out at various temperatures in order to improve the oxidation efficiency of this reaction. The objective was to improve the selectivity of the hypochlorite ion (ClO  It is well-known that manganese sesqui-oxide (Mn The aim of this third phase is to reach a maximum amount of MnO The hydrolysis of manganese oxides is not desirable but it is inevitable in this experiment. With a concentration of 5 M HNO The analysis of the manganese oxide precipitated in the second stage showed significant amounts of NaCl that co-precipitated. Furthermore, incorporation of H Several tests were carried out at various temperatures since this factor plays an important part during the transmutation reaction. The maximum content of Mn was obtained at 60 °C, hence this value was chosen for further experiments. Several experiments were carried out to determine the best solid/liquid concentration for optimal transmutation. An increase in the solid/liquid ratio led to a slight increase in the Mn content which reached 54.4 The transmutation was stopped at different times to determine the minimum duration necessary for the reaction. It was found that complete transmutation was reached in the first hour giving a black product containing 54.4% Mn. In general, the variation of Mn content was 53.4 The structural analysis of the solid product (MnO The enrichment of Moroccan pyrolusite tailings made it possible to obtain a product containing hydrated manganese dioxide (97% MnO