The residence time distribution (RTD) of the liquid phase and the mineralogical characterization of the biooxidation of refractory gold mineral was studied in a continuous stirred tank reactor. The latter was achieved using a native mixed culture of acidophilic mesophiles. The RTD was assessed using a mathematical model of stirred tanks in parallel. The oxidation of sulfide and the phases generated through the biooxidation process were evaluated via X-ray diffraction (XRD).The results indicated that the experimental RTD fit to the model. The reactor has a high tendency to behave as a completely mixed reactor. However, the mixed flow inside the reactor has disturbances such as by-pass and dead zones. The estimated mean residence time for the model was approximately 36% greater than the theoretical residence time. It was probably caused by the delay in the outflow of the tracer due to gas hold-up, foaming at the top and the design of the reactor outlet structure. The XRD outcomes showed that the oxidation of arsenopyrite was greater than that of pyrite. Similarly, the formation of jarosite and brushite was observed. It was concluded that the dead zones could increase the probability of jarosite precipitations.tracer concentration in the effluent at time Residence time distribution function Dimensionless residence time distribution function residence time distribution of the model experimental residence time distribution transfer function of the stirred tanks time at which the sample is taken from the reactor effluent during the tracer test experimental mean residence time ( complex variable mean residence time in the large stirred tank ( mean residence time in each small stirred tank in series ( mean residence time of the three agitated tanks in series ( flow fraction of the upper path flow fraction of the lower path dimensionless time ( The biooxidation of sulfide minerals in continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR) has become an important method for the pretreatment of refractory gold ore ( Biooxidation is catalyzed by bacteria that oxidize reduced iron and sulfur compounds. In industrial applications of mining and metallurgy, cultures of mesophiles or moderate thermophiles are widely used for the oxidation of sulfide ores ( Currently, the research and development areas related to biooxidation technology include the development of an improved agitation system, and the reduction of retention time ( Hydrodynamic behavior studies in biooxidation reactors are limited in the literature. The mathematical description of residence time distribution (RTD) is usually expressed either through the dispersion model or through the tanks-in-series model. A hydrodynamic assessment of a reactor conducted by analyzing the residence time distribution (RTD) is crucial to determine possible flow abnormalities such as by-pass and dead zones which may affect the process operation and performance ( Mixing conditions in stirred tank reactors for the biooxidation of gold concentrates depend on many factors including pulp density, aeration and agitation rate, reactor design features such as tank geometry, impeller type and diameter, and air injection type and location ( The aim of this paper was to determine the RTD of the liquid phase of a continuous stirred tank reactor used for biooxidizing sulfides at laboratory scale. This was done in order to characterize the mixing conditions established by the operating conditions and reactor design. The RTD was analyzed through a developed mathematical model of completely stirred tanks in parallel. After determining the RTD the bacterial oxidation of sulfides was evaluated and a mineralogical characterization through X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to determine the level of sulfide oxidation and the phases generated in the biooxidation process, respectively. This model consists of three small perfectly mixed reactors in parallel with a combination of a large perfectly mixed reactor in series with two smaller reactors ( A very useful concept for modeling the RTD of real reactors is the transformation of RTD into the Laplace domain ( The Laplace transform of the residence time distribution, or the The overall transfer function for the arrangement of tanks in parallel in By substituting Eq. If Eq. By applying the inverse Laplace transform to both sides of Eq. A refractory gold ore from the “El Zancudo” mine (Titiribí – Colombia) was used in this study. The mineralogical characterization of the mineral was determined via optical microscopy using plane-polarized light and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The mineral composition was 33.23% pyrite, 26.19% arsenopyrite, 8.3% sphalerite, 6.07% galena, 4.15% chalcopyrite and 22.04% gangue. The gangue minerals present were quartz, muscovite, kaolinite and carbonates (dolomite and aragonite). The mineral’s chemical composition was determined using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS). The results were 23.3% Fe, 2.3% As, 2.3% Pb, 1.05% Zn, 0.22% Sb and 0.085% Cu. The mineral was crushed and passed through a 325 mesh screen ( The study was conducted in an 8 The agitation and aeration conditions were previously established for the biooxidation process using a 2 The solid and liquid feed rates were controlled in order to ensure the presence of 10% The hydrodynamic evaluation of the reactor was conducted without using microorganisms. To avoid changes in fluid density, the reactor was operated under the same conditions established in the biooxidation process. The pH of the reactor was controlled at 1.7 Lithium chloride (LiCl) is frequently used as a tracer in mineral processing and hydrometallurgical operations because it is usually not present in the slurry and does not interact significantly with the ore or solution ( The fitting of experimental results to the model was performed using the least squares method. This method allows calculating the parameter values of the model. Mathematically, this is expressed by Eq. The mixture of acidophilic microorganisms used in this study was previously isolated at the “El Zancudo” Mine (Titiribí – Colombia). This culture was identified and showed to be compatible with The culture was kept within a pH of 1.5–1.9, and at a temperature of 35 The inoculum added to the biooxidation reactor was 500 The mineralogical characterization of the biooxidized mineral was performed using X-ray diffraction (XRD). This made it possible to obtain information regarding the sulfides oxidation level, the pre-existing mineral phases and the mineral phases generated during the biooxidation process, before and after initiating the continuous mode operation. Samples were taken after 240 and 494  The experimental mean residence time obtained from the distribution curve of tracer concentration in the reactor effluent was 130.7 Eq.  The results indicate that the model of completely mixed tanks in parallel had a good fit to experimental data. The estimated mean residence time for the model is approximately 36% greater than the theoretical residence time. This behavior can be explained because the tracer is expected to delay its outflow probably due to: gas hold up, foam formation at the top and the design of the reactor’s outlet structure (  The XRD results show that the oxidation rate of the arsenopyrite was greater than that of pyrite in both of the biooxidation reactor’s operating modes ( The XRD analyzes showed the formation of jarosite in both operation modes. The highest formation of jarosite occurred after 477 Jarosite is a common byproduct of the biooxidation of sulfides containing iron ( The set of data from the XRD show a high presence of silicates in the biooxidation process as a result of their exhaustive dissolution resulting from the controlled pH conditions (1.7  RTD results from the liquid phase of the reactor has indicated there is a 36% of dead zones meaning that in the continuous operation mode of the reactor a 36% of a delayed outflow of ferric iron in solution is probable. This outcome could increase the possibility of jarosite formation. XRD analyses show the presence of jarosite in the continuous mode for concentrations of ferric iron in solution during the steady-state approximately 8.3 It may be deduced from the outcome of this study that jarosite precipitation could be related to dead zones since the delay in the outflow of the tracer indicates that the concentration of ferric iron in solution is likely to delay its outflow by approximately 36%, hence increasing the probability of iron precipitation inside the reactor. Further research is required in order to identify the effects of hydrodynamic behavior in the formation of precipitates in biooxidation processes, since these are carried out using large commercial-scale continuous stirred tank reactors that usually exhibit high concentrations of ferric iron during the steady state ( The hydrodynamic evaluation of the biooxidation reactor of refractory gold concentrate was carried out without the use of microorganisms. Cell growth could have affected foaming, since the dissolution of sulfides may affect the physicochemical properties of the medium and therefore the surface phenomena. According to Considering that microorganisms are responsible for providing sulfuric acid for a proton attack and for maintaining high concentrations of ferric iron for an oxidative attack on the mineral ( The hydrodynamic behavior of the reactor depends directly on the impeller. The formation of precipitates should therefore be assessed with different impellers such as axial flow hydrofoil impellers, e.g. Lightnin A315 impellers, which are used in biooxidation plants ( RTD and XRD analyzes from a laboratory-scale biooxidation reactor make it possible to obtain observations that can be used for the design and scale-up of reactors in order to improve their operation and performance. Hydrodynamic evaluation showed that the reactor had a high tendency to behave as a perfectly mixed reactor. However, the mixed flow inside the reactor had disturbances such as by-pass and dead zones that make the process far from ideal. It is highly probable that the outflow of the tracer was delayed. This was caused mainly by gas hold-up, foaming at the top and the design of the reactor output structure itself. The tanks-in-parallel model fit well the experimental residence time distribution. This indicated that the estimated mean residence time for the model was approximately 36% greater than the theoretical residence time this was due to the delay in the outflow of the tracer. Additionally, 91.58% of the reactor’s volume behaved as a completely mixed tank and 5% of it had by-pass zones. The XRD outcomes showed a greater oxidation of arsenopyrite than pyrite besides the formation of jarosite and brushite. Although the presence of jarosite in continuous mode is lower than in batch mode, the dead zones in the continuous operation of the reactor may increase the possibility of jarosite precipitation. The authors would like to thank the Biotechnology National Program of COLCIENCIAS, CDI S.A. Mines Company and the Biomineralogy Laboratory from the National University of Colombia (Medellin campus)