This study was performed to evaluate the use of three-dimensional (3D) strut plates for the surgical management of mandibular angle fractures and to determine the subsequent postoperative complication rate. Two hundred and twenty-two patients met the inclusion criteria for mandible angle fracture at the university hospital in Miami between 2009 and 2013 and were included in this study. The treatment protocol for mandibular angle fractures included open reduction and internal fixation with the utilization of a 3D strut plate. Patients were not placed in postoperative intermaxillary fixation. An evaluation of the cases revealed a complication rate of 15.3%, of which 6.8% were considered major complications requiring a surgical intervention. The 3D strut plate has been found to have many advantages over single miniplate techniques with respect to the stability of the fracture and the rate of complications. Based on the current data, 3D strut plates provide a predictable result in the treatment of mandibular angle fractures.Facial bone fractures are a common occurrence following assaults, motor vehicle accidents, and falls. Between 19% and 40% of all facial fractures involve the mandible. Furthermore, 30–40% of all documented mandibular fractures are located at the angle. Champy and others have described the ideal line of osteosynthesis, which is now well known and accepted, forming the basis of internal fixation using miniplates and screws. Historically, the treatment of mandibular angle fractures has involved rigid fixation techniques allowing for absolute stability and primary bone union. Newer three-dimensional (3D) techniques allow oral surgeons to fixate angle fractures using a combination of transorally placed plates and screws. Farmand and Dupoirieux first described the 3D quadrangular strut plate, which is formed by joining two miniplates with interconnecting crossbars. This study was performed to evaluate the surgical management of patients treated with 3D strut plates for mandibular angle fractures, occurring either alone or in combination with other mandibular fractures, and to determine the subsequent postoperative complication rate. Outcome parameters evaluated included infection, wound dehiscence, plate fracture, and malocclusion; these were further classified into major and minor complications. Information about the type of fracture, presence of the third molar, degree of displacement, mechanism of injury, medical comorbidities, use of intermaxillary fixation (IMF), and time taken to perform the procedure were also recorded. This was a retrospective study of 263 patients with mandibular angle fractures treated with 3D strut plates at a university hospital in Miami, Florida, USA; the study was approved by the institutional review board. The hospital database and records were reviewed for the period 2009–2013. The following data were collected: patient demographics, fracture type and characteristics, presence of teeth in the line of fracture, timing of the procedure, duration of the procedure, medical comorbidities, patient medications, presence of nerve damage, post-surgical complications, perioperative course, and follow-up. Patient age ranged from 16 to 63 years, with a mean age of 30 years. All patients with mandibular angle fractures treated with the 3D strut plate were initially included in this study. Exclusion criteria included the following: bilateral angle fractures, condylar and subcondylar fractures requiring IMF, severely comminuted mandibular angle fractures requiring extraoral approaches, and patients with inadequate perioperative and follow-up information. Severely comminuted angle fractures were defined as any shattered angle fractures or fractures with fragmentation so severe that the individual fracture segments could not be fixated, could not be used to provide support for the fixation of the mandible, or the fractures would extend beyond the internal fixation screw holes of the strut plate. Out of the 263 patient charts reviewed, 222 were included in the study. Eight patients were excluded due to the involvement of a condylar/subcondylar fracture, 19 patients presented with a severely comminuted angle fracture, three had bilateral angle fractures, and 11 patients had inadequate follow-up documentation (never returned for any postoperative visits). The quantification of fracture displacement was assessed by direct measurement using the calibrated measurement tool on axial and coronal computed tomography (CT) scans. The surgical operative time was recorded from incision to wound closure. The operative time excluded the duration of IMF application. All plates were placed via an intraoral approach and fixated with eight monocortical screws, four on the proximal segment and four on the distal segment. A transbuccal trocar technique was used to aid in the drilling of bone and placement of the self-tapping screws. No drains were placed and all patients received one preoperative dose of 3 Complications were divided into two groups: major and minor. Major complications were defined as those undesirable postoperative sequelae requiring a surgical intervention, while minor complications were defined as postoperative sequelae that were resolved without a surgical intervention. Finally, a review of documented nerve injury was also conducted. Based on the review of the 222 patients, the most common cause of the angle fracture was assault and interpersonal violence. This was followed by motor vehicle collision and falls ( Fifteen patients had major complications ( Ten patients developed infections requiring additional surgery for removal of the fixation plates and screws, with incision and drainage of any abscess refractory to oral antibiotic therapy. The fracture site was debrided and no additional internal fixation was utilized. If the fractures were not healed, IMF was applied to the patients for 6 additional weeks. Two of the patients sustained a postoperative 3D strut plate fracture. Both patients initially presented with a non-favorable angle fracture with displacement greater than 3 When reviewing the database, 129 of the 222 patients had an adequate assessment of preoperative and postoperative inferior alveolar nerve (IAN) paresthesia. Of the patients with appropriate nerve assessment, 69 presented with paresthesia prior to angle fracture management, while 60 had intact sensation of the IAN. After the surgical intervention, 19 of the 60 patients with intact nerves developed postoperative paresthesia. One of the factors contributing to the number of major complications was the degree of displacement as measured on axial and coronal CT scans. Although displacement of 4 In regard to minor complications, 10 patients experienced postoperative wound dehiscence and nine had limited mouth opening. The distribution of complications is shown in The duration of surgery, as measured from incision time to wound closure, was directly correlated with several factors including the degree of displacement and number of coincident mandible fractures, as well as comminution and favorability. The average procedure time ranged from 2 This study was designed to retrospectively assess the effectiveness of the 3D strut plate in the fixation of mandibular angle fractures without the use of postoperative IMF. Effectiveness was measured in terms of surgical efficiency and the reduction in complications. All measurements were compared to data in the current literature related to the management of angle fractures utilizing monocortical single plate fixation via intraoral approaches. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) is now considered the treatment of choice for mandibular angle fractures. This is related in part to the absence of teeth in the distal segment of the fracture, which prevents stabilization of the fracture segment by closed reduction alone. Champy's technique, which involves placing one plate at the superior border to repair fractures of the mandibular angle, has been the most commonly used method of fixation to date. Although the 3D strut plate is a relatively recent development in the treatment of mandibular angle fractures, the current literature documents successful clinical and biomechanical outcomes. The design of the strut plates confers a significant advantage over single plate and two-plate fixation methods on the lateral surface of the mandible. The advantage of the strut plate is the stability conferred by the vertical strut components. As mentioned extensively in the literature, the functional mandible consists of a zone of compression and a zone of tension ( Access to the mandibular angle fractures and the reduction and fixation procedures were all performed via an intraoral approach. The intraoral management of mandibular fractures confers advantages in reduction of approach and closure time, as well as minimal scarring for the patient and minimal risk to the motor nerves, glands, and vital neck structures. The disadvantages of the intraoral approach are the limited view, along with the difficulty associated with the manipulation of the fracture segments and the confirmation of appropriate reduction of the fracture segments. The single plate, double plate, and Champy's monocortical fixation techniques were developed due to these limitations. Even in the most skilled hands, monocortical semi-rigid fixation is technically easier than bicortical reconstruction plate rigid fixation from an intraoral approach. All patients were placed in Erich archbars prior to the approach to the fracture. Once the access had been made, the fracture was identified, the segments were debrided, third molars in the line of the fracture were extracted, and the fracture segments were reduced ( Several studies have reported that a single miniplate does not provide sufficient stability to mandible angle fractures and that the addition of IMF is required. In regards to the duration of surgery, all patients included in this study underwent surgery at a teaching hospital. During all surgical procedures, the residents were the primary surgeons performing the procedure under the direct supervision of the attending surgeon. This point relates to the duration of the procedure. Even when a less experienced surgeon performed the surgery, the time involved to complete ORIF utilizing the 3D strut plate remained comparable to the duration it took an experienced surgeon to perform Champy's technique. In a prospective randomized trial done by Laverick et al. comparing the duration of surgeries, no significant difference was found between the transbuccal approach (60 Several articles have compared the complication rate between the 3D strut plate and Champy's technique. A recently published meta-analysis of six studies comparing the 3D strut plate to Champy's technique to repair mandible angle fractures revealed a 58% reduction in postoperative complications when the 3D strut plate was used. Three patients presented with postoperative malocclusion requiring surgical correction. The cause of the malocclusion was determined to be inadequate contouring of the 3D strut plate leading to misalignment of the fracture segments with subsequent manifestation as a malocclusion. The impaired bone healing and malocclusion ultimately affected the treatment and outcome. Two patients sustained a fracture of the 3D strut plate. The fracture of the 3D strut plate was attributed to the non-favorability of the fracture, full complement of teeth, and failure to maintain a soft diet. The results are consistent with those found in the literature. Of 140 patients undergoing 3D strut plate fixation in a study conducted by Farmand and Dupoirieux, there was only one case of plate fracture (0.7% incidence). Only 10 patients (4.5%) developed postoperative infections and required surgical incision and drainage with removal of the fixation plates due to the infection. The angle fracture in all of these cases was displaced more than 3 In this study, wound dehiscence and plate exposure was considered a minor complication, since this did not require an additional surgical intervention. Ten patients in the study developed plate exposure during the monitored postoperative recovery period. This low rate of exposure can be attributed to the position of the fixation plate. The 3D strut plate is placed on the lateral aspect of the mandibular angle with the superior aspect of the plate positioned at a safe distance from the access incision. In contrast, the superior border plate routinely crosses just deep to the surgical incision. This characteristic of the superior border technique has, in the authors’ clinical experience, led to a greater rate of wound dehiscence and plate exposure. In addition to plate positioning based on the technique used, the volume of tissue overlying these two types of plate is markedly different. The 3D strut plate is always located deep to the masseter and buccinator muscles, as opposed to the superior border plate which is covered, in part, only by thin alveolar gingiva. Therefore the greater bulk of soft tissue can be surmised to decrease the risk of wound breakdown and plate exposure. Nine patients developed postoperative trismus based on clinically measured inter-incisal distances. None of the patients had a limited mouth opening after 3 months. This result is consistent with those of other studies, including that of Vineeth et al., which found that patients treated with Champy's technique had limited mouth opening at the 1-month postoperative visit. Nerve damage was the final complication assessed. Both preoperative and postoperative assessment of IAN paresthesia of the affected mandible was performed for 129 of the 222 patients. Sixty-nine of these patients presented IAN paresthesia at the time of initial preoperative assessment. In the postoperative assessment, 14 (20.3%) of the patients presented with improved sensation or resolution of the paresthesia, while 55 (79.7%) of the patients continued to present paresthesia post-surgery. Of the 60 patients who presented without any paresthesia at the preoperative assessment, 19 (31.7%) developed postoperative paresthesia, while 41 (68.3%) did not. The rationale for the worsened status of the IAN was likely due to varying iatrogenic causes. Manipulation of the fracture segments, the debridement of the fracture site, the extraction of the third molar, and possible screw placement into the mandibular canal could all independently or in combination lead to transient nerve damage. Due to the prolonged recovery course of IAN paresthesia, an accurate long-term assessment of nerve injury over time is difficult, since often times the patient is discharged from care with a well-healed mandibular fracture while having residual neuronal injury. There was no correlation between the incidence of complications and medical comorbidities. The mean age of the patient population was 30 years. Due to the low mean age of the population evaluated, medical comorbidities were not prevalent in the patients sustaining angle fractures. Only 50 of the patients in the study presented with a medical comorbidity, representing 22.5% of the total patient pool, with psychiatric disorders (depression, bipolar, and anxiety disorders) and hypertension being the most prevalent medical comorbidities. Fifty-five patients or 24.8% of the patient pool were smokers. Thirteen of the 34 patients developing complications (38.2%) were smokers, including six patients with major complications (four infections and two plate fractures) and seven with minor complications (four dehiscence and three trismus). However, when evaluating the medications that were being taken by some of the patients, they correlated with the medical comorbidities and did not reveal any correlation with the rate of complications. Even though diabetes has a direct effect on wound healing based on microvascular pathology along with compromised neutrophil chemotaxis, only one of the diabetic patients in the study group developed a complication (dehiscence). Other factors of note were the characteristics of the angle fracture. Fractures of the mandible have multiple categorizations. Other fracture characteristics investigated included the determination of whether the fracture was an open or closed fracture. Open fractures involve erupted teeth in the line of fracture, or there is an open communication between the oral cavity and the fractured bony segments. It is well documented that the incidence of postoperative infection is greater when the fractures are open. The reason for this is based on the open communication, which allows the oral flora to migrate into the fracture site and adjacent soft tissues and proliferate. When reviewing the data, the incidence of open fractures of the mandible was found to be 85.1%. Of the 189 patients with open fractures, 32 developed a postoperative complication (14 major and 18 minor), representing 94.1% of postoperative complications and including 90% of the infections. This elevated percentage of complications based on open fractures may be influenced by the disproportionately large number of open fractures presented in the angle area of the mandible. Another characteristic of angle fractures that was documented was the presence of comminution. Severely comminuted fractures, as defined earlier, were excluded from the study. When the degree of comminution is severe, the strut plate cannot be utilized due to the inability to stabilize the fragments for fixation. When reviewing the data, comminution did not reveal an increased rate of complications. If the comminution remains within the confines of the fixation screws, the strut is able to stabilize the proximal and distal segments along with the comminuted segments of bone between them. Thirteen (5.9%) of the patients with angle fractures presented with comminution. Of these comminuted fractures, one resulted in a complication involving plate fracture. Most third molars in the line of the fracture were extracted. When reviewing the data, third molars were present in 80.6% of the fractures. The presence of third molars at the time of the injury did not affect the incidence of complications. Of the patients evaluated, 26 (14.5%) did not have their third molars extracted at the time of fracture management. Two of the patients who did not have their third molar extracted during fracture management developed an infection (major) and one developed trismus (minor). Although the extraction of the third molar in the line of fracture has the potential to displace the angle fracture or to fracture the lingual or buccal cortices adjacent to the fracture, the presence of the third molar was hypothesized to increase the chance of postoperative infection. Indeed, when evaluating the 10 patients who developed a postoperative infection in the population studied, 20% did not have their third molar extracted at the time of fracture fixation. Another factor involved in the management of the angle fracture is the timing of the injury in relation to the surgical intervention. On average, the surgical intervention took place at 4.60 days after the injury (ranging from the day of injury to 35 days post injury). There was no correlation between the development of complications and the delay to the procedure. The average time elapsed between injury and surgical intervention for all cases developing a complication was 4.55 days; those developing major complications had an average delay to treatment of 4.33 days and those with minor complications had an average delay of 4.73 days. Limitations of this study primarily involve the retrospective nature of the design. In addition, patients with second or multiple fractures along with the primary mandibular angle fracture were included. Isolated mandibular angle fractures are not very common in comparison to combination fractures involving a mandibular angle and a contralateral parasymphysis, body, or subcondylar fracture. The management strategies associated with the bilateral or multi-fractured mandible differ from those of the isolated angle fracture. In conclusion, the results of this retrospective study suggest that the utilization of the 3D strut plate for the treatment of non-comminuted mandibular angle fractures is an efficacious management technique due to the low complication rates in comparison to the previously utilized Champy technique. Furthermore, the use of 3D strut plates decreases the need for IMF, ensuring early restoration of mandibular function. The simplicity, ease of application, shortened procedural times, and reduced risk of infection are the primary advantages of the 3D strut plate over the superior border technique. None. None. Ethical approval was obtained from the University of Miami, Human Subject Research Office (IRB ID#20150074, issue date 3/24/2015). All patients consented to the clinical photography.