Polyphasic optimisation process for ferric iron mediated metal extraction with 50mL system on COD digester showed 60% copper and 56% zinc extractions in only 30 and 90min of contact time respectively. Optimum conditions were 90°C reaction temperature, 10% (w/v) pulp density, pH 1.8 and 1.5% (w/v) Fe3+ concentration. The system was scaled up successfully to 5000mL and as high as 80.81% copper and 54.0% zinc extractions were obtained in 30 and 90min respectively without addition of any catalyst. The bioregeneration of Fe3+ iron from the leachate in shake flask study by developed iron oxidising consortium showed IOR of 396mg/L/h in the presence of as high as 124.8, 21.0, 2.8 and 26.7g/L total dissolved solids, total iron, copper and zinc respectively. The developed biofilm in down-flow packed bed column having UHMWPE plastic material as support matrix showed 3100mg/L/h IOR, which is eight fold higher as compared to the best IOR obtained in shake flask study.Interest in hydrometallurgical processing of polymetallic ores and concentrates has been increased due to better possibilities of economical recovery of the metals by this processing ( In case of polymetallic ores and concentrates, the extraction kinetics is affected by interactions of different metals that are present altogether. Moreover, the generated multi-metal containing leach liquor complicates the downstream processing. Hence, the optimisation of parameters like ferric iron concentration, pH and temperature are the prime requirement for the selective leaching of different metals from polymetallic ores and concentrates. However, in such process ferric sulphate used gets reduced to ferrous sulphate and for each new cycle additional ferric sulphate is needed. An acidic condition, which prevailed in the process, creates a bottleneck for the chemical regeneration of ferric iron from the Fe In this context, the present work was aimed to optimise various physico-chemical parameters for the chemical leaching of metals from polymetallic bulk concentrate. Second objective of the study was to scale up the process from 50 to 5000 PBC was kindly provided by Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation (GMDC), Ambamata Multimetal Mine Project, Gujarat, India. The PBC sieved through − Over-burden silica sand as well as sulphur and iron containing soil samples were collected with sterile samplers from abandoned Rajpardi lignite mine in Gujarat, India, situated at 21.76°66′ latitude and 73.23°33′ longitudes ( For enhanced extraction of copper and zinc from PBC by chemical leaching, the optimisation of various parameters viz. pH, pulp density, temperature, Fe All the initial experiments were performed in triplicates using COD digester (NOVA, India) with total 50 Further, for scale up of the process experiments were performed with 200, 1000 and 5000 The actively growing iron oxidising consortium was used to generate Fe For the development of biofilm of the consortium in column bioreactor, Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene (UHMWPE) pieces were used as a support material for the immobilisation of bacterial consortium. The UHMWPE material shredded in spiral shaped was procured from Das Plastics Pvt. Ltd. Gujarat, India. The UHMWPE, a subset of thermoplastic, is very light in weight, highly resistant to extreme alkaline and acidic pH. It also withstands temperature up to 145 The leach liquor generated in chemical leaching experiments was used to regenerate Fe The prepared column was filled with culture medium and iron grown adapted consortium in the ratio of 1:1 (v/v). The culture medium contained 0.4 In all the experiments at regular time interval, concentrations of copper, zinc and total iron in the leach liquor samples were analysed by atomic absorbance spectrophotometer (Elico Ltd. BL-194, India). For the estimation, as per requirement, 0.1 Major constituents of the PBC were sphalerite (Zn 30%), chalcopyrite (Cu 2.5%), galena (Pb 13%), pyrite (Fe 9%) and sulphur 27% as revealed by the mineralogical analysis by the polarising microscope, SEM-EDX analysis, and atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Results of metal extraction obtained from PBC with 50 As shown in The influence of system volume as well as stirring condition was also investigated and results are shown in In 1000 During metal leaching experiments, added Fe As Fe Both the copper and zinc extractions under the optimised conditions were highly correlated with time and temperature. However, the maximum copper and zinc extractions were achieved at 30 and 90 We are thankful to