Hypothesis/Background
                  Olecranon fractures have variable size of the proximal fragment, patterns of fragmentation, and subluxation of the ulnohumeral joint that might be better understood and categorized on the basis of quantitative 3-dimensional computed tomography analysis. Mayo type I fractures are undisplaced, Mayo type II are displaced and stable, and Mayo type III are displaced and unstable. The last is categorized into anterior and posterior dislocations. The purpose of this study was to further clarify fracture morphology between Mayo type I, II, and III fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Three-dimensional models were created for a consecutive series of 78 patients with olecranon fractures that were evaluated with computed tomography. We determined the total number of fracture fragments, the volume and articular surface area of each fracture fragment, and the degree of displacement of the most proximal olecranon fracture fragment.
               
                  Results
                  Displaced olecranon fractures were more comminuted than nondisplaced fractures (P = .02). Displaced fractures without ulnohumeral subluxation were smallest in terms of both volume (P < .001) and articular surface involvement (P < .001) of the most proximal olecranon fracture fragment. There was no difference in average displacement of the proximal fragment between displaced fractures with and without ulnohumeral subluxation (P = .74). Anterior olecranon fracture-dislocations created more displaced (P = .04) and smaller proximal fragments than posterior fracture-dislocations (P = .005), with comparable fragmentation on average (P = .60).
               
                  Discussion/Conclusion
                  The ability to quantify volume, articular surface area, displacement, and fragmentation using quantitative 3-dimensional computed tomography should be considered when increased knowledge of fracture morphology and fracture patterns might be useful.An improved understanding of fracture morphology based on computed tomography (CT) and quantitative 3-dimensional CT (Q3DCT) analysis has confirmed and influenced our current understanding of coronoid fractures and to some degree distal radius and distal humerus fractures. The Mayo classification of olecranon fractures is commonly used, guides decision-making, We used Q3DCT to analyze the volume, articular surface involvement, number, and location of olecranon fracture fragments to further clarify fracture morphology between Mayo type I, II, and III fractures. We used Inclusion criteria were (1) intra-articular olecranon fracture and (2) age 18 years or older and (3) CT scan with adequate quality for 3-dimensional (3D) modeling (ie, slice thickness <1.5 mm). Exclusion criteria were (1) postoperative CT scan, (2) CT scan with intra-articular injection of contrast material, (3) patients with associated fractures, and (4) fractures caused by penetrating trauma. We excluded 6 fractures with a concomitant distal humerus fracture, 2 fractures caused by a gunshot, 1 fracture caused by a chainsaw, and 2 “terrible triad” injuries (the combination of posterior olecranon dislocation with radial head and coronoid process fractures Fractures were classified as Mayo type I, II, or III using radiographs and CT scans taken immediately after injury that were part of care without any standardization specific to research. Based on the radioulnar relationship, Mayo type III fractures were categorized into anterior and posterior olecranon fracture-dislocations. CT scans were saved as Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine files and were then uploaded into 3D Slicer (version 4.3.1; Boston, MA, USA). A threshold of 250 Hounsfield units was used to manually mark all bone structures of every olecranon fracture fragment in every coronal, axial, and sagittal slice ( Using Rhinoceros, we first determined the coordinates for the center of every fracture fragment in the x-, y-, and z-axes. The fracture was then reassembled using an unfractured right-side olecranon as a template to define the shape of the native preinjury anatomy ( In Rhinoceros, a square plane—perpendicular to the shaft of the ulna and placed at the level of the coronoid process tip—was used to separate the olecranon from the ulna ( The volume of olecranon fracture fragments was measured using the standard volume command in Rhinoceros. By measuring the volume of all olecranon fragments, the total volume of the olecranon was determined. Subsequently, the articular surface area of the ulnar trochlear notch was marked with a polyline on the mesh reconstructions and measured using the area command after splitting the mesh surface with the applied polyline. By outlining the edges of the articular surface area of each fracture fragment, the total articular surface area of the ulnar trochlear notch was determined. The volume and articular surface area of the most proximal fracture fragment were calculated as a percentage of the total volume and articular surface area. Two research fellows (B.L., S.J.) measured volume and articular surface area of a set of 10 randomly selected olecranon fracture models independently to assess interobserver agreement using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) through a 2-way mixed effects model with absolute agreement. Absolute agreement in an ICC assesses how much each measurement performed per observer differs from the other observer. Interpretation of the ICC values was carried out according to the guidelines proposed by Shrout Categorical variables were demonstrated as absolute numbers with frequencies, continuous distributed variables as median with interquartile range (IQR). We measured (1) number of fracture fragments, (2) volume, (3) articular surface area, and (4) degree of displacement. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare the difference in these 4 outcome measures among Mayo fracture types (a 2-sided The Mann-Whitney Stata (Stata 13; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA) was used for statistical analyses. There were 45 (58%) women and 33 men with a median age of 62 years (IQR, 50-74 years). Thirty-six (46%) patients injured the right elbow. There were 3 (3.8%) Mayo type IA, 3 (3.8%) Mayo type IB, 2 (2.6%) Mayo type IIA, 20 (26%) Mayo type IIB, 4 (5.1%) Mayo type IIIA, and 46 (59%) Mayo type IIIB fractures. Mayo type III fractures were classified into 27 (54%) anterior and 23 (46%) posterior olecranon fracture-dislocations (21 with associated radial head fractures). Displaced olecranon fractures (Mayo types II and III) were more comminuted (median, 4 fracture fragments; IQR, 3-6) than nondisplaced fractures (Mayo type I; median, 2.5; IQR, 2-3; Anterior olecranon fracture-dislocations created more displaced ( Q3DCT analysis improves our understanding of fracture morphology and fracture patterns and might help improve surgical management and prognosis of olecranon fractures. The purpose of this study was to analyze differences in fracture morphology—defined as (1) overall degree of comminution, (2) volume, (3) articular surface involvement, and (4) displacement of the most proximal olecranon fracture fragment—between Mayo types I, II, and III fractures of the olecranon and anterior and posterior fracture-dislocations. There are several limitations to consider. First, we did not include patients without a CT scan. CT scans are not ordered for most olecranon fractures, the majority of which are Mayo type IIA (displaced, noncomminuted fractures with no ulnohumeral subluxation). We draw several potentially useful observations from our analysis. First, nondisplaced fractures are relatively distal (larger proximal fragments). Nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures are uncommon, and our impression is that surgeons tend to worry about displacement and might operate more than is necessary or beneficial. If future research confirms that nondisplaced and minimally displaced fractures are relatively distal fractures, it might give surgeons more confidence that the fracture will not displace if the fracture is relatively distal. Second, the proximal fragments of displaced fractures without ulnohumeral subluxation were equally displaced but smaller than the proximal fragment in a fracture-dislocation. The fact that Mayo type II fractures were as fragmented as Mayo type III fractures is likely due to over-representation of Mayo type IIB over the more common Mayo type IIA fractures among the subset of patients who had CT scans. Biomechanical evaluations suggest that the percentage of ulnohumeral stability lost is proportionate to the percentage loss of the proximal olecranon. Quantitative analysis of olecranon fractures further clarified fracture morphology of Mayo type I, II, and III fractures. Differences in average displacement and size of the proximal fragment by Mayo class may help inform management. Keeping in mind the potential spectrum bias, we found that nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures tend to be relatively distal and that fragmented displaced fractures without ulnohumeral subluxation and anterior olecranon fracture-dislocations create smaller proximal fragments that might benefit from wire or suture engagement of the triceps insertion in fixation. In any case, the ability to quantify volume, articular surface area, displacement, and fragmentation using Q3DCT should be considered when increased knowledge of fracture morphology and fracture patterns might be useful. David C. Ring has received study-specific grants from Skeletal Dynamics and Biomet. He is a consultant for Wright Medical, Skeletal Dynamics, and Acumed. He receives honoraria from AO North America and AO International. He receives royalties from Wright Medical, Biomet, and Skeletal Dynamics. He has stock options in Illuminos. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.