We describe a composite hydroxyapatite (HA)–silk fibroin scaffold designed to induce and support the formation of mineralized bone matrix by human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) in the absence of osteogenic growth factors. Porous three-dimensional silk scaffolds were extensively used in our previous work for bone tissue engineering and showed excellent biodegradability and biocompatibility. However, silk is not an osteogenic material and has a compressive stiffness significantly lower than that of native bone. In the present study, we explored the incorporation of silk sponge matrices with HA (bone mineral) micro-particles to generate highly osteogenic composite scaffolds capable of inducing the in vitro formation of tissue-engineered bone. Different amounts of HA were embedded in silk sponges at volume fractions of 0%, 1.6%, 3.1% and 4.6% to enhance the osteoconductive activity and mechanical properties of the scaffolds. The cultivation of hMSCs in the silk/HA composite scaffolds under perfusion conditions resulted in the formation of bone-like structures and an increase in the equilibrium Young’s modulus (up to 4-fold or 8-fold over 5 or 10 weeks of cultivation, respectively) in a manner that correlated with the initial HA content. The enhancement in mechanical properties was associated with the development of the structural connectivity of engineered bone matrix. Collectively, the data suggest two mechanisms by which the incorporated HA enhanced the formation of tissue engineered bone: through osteoconductivity of the material leading to increased bone matrix production, and by providing nucleation sites for new mineral resulting in the connectivity of trabecular-like architecture.Bone repair procedures often require a replacement graft to restore the function of damaged or diseased tissue. These grafts are in most cases derived from tissues harvested from a second anatomic location of the same patient (autografts) or from other patients (allografts). Autografts have been considered the gold standard for bone repair. However, limited supplies of suitable bone grafts, donor site morbidity and difficulties in shaping explanted bone have posed significant problems. On the other hand, allografts have a risk of disease transmission Successfully engineered bone grafts must be biocompatible and meet certain minimal mechanical requirements to be functional. The scaffold material provides many of the mechanical properties of the engineered graft. Organic- and polymer-based scaffolds are easily fabricated into different structures but often do not have the desired compressive modulus Bone-like constructs have been prepared All reagents were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise specified. Silk fibroin was extracted from Four groups of scaffolds with different content of HA-silk composition were fabricated with mixtures of Silk:HA:Salt ratios by weight of 1:0:20, 1:0.5:20, 1:1:20, and 1:1.5:20. The volume fractions of silk and HA in the porous scaffold were calculated using the amount of the materials added and their densities which are 1.4 g/ml and 3.16 g/ml, respectively. As a result, the designated group names were based on approximated HA volume fraction in the scaffolds which were 0%, 1.6%, 3.1%, and 4.6% HA, respectively. SEM was performed to determine pore structure and surface topography on two scaffolds of each group. In brief, scaffolds were washed in PBS and then fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS overnight. Constructs were washed in alcohol gradient up to 70% and then freeze-dried overnight in a lyophilizer. Dried samples were coated with gold and imaged at 200× and 1000× in an SEM (JEOL, Japan). Fresh bone marrow aspirates were obtained from Cambrex Life Sciences (East Rutherford, NJ), isolated and characterized as previously described A perfusion bioreactor developed in our laboratory and described and used previously After harvest at day 0 and week 10, two half scaffolds per group were washed in PBS and stained with 1 m Constructs were cut in half in the longitudinal direction, washed in PBS and the wet weights were determined. For DNA analysis, the samples ( The equilibrium compressive Young’s modulus ( μCT imaging was performed using a modification of a previously used protocol Constructs were washed in PBS, fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned into 4 μm slices and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and Von Kossa. Immunohistochemistry staining for collagen type I, bone sialoprotein (BSP), and osteopontin was also conducted as previously described Multiway Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) to analyze groups at the same time point and within group at different time points was carried out followed by Tukey’s The inter-pore connectivity of the scaffolds was maintained with the incorporation of HA into the silk sponges, while minimally reducing the porosity as seen in low magnification SEM images ( After 5 and 10 weeks of culture, the DNA content significantly increased from Day 0 in all groups and as much as 4 fold in the 4.6% HA ( The structure of the tissue engineered bone developed over 5 and 10 weeks of culture ( Quantification of morphological parameters confirmed development of trabecular-like structures in 3.1% and 4.6% HA groups ( The equilibrium Young’s modulus gradually increased over time in all groups ( The calcium content of scaffolds increased over time but the increases were not statistically significant within each group ( H&E ( Silk has shown significant promise as a biomaterial for bone tissue engineering scaffolds We successfully fabricated biocompatible HA-embedded silk scaffolds while maintaining pore size and interconnectivity ( The compressive (Young) modulus of engineered bone constructs increased as much as 8-fold for HA scaffolds when compared to silk alone ( Calcium production by the differentiated hMSCs correlated with the amount of embedded HA in a dose-dependent manner up to 3.1% HA and remained constant thereafter, which was consistent with prior reports An interesting observation was that the increase in bone volume ( It is also possible that the enhanced outcomes in the HA scaffolds may be explained in part due to the changes in the initial stiffness and surface roughness, both of which may influence cellular responses. However, initial scaffold stiffness was not significantly altered among the groups and other forms of modifying silk scaffolds have provided considerably higher initial compressive moduli but did not elicit such significant cell-mediated improvements The effect of incorporating the HA mineral into porous silk scaffolds was investigated for tissue engineered bone formation with hMSCs. The HA mineral enhanced hMSCs osteogenic differentiation and provided a platform for bone-like structure formation when adequate HA content was incorporated. The HA mineral provided a platform for the formation of engineered bone by hMSCs, both through the osteoconductivity of the material and by providing nucleation sites for the newly produced mineral. Authors declare no conflict of interest. The NIH support of this work (DE016525, P41EB002520, EB003210) is gratefully acknowledged. Figures with essential color discrimination.