The application of finely divided (black) Pd and Pd–Fe powder in the sono-electro-catalytic reduction of chlorophenoxy herbicides (2,4-D) and chlorophenols (2,4-DCP) in aqueous solutions allows for effective destruction of toxic chlorinated aromatic compounds. At 20°C complete conversion of these compounds is observed within 10min. On bimetallic Pd/Fe catalyst, intermediates due to the oxidation reaction are detected in addition to the products of dechlorination. The bimetallic catalyst appears to be energetically and economically superior to the Pd. In both cases, the reaction times were considerably shortened in comparison with traditional electro-catalytic processes.Despite considerable scientific efforts, detoxification of chlorinated aromatic compounds still represents a challenging environmental problem. Of particular interest is the case of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D): having been the most widespread herbicide worldwide for the last 50 years, it is an ubiquitous contaminant of waste and fresh waters. Although 2,4-D itself is only mildly toxic, some of its decomposition products, like 2,4-dichlorophenol (2,4-DCP), are highly toxic and subject to stringent limitations. (The maximum concentration level for 2,4-DCP in drinking water recommended by the World Health Organization is 70 Hydrodehalogenation (HDH) techniques are well known low-waste approaches for detoxification of organic halogenated liquids or gaseous wastes A well known advanced oxidation technique for wastewater treatment is ultrasound irradiation Recently, we reported that ultrasound considerably increases the electrochemical oxidation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in an ultrasound enhanced electrochemical Fenton process To the best of our knowledge, the effect of ultrasound on the electro-catalytic reduction of chlorinated aromatic compounds has not yet been investigated. In the present work we have studied the effect of ultrasound on the electro-catalytic reduction of 2,4-D and 2,4-DCP over two Pd catalysts and evaluated the effect of the catalyst on the selectivity of the degradation of the chlorinated aromatic compounds. The conditions which avoid 2,4-DCP production have been established by monitoring the intermediate compounds formed during the process. Our experimental setup has been described in detail elsewhere Sonication was conducted at low frequencies (20 Both the cathode and the anode used for the electro-catalytic reactions were made of nickel foil (0.125 Catalyst preparation was conducted according to the method presented by Vasilkiv et al. The Pd suspension formed as a result of the sonochemical reduction was heated to 150 The surface of the zero-valent iron (Fisher, 100 mesh) used in these experiments was cleaned with 1 Both target compounds, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (Aldrich, 98%) and 2,4-dichlorophenol (Fluka, 95%), were analyzed by HPLC and used as supplied with no further purification. Dichloromethane of spectroscopic purity (Carlo Erba, 99.8%) was used after testing by GLC. Analytical grade sodium sulfate (Agan, Israel) was used as supplied. All experiments were carried out at pH 3 with initial concentration of 0.25–1.5 Samples taken out of the reaction vessel at various times during experimental runs were analyzed for variations in 2,4-D and 2,4-DCP concentrations, by means of an HP 8453 UV–vis photodiode array Hewlett Packard spectrophotometer. To identify stable intermediates formed during the degradation of 2,4-D and 2,4-DCP, the organic components present in small samples (5 Sonolytic degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid has been investigated in detail by Peller et al. Electro-catalytic reduction of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid by Pd  The study of electrochemical hydrodehalogenation of chlorinated phenols in aqueous solutions has revealed that catalytic efficiency of bimetallic Pd/Fe is comparable to that of pure Pd Time dependent relative concentration of the starting compound is presented in In the previous sections we have shown that mineralization of 2,4-D has been successfully achieved with the help of both suspended nano-sized Pd and bimetallic Pd/Fe catalyst under the influence of ultrasound. The considerable enhancement of the electro-catalytic reduction on Pd in the presence of ultrasound could be attributed to the production of hydrogen by water sonolysis (see The yield of OH and H radicals produced under low frequency sonolysis is probably quite low, and not enough to fully account for the experimental results. The actual yields of formation of OH radicals, under low frequency sonolysis (20–50 It is noteworthy that no oxidative conversion to 2,4-DCP could be detected in our experiments. This fact supports our above conclusion, since 2,4-DCP should be detected as a product, in the presence of OH This consideration allow us to attribute the enhancement of the electro-catalytic reduction on Pd in the presence of ultrasound to several reasons: Effective renovation of reaction mixture near electrode space and as a result increasing of number of molecular reactive collisions. Also possible is a cavitational effect which disperses the catalyst. Furthermore, the catalyst particles may be crushed as a result of the collapse of cavitation bubbles giving fresh, extraordinarily active catalytic centres which produce greater degradation of dissolved substances. In the case of Pd/Fe catalyst, hydrogen gas production is additionally promoted by metallic iron according to the following reaction: Furthermore, ferrous ion(II) causes an enhanced production of hydroxyl radical OH Energy consumption (ECN) is a key parameter in the design and assessment of electrochemical processes. It is calculated according to the formula Generally speaking, ECN is a function of time. With the setup used in this work, only an estimate of average ECN can be given. The reaction was controlled galvanostatically with Our results demonstrate that coupling ultrasound to electro-catalytical reduction of 2,4-D results in complete mineralization of the substrate. Moreover, reaction times are greatly shortened in comparison with traditional electro-catalytic processes. The enhancement is due to the synergetic combination of multiple factors, such as improved mass transport, cleaning and constant reactivation of catalyst surface as well as sonolysis of water to give hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide. Therefore, we consider this method to be promising for the remediation of both fresh and wastewaters contaminated by chloroorganic compounds. The bimetallic Pd/Fe catalyst appears to be superior to the pure Pd catalyst from both economic and energetic point of view. This research has been supported in part by the Grand Water Research Institute and by the James Frank Program in Laser Matter Interaction. V.B and I.R. are grateful to the Israel Ministry of Absorption for a grant provided to new immigrant scientists.