The flotation and adsorption of sodium oleate (NaOL) on spodumene with four different particle size fractions (45–75μm, 38–45μm, 19–38μm and 0–19μm) were investigated. The flotation recovery increases upon slightly decreasing the size fraction, reaching a peak value at a size fraction of 38–45μm. The recovery then decreases gradually upon further decreasing the particle size over the entire investigated range of solution pH values. The specific chemisorption sites for the anionic NaOL collector are the Al sites on the surface of negatively charged spodumene, which is confirmed by FTIR and zeta potential measurements. Anisotropic surface energies and broken bond densities are calculated based on density function theory (DFT) to characterize the surface chemistry of spodumene crystal planes. The anisotropic adsorption behavior of NaOL on different crystal planes of spodumene is studied in terms of adsorption conformations and interaction energies by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. It is demonstrated that NaOL prefers to bind in a monodentate chelating complex configuration to the most stable surface plane, the (110) plane, which has two broken AlO bonds. The (110) plane of spodumene is more favorable for chemisorbing NaOL than the (001) plane, which has one broken AlO bond. The flotation behavior of spodumene with different particle sizes is well explained by the surface crystal chemistry. Based on the findings of this work, further improvement in spodumene flotation is possible if a selective comminution or grinding process is used that favors the production of (110) planes.Lithium (Li) is known to have excellent properties for energy storage applications and has become a precious commodity. The availability of known and anticipated lithium resources has gained considerable attention due to the increased demand for Li in batteries, especially for electric vehicles Flotation is the most widely used industrial method for the beneficiation of spodumene from associated silicate gangue minerals, employing fatty acid collectors such as oleate, naphthenic soap, oxidized paraffin soap, or a combination of two such reagents The reduction of particle size by mechanical crushing and grinding is closely related to the mineral flotation process. It is well known that as the mineral particle size is gradually reduced during processing, the mineral’s shape and surface properties become more important Because the particle size factor can affect the surface crystal chemistry properties of spodumene, flotation tests of NaOL on spodumene with four different particle size fractions were carried out. Various surface chemistry characterization techniques, including zeta potential measurements, infrared spectroscopy of the NaOL-spodumene system and adsorption measurements of NaOL on spodumene, were conducted. In addition, the anisotropic surface energies and broken bond densities were calculated based on density function theory (DFT) to characterize the surface crystal chemistry for spodumene planes. The anisotropic adsorption behavior of NaOL on different crystal planes of spodumene is studied in terms of adsorption conformation and interaction energy by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Furthermore, the aim of this work is elucidate how the anisotropic surface chemistry properties of spodumene and its anisotropic adsorption of NaOL influence the flotation of spodumene with different particle sizes. A pure mineral sample of spodumene was obtained from the The particle size distribution of sieved fractions of spodumene was determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Beckman Coulter, LS13320). The specific surface area (SSA) of spodumene powders was determined by N The anionic collector NaOL of analytical grade was obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Ferric trichloride (FeCl Flotation tests were carried out in a 40-mL hitch groove flotation cell. Prepared mineral particles (3 A suspension containing 0.1 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer at 25 A variety of surface slabs were modeled from the bulk unit cell of spodumene at its Miller indices using the Surface builder module in Materials Studio 6.0 (MS). The density of broken bonds for the creation of a specific surface was calculated according to Bulk spodumene structures were modeled using experimental lattice constants and positions as available from the structural database in MS. All of the surfaces were modeled using slabs consisting of three layers and a 0.5 The surface energies of spodumene planes (1 In this paper, the phyllosilicate force field embedded in the polymer-consistent force field (PCFF-Phyllosilicate) was adopted throughout the simulation. This force field was developed by Heinz et al. to provide reasonably accurate results for both phyllosilicates and hydrocarbon chains, such as atomic charges, cell parameters, and surface energies The crystal parameters were optimized using the PCFF-Phyllosilicate force field and are listed in The optimized NaOL molecule was docked on the spodumene planes. The initial geometry of the mineral-oleate complex was created physically on the screen using molecular graphics tools, taking into consideration the possible interactions of carboxylic functional groups with the surface atoms. The NaOL molecule was then allowed to relax completely on the surface. Several initial conformations (∼20) were assessed to locate the minimum energy conformation of the NaOL molecule at the mineral surface The adsorption of NaOL on spodumene powder samples with different size fractions was studied under various solution pH conditions. Elementar liquid TOCII (Elementar Co., Germany), which is often used to determine the total organic carbon concentration in organic matter, was used to measure the amount of adsorbed NaOL on spodumene. The sample preparation process is as follows: pure mineral particles (2.0 The morphologies of spodumene with size fractions of 45–75 The flotation behavior of spodumene with four particle size fractions (45–75 With respect to the effect of particle size on spodumene flotation, the unactivated and activated spodumene display the same flotation rule. This suggests that the activator (Fe The zeta potentials of spodumene in the absence and presence of NaOL as a function of solution pH are illustrated in To further understand the chemisorption mechanism of NaOL on spodumene, the infrared spectra of spodumene treated by 0.5 As mentioned earlier, the Al sites on spodumene surfaces are responsible for the chemisorption of NaOL. The density of broken surface Al To more definitively identify the affinity of NaOL for different planes of spodumene, MD simulations were carried out for the edge (1 As shown in To confirm the floatability of spodumene with different size fractions, the adsorption densities of NaOL on spodumene with four different size fractions were measured as a function of pH, and the results are given in As discussed in the previous section, spodumene is a very anisotropic mineral. Due to its tendency to cleave along the (1 Chemisorption of the NaOL collector occurs at the Al sites on the surface of spodumene, which is indicated by FTIR and zeta potential measurements. The calculation of broken surface bond densities confirms that the anisotropic adsorption of NaOL on different crystal planes of spodumene is related to the nature of surface Al sites. The anisotropic adsorption behavior of NaOL on different crystal planes of spodumene was investigated by MD simulations. It was demonstrated that NaOL prefers to bind to the most stable surface plane, (1 The flotation behavior of spodumene with four particle sizes is well explained by considering the surface crystal chemistry. Fine spodumene particles with a size fraction of 38–45 Based on the findings of this work, it is suggested that if the exposure of (1 The authors would like to thank the