The past European conferences on Mixing took place in Cambridge (1974, 1976), York (1979), Noordwijkerhout (1982), Würzburg (1985), Pavia (1988), Bruges (1991), Cambridge (1994), Paris (1997), Delft (2000), Bamberg (2003), Bologna (2006), London (2009) and Warsaw (2012). St. Petersburg was selected by the EFCE Working Party on Mixing as the venue for the 2015 conference. St. Petersburg is known as the ‘Cultural capital of Russia’ due to its cultural and educational institutions, its history, still short (the city was founded by Peter the Great in 1703) but rich with key events, and numerous historic and cultural sites. Incredibly almost one in ten inhabitants of the five-million population city are students, i.e. about 500,000 students live in this city! The 15th European Conference on Mixing took place in St. Petersburg (Russia) during the best time for this city – the time of the famous White Nights, at the end of June/beginning of July 2015. Around 100 participants from 34 countries including almost all European countries, Brazil, Canada, China, India, Israel, Japan, Korea, Russia, Turkey and USA joined the Conference. Mixing is a key feature of modern technologies, although it has a very long history ascending to ancient tools, e.g., for the leaching from gold ores. The modern world is changing very quickly, but even very fine technologies are impossible to imagine without a good chemical engineering background, including mixing capabilities. Only two diametrically opposite examples can corroborate the importance of mixing. The first example belongs to hydrometallurgy. Modern hydrometallurgy plants include huge mixers (with a volume of 5000 cubic meters and more) with very heavy particles of ores (gold, iron, etc.). These apparatuses are actually bio-hydrometallurgical, because bacteria used in the process drastically improves the leaching process. It is clear that inside of these apparatuses very even distribution of temperature and good mixing conditions are necessary, and this is real challenge. The second example has very small spatial scale and belongs to micro-technologies, which have seen rapid development in the past two decades. At first glance it would seem that in small objects with a cross section diameter of 1 For all of these technical applications a stable theoretical background is necessary. Traditional classical hydrodynamics developed in the 17th–19th centuries, dynamics of multiphase flows and modern methods like population balance, advanced turbulence phenomena, eigenvalue and spectral analysis are all used for modeling and design of processes and apparatuses. New problems have stimulated the development of new methods. Technology and science have helped each other to grow and to create a sustainable industry. This special issue features papers on both approaches: new theoretical approaches to fundamentals of mixing, rheology and turbulence and development of theory and practical applications for mixing and conjugated processes like deagglomeration, extraction, drop dispersion and coalescence, of some new types of mixers like e.g. fractal impeller, pulsating flow-type apparatus or micromixers. In addition to the papers selected from the conference an additional paper ‘Experimental investigation of the mixing of viscous liquids and non-dilute concentrations of particles in a stirred tank’ of Manon Lassaigne, Bruno Blais, Louis Fradette and François Bertrand is included in this issue. Although the authors were unable to attend the conference the subject of the paper corresponds well with the topics of the conference so is a welcome addition to the collection of papers presented here. I would like to express my gratitude to my colleagues – guest co-editors of this Mixing-15 special issue: Jerzy Bałdyga from Warsaw University of Technology (Poland), Alain Liné from INSA Toulouse (France) and Suzanne Kresta from University of Alberta (Canada) for their collaboration. I also extend my gratitude to all reviewers of papers for this issue for their highly professional expertise (two dozen of the papers from 44 manuscripts were ultimately selected for publication). I hope you will enjoy this special issue of the 15th European Conference on Mixing and find the extended papers interesting and useful for your further work and reference. The 16th European Conference on Mixing will take place in Toulouse, France in 2018.