Combustion of two semi-dried sewage sludges in a 110mm has been characterized in terms of particulate and gaseous emissions. Sludges differed in that they had been conditioned – at the flocculation stage of wastewater treatment – either with Ca-based inorganics or with polyelectrolytes. Combustion was efficient for both sewage sludges under all the operating conditions tested. Significant differences have instead been observed between the two types of sewage sludges as regards particulate and macro-pollutant gaseous emissions (SO2, NOx). NOx formation is significantly influenced by ash accumulation inside the bed only when sewage sludge conditioned with Ca-based inorganics is fired. The time-resolved profiles of NOx concentration and the mass flow rate of the elutriated fines have been worked out to evaluate the fuel nitrogen yield to NOx as a function of ash accumulated inside the bed divided by the air mass feed rate. Experimental results have been compared with data present in literature.Disposal of sewage sludge is a challenging environmental issue emphasized by the continuously increasing volumes of sewage sludge generated by municipal wastewater treatment plants. The environmental legislation is becoming more and more restrictive as regards landfilling of this biodegradable waste (Landfill Directive 99/31/EEC). The use of sludge in agriculture ( The present paper aims at a better understanding of the relationship between sludge properties and the nature and extent of gaseous and particulate emissions associated with the fluidized bed combustion of different semi-dried sewage sludges, with an emphasis on the influence of accumulation of bed ash on NO The experimental apparatus with the ancillary equipments used during the stationary combustion experiments is shown in The reactor was charged with 5 The fuel consists of sludge particles of about 1–3 The experimental campaign consists of steady combustion tests with continuous feeding of the sludge particles at different values of the fuel mass feeding rate. The gaseous and particulate emissions were monitored during both the start-up stage and once steady state conditions were reached. In particular, the mass flow rate of elutriated fines collected by the high-efficiency cyclone was measured as a function of time from the beginning of fuel feeding. At the end of each test the bed was discharged and characterized. The combustion tests were repeated three times at least to have significant statistical data.  Significant differences can be observed between sewage sludges conditioned with polyelectrolytes (SS60 and SS70) and those conditioned with Ca-based inorganics (SS65 and SS75) as regards particulate and macro-pollutant gaseous emissions (SO The difference in SO As far as concerning particulate emissions at the exhaust, it should be taken into account that the combustor was operated without bottom ash discharge and the carbon content of the elutriated particles was negligible. Accordingly at steady state conditions, the mass flow rate of elutriated fines should reflect the inlet ash mass flow rate, which, in turn, is determined by the ash content and heating value of the sludge, for given thermal throughput. These features are more unfavorable for sewage sludges SS65 and SS75, in agreement with the larger values of particulate emissions measured at the exhaust. However, if one considers that primary and secondary fragmentation and abrasion of sewage sludge are extensive ( Although the yield of fuel nitrogen to NO  The analysis of the time-resolved profiles of NO NO Data obtained during runs 4 and 5 (SS65 and SS75) can be fitted by the relationship: It is interesting to compare results concerning the influence of ash-catalyzed NO Fluidized bed combustion of different semi-dried sewage sludges in a 110 The authors acknowledge the support of Mr. V. Stanzione in the ICP-MS elemental analysis of fuels.