A mixture of rare earth double sulfates was produced from a Turkish bastnasite-containing pre-concentrate (low grade concentrate) by sulfuric acid baking, subsequent water leaching and precipitation with sodium sulfate. The results of acid baking and leaching indicated that recoveries of rare earth elements up to 90% were readily obtained and the recovery of hydrofluoric acid as a by-product was also possible. Reasonable decontamination of the rare earth double sulfate salt from impurities such as Th, Fe, Al and Mg was possible by rapid precipitation at 50 °C using 1.25 times the stoichiometric amount of Na2SO4. The total rare earth double sulfate content (TREDS) was >90% and analysed 17.3% La, 15.6% Ce, 3.2% Nd, 1.1% Pr, 0.3% Sm, 0.03% Eu, 0.01% Yb and 0.02% Y together with about 0.7% Ca, Fe, Al and other impurities.The rare earths (RE), as a group, occur in a variety of minerals—some of which are of commercial interest such as bastnasite (fluorocarbonate mineral), monazite (phosphate mineral), allanite (hydrous silicate mineral), gadolinite (silicate of yttrium) and xenotime (phosphate of yttrium). After leaching, usually with H The main resources of mid-heavy rare earths in the world are the weathered crust elution-deposited rare earth ores in China ( Generally, a bastnasite concentrate containing about 60% REO, which has been produced by mineral dressing processes, is used in the conventional processes. In concentrates that have been produced by flotation, bastnasite is present with calcite (CaCO The purposes of calcination are two-fold: i. Decomposition of fluorocarbonates, formation of REO and elimination of CO ii. Oxidation of Ce(III) to Ce(IV) and formation of CeO The calcination process is typically carried out over 3 h in an 8-hearth Herreshoff type multi-layer furnace in an oxidizing medium at 620 °C using low-sulfur fuel. In the calcined concentrate; cerium is present as CeO Rare earths are precipitated in the form of insoluble double sulfate salts (as confirmed by XRD) by addition of sodium sulfate at pH 1.5 to avoid ferric hydroxide precipitation. The chemistry of the precipitated double sulfates (NaRE(SO The aim of this research was to determine the optimum hydrometallurgical parameters to extract the rare earth elements as rare earth double sulfates from a bastnasite ore in Beylikahır, Eskişehir, Turkey. The resource was estimated to be 1 million tons with an average grade of 3.14% REO. The other major constituents of the ore were calcium fluoride, barite, calcite and minor amounts of thorium, iron and manganese containing minerals. The bastnasite mineral occurred either as cement material between fluorite and barite particles or was intimately associated with these minerals. The rare earth elements were enriched considerably in sub-sieve sizes; therefore physical concentration of the ore was very difficult by mineral dressing processes. For this ore, the best physical concentration methods were determined as attrition scrubbing, screening and desliming by cyclones which produced a low grade concentrate, or so called pre-concentrate, containing only 23.5% REO. The chemical composition of the pre-concentrated bastnasite and its distribution of RE are shown in In connection with Beylikahır pre-concentrate acid baking experiments, the stoichiometric requirement of sulfuric acid was calculated to be 0.91 kg H Samples (50 g) were baked at an optimum temperature of 200 °C with acid in a Teflon beaker or porcelain capsule and then ground to < In the precipitation experiments, the amount of pure solid sodium sulfate (Na Several studies have been done on acid baking of bastnasite type ores ( Fluorspar (CaF The baked sulfates dispersed easily in water, so not surprisingly, half an hour was enough to extract 90% La and 86% Ce as sulfates into the leach solution and extended leaching times and changes in stirring speed from 200 rpm to 800 rpm had no effect on recovery. Likewise the recovery was unchanged when the solid:liquid ratio was varied from 1:8 to 1:3 indicating that the solution was not saturated. Nevertheless, when the leaching temperature was varied between 5 and 90 °C, the recovery of REE decreased slightly with increasing temperature as shown in In an additional series of experiments, the effect of H A pregnant leach solution was produced under the optimum baking and leaching conditions and used in the precipitation experiments. The aim of the precipitation study was to produce a reasonably pure mixed rare earth double sulfate salt using sodium sulfate but not complete selective precipitation. The pH of the leach solutions vary considerably since it is difficult to control the remaining acid left after baking––but after sodium sulfate addition, the sulfate buffers the solution to about pH 2–2.6. After precipitation, the waste liquor typically contains thorium and low concentrations of REE and other impurities as given in Sodium sulfate was added at 1 to 3 times the stoichiometric ratio, but the effect on recovery was small above a ratio of 1.25 as shown in On the other hand, the amount of thorium in the precipitate increased with increasing Na When the precipitation temperature was changed between 25 °C and 90 °C, the recoveries of the rare earths were rather low below 50 °C; but did not change much above 50 °C as seen in The rate of precipitation of the mixed rare earth sulfate was equally fast at both 50 °C and 90 °C with the most of the precipitate obtained in 5 min. Crystallization equilibrium was achieved in 90 min. However, it was found that impurity elements such as Ca, Fe, Al and Th were slower to crystallize as gypsum, jarosite, alunite and thorium oxide etc, resulting in an increase in the impurity content of the rare earth double sulfate precipitates. For example, 24% Th in the pregnant leach solution was precipitated within 5 min at 90 °C, but 30% Th was co-precipitated after 90 min. Generally, jarosite and alunite are precipitated at higher temperatures with seeding and in this work only about 20% iron and aluminium co-precipitated from solution. Therefore, it was easier to produce a cleaner REE precipitate at a relatively low temperature and in a shorter time. The chemical analysis of this rare earth double sulfate precipitated at 50 °C after 5 min contained 17.33% La, 15.64% Ce, 3.15% Nd, 1.10% Pr, 0.31% Sm, 0.03% Eu, 0.01% Yb, 0.02% Y, together with impurities of 0.42% Ca, 0.10% Fe, 0.11% Al, 0.01% Mn and trace amounts of Mg and Ba, giving an overall grade >  Sulfuric acid baking and water leaching of bastnasite pre-concentrate readily extracts 85–90% RE including Th and produces HF acid as by-product. Calcium and barium accumulate in leach residue as gypsum and barite. The optimum leaching conditions were determined to be 25 °C or ambient temperature for 30 min. Whilst the optimum conditions for the precipitation of a rare earth double sulfate salt with sodium sulfate were 50 °C using 1.25 times stoichiometric Na Further treatment of this intermediate, low cost product is required to produce more valuable REE products, which is beyond the scope of this work. In general, this is carried out by conversion of the rare earth double sulfate to rare earth hydroxide by sodium hydroxide; hydrochloric acid leaching and production of CeO