Desalination of unconventional water resources is becoming increasingly common for the augmentation of drinking water supplies. Desalination is energy and cost intensive, and concentrate disposal is a significant issue that impedes desalination in many regions of the globe. One possible approach to decrease desalination costs while alleviating concentrate disposal issues is through the extraction of valuable commodities. While past researchers have evaluated the technical feasibility of extracting minerals from both seawater and, to a lesser extent, desalination concentrate, the feasibility of commodity extraction is dependent upon technical, energy, and cost considerations, as well as, market fluctuations of the minerals extracted. Most of the available literature has focused on technical processes used to extract minerals and has not evaluated the feasibility of extraction considering the aforementioned concerns. For this study, the feasibility of material extraction from seawater and desalination concentrate was investigated through three steps: 1) screening for potentially profitable compounds; 2) reviewing literature on extraction methods and market fluctuations for these compounds; and 3) assessing the costs of extracting these compounds. Although the extraction of various compounds from desalination concentrate is technically viable, based on the literature review and the primarily cost analysis, the extraction of the majority would not be profitable considering the current market and available technologies. The results from this study suggest that while the extraction of commodities of sodium, chlorine, potassium, and magnesium from desalination concentrate could be profitable, the feasibility of extraction is highly dependent on commodity pricing and final product purity. Due to the marginally attractive economics of extraction and significant uncertainties associated with producing commodities, this study suggests that extraction from desalination concentrate is unlikely to significantly improve the economics of desalination unless concentrate disposal costs were significantly reduced as a result.Due to the lack of additional conventional water supplies, unconventional water resources such as seawater and brackish water are being targeted to meet current and future water demands ( The benefits of concentrate minimization and ZLD practices are often offset by their high operation and maintenance costs, and energy requirements ( Seawater has long been viewed as an inexhaustible source of valuable constituents and several salable commodities are currently (sodium chloride, magnesia), or have been (magnesium metal, bromine), extracted from seawater in appreciable quantities ( The objective of this study was to review the extraction methods and economic information concerning potentially commercial salts and metals in seawater and desalination concentrate. A preliminary cost assessment of selected extraction methodologies for commercial commodities was then performed to evaluate economic viability. A basic assessment was performed to screen out compounds that could not be extracted for profit, and the highest possible annual profit from extraction of each constituent from seawater (the influent water for RO system) was calculated without considering capital costs (no investment cost was assumed). The annual profit was calculated using the conservative market price for any constituent ( Annual profit was estimated for desalination facilities with influent flow rates of 5000 to 50,000 (m Large quantities of bromine were extracted from seawater in the early to middle 20th century using the ‘blow out method’. This process for bromine extraction uses gaseous chlorine to liberate bromine from an aqueous solution after which, adding sulfur dioxide to the bromine-enriched air stream produces hydrobromic acid. Other methods for extracting bromine have either been proposed or used in the past including electrolysis ( There is increased interest in calcium removal from RO concentrate to prevent secondary RO scaling, as well as the extraction and sale to recoup desalination costs ( Chlorine and sodium hydroxide are primarily produced from saturated sodium chloride or brine solutions using the chlor-alkali process and either diaphragm, membrane, or mercury electrolytic cells. Several researchers have proposed that chlorine produced from seawater or SWRO concentrate could be used for disinfection of finished drinking water ( Second to sodium, magnesium is the most abundant metal ion in seawater comprising approximately 15% of the total salt. There are several forms of magnesium that have historically or are currently being extracted from seawater including magnesium metal and various magnesium compounds. Magnesium metal was once predominantly produced from seawater however, the current world-wide production processes use magnesium derived from carnalite deposits ( Several desk-top feasibility or small-scale laboratory studies have explored the concept of extracting magnesium from desalination waste streams to both improve recovery as well as for economic gain ( Worldwide potash consumption is expected to increase annually by approximately 3% through 2016 due to population growth and increased demand for fertilizers ( Although past USGS rubidium commodity summaries stated that the development of new rubidium markets is unlikely, the USGS recently indicated that there is increased interest in its use ( Besides the low concentration of rubidium in seawater, there are a number of challenges associated with the extraction of rubidium from RO concentrate at a desalination facility. Adsorbents and ion-exchange resins that have shown promise for rubidium uptake also tend to have moderate adsorption capacities for other alkali metals such as cesium, lithium and potassium. Preparation of commodity grade rubidium requires the removal of other metals, which has proven difficult and requires additional technologies including methods for isolating rubidium and concentrating the final solution (e.g., distillation). Very little work has been conducted to develop adsorbent materials specifically for rubidium uptake, and those that have been developed have not been evaluated with a seawater matrix. Also, rubidium has a very low demand and is not traded on the open market. Therefore, extraction of rubidium from desalination brine is unlikely to be viable from both a technological or economic perspective. Sodium is consumed as a number of different compounds and in a variety of end-uses. A number of researchers have proposed producing sodium compounds from desalination concentrate although in most cases salt production was never evaluated on an appreciable scale. Various extraction schemes and technologies have been proposed or evaluated including evaporation technologies ( Strontium compound consumption is expected to increase in the near future, both in traditional applications, and more advanced applications (e.g., pharmaceuticals) ( In addition to the elements discussed above, there has been research into the extraction of a number of different elements in aqueous solutions. Most literature identified is related to extraction of cesium, lithium, molybdenum, nitrogen, and uranium. It can be observed from Cesium commodity information including pricing and usage data is mostly unavailable. Despite the small market for cesium, several researchers have suggested that cesium could be extracted from SWRO brine for economic gain. The majority of studies on cesium extraction has evaluated ion-exchange materials or liquid–liquid extraction processes and has not typically focused on obtaining a pure cesium product (e.g., The significant recent increase in lithium ion battery production has raised questions as to the short- and long-term availability of lithium resources ( A number of different technologies have been investigated for the extraction of lithium from seawater including adsorption ( Seawater or brackish waters typically have low concentrations of inorganic nitrogen, however, RO concentrate from water reuse applications can have inorganic nitrogen concentrations greater than 40 mg-N/L. Besides the recovery of ammonia-nitrogen through struvite production, the extraction of ammonia from wastewater effluent or RO concentrate for economic gain has received limited attention. Physical-chemical processes for the removal of ammonia from wastewater streams include air-stripping, electrodialysis, ion-exchange, and precipitation. Various ion-exchange materials have been developed or evaluated for ammonia uptake, and significant research has been performed on the use of natural and synthetic zeolites (i.e., clinoptilolite) as sorbent materials due to their capacity and affinity for ammonium ions, and low cost ( Although seawater has a relatively low uranium content (∼3 ppb), there is approximately 1000 times the amount of uranium by mass in the world's ocean compared to the amount of estimated in known terrestrial ores ( Cobalt is generally found at extremely low concentrations in natural waters ( Based on literature and preliminary screening, sodium chloride (NaCl), magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH) Preliminary cost analyses were performed on each of the schemes to evaluate the profitability of extraction by considering capital costs (i.e., costs of equipment, buildings, construction, and land and unpredicted costs), O&M costs, and sale revenues. A total income tax rate of 30 percent was applied, and a 7-year modified accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS) was used for depreciation calculations. Startup cost was assumed as 10% of total depreciable capital, general expenses were assumed as 5% of sale revenues, and working capital was assumed as 10% of manufacturing cost. To be conservative, 80% unit extraction process efficiency was assumed, and the number of days in a year was assumed to be 350. The cost analyses were performed for a concentrate flow rate of 5 mgd (approximately 19,000 m An economic analysis was performed to evaluate the feasibility of extracting MgO from SWRO concentrate using the conventional magnesia from seawater approach discussed in Section Major caveats associated with chlorine and sodium hydroxide production from brine include the necessity to remove any impurities, and the fact that the chlor-alkali industry produces near saturated and high purity sodium chloride solutions for feed stock and still employs pretreatment to remove ions that can interfere with the electrolysis process. Therefore, the proposed process illustrated in The profitability of producing chlorine and sodium hydroxide from desalination brine was found to be highly sensitive to several factors particularly the product price and O&M costs (see   Concentrate management is a divisive issue that can impede the use of desalination to augment drinking water supplies with unconventional water resources (i.e., brackish water, seawater, wastewater). There is significant interest in developing approaches to reduce the amount of concentrate requiring disposal with the ultimate goal of zero liquid discharge. The extraction of commodities from desalination concentrate has attracted interest both to increase a facilities product water recovery using downstream treatment processes (e.g., softening followed by secondary RO) and to improve the economics of desalination through the production of salable commodities. While studies on the latter have reported that extraction of various commodities for profit is viable, few have evaluated the maturity of extraction techniques, existing commodity markets, and economics of extraction. In addition, while several papers have reported the revenues associated with extraction, few if any have evaluated the costs associated with producing salable commodities. The objective of this study was to review the literature pertaining to commodity production from seawater and desalination concentrate, and evaluate the economics of extraction. A summary of literature on element extraction is provided in An economic analysis was performed on past, current or proposed extraction schemes for the production of bromine, magnesium hydroxide and sodium chloride; chlorine and sodium hydroxide; magnesia; and sodium chloride. Results of the analyses indicate that if high purity commodities can be produced, extraction could produce a profit after approximately ten years (with the exception of bromine). A sensitivity analysis indicated that the profitability of extraction is strongly tied to commodity pricing (which is a function of product purity and market fluctuations) and operation and maintenance costs. Besides these considerations, the feasibility of producing commodities for profit from desalination concentrate is dependent on factors such as proximity to a buyer, extraction efficiency, product purity and uniformity, safety, material handling, and storage and transport. Due to the marginally attractive economics of extraction and significant uncertainties associated with producing commodities, this study suggests that extraction from desalination concentrate is unlikely to significantly improve the economics of desalination unless concentrate disposal costs were significantly reduced as a result. The authors thank the WateReuse Research Foundation for its financial, technical, and administrative assistance in funding and managing of this project. The comments and views detailed herein may not necessarily reflect the views of the WateReuse Research Foundation officers, directors, affiliates, or agents.  Brackish water reverse osmosis Electrodialysis Electrodialysis reversal Interest rate Ion-exchange Modified accelerated cost recovery system Multiple-effect distillation Mechanical vapor compression Nanofiltration Net present value Operation and maintenance Reverse osmosis Seawater reverse osmosis Metric ton Ultrafiltration United States Geological Survey Zero liquid discharge  Negatively impacted by the recent recession Increased demand is expected in Asia and South America Proven worldwide boron reserves will meet global demand for the foreseeable future [USGS] US demand for gypsum is expected to increase Production of gypsum from coal-fired power plant scrubbers is expected to increase ( Possible applications for low quality commodities: CaCl CaCO Small market as drilling fluid, drill pipe unsticking, and treatment of some tumors Demand for sodium hydroxide has increased over the past 5 years Chlorine demand has decreased recently due to the global economic recession Production of magnesium metal from seawater is not competitive with current methods of production Caustic calcined magnesia and magnesium hydrioxide demand is expected to increase in the near future U.S. currently imports the majority of consumed magnesia World nitrogen consumption for fertilizer is expected to increase ( Due to stable natural gas prices, nitrogen fixing production is expanding Worldwide potash consumption is expected to increase annually by approximately 4% due to population growth and increased demand for fertilizers. Potassium as a fertilizer has no substitutes. Possible increased interest in the use of rubidium for quantum computing, in atomic clocks and superconductors, and for biomedical uses. Little demand. Sodium compounds are consumed in large quantities by a variety of end-users and industries and demand is relatively stable It is likely that many local markets exist for sodium compounds regardless of manufacturing location Worldwide strontium demand has decreased significantly since 1997. Strontium compound consumption is expected to increase in the near future, both in traditional applications (e.g., ceramics, glasses and magnets), and more advanced applications (e.g., pharmaceuticals) ( Demand is expected to increase due to increasing lithium-ion battery production. Recent literature disagrees on the extent to which increased demand will affect lithium commodity pricing, and whether or not known reserves will be able to meet future demand. Lithium is distributed unevenly globally Despite low demand since the nuclear disaster in Japan in March 2011, worldwide demand is projected to increase, reaching 110 kton-U/yr by 2030 ( Uranium could be extracted from seawater cost between $220 and $280 per kg-U (