Objectives
                  Aim of our study was to assess the role of addition of fibular strut graft to multiple cancellous screws in functional outcome, union and complications associated with those managed by only multiple cancellous screws in fresh femoral neck fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A randomized control trial study was conducted on the patients of femoral neck fractures managed with multiple cancellous screws (group A) and multiple cancellous screws with fibular graft (group B). Patients aged between 20 and 50 years, having Gardens type III or IV fracture with duration of injury less than two weeks were included in the study.
               
                  Results
                  Eighty seven cases were analysed n = 45 were in group A and n = 42 in group B. Functional outcome (Harris hip score) was excellent in 30 patients in group A as compared to 12 in Group B which was statistically significant favouring group A. The time of full weight bearing, union and non union rates showed no statistical significance (p > 0.05). On statistical grounds none of the procedures proved to be better than other.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Fresh femoral neck fracture in young adults managed with multiple cancellous screws fixation with fibular graft has no added advantage over multiple cancellous screws fixation alone.Femoral neck fractures are uncommon in young adult population and usually occur after significant trauma. Femoral neck fractures in patients of less than 50 years constitute about 2–3% of all femoral neck fractures. A randomized control trial was conducted at our institution from Aug.2009 to Aug.2013, on the patients with femoral neck fracture, two groups were formed, Group A was managed with multiple cancellous screws ( All patients between 20 and 50 years of age with Garden type III and IV fresh femoral neck fractures and duration of post traumatic fracture less than two weeks attending the Orthopaedic OPD/Emergency between August 2009 & December 2011 were included in the study. Patients with diabetes mellitus, infection around surgical site, evidence of sequlae of septic arthritis or avascular necrosis or previous history of any surgery around affected joint, Polytrauma and fractures those requiring open reduction were excluded from the study. A total of 100 patients were taken into the study. The patients were randomized as per random allocation table to receive either of the above operative management into group A & B respectively. Three patients required open reduction so they were excluded from the study. Four patients were lost to follow up in group A and six patients were lost to follow up in group B. In total, 45 in group A (multiple cancellous screws) and 42 in group B (multiple cancellous screws with fibular graft) were left for analysis. Preoperatively all patients were applied with above knee skin traction till the operation to alleviate pain and overcome muscle spasm. Preoperatively informed written consent of the patient was taken duly in all the cases. All operations were done on fracture table. The fractures were reduced by standard technique of closed methods. Reduction was confirmed with the help of C-arm image intensifier with anteroposterior and lateral views, based on the Garden's alignment index. An angle of 160°–180° in both views was considered satisfactory reduction. In group A cases after closed reduction, internal fixation were done either percutaneously or through small incision laterally with 3 partially threaded 16/32 mm × 6.5 mm cannulated or non cannulated cancellous screws out of them at least one was placed along the calcar and other along the posterior cortex. In cases of group B two teams were deployed. One surgical team prepared the tunnel in proximal femur for the fibular strut grafts using a 10 mm cannulated reamer. The other team harvested the fibular graft from the ipsilateral leg using the standard posterolateral approach. The standard lateral approach was used and after securing reduction with multiple 2 mm K wires, channel for fibula graft was prepared in central or superior part of head and neck. The fracture was fixed with two 6.5 mm partially threaded cannulated or non cannulated cancellous screws in the previously mentioned fashion and then fibular graft was duly impacted. Post operatively single POP hip spica cast was applied in all the patients for six weeks after wards they were allowed quadriceps and knee range of motion exercises upto eighth weeks and later on hip abductor strengthening exercises in supine position. Partial or full weight bearing was allowed only on the basis of radiological presence of bridging trabeculae. Initial follow up were done at six weeks interval till the bony union and 3 monthly thereafter. Hip pain, range of hip motion, walking capacity, evidence of bone union, presence of avascular necrosis, graft incorporation, and position of the screws/graft were evaluated. Functional outcomes were evaluated using the Harris hip score. Data was compiled using MS office Excel 2007 and statistically analysed using SPSS version 16. Since it was non parametric distribution, Mann–Whitney U Test was used to compare Harris hip score and time of clinico-radiological union. Complications were assessed using Chi-square test. Time of partial/full weight bearing was compared using Independent samples t test. Results were calculated at an average follow up period of two years and 87 patients were included in analysis. There were 55.17% (48) males and 44.82% (39) females in our study. According to Garden's classification, 66 (75.86%) cases were of type III, out of which 33 patients were in group A while 33 were in group B. 21 (24.13%) patients were of type IV, 12 in group A and nine in group B ( In our study, according to Harris hip score, the functional outcome was statistically significant in favour of group A with excellent results in 30 (66.6%) patients as compared to only 12 (28.5%) patients of group B ( The mean time of partial weight bearing was 10.13 ± 4.81 weeks in group A, and 12 ± 4.04 weeks in group B (p = 0.004). The mean time of union was 16.53 ± 8.2 weeks in group A and 16.28 ± 8.8 weeks in group B (p = 0.99) & the mean time of full weight bearing was 16.53 ± 8.2 weeks in group A and 16.28 ± 8.3 weeks in group B (p = 0.46). In both the groups these findings were statistically not significant ( On assessment of complications in group A there were six (13.33%) patients of non union out of which three patients showed distal migration of screws. Three patients had avascular necrosis of femoral head. In group B there were five (11.90%) patients of non union, in which two patients also had avascular necrosis of femoral head. One patient had broken fibular graft which finally showed sign of union ( Displaced femoral neck fractures often accompany comminution of the posteromedial cortex of the femoral neck, which is an important risk factor of non-union due to the loss of the buttressing effect against lateral rotation and insecure fixation. There is no added advantage of non-vascularized fibular grafting with multiple hip screw fixation in fresh femoral neck fractures in young adults over multiple hip screw fixation alone. It is unnecessary to increase donor site morbidity, operative time and intra-operative blood loss. Because of no difference between the results of both, it all depends on the decision making of the surgeon who can choose the procedure according to patient. All authors have none to declare.