In 1997 Newmont USA Ltd. introduced the N2TEC process for the flotation recovery of auriferous pyrite and other sulfide minerals in Carlin type ores, using nitrogen as the flotation gas, and low pH to prevent oxidation and hydrolysis of the pyrite surface. However, increased amounts of carbonate gangue minerals in certain Carlin type ores adversely affect the flotation recovery due to difficulties with pH control in the presence of carbonate minerals, i.e. calcite, dolomite, etc. Subsequently, it was discovered that by using CO2 for flotation, the pH of the system can be more effectively controlled, and consequently the recovery and rate of pyrite flotation can be improved significantly.
                  In our current laboratory research on pyrite flotation chemistry these results were confirmed, as both fresh and oxidized pyrite particles exhibited an increased flotation response in CO2 saturated solution. It was found that the water contact angle at the pyrite surface increased in CO2 and N2 saturated solutions, while surface oxidation and bubble attachment time decreased. In addition to decreased surface oxidation and the influence of pH on surface hydrolysis, the significance of bubble attachment phenomena in these CO2 flotation systems helps to explain the improved flotation response.It is well established that sulfide minerals, including pyrite, are naturally hydrophobic under anaerobic conditions ( However, the presence of carbonate gangue minerals in Carlin type ores causes serious difficulties in the flotation separation, as they significantly increase the pulp pH which inhibits pyrite flotation. Flotation recovery of auriferous pyrite in the presence of low, medium, and high carbonate feed has been reported as 51.3%, 38.6%, and 36.7%, respectively ( In order to make further improvements in the flotation efficiency, a better understanding of the corresponding fundamental surface chemistry issues of auriferous pyrite flotation with carbon dioxide and nitrogen would be useful. It should be noted that following the dissolution of CO A high-quality cubic crystal of pyrite was obtained from the Geology Department at the University of Utah. The powder XRD pattern of the sample, presented in previous publications ( N The captive bubble method was used to measure the CO The pyrite particles for particle bed experiments were prepared by crushing and grinding natural crystals in a ceramic mortar. The ground particles were then dry sieved and sorted into different size classes. Prior to the experiments, the sample of desired size (150 × 106 µm) was washed in an excessive amount of DI water to remove slimes and any remaining ions from the surface. All ground samples were kept in a refrigerator at a temperature below −4 °C to prevent and minimize surface oxidation, as suggested in previous studies ( In order to characterize the surface charge of the samples, zeta potential measurements were performed both in DI water and CO A camera imaging-based bubble size measurement device similar to a McGill bubble size analyzer ( In order to represent actual flotation phenomena, microflotation experiments with collector (potassium amyl xanthate - PAX) were conducted to determine the flotation response of the fresh and oxidized pyrite samples for various solution conditions. The variable parameters in the flotation tests were pulp pH, and surface characteristics of the pyrite (fresh or oxidized). All other parameters were kept constant, such as, flotation time, collector and frother types and concentrations, conditioning time, etc. Based on the results from contact angle and attachment time experiments, flotation experiments were conducted in CO All ground samples were kept in a refrigerator at a temperature below −4 °C to prevent and/or minimize surface oxidation, as suggested in previous studies ( The same flotation experiments were repeated using the oxidized pyrite, to mimic the actual surface state for industrial operations. In order to oxidize the pyrite sample, the surfaces were exposed to pure humidified oxygen at 70 °C for 15 days in a set-up similar to a dry fluidized bed. At this point H In the absence of collector, the results indicate that the N It is evident that for CO  Bubble attachment times for sized pyrite particles were measured for both N Bubble attachment times for sized pyrite particles were also measured for both N It is noteworthy that, although there is not a major difference or any notable trend in contact angle data, bubble attachment time results indicate that the N The surface charge of CO The surface charge of both fresh and oxidized pyrite as a function of pH is depicted in It has been shown that hydrolysis and oxidation of the pyrite surface lead to the formation of ferrous hydroxide which then is oxidized to ferric hydroxide. The ferric hydroxide is stabilized on the surface of pyrite after oxidation ( Initial experiments showed that the pyrite particles behave totally differently in CO In general, the CO Furthermore, an interesting phenomenon was observed during contact angle measurements in N From the attachment time and surface charge results, it is expected that the flotation of pyrite can be improved in CO The flotation response of the fresh and oxidized pyrite at pH 6 ( Flotation recovery of fresh and oxidized pyrite in the CO From the results presented in It is noteworthy that both bubble size and froth stability in CO The improvement in fresh pyrite flotation in CO It is well known that CO In recent years, while the demand for gold production increases, recovery from marginal resources has become more difficult. Carlin type ores are one of these resources which contain refractory gold as submicron gold particles disseminated throughout host sulfide minerals, i.e. pyrite, arsenopyrite, arsenian pyrite, etc. For such resources, sulfide minerals are separated from gangue minerals and sent to the leaching process for gold recovery after an extra oxidation step. A novel flotation process, N Surface charge experiments showed that the zeta potential of pyrite particles in CO Flotation experiments with CO The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. The authors are grateful to