Double roll crushers (DRC) have the highest throughputs among primary crushers. In the oil sands, the hourly capacity may exceed 14,000t/h. They are preferably used to comminute medium-hard rock or sticky materials. An unusual tough particle or unbreakable object may effect substantial dynamic forces in a DRC. Considering the large amount of energy stored in the flywheels and the fact that the mass of the floating rolls of the largest machines exceeds 60t, any unexpected dynamic behavior can be an issue for a safe and reliable operation.
                  Research is conducted on a small industrial scale smooth DRC at the Institute of Mineral Processing Machines. Results of the crushing force dynamics under extreme conditions, as well as the related product particle size distribution and the influence of the mineral structure of a variety of rocks on the nipping behavior are presented.Rolls have been used in comminution since ancient times. Rolls were easy to manufacture, to install and to operate in a wide range of applications. A robust and reliable design, low machine height and an excellent ratio of capacity versus machine mass make double-roll crushers (DRC) still today the preferred choice for many soft to medium-hard rock applications in quarries and ore mines. The principle is particularly suitable for the comminution of wet, sticky or frozen feed material ( Research on DRC conducted so far covers a wide range of topics such as throughput, power consumption, wear, geometry and material of crushing tools, and product particle size distribution. Models derived range from empirical equations ( Knowledge on realistic magnitude and dynamic characteristics of those forces is essential to improve the design of machine components such as rolls, shafts, casings and retraction hydraulics and to expand the DRC application into new areas. Moreover, relief systems are usually installed to withdraw the floating roll in case of an overload. Also for the proper design of those systems, knowledge on magnitude and duration of peak-loads in normal operation is essential. The paper presents initial results of investigations on the influence of nip conditions, rotation speed and certain feed material characteristics onto the crushing and bearing forces. The investigations were conducted on a smooth DRC to exclude influences of the crushing tools (profile, tooth shape, etc.) design on the measurements at this stage. In order to grab a particle between the rolls, the intaking force The horizontal components of the forces acting from both rolls onto the particle are balanced. Hence, only the vertical components have to be considered. Due to the symmetry, the calculation of these forces shall be shown only for the contact point on one side. The vertical forces mainly consist of forces resulting from compression and friction. The outpushing force If a particle shall be grabbed, the following condition has to be met. The insertion of Eqs. In principle, two different friction conditions might be considered: the static friction, characterized by the coefficient In all other cases, the particle hits the roll surface with differential speed. It is sliding over the surface until it has eventually synchronized its speed. In this case, the kinetic friction factor There are only a very few sources to be found in literature for the kinetic coefficient of friction, e.g. for hard abrasive material-steel The maximum equivalent feed particle size With focus on the question of self-similarity in comminution, investigations were conducted with a Dolomite (Ostrauer Kalkwerke GmbH; σ A possible explanation of this behavior is the caking of the material even at single particle comminution with rather low size reduction ratios in the DRC. The size reduction in a JC occurs stepwise when the material passes the crushing chamber, with pressure release and reorganization of the material after each compression. In contrast, the comminution in a DRC occurs in one single step. Finally, the influence of the material and the reduction ratio was further investigated in a piston die press. It was found that at reduction ratios of  The forming of the cake even at low reduction ratios explains why the cumulative PSD curve of a DRC is more similar to the one of a piston-die press than to the one of a jaw crusher even in single particle comminution. An agglomerated material bed may resist much higher forces as a single particle of comparable size and of the same material. As a result, the forces acting in a double roll crusher could be much higher, at least locally, as one would expect for normal single particle comminution. This should be true even if the DRC is, as usual, starvation fed with just about 15 per cent of the crushing gap filled with solids. For sizing a DRC and its components, the knowledge of the acting forces is essential. There are different ways to predict the forces, in particular the maximum ones. Most commonly, one of the following methods is applied: consideration of the maximum transmitted torque, consideration of the materiaĺs compressive strength. The first approach shall be investigated in further detail. The calculation starts with the maximum drive torque, which can be transmitted in the static friction case. The crushing force The maximum bearing force, however, does not occur during normal crushing operation but under extreme conditions, when the rolls grab an uncrushable particle. In the condition of stalling, the maximum power The power at the roll shaft is The blockage power results from the released energy of inertia Other power losses, caused by bearing friction for instance, are neglected to simplify the calculation. Eqs. Another method to calculate the crushing force and, accordingly, the bearing force for single particle comminution, is the use of the material compressive strength. Since the PLT-index The force at the PLT is introduced between two round tipped cones, so there is a point to point load condition. The load conditions in the roll crusher, however, are usually point to face or face to face load conditions, which cause a larger contact area and therefore a slightly higher breaking force to be considered by a conversion factor ( The breaking force The aim of the investigations is to determine the magnitude and dynamics of the bearing forces and their dependencies on the crushing gap, the feed particle size and the material properties.  The forces The initial trial tests were conducted with various mineral materials (see Four size fractions (5.6/6.3 The other materials showed a worse nipping behavior. Granodiorite particles up to 20.0 According to the results from the first test series, the following tests were conducted with limestone from the quarry Bad Kösen, Germany, at a peripheral speed of both rolls was 3.0 The tensile forces from the four pull rods were summarized to get the total horizontal force The correlation between The maximum average total force The maximum bearing forces measured shall be compared with respective values occurring during roll blockage as per Eq. The angle Tests were conducted with the drive uncoupled from the crusher just before the crushing event to measure the slight deceleration during crushing. This allows the calculation of the energy consumption for comminution. 50 samples of limestone (Bad Kösen, as per  When considering the peak force acting at The development of the peak forces close to the crushing gap center similar to the HPGR as well as the local formation of a particle bed due to caking is seen as the reason for peak loads in DRC. These peak loads may even occur in case of very local agglomerating events and may cause high loads on respective spots of the crushing roll. That is why it may be recommendable to consider local agglomerating also in the case of designing other DRC than just the smooth faced ones. As already described by The peak forces on the DRC are extremely short time events. In the investigated case, they usually lasted for just around 20–35 The nipping behavior not only depends on geometrical data of the rolls, the particles and the commonly used static friction factor. The kinetic friction factor considering the influence of relative speed of the friction partners will have to be used. Further investigation on kinetic friction factors of various mineral materials is recommended.