Sixty one femoral fractures treated with ACE unreamed titanium nail (AIM femoral nail, ACE Medical, Los Angeles, CA) were studied. Ten patients died before bony union and three were lost to follow up. Forty eight fractures were followed up for an average of 11.2 months (4–31 months). All fractures united except one in which plating and bone grafting was performed at 6 months due to failure of progression of union. The mean time to bony union was 6.2 months. There was no implant failure but one distal interlocking bolt broke at 6 weeks. No incidence of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was observed. Malunion was seen in one patient whereas three cases had shortening of more than 2 cm. Our results show that unreamed femoral nailing using titanium nail is a safe and effective procedure for the treatment of femoral shaft fractures.Closed ante-grade insertion of an intramedullary nail has become the most acceptable method of treating femoral shaft fractures. With the development of the interlocking nailing system and the ever expanding use of reamed intramedullary nails, many concerns have risen regarding the indication, design of implant, effect on healing, the need for secondary procedures and complications. Over the past few years, systemic effects of reamed nailing in patients with femoral shaft fractures associated with other injuries or pulmonary trauma have been a topic of interest. An association between early reamed femoral nailing and a higher risk of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) has also been suggested The diameter of the intramedullary nail used in the case of unreamed nailing is significantly lower in comparison with reamed nails. Earlier attempts to treat femoral fractures with unreamed stainless steel nails were associated with a high incidence of implant failure. The introduction of new stronger implants made of titanium alloy has made unreamed femoral nailing an effective option for stabilisation of femoral shaft fractures. These new implants have better biomechanical characteristics allowing use of nails with smaller diameters then those of stainless steel, but with sufficient mechanical strength. We report our experience of treating femoral fractures using unreamed femoral nails (AIM femoral nail, ACE Medical, Los Angeles, CA). A report of using this implant for treatment of femoral fractures in elderly patients has been published earlier from the same centre This is a retrospective study of 61 femoral shaft fractures in 60 patients treated at Russells Hall Hospital, Dudley (West Midlands) between April 1995 and December 1998. There were 29 male and 31 female patients (1 female patient had bilateral fractures). The age of the patients ranged from 16 to 97 years (average age was 62.37 years). Sixteen fractures (26.2%) resulted from a road traffic accident whereas the remaining 45 (73.7%) were attributed to a fall. Most of the fractures were located in the middle third of the femur ( The mean operating time for static interlocked nailing was 51 ± 15 min from skin incision to closure of the wound. Forty eight fractures were followed-up to full radiological and clinical union. Ten patients died before fracture union and three patients were lost to follow-up. The follow-up period ranged from 4 months to 31 months (average 11.2 months). The time of union of the fracture was defined as from the time of injury to full weight bearing without any pain and bridging of all four cortices on antero-posterior and lateral radiograph of the fracture site. Delayed union was diagnosed as failure of clinical and radiological union at 26 weeks and non-union at 52 weeks. The average time to union in our series was 6.2 months. At final follow up, the average flexion of the hip was 88° (range 70°–110°) and of the knee joint was 114° (range 80°–140°). In three patients with a fracture in the distal shaft of the femur minimal reaming of the proximal shaft using a 9 mm hand reamer was done as the canal was very narrow. One patient went on to non-union and was treated by removal of nail and dynamic compression plating with bone grafting. In three patients dynamisation of the nail was done at 12 weeks as the callus formation was very slow. This practice was abandoned later in the study. There was no breakage of the intramedullary nail or the proximal locking bolt. Shortening of the leg of 3 cm developed in one patient and 2 cm in two patients (measured clinically). One patient had union in 20° external rotational deformity. This was due to malpositioning of the proximal locking bolt which missed the nail leading to loss of rotational control of this subtrochanteric fracture. No case of ARDS was seen in our series. The patient who developed per-operative hypoxia had a normal chest X-ray and arterial blood gas (ABG) postoperatively. Ventilation perfusion scan was not thought to be necessary as all other parameters were normal. Interlocking nails have greatly expanded the indications for closed intramedullary nailing of femoral fractures. One of the main advantages of closed intramedullary nailing is the high rate of uncomplicated fracture union Reaming of the medullary canal also leads to circulatory disturbances of the femoral cortex Biomechanical data also support the use of intramedullary nails made of titanium alloy. Titanium nails produce comparable findings in bending stress even when they are 4 mm smaller in diameter than the first generation interlocking nails made of steel alloy. Laboratory testing has shown that the fatigue strength of titanium alloy is more than twice that of cobalt chrome and four times that of stainless steel. The fatigue strength of titanium is among the highest of the implant metal alloys A high incidence of nail breakage has been reported (3–4.7%) while using stainless steel implants As there is an increased risk of fatigue failure of the nail at the site of the screw hole closest to the fracture site in the distal third femoral fractures, it is advised that distal interlocking should be done either with two screws or with the proximal of the two distal holes, thereby, protecting the more distal hole In our series, the average time to union was 6.2 months. This figure is very close to 26.9 weeks reported by Giannoudis et al. In our study five patients (8.2%) showed heterotopic bone formation at the site of entry of the proximal femur. A significantly higher incidence of heterotopic bone formation has been reported with reamed nails Another area of controversy has been the systemic effects of reamed nailing, especially in relation to fat embolism syndrome and ARDS. In the early 1990s, great emphasis was put on early fixation of femoral fractures in order to avoid these problems Kropfl et al. In our series, bony union was achieved in 98% of patients treated with unreamed femoral nails. Our results do show a relatively slow rate of healing of fractures (average union time 6.2 months) when treated by unreamed femoral nails (Figures