The efficiency of an integrated ultra-violet (UV) photocatalysis and anaerobic digestion (AD) system in the degradation of methylene blue (MB) dye was studied in up-flow fixed bed reactors. Zeolite was applied as support material for micro-organism and photocatalyst in the bioreactor and photoreactor, respectively. It was established that the application of either UV photodegradation or AD process as a single treatment method was not efficient in colour removal and chemical oxygen demand (COD) reduction. The AD process as a stand-alone process could only remove 32% of the colour and 57% COD while photodegradation as a stand-alone process had a good performance on colour removal (70%) but low COD removal efficiency (54%). However, integration of the two processes led to high COD, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and colour reduction efficiencies of above 75%. Results show that UV pre-treatment of MB before the AD step improved the biodegradability of the MB dye by 3-fold, this resulted in a 2.7-fold increase in biogas production as compared to a non-UV pre-treated MB.Textile industry is very water intensive Apart from consuming a lot of water, textile industry is also energy intensive Recently, there has been a considerable interest in the utilization of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for complete removal of dyes present in textile effluents Previous studies have attempted integration of AOPs and biological treatment processes as an economical means for treating bio-recalcitrant organic contaminants in wastewater AOPs have been applied to improve biodegradability of various recalcitrant organic compounds Methylene blue (MB) dye and titanium dioxide powder (Technical grade, 99% purity) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. South African natural zeolite was purchased from Pratley mining company in South Africa and crushed to particle size of 2 Inoculum used was obtained from a secondary digester of a local municipal wastewater treatment plant (Sebokeng wastewater plant, South Africa). A stock solution (3500 Up-flow fixed bed bioreactor and photoreactor were used in this study. The effective volume of each reactor was 0.45 In the first part of the study, photodegradation and biodegradation experiments were carried out separately in the respective reactors; this was then followed by an integration of the two processes in batch. In the integrated system, the two processes were arranged in series such that, in the first case, the photodegradation process was followed by the AD process while in the second case the AD process was followed by the photodegradation process. The rationale was to find the best reactor configuration for the treatment process. The photodegradation of the MB was conducted at pH 9, this was the best photodegradation pH for MB as was established in our preliminary studies. In the case where the photodegradation was applied as the first treatment step, the pH of the photoreactor effluent was adjusted to 7.0–7.2 using 0.1 Samples from the influent, reactors and the final effluent were collected for analysis. The TSS, COD and BOD were analysed in accordance with the standard laboratory procedure To compare the performances of AD as a stand-alone process and integrated AOP-AD or AD-AOP system,  During photodegradation, 71% colour removal was achieved after irradiation time of 90 Biodegradability index (BOD Methylene blue has aromatic rings in its structure and therefore its degradation is expected to produce aromatic amines, which are more toxic, as intermediate products. However, due to the observed increase in biodegradability after UV treatment, it can be inferred that this process did not produce such compounds. Similar observations were reported by Al-Momani et al. Anaerobic digestion of the UV pretreated and non-UV pretreated wastewater samples was carried out in the bioreactor. The COD reductions were 73% and 57% for the UV pretreated and non-UV pretreated samples, respectively, while the corresponding BOD reductions were 85% and 58%, respectively. The UV pretreatment enhanced degradation due to its ability to improve the biodegradability of the MB as shown in Contribution of adsorption to the contaminant removal or concentrating the pollutants on the catalyst or zeolite surface in the photoreactor and bioreactor was studied. The data in Daily biogas production during the anaerobic degradation of the non-UV pretreated and UV pretreated samples was recorded. The methane content of the biogas produced was analyzed after every four days. In The pH of the wastewater samples was monitored during the entire digestion period. It was observed that during the digestion period the pH values were within the expected pH range in anaerobic digester. However, there was a slight increase in pH values with the degradation time from day 0 to day 28. This observation might have been due to the corresponding reduction in VFAs concentration with time as shown in In The photodegradation (AOP) and AD processes were integrated in two ways; in the first case, AD was performed before the AOP (AD-AOP) while in the second case the AOP was conducted before the AD (AOP-AD). In  The If UV photodegradation (AOP) was employed as the only treatment method to reduce colour and COD to above 75% as was achieved by the integrated AOP-AD system, then higher energy would be required to drive the process. It required irradiation time of 120 Anaerobic digestion (AD) and UV photodegradation (AOP) using South African zeolite were applied in the treatment of methylene blue dye in up-flow fixed bed bioreactor and photoreactor. In the first case, the two processes were applied as separete treatment techniques while in the second case, the two processes were integrated. It was found that anaerobic degradation performed better in COD reduction than in colour reduction, achieving 57% and 32% reduction, respectively. In contrast, photodegradation performed better than the AD in colour reduction achieving 70% efficiency but achieved a lower COD reduction of 54%. The efficiency of the two processes applied separately in the degradation of MB dye was generally low. However, integrated AOP-AD system achieved better degradation with colour and COD reductions of 81% and 80%, respectively. Moreover, it was found that UV photodegradation pr-treatment improved the biodegradability of the MB dye by 3-folds after irradiation time of 60 This work was financially supported by the