When valuable digenite is heavily oxidized, it may not respond to the flotation process and remain largely in the tailing with the pyrite. This is problematic because the recovery of digenite from heavily oxidized Cu-S ore is of great significance. In this study, the effect of sodium sulfide on the selective flotation separation of heavily oxidized digenite and pyrite was investigated. The micro-flotation results showed that the floatability of digenite could be effectively restored with the addition of sodium sulfide and sodium butyl xanthate (SBX). However, pyrite showed a poor floatability under the same conditions. Based on this, the flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals was carried out, and a satisfactory result with 51.4% Cu grade and 93.1% Cu recovery could be obtained in the optimized flotation conditions. Then, the sulfidization mechanism of heavily oxidized digenite was discussed in detail through an examination of zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements, contact angle measurements, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses. The results indicated that the negatively charged SH− could adsorb on the surface of digenite through chemisorption, and lower the quantity of hydrophilic copper sulfate and oxides/hydroxides on the digenite surface in the presence of SBX, thus significantly increasing the surface contact angle, decreasing the amount of SBX adsorbed to the value observed for unoxidized digenite, and promoting the flotation of heavily oxidized digenite.Copper is an important nonferrous metal that is primarily extracted from copper sulfide minerals. In general, most copper sulfide minerals are closely associated with pyrite (FeS Studies concerning the oxidation of copper sulfide minerals like chalcocite, covellite, and chalcopyrite have been widely reported in the published literature ( To restore the floatability of oxidized sulfides, various methods have been used, including an ultrasonication/decantation technique ( Digenite (4Cu Pure digenite and pyrite samples were obtained from Zijin Mining, Fujian Province, China. After being carefully crushed and hand-selected, the samples were further dry-ground in a porcelain ball mill and dry-sieved to obtain the −74 +38 μm fractions of digenite and pyrite for the micro-flotation experiments. For the flotation of un-oxidized digenite and pyrite, prepared samples were stored in a nitrogen-filled desiccator to minimize oxidation, and were floated within two weeks of preparation ( Sodium normal butyl xanthate (SBX) obtained from Tieling in China, sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na Micro-flotation experiments were carried out using an XFGC The zeta potential of −5 μm digenite was measured with a Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer at room temperature (approximately 25 °C). A 20 mg sample was mixed with 50 mL DI water containing 1 × 10 The quantity of SBX adsorbed on the mineral surface in the presence and absence of Na The contact angles of samples were measured with a contact angle apparatus (JC2000A). Lamellar samples with highly smooth surfaces were prepared using the compression method ( The samples after conditioned in the desired solutions were taken out from the flotation cell, and then rinsed with DI water, and dried in a stream of high purity nitrogen. The sample preparation method was the same as that in the literatures ( XPS analyses were performed using a Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250 XI spectrometer with an Al Kα source (1253.6 eV) operated at a power of 200 W (12.5 kV × 16 mA) and a scanned area of 2 mm × 2 mm. The vacuum pressure in the analysis chamber was 8.0 × 10 The pH and oxidation of the pulp had significant effects on the flotation of sulfide ores. To improve the flotation performance of digenite and pyrite, experiments investigating the recovery of oxidized digenite and pyrite with varying SBX dosages at pH 8.0 were carried out, and the results are shown in  To investigate the effect of Na Zeta potential measurement is an in situ surface sensitive technique that can reflect the interaction between the mineral surface and a reagent in solution (  However, the heavily oxidized digenite exhibited zeta potentials at pH 3.5–11.5 that were less negative and, in some cases, even positive. IEPs were found at pH 7.4 and 9.3. These values are close to those of copper oxides/hydroxides, which are found at pH 9.5 ( When Na The flotation performance of sulfide minerals is closely related to the amount of SBX adsorbed on the surface. Mineral floatability is related to the surface wettability, which can be estimated by measuring the contact angle. To further characterize the changes that occurred on the surface of heavily oxidized digenite with different treatments, XPS analysis was performed, and the results are presented in  The Cu 2p3/2 high-resolution spectra and corresponding identification and differentiation of the XPS peaks of oxidized digenite with and without the addition of Na For heavily oxidized digenite treated with DI water, cupric oxides/hydroxides represent 28.5% of the species generated on the surface. Meanwhile, a low intensity broad satellite peak at approximately 942.36 eV, which could appear if the surface was strongly oxidized ( The S 2p XPS spectra of digenite with and without the addition of Na When heavily oxidized digenite was treated with 5 × 10 After heavily oxidized digenite was treated with 1.3 × 10 This study investigated the effects of Na The authors sincerely acknowledge the financial support provided from the