Surrounding rock control in the overlying protective coal seam is a challenging topic for de-stressed mining of multi-seamed coal. Current research findings on roadway control were used in the design of a physical model of a complex textured roof having a varying thickness. The model was used to study roadway instability and collapse caused by dynamic pressure. The results show that when the thickness of the roof exceeds the bolted depth the roadway security is least and the roof has the greatest possibility for collapse. Numerical simulations were also carried out to study stress redistribution before and after roadway excavation during underlying protective seam mining. The evolution of roadway displacement and fracture, as affected by support methods, has been well studied. A series of support principles and technologies for mining affected roadways has been proposed after demonstration of successful practical application in the Huainan Mines. These principles and technologies are of extended value to deep coal mining support in China.Statistics show that most Chinese coal mines are gassy and geologically complicated, with many soft seams of low permeability and high adsorption An overlying protected seam, Seam 13-1, as influenced by de-stressed mining of Seam 11-2 in Guqiao, Huainan is used herein as an example. Physical and numerical simulations have been integrated to give a better theoretical basis for surrounding rock control during underground mining. The research objects of underground coal mining engineering are coal and rock masses with their inherent heterogeneity, discontinuity and anisotropy that complicate underground engineering. Physical simulation has proved to be an important research approach in this field. A true tri-axial roadway simulation was constructed to carry out our studies, which is shown in The roof of Seam 13-1 is a complex texture of carbonaceous shale, mudstone and parts of the unworkable Seam 13-2: this makes it bedding separation prone. Three types of simulation programs were designed according to the relationship between roof thickness and bolting depth. These were: 1) When the thickness of the roof is less than the bolting depth. 2) When roof thickness is the same as the bolting depth. 3) When roof thickness exceeds the bolting depth. Each of these physical models was tested and the characteristics of roadway deformation under dynamic pressure were observed. High stress and dynamic pressure cause roof thickness to have a significant influence on roof stability. When the roof thickness is smaller than the bolting depth the roof is still steady, as shown in The physical simulation tests indicate that under dynamic pressure the thickness of a complex textured roof plays a decisive role on roadway stability. The thicker the roof the more severe the damage to the roadway will be. When the thickness of the roof exceeds the bolting depth the roadway is least stable and it may even collapse. Therefore, increasing the bolting depth not only reduces the ratio of roof thickness to bolting depth, which benefits the stability of the roadway under dynamic pressure, but also involves more surrounding rock in the bearing structure to promote roadway integrity and safety. Stress and deformation in the surrounding rock were estimated by numerical simulation with UDEC The plane strain model consists of 16 rock layers in total. The model dimensions were: length × width was 500 m × 152 m; the work face width × height was 240 m × 3.5 m; and the roadway width × height was 5.0 m × 3.5 m. Boundary effects were eliminated by adopting a strain softening model for the roof of Seam 11-2 130 m in width extending to both sides. The simulation began with a mining of the working face to make the simulation process corresponds to the in-situ practice. Then, after a 5000 step calculation, the roadway excavation of the overlying coal seam was started. With the help of the UDEC numerical simulations a thorough study of the stress evolution and roadway stability of the de-stressed coal seam during mining was made. A monitoring line was set on top of Seam 13-1 to observe the stress changes. The stress distribution of the overlying coal seam after mining Seam 11-2 was plotted at 1000, 3000 and 5000 iteration steps, see Note that: Due to the symmetry of the model the stress distribution is symmetrical. The influence from mining extended from −160 m to 160 m. After 1000 steps the area showed decreasing stress. Rock stress above the goaf dropped as low as 3 MPa showing an obvious pressure-relief effect and dilation deformation of the coal seam. At 3000 steps the stress was changing as it increased to some extent over all, but especially in the middle of the goaf. The de-stressed zone shifted from the core to the sides of the panel. The abutment stress was as high as 20.83 MPa 18 m from the center at the edge of the goaf. Further compaction of the goaf caused the abutment stress to continue to increase to a maximum of 23.69 MPa with no change in the position of the maximum. The influence of roadway excavation and the support pattern on the stress evolution was obtained from a 5000 iteration calculation that takes model symmetry into account. Only the track gate was excavated for this calculation. The results are shown in  The overlying strata are still in an active phase of stress adjusting at 5000 iterations after the excavation of the Seam 11-2 roadway. In unaffected areas stress was still increasing but at an apparently slower rate. In the area affected by roadway excavation, from 80 m to 160 m, the stress showed markedly asymmetric characteristics as the new stresses became superposed upon the mining stress. The bolt support has optimized the stress field in the surrounding rock and caused the peak stress on both sides to be nearly equal. Without this support the peak stress on the left side dropped and the peak stress on the right side increased relative to the supported case. Stress differences up to 8 MPa were estimated to exist under the non-bolted condition. The minimum stress in the roof was almost zero then and the roadway could lose its stability and collapse in this situation. During stress evolution the rock surrounding the roadway experiences mining de-stressing from the underlying working face and mining stress adjustment and de-loading from the protected roadway excavation. These three deformation stages can be seen: a dilation deformation stage; a compression deformation stage; and a roadway excavation de-loading deformation stage. The first two deformation stages show initial fracturing that gradually develops into macroscopic sized fractures that then close under compression load. After roadway excavating without bolt support the opening of fissures expands them and produces secondary fracture. These fractures interact to produce numerous new fracture planes. This could lead to roof collapse or even total roadway destruction ( Bolting support provides high pressures that improve the level of radial stress at the start of roadway excavation. As a result the surrounding rock was always in a three-dimensional stress state with a higher radial stress. Closing of fractures prevents further crack propagation. Bolts through the joint surfaces can improve the deformation and shear resistance of the joints, which maintains a relatively high residual strength to ensure stability of the structure. However, as the roadway was tilted to the side of the goaf and new moments formed floor heave and rib slipping occurred easily, as shown in The physical simulations and numerical analyses show that roadway stability can be affected by mining, especially in the case of a thick, complex textured roof. Some proposed control principles are: Strengthen the roof: After excavation the loss in roof stability is a dynamic process. The roof gradually collapses and the roadway may be completely destroyed. Strengthening the roof can reduce falling and promote the formation of a pre-bearing structure. This structure has good support capabilities and adjusts to pressures from the external strata through large deformations. This maintains structural integrity of the roof Reinforce both sides: The coal occurs in layers and both sides are naturally weak. Mining influences from the underlying seam may cause the surroundings to loosen and break. Furthermore, different stress levels and degrees of damage of the two sides make them move toward each other and enhance roof subsidence. Therefore, effective reinforcement of both sides can improve roadway stability and achieve the goal of “controlling the sides and roof at the same time”. Strengthen key areas: The floor is the key area that must be strengthened in deep mines under high stress. During roadway construction and deformation the floor is a free surface and its stability is helpful to the stability of the walls. When the floor and sides are stable the stress state of the roof is also improved, which is conducive to roof stability. Otherwise, the stability of the entire structure may be lost. Strengthen bolted areas: last but not least, roadway stability is very sensitive to the bolted area, especially under dynamic pressure. So enlarging the bolted area is very important.  The new “three-high” bolt: Deep roadways under dynamic pressure have a strong dependence upon strata behavior. They place higher demands on the initial support strength but the new “three-high” (highly pre-tensioned, high strength, high stiffness) bolt meets the requirements by integrating surrounding rock into a whole The 3D cable bolt beam: The pre-tensioned 3D cable bolt beam with high load carrying capacity is used for roof or rib support. Note that the diameter of the cable bolt is from 18 to 22 mm instead of the traditional 15 mm. These fully mobilize bearing capacity of the shallow and deep rock and reinforce the natural stability of the structure. The floor angle bolt: For the short service periods required of roadway and floor bolt reinforcement techniques, floor support is indirectly performed by installing floor angle bolts that contribute to the formation of an integral extruded zone between the floor and sides with fewer floor heaves. The Guqiao Mine mainly works Seam 11-2 and Seam 13-1 in the first mining level (−780 m). These are two horizontal seams. Seam 11-2 is outburst free because of its low gas content, while the coal of Seam 13-1 is classified as an outburst seam because of high gas content and low permeability. Hence, Seam 11-2 was selected as the protective seam. Panel 1117(1) of Seam 11-2 was first mined to de-stress Panel 1117(3). After Panel 1117(3) was mined the outburst risk of Seam 13-1 was eliminated. The overlying strata are still affected by mining activity and during an active stage just after the mining of Panel 1117(1). Immediately above Panel 1117(1) is the stable Panel 1117(3), whose elevation ranges from −723 m to −608 m. The strike length and slope length are 2765 m and 240 m, respectively. Observations through borehole imaging instruments show that Seam 13-1 is 2.85 m–4.65 m thick with an average thickness of 3.88 m. The seam is geologically complicated with two to three layers of carbonaceous shale and mudstone partings. The seam thickness varies greatly within certain areas. The properties of the roof strata have undergone great changes and most of the roof is complex, being textured by carbonaceous shale, mudstone and even parts of the unworkable Seam 13-2. The roadway is 5.0 m wide and 3.4 m high. Its support parameters are shown in The roof is co-supported by seven pre-tensioned bolts (grade IV, left-hand twist thread steel), a 4.8-m-long steel belt of the M5 type and a diamond-shaped metal mesh. The bolts are Ф22-M24-2800 mm parts. Each bolt requires two resin anchorage packages of the type Z2380. Bolt spacing and row spacing are 750 mm and 800 mm, respectively. Both walls are supported by five pre-tensioned blots (constant strength, left-hand twist thread steel), a 3.2-m-long steel belt of the M5 type and a metal mesh. The bolt specifications are Ф20-M22-2800 mm. Each bolt requires one resin anchorage package, Z2380 type. Bolt spacing and row spacing are 750 mm and 800 mm respectively. A set of highly pre-tensioned cable bolt beams is located in the middle of each row of roof bolts. Under the strands (Φ21.8 × 7.8 m) 2.6 m long channel steel of the 14# type is laid over a 1100 mm spacing with a row spacing of 800 mm. Along the roadway strike two rows of cable beam were arranged under which 2.2 m long 14# channel steel was laid. The cable holes are 7.5 m in depth and each hole requires three Z2380 resin anchorage packages to ensure bolting effectiveness with a 80–100 kN pre-load and no less than a 200 kN anchoring force. In the fractured zones of the roof and sides each single bolt has a large plate that strengthens support. Two Z2380 resin anchorage packages are used with each. If the roof is uneven a single cable instead of a cable beam would be fixed in combination with a large 400 × 400 mm plate. Cable is still laid under the “5-3-5” layout with no change to the anchorage requirements or other parameters. In the event an abnormal zone, fault zone, abnormal change in direct roof thickness or other special condition is met, it is wise to narrow the row spacing and increase the density of the bolts (cable) in a timely fashion. Chemical grouting should be applied to reinforce the roof, both sides or floor whenever necessary. Strata observations were carried out during roadway excavation. Due to cutting disposal on the floor the observations of roadway displacement were focused mainly on roof subsidence and side deformation. As shown in A borehole imaging instrument was used to detect different conditions in the surrounding rock (  Physical simulation shows that roadway stability under dynamic conditions is determined by the thickness of the complex, textured roof. The thicker is the roof, the more severe the damage is to the roadway. Key to promoting roadway integrity and roadway safety is the increase in bolting depth and the incorporation of more surrounding rock into the load bearing structure. Numerical simulations have shown that mining-induced stress changes dynamically. Superposition of mining-induced stress with excavation induced stress determines the fundamental redistribution of stress in the surrounding rock. Bolting support can optimize the stress and fissure fields in the surrounding rock and can ensure the stability of that rock. Especially, this prevents dilation deformation. An integral analysis from diverse perspectives leads to a set of proposed support principles and technology for roadway construction in an overlying protected seam during protective seam mining. Tests conducted in a typical in-situ industrial setting show they work with a reliable effect. Financial support for this work, provided by the