Chocolates with reduced calories have become popular among consumers and manufacturers. One way of manufacturing chocolate with reduced calories is to replace sucrose with some alternatives. Effects of different bulk sweeteners (maltitol, isomalt, and xylitol) with different particle size intervals (PSI) (106–53, 53–38 and 38–20μm) on rheological properties of molten chocolate were investigated. The best model that fit the rheological data was Herschel–Bulkley model. Maltitol resulted in similar rheological properties of chocolate compared to sucrose and thus can be a good alternative. Isomalt resulted in higher plastic viscosity while maltitol resulted in higher yield stress than others. As the particle size increased the plastic viscosity and the yield stress increased. The differences in rheological properties of chocolate with different bulk sweeteners were caused by differences in solid volume fraction and particle size distribution (PSD). A substitute with large particle size should be chosen to replace sucrose for improving rheological properties of chocolate, but the particle size should be small enough to obtain good sensory properties.Molten chocolate is a dense suspension consisting of nonfat particles (sucrose, cocoa, milk) dispersed in cocoa butter as a continuous phase ( Increasing solid concentration results in higher viscosity as shown by Sucrose-free chocolates have become popular among consumers and manufacturers because they have reduced calorific values, and they are noncariogenic and suitable for diabetics ( Replacement of sucrose with sugar alcohols would affect rheological properties and thus the processing conditions and quality of chocolates. The objective of this study was to investigate effects of different bulk sweeteners (maltitol, isomalt, and xylitol) and their PSDs on rheological properties of molten chocolates. Cocoa powder, cocoa butter, and lecithin were obtained from Pelit Chocolate & Pie GmbH (Istanbul, Turkey). Sucrose was obtained from Elit Chocolate and Confectionary GmbH (Istanbul, Turkey). Maltitol and isomalt were obtained from Dora Foreign Trade GmbH. (Istanbul, Turkey). Xylitol was obtained from Perfetti Van Melle Food Industry GmbH (Istanbul, Turkey). Sucrose, maltitol, isomalt, and xylitol powders were placed on a tier of sieves of decreasing mesh size of: 106, 53, 38, and 20 Sucrose, isomalt, xylitol, and maltitol of each PSI were used to manufacture chocolates in our laboratory. In order to manufacture 100 Rheological properties of the chocolate samples were measured using a shear rate-controlled rheometer (Haake Rotovisco RT 20, Thermo Electron Corp., Karlsruhe, Germany) with a concentric cylinder system (sensor Z40 DIN) according to IOCCC method ( Data from rheological measurements were analysed using linear and nonlinear regression analysis for evaluation of different mathematical models using SPSS Release 10.0.1 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Diagnostic analyses were performed to determine validity of the models according to The PSD parameters of the bulk sweeteners for three different PSI are given in The shear rate vs shear stress data from the 30th measurement in all chocolate samples were applied to Casson, Bingham, and Herschel–Bulkley models. Thixotropic behavior of chocolate has been reported ( Statistical evaluations of the models showed that the best model that fit the data was Herschel–Bulkley model Xylitol and maltitol in chocolate resulted in similar plastic viscosity to sucrose while the plastic viscosity of chocolate with isomalt was significantly higher ( Higher plastic viscosity with isomalt may be associated with its higher solid volume fraction in chocolate because the density of isomalt (1.50 Higher plastic viscosity with isomalt was apparently not related with its PSD parameters. PSD parameters of isomalt were larger than that of other bulk sweeteners ( Viscosity of chocolate changes with conching temperature and duration, as the conching temperature decreased viscosity of chocolate decreased ( Similar results where viscosity decreased as particle size increased have been reported in literature. For example, 1.2–2 times higher plastic viscosity for chocolate with finer particle size has been reported ( Yield stress of chocolate samples with maltitol was significantly higher than that with isomalt while no difference was detected among other pairs of samples ( Yield stress is important in keeping small solid particles in suspension and in the coating of solid surfaces ( Flow behavior index ( Apparent viscosity of chocolates prepared with different bulk sweeteners were determined at 30 Isomalt, maltitol, and xylitol can be used in manufacturing of sucrose-free chocolates. These sweeteners have advantages and disadvantages compared to each other. For example, cooling effect observed in xylitol is absent in isomalt and maltitol ( Herschel–Bulkley model was the best model that fit the rheological data of chocolate samples. Maltitol resulted in similar rheological properties of chocolate to sucrose, and thus it may be recommended as a good alternative to sucrose in chocolate formulations. Chocolate with isomalt resulted in higher plastic viscosity while xylitol resulted in higher flow behavior index. Addition of bulk sweeteners on volumetric basis (especially if density of the sweetener is different than that of sucrose) may reflect the effect of sweeteners on rheological properties more accurately. Plastic viscosity and yield value of chocolates increased with decreasing particle size of bulk sweeteners. Large particle size would result in better rheological properties for manufacturing process, but it may adversely affect sensory properties. Further experiments with better control of PSD of bulk sweeteners and chocolate mix, and varying conching conditions should be conducted to determine the effects of bulk sweeteners on physical and sensory properties of chocolates. This study was supported by Research Funds of Istanbul Technical University. We greatly acknowledge Pelit Chocolate and Pie GmbH, Elit Chocolate and Confectionary GmbH, Dora Foreign Trade GmbH, and Perfetti Van Melle Food Industry GmbH for their donations of ingredients. We acknowledge Serdar Ozgen for providing access to the particle size analyzer. We also acknowledge Meral Kilic for reviewing the language of the manuscript.