A large number of studies have been carried out to investigate the effect of scale on the shear behaviour of rock joints. However, the nature of scale dependency of rock joints is still unknown and remains an ongoing debate. This paper investigates the effect of joint length on the shear behaviour of rough rock joints using PFC2D. In this numerical approach, the intact material is simulated by a dense packing of bonded particles and the joint is represented by micro-scale slip surfaces at contacts between particles. The validity of this numerical approach in reproducing the shear behaviour of rock joints has been studied in previous studies of authors against the physical experiments, analytical and empirical models. In this study, numerical direct shear tests on a natural tensile joint and subdivided joints were carried out and the shear behaviour of these joints at different scale was investigated. Results of this study show that as the joint length increases, the peak shear strength, peak dilation rate and shear stiffness decrease while the peak shear displacement increases. In order to find out the reason of observed scale dependency, the mechanism of asperity degradation at different scales was investigated and it was found that the mobilisation of different sized asperities at different scales resulted in the observed scale effect.Rock joints play an important role in the mechanical behaviour of a rock mass. Effective design of underground excavations and rock slopes requires a good understanding of the mechanical behaviour of rock joints ( The main difficulty in the study of the scale dependency of rock joint mechanical properties involves undertaking large scale in-situ direct shear tests. The frequency of large scale shear tests is limited due to special difficulties in set-up and cost and is often limited to the size of a few square metres. It is rare to find a well-documented in-situ direct shear test examining the size effect. In-situ tests are very expensive and are usually limited to investigation of the most critical discontinuities such as shear zones and in-filled joints when the scale effect may be irrelevant. In addition, the results of experiments which can be susceptible to scale effect have often provided inconclusive results. The comparison between the results of laboratory and in-situ tests can be conclusive if the small sized samples are subdivided from the same large sample or at least very similar to the surface of the sample tested in-situ ( Numerical modelling can provide a useful tool to study the effect of scale on the shear behaviour of rock joints. Recent developments in discrete element modelling provide an opportunity to explicitly study the process of asperity damage and degradation of rock joints in the shearing process. By measuring the geometrical texture of rock joints, numerical direct shear tests at different scales can be undertaken which can help to discover the unknown mechanism of shear behaviour at different scales and also provides an alternative to physical testing. This paper numerically investigates the effect of scale on the shear behaviour of rock joints. Recently, The most comprehensive laboratory investigation of scale effect on the shear behaviour of rock joints was carried out by a decrease in the peak shear strength (negative scale effect) a gradual increase in the peak shear displacement a decrease in the peak dilation angle a transition from brittle to plastic mode in shear stress–shear displacement response a decrease in the magnitude of scale effects with a decrease in the joint roughness. They noted that this negative scale effect was attributed partly to the change in the intact asperity strength and partly to the change in effective roughness with scale, as shown in  A comprehensive review of previous studies of scale effect on the shear behaviour of rock joints is presented in In particle flow code (PFC), the intact material is represented by the bonded particle model (BPM). In the BPM, discrete elements of non-uniform-sized circular (PFC2D) or spherical (PFC3D) particles are bonded together at contact points. The mechanical behaviour of BPM is controlled by displacement Traditionally, joints have been simulated in PFC by removing bonds between the particles that lie on the joint track ( In this study, the direct shear test was simulated using the modified SJ model. In this method, the upper and lower blocks of shear box are generated separately and the smooth joint model is applied at contacts between the particles of these blocks. The procedure of shear box generation is depicted in In the normal direct shear tests, a specified constant normal stress was applied to the upper block and this stress was held constant during the shearing process by using a servo-control mechanism ( An essential step prior to undertake the numerical analysis in PFC is the calibration of micro-properties. As explained in The micro-properties of particles and bonds were calibrated against the physical uniaxial compression strength ( The micro-properties of SJ contacts were calibrated against the physical normal deformability and direct shear tests on planar joints of Hawkesbury sandstone. Numerical samples having a length of 100 In order to study the effect of scale on the shear behaviour of rough rock joints, a rough tensile joint surface of Hawkesbury sandstone was digitised using the photogrammetry method. The 3DM Analyst Mine Mapping Suite software was used for this aim which is developed by ADAM Technology (  The Grasselli roughness value can be measured by graphing the possible contact area The calculated The size of particles is an important parameter in the numerical simulation of the direct shear tests in PFC and dictates the minimum size of micro-scale asperities that can be simulated in PFC. This parameter should be smaller than the size of effective micro-scale asperities. On the other hand, selection of very small particle size leads to an increase in the total number of particles and consequently longer computation time. In this study, the minimum radius of particles Numerical direct shear tests under the constant normal stress of 0.5 The normalised shear stress versus shear displacement graphs for each subdivided joint at different lengths are shown in  The effect of joint length on the normalised peak shear strength, peak shear displacement, peak dilation angle and system shear stiffness is depicted in The peak shear displacement represents the distance that the joint needs to travel till effective contact is made between the asperities that control the peak shear strength. The effect of scale on the peak shear displacement is illustrated in The peak dilation rate represents the slope of portion of the normal displacement versus shear displacement graph corresponding to the peak shear displacement ( Shear stiffness is the slope of the pre-peak portion of the shear stress versus shear displacement graph. The effect of scale on the system shear stiffness of the numerical specimens was investigated by plotting the measured shear stiffness of all subdivided samples as a function of the joint length, as shown in As can be seen in In order to explain the observed scale effect, the shearing mechanisms of subdivided numerical models for different joint lengths were investigated. The surface damage and asperity degradation of these subdivided samples after 3 In order to explore the shearing mechanisms of effective asperities for different joint lengths, the asperity damage of two points of the joint surface during the shearing process for the largest and smallest samples were surveyed. These two points are shown in The shearing mechanism of larger base-length and less steep asperities after 3 In this paper, the effect of scale on the shear behaviour of rough rock joints was numerically investigated using PFC2D. A rough joint profile having a length of 400 The proposed numerical model in this study can provide a useful tool to study the shear behaviour of large scale rock joints where the current knowledge about their shearing mechanisms is very limited. This method has the ability of explicit simulation of rock joints and micro-scale study of the process of asperity degradation during the shearing process. However, the minimum size of particles and computation time are the limiting factors at the moment. Application of pbricks and parallel processing or Adaptive Continuum/DisContinuum logic would be an important development of this research. Application of this approach to study the scale effect on several joint geometries and different types of materials is recommended for future studies and also implementation of this approach to three dimensions would be an important development in the study of the shear behaviour of large scale joints and scale effect. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Glenn Sharrock, Dr. David Potyondy, Dr. Mathew Pierce, Dr. Xavier Garcia and Dr. Diego Mas Ivars from Itasca Consulting group for their useful suggestions and technical help.