The continuous separation of tracer particles in the air-sand dense-medium Reflux Classifier was investigated. The Reflux Classifier consisted of a 1m long vertical fluidized bed section with a 2m long channel inclined at 70° to the horizontal mounted above, both with a 20×100mm cross section. Silica sand of 220μm average diameter (−355+125μm) was used as the dense medium. The Reflux Classifier produced good density separations for tracer particles ranging in size from 6.35 down to 1.0mm. The density cut-point could be varied from 1418 to 2130kg/m3 by varying the underflow rate and the Ep was within the range of 0.06–0.46×103
                     kg/m3 depending on particle size and gas rate. At certain gas flowrate and underflow conditions the density cut point ranged between 1534 and 1619kg/m3 across six particle sizes, suppressing the effects of particle size on the density cut point. As air rates increased from 4.03 to 5.64×10−4
                     m3/s the density cut-point increased, as did the Ep. The results were compared with separations in a vertical fluidized bed of the same total length. Ep values in the vertical fluidized bed ranged between 0.07 and 1.49×103
                     kg/m3 over the same experimental conditions as the inclined bed and the density cut point showed more variability with the conditions. The addition of an incline above the fluidized bed provides a more stable system allowing for greater separation efficiency and minimizing the effect of changing conditions. Increasing the flow of sand medium to the underflow decreased the density cut point while raising the gas rate increased the density cut point. Raising the gas rate also increased the variability of the system which resulted in a lower separation efficiency.Run-of-mine coal consists of combustible carbon based material and non-combustible mineral matter, commonly referred to as ash, which is typically composed of silica based material. Often, before it can be utilized to produce energy or metallurgical coke, the coal must be beneficiated to remove much of the non-combustible material. A typical coal beneficiation process involves breaking the coal to pass a 50 The efficiency of water based processing is undeniable, with near ideal density based separations achievable. Water processing is, however, not without disadvantages. In particular, the product is moist, and thus has a lower calorific value. Water beneficiation processes require significant infrastructure for tailings disposal and water recovery processes such as filters, centrifuges and thickeners. Australia is the fourth largest coal producer in the world and the largest exporter. It is also the driest inhabited continent on Earth. As the reliability of water in many mining regions decreases interest in dry beneficiation methods for coal is increasing. In addition to not needing a reliable water supply, a dry beneficiation process provides a dry coal product which has a higher calorific value and lower transport costs than coal that has been beneficiated in water based processes. Some potential disadvantages of dry coal processing when compared to water processing include an increased need for dust controls, the risk of explosion of coal fines and a need for a dry feed. The use of the Reflux Classifier for the dry beneficiation of coal has already been reported by these authors with reference to the performance of a batch system with no underflow stream ( The apparatus used for the continuous separations was a modification of that used by To allow for simultaneous solids removal and fluidization gas addition at the bottom of the Reflux Classifier (RC), the gas distribution system was modified. A new flanged channel section was constructed with the channel walls forming the distributor plate. 20 Below this new gas distributor the bed was constricted through a pyramid shaped channel into a 25 Samples of plastic tracer particles ( To commence an experiment, the bed was filled with sand ( The air rate was varied between 4.03 and 5.64 Each overflow and underflow sample was screened at 710 The experiments done in the Reflux Classifier were repeated in a vibrated vertical fluidized bed ( A partition curve gives the probability that a particle with a given property (in this case density) will report to the overflow (or underflow) stream of a continuous separation process. In many cases only two parameters, the cut point density, The rate of sand exiting the bed through the overflow and the underflow was measured on a mass basis. The underflow was very steady because a fixed volume was removed through the pinch valves in a given time interval. The overflow showed much greater variation, reflecting the flow pattern in the bed. From visual observations it was known that the upper surface of the bed was significantly below the overflow and that the surface rose and fell with the slugs of gas rising beneath it and then breaking through. Over time the volume of sand in the bed increased until a bubble forced a large volume of sand into the overflow all at once. Further discussion of this phenomenon can be found in  There are two velocities that work concurrently to cause the particles to separate ( When we consider the action of these two mechanisms, it is clear that the buoyant velocity of the particles in the medium will be greater for large particles than for small ones. This is partly because the larger particles ‘see’ the medium as a continuum rather than as discrete sand particles suspended in gas, also known as the dense medium effect. Additionally the buoyant force increases with particle volume much more quickly than the drag force which is only proportional to surface area, so the terminal rise/settling velocity of large particles is greater than for small ones. As a result, larger particles are more likely to overcome the effects of local turbulence than smaller particles which will in turn result in better separations and lower The medium convective velocity is superimposed equally on all particles ( Because the convective velocity has a greater effect on the smaller particles, if there is significantly more sand moving to the overflow than the underflow, then it is expected that the In the course of an experiment, not all particles exited the inclined bed, particularly in the largest particle size fractions. In The nature of the fluidization, with the top surface of the bed rising and falling due to the slugging, meant that it was not sufficient for the particles to simply rise to the top of the bed in order to be elutriated. There also needed to be a flow of air-sand medium through the overflow to carry the particles out. This was most particularly observed in experiments where a high underflow rate meant there was a very low overflow sand rate. In these cases a very high proportion of the larger 1600, 1800 and 2100 In the experiments where there was significant retention of moderate density particles there are two possible explanations for why they did not exit. The first possibility is that the particles had reached the top surface of the bed, but due to insufficient sand flowrate were unable to exit the bed. Alternatively, the particles may have reached an equilibrium between their buoyant velocity and the convective velocity of the sand, and were thus unlikely to exit through the overflow. In the water-based Reflux Classifier, particles can become trapped in the inclined section in a batch test. This is because the convective velocity of the water in the vertical direction, that is in the direction of particles settling, is greater in the vertical bed than in the incline. This can be seen from a simple analysis of the geometry. Although the air-sand dense-medium vibrated Reflux Classifier does not have the same continuity of medium, a similar retention of particles appears to occur. Retention tends to be for large, low density and small high density particles in the wet Reflux Classifier. From The experimental values of the It can be seen in In comparing the Reflux Classifier with the vertical fluidized bed, it is evident the In Increasing the gas rate caused an increase in the variability of the fluidized bed ( The rate of rise of the bubbles was not affected by the changing gas rate, with an average rise velocity of 0.41  In  With increasing gas rate in the inclined system, the It can be concluded from the observations above that in order to ensure the best possible separation performance, the gas feed rate should be as low as possible to minimize the  Although the results from this investigation show that it is possible to separate particles on the basis of density in the air-sand dense-medium Reflux Classifier it must be remembered that the conditions of these experiments are far removed from those in an industrial setting. The concentration of particles in the bed is extremely low, and thus the effect of the presence of other particles on the action of the dense medium is minimized. It is expected that in a coal separation the accumulation of particles in the incline would reduce the effectiveness of the medium through dilution. Nevertheless, these results imply that the system could work for coal separations as well as provide insight into how the system would behave under different conditions. An air-sand dense-medium was subjected to vibration in a Reflux Classifier and its performance in the separation of particles on the basis of density determined. It was shown that the inclined channels of the Reflux Classifier led to more stable and sharper separations. As shown in previous work ( It is possible to effectively separate particles on the basis of density, with minimal size effects, in the air-sand dense-medium Reflux Classifier with vibration. The Reflux Classifier performs favorably when compared with a vertical fluidized bed under the same conditions and there is clear evidence that the refluxing action observed in the water based Reflux Classifier ( The financial support of this project by the Australia Research Council, the Australian Coal Association Research Program and Ludowici Australia is acknowledged. The assistance of Lee Melville in the experimental work of this paper is also appreciated.