Tungsten is notoriously brittle metal at room temperature. Furthermore, contrary to most metals, plastic deformation increases ductility and recrystallization decreases ductility of tungsten. The fundamentals that govern this behavior have challenged academia and industry for decades. This paper focuses on understanding the controlling factors of ductility through a systematic investigation of the changes in microstructure and mechanical properties of cold-rolled tungsten that occur during annealing. Cold-rolled tungsten samples were annealed at temperatures up to 1400 °C, and mechanical testing and microstructural analysis was performed before and after annealing. Furthermore, a dislocation mobility model based on the Orowan equation was applied. The mechanisms of deformation are discussed within the context of deformed and annealed microstructures. The high fraction of low angle grain boundaries and high density of edge dislocations were found to be the most important factors for ductility. Although there were gradual changes in microstructure and mechanical properties, the ductility of cold-rolled tungsten was maintained up to 1300 °C. The material recrystallized when annealed above this temperature, had no ductility, and suffered brittle fracture. Microstructural characterizations of the as-rolled material revealed a typical BCC texture, with grains elongated in rolling direction and a large amount of edge dislocations and low angle grain boundaries. The level of texturing and the fraction of low angle grain boundaries diminished after recrystallization. It was found that, compared to the recrystallized material, as-rolled tungsten can accommodate over 7 orders of magnitude higher deformation velocity due to the high density of edge dislocations.Body-centered cubic (BCC) metals are of great interest to both academic and industry researchers. The plasticity of BCC metals is fundamentally different from face-centered cubic (FCC) or hexagonal (HCP) metals [ Tungsten is notoriously brittle at room temperature and has a high ductile-to-brittle transition temperature (DBTT). This causes serious difficulties in manufacturing and a number of end-use applications. Based on the fundamentals of dislocation theory, even restricting slip to only {110} type planes, there are 12 unique {110}<111> slip systems in tungsten. According to von Mises principle, a minimum of five independent slip systems is required to accommodate an arbitrary strain field during deformation of a polycrystalline material [ As discussed previously, the ductility of deformed tungsten can be completely lost by annealing at high temperatures, in contrast to the classical behavior of most metals. Both Terentyev et al. and Reiser et al. reported dramatic increases in DBTT and degradation of tensile strain after annealing cold-rolled tungsten at 1600 or 2000 °C [ In the present work, a detailed investigation was undertaken to study the evolution of the microstructure and ductility during annealing of rolled tungsten. The effects of annealing on microstructure, including grain boundaries, texture, dislocation density, ductility, and hardness, are presented herein. As such, the goal of this work is to understand the effects of microstructure on the ductility of tungsten. Furthermore, the mechanisms of deformation of tungsten are analyzed and discussed within the context of basic dislocation theory. Commercially pure tungsten plate, manufactured by sintering tungsten powder and subsequent rolling, were purchased from Plansee. Samples had a reported purity of greater than 99.97%, with the content of each impurity element reported at less than 100 ppm. The purchased sheet had a microstructure that is characteristic of cold-rolling, thus it is referred to as cold-rolled tungsten in this work. Annealing of the cold-rolled tungsten was performed using an atmosphere-controlled tube furnace to study the effect of annealing temperature on the microstructure and mechanical behavior. All samples were heated at a rate of 5 °C/min and annealed at 300, 600, 800, 1000, 1200, 1300, 1350, and 1400 °C for 1 h in argon (purity >99.995%). Instrumented three-point bending tests were performed according to the ASTM During the test, the speed of the loading pin was 0.3 mm/min, which corresponded to a strain rate of Specimens for hardness analysis were polished using diamond suspensions down to 1 μm. Hardness of as-rolled and annealed tungsten was measured using a LECO LV700AT Vickers Hardness Tester with a load up to 30 kg on the polished surface of rolled sheet. At least 5 measurements were performed for each sample condition, and the average values are reported. The microstructures of as-rolled and annealed tungsten samples were characterized using a FEI Nova Nano scanning electron microscope (SEM). In order to measure grain size and shape, the tungsten samples were polished using diamond suspensions down to 0.25 μm. SEM images of the grain structure were taken on the polished surfaces, and grain sizes were determined using the linear intercept method. At least 300 intercepts of grains were measured parallel and perpendicular to the rolling direction, and at least 5 SEM micrographs from random and spread out locations were analyzed for each condition. The average grain size was calculated based on the length of these intercepts. The grain shape aspect ratio was calculated by dividing the average width of grains by the average length of grains. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurements were performed using an FEI Nova NanoLab 600i SEM with an EDAX Hikari EBSD detector. The images were acquired using a 20 kV acceleration potential and 2.1 nA probe current. Areas of 45 × 60 μm were scanned with a step size of 100 nm for finer-grained samples. However, larger scan regions (170 × 225 μm) were required to obtain an adequate number of grains for texture and microstructural analysis of materials annealed at high temperatures. Grain boundaries with misorientation of <15° were considered low angle grain boundaries, while those with misorientation >15° were considered high angle grain boundaries. The as-rolled and annealed tungsten foils for TEM analysis were extracted from the bulk samples using a focused ion beam (FIB) on a FEI Helios NanoLab 650 system. The foil specimens of about 200 nm in thickness were polished to electron transparency using a Fischione Model 1060 argon ion mill to remove potential surface damage during the FIB process. TEM analyses were performed using a JEOL JEM 2800 scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) using bright field and dark field STEM at a 200 kV acceleration potential. Bending tests were conducted at 200 °C on the cold-rolled tungsten samples annealed at various temperatures.  The Vickers hardness of cold-rolled tungsten after annealing at different temperatures is shown in The average grain sizes and grain aspect ratios as a function of annealing temperature are given in    The crystallographic textures of the as-rolled, 1200 °C annealed, and 1400 °C annealed materials are represented by pole figures shown in In order to obtain more detail about the type and distribution of grain boundaries, the angles of grain boundaries were calculated based on the grain misorientations in the EBSD maps.  The overview TEM images of the three conditions shows consistent results with the previous SEM and EBSD analyses. No significant grain size and shape changes were found after annealing cold-rolled tungsten at 1200 °C. However, the tungsten annealed at 1400 °C showed recrystallized and grown grains with an equiaxed polyhedral morphology and larger average grain size. A large amount of dislocations can be easily observed in both the as-rolled and 1200 °C annealed grains, while the 1400 °C annealed sample contains only a limited amount of dislocations inside the grains. A closer analysis reveals the existence of high density dislocation tangles and free dislocations inside the severely deformed tungsten grains in as-rolled condition. After 1200 °C annealing, the free dislocations are still present and uniformly distributed inside the grains, but the dislocation tangles are largely eliminated. The density of free dislocations was determined using the intercept method, which was The high-resolution images show selected grain boundaries for each of the three conditions.  As mentioned above, contrary to the basic principles of work hardening in metals, tungsten demonstrates a clear improvement in ductility after cold working. To understand this peculiarity of tungsten, this section will compare the fracture toughness and ductility of deformed and recrystallized tungsten. Based on the experimental results, grain boundaries and dislocations are discussed in detail. The large amount of low angle grain boundaries along with the rolling texture are determined to have a strong effect on tungsten's mechanical behavior. Modeling work, using the Orowan equation, shows that the high density of mobile edge dislocations also played an important role in cold-rolled tungsten's ductility. Compared to as-sintered or recrystallized tungsten, cold-worked tungsten has a much higher density of grain boundaries as well as an increase in the relative number of low angle grain boundaries. Segregation of impurities like oxygen or phosphorous have been reported to significantly weaken the cohesion of tungsten grain boundaries, which results in poor ductility [ Based on the EBSD results, a large amount of low angle grain boundaries were generated during cold working. These low angle grain boundaries were stable through the low temperature annealing, but were removed during recrystallization and grain growth. This is consistent with a study reported by Reiser et al. [ The poor lattice coherency of high angle grain boundaries significantly increases the difficulty for dislocation migration and results in dislocation pile-ups and tangles. Dislocation tangles introduce local strains into the lattice, which may further impede the migration of dislocations. Since the availability of dislocation sources and dislocation mobility at the crack tip are the two main factors affecting the DBTT of tungsten [ Besides the frequency of low angle grain boundaries, microstructural morphology also has a strong effect on the mechanical properties of tungsten. As shown in Dislocations are the key factor in the work hardening of metals. A high density of dislocations generated during plastic deformation impedes the movement of further dislocations, which results in strengthening of the metal and degradation in ductility. However, the plastic behavior of tungsten is inconsistent with this basic principle of work hardening, as tungsten has repeatedly demonstrated a clear improvement in ductility after cold working [ Based on the TEM results discussed in the previous section, cold working tungsten generates a significant amount of dislocations, similar to most metals. Compared to the recrystallized material with significant grain growth, as-rolled tungsten had a more than two orders of magnitude higher free dislocation density and a considerable amount of dislocation tangles. Talia et al. studied the effects of surface oxide films on the mechanical behavior of single crystalline and polycrystalline tungsten and molybdenum materials [ Dislocations generated during the rolling process may have edge, screw, or mixed character, based on their orientation in the crystal lattice. Large differences have been found in the activation energies for the motion of screw and edge dislocations. The screw dislocation in BCC metals has an inherently compact and three-dimensional nature, which contributes to a relatively high Peierls barrier [ As shown in Based on a comparison of experimental data with modeling results, it can be seen that as-rolled tungsten should have a large dislocation density with a majority of edge-type character. These high mobility edge dislocations may blunt crack tips by accommodating plasticity. As-rolled tungsten also contains a major fraction of low angle grain boundaries. The large fraction of low angle grain boundaries provide a close to ideal condition for dislocation transfer across grain boundaries, which limits both the dislocation pinning effect and nucleation of cracks at these boundaries. After annealing at 1400 °C, most of the highly active edge dislocations disappeared during the processes of recrystallization and grain growth. The dislocation density decreased drastically and screw dislocations became dominant. Compared to edge dislocations, screw dislocations have much lower mobility. The drop in dislocation density also decreases the ductility of tungsten due to the lack of dislocation sources. Additionally, after high temperature annealing, the majority of grain boundaries became high angle boundaries, which is not favorable for dislocation transfer. As such, it is reasonable to state that the experimental and modeling results are consistent in explaining the sharp decrease in ductility after annealing at 1400 °C. To conclude, grain boundary character, dislocation source, and dislocation mobility are all important factors controlling the ductility of tungsten. Low angle grain boundaries with nearly parallel slip planes and directions reduce intergranular strain and prevent the nucleation of grain boundary cracks. A high density of dislocation sources is beneficial for blunting crack tips and accommodating strain. Dislocation density and character determine the local effective strain rates that can be accommodated during deformation. High dislocation mobility accommodates deformation processes and controls crack growth. Therefore, in order to obtain good ductility and low DBTT in polycrystalline tungsten, a microstructure with a large fraction of low angle grain boundaries and a high density of edge dislocations is desired, which can be observed in the microstructure of cold-worked tungsten. After high-temperature annealing, the fraction of high angle grain boundaries increases, the total dislocation density decreases, and screw dislocations becomes more prevalent. Therefore, the ductility degrades significantly. The present work focused on understanding the changes in microstructure and mechanical properties of cold-rolled pure tungsten as a function of the annealing temperature. Additionally, the factors that contribute to the ductility in deformed tungsten and the lack of ductility in recrystallized tungsten were discussed. To achieve this objective, the mechanical properties of a set of cold-rolled tungsten samples annealed at different temperatures were tested using three-point bending. Furthermore, the annealed microstructures were studied using a variety of characterization techniques, including SEM, TEM, and EBSD. The role of grain boundaries and dislocations in the ductility and DBTT of tungsten were discussed based on both experimental and modeling results. The following can be summarized: Annealing of cold-rolled tungsten at intermediate temperatures from 500 to 1200 °C didn't cause drastic changes in mechanical behavior. Although there were minor changes, the ductility remained relatively consistent. Annealing above 1350 °C caused recrystallization and grain growth, which lead to a dramatic loss in ductility and toughness. As-rolled tungsten and samples annealed at moderate temperatures had a clear texture with α (<110>||RD), γ (<111>||ND), and ε (<110>||TD) fiber components, and elongated grains along the rolling direction. After high temperature annealing, the material was fully recrystallized, but maintained a texture that is typical of rolled BCC metals, with α, γ, and ε fibers. However, the overall intensity of the texture decreased. Additionally, grains became near-equiaxed polyhedrons by predominantly growing perpendicular to the rolling direction. In the as-rolled samples and those annealed at moderate temperatures, a majority of grain boundaries had small angles of misorientation, while the recrystallized samples had a majority of high angle grain boundaries. The degree of misorientation plays a key role in accommodating strain across boundaries. That is, low angle grain boundaries are less likely to show brittle intergranular fracture, as boundary angles less than 15° are favorable for dislocations transfer. This improved dislocation mobility limited the pinning effect of grain boundaries on dislocation mobility, decreased dislocation pileup, and reduced nucleation of grain boundary cracks. Dislocation density decreased gradually during annealing at low to moderate temperatures. However, it decreased sharply after recrystallization and grain growth. Edge dislocations were more prevalent in as-rolled and moderately annealed conditions. Screw dislocations became dominant after recrystallization and grain growth. The significantly higher density of edge dislocations generated by cold working may function as extra dislocation sources based on dislocation-dislocation interactions, thus leading to improved ductility. A combination of factors, including the large fraction of low angle grain boundaries and a high density of edge dislocations, were responsible for the significantly better ductility of the cold-worked tungsten. The dominance of high angle grain boundaries and the overall lack of dislocations were responsible for the lack of ductility in the fully-recrystallized tungsten. The authors wish to thank the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at