Objectives
                  The main objectives were to examine the fracture mechanism and process of a ceramic fixed partial denture (FPD) framework under simulated mechanical loading using a recently developed numerical modeling code, the R-T2D code, and also to evaluate the suitability of R-T2D code as a tool for this purpose.
               
                  Methods
                  Using the recently developed R-T2D code the fracture mechanism and process of a 3U yttria–tetragonal zirconia polycrystal ceramic (Y–TZP) FPD framework was simulated under static loading. In addition, the fracture pattern obtained using the numerical simulation was compared with the fracture pattern obtained in a previous laboratory test.
               
                  Results
                  The result revealed that the framework fracture pattern obtained using the numerical simulation agreed with that observed in a previous laboratory test. Quasi-photoelastic stress fringe pattern and acoustic emission showed that the fracture mechanism was tensile failure and that the crack started at the lower boundary of the framework. The fracture process could be followed both in step-by-step and step-in-step.
               
                  Significance
                  Based on the findings in the current study, the R-T2D code seems suitable for use as a complement to other tests and clinical observations in studying stress distribution, fracture mechanism and fracture processes in ceramic FPD frameworks.Dental ceramics are considered to have good biocompatibility, excellent translucency and appearance, and to be one of the most inert dental materials currently in use Since the anatomic variation of human teeth is relatively wide, as is the variation in shape and dimension of dental restorations, a number of computerized numerical methods have been used to facilitate analyses of stress distributions and to simulate mechanical loading of dental restorations Since the fracture mechanisms and processes of three-unit all-ceramic FPDs are still not clear and the newly developed R-T In the present study, the R-T In the current study, the Y–TZP ceramic was assumed to be a heterogeneous material, that is, one containing impurities, voids, microcracks and other kinds of weaknesses. To characterize this heterogeneity, the R-T The formula for Weibull's distribution law is In order to mimic laboratory situations, the loading head was applied in the centre of the top of the framework perpendicular to the framework's ‘occlusal plane’, but five elements shifted to the right towards one of the abutments. Five elements corresponded to around 0.2 In the present study, compressive stress was defined with a positive value, whereas tensile stress was defined as negative. Therefore, the maximum principal stress described the compressive stress and minimum principal stress described the tensile stress. The framework deformed under loading and linear elastic relationship, i.e. Hooke's law, was applied to describe the relationship between stress and strain until failure occurred. In the R-T Photoelasticity is an experimental stress analysis method used to study the mechanics problems of elasticity using optic principles From the quasi-photoelastic stress fringe pattern one can see the stress distribution under loading not only for transparent materials but also for opaque materials such as ceramics and steel, which makes it possible to identify the fracture-risk area and even the crack initiation location. In the present study, the fringe pattern for either maximum principal stresses or minimum principal stresses through various elements is calculated and depicted with great clarity ( Acoustic emissions (AE) are the stress waves induced by the sudden internal stress redistribution of the materials caused by the change in the internal structure. In the R-T The calculation of AE could be performed visually in the R-T The crack started at the ninth step and the whole fracture process happened during this step. The chain reaction of the fracture process was calculated through 43 steps within the ninth step. In In the R-T In the current study, the fracture process of a one-layer 3 Comparison between the present numerical simulation and the previous laboratory test In other tests In order to mimic the loading conditions more closely to when frameworks have been seated manually and, thus, not exactly symmetrically, the load in the numerical simulation was applied not exactly in the middle of the pontic, but shifted five elements towards one of the connectors. For the numerical simulation a more balanced and almost exactly symmetrical loading could be achieved compared to loading in the laboratory test. In a preparatory study, when the simulated load was placed as exactly as possible in the middle of the framework the cracks started simultaneously from both sides of the connector areas at the lower boundary. In addition, in order to evaluate the effect of the pontic design on the fracture pattern, a symmetrical model with a longer and flatter pontic than that in the laboratory study was evaluated in another preparatory study using the R-T In the present study, the stainless steel was assumed to be a homogeneous material which stands compressive strength as much as tensile strength. Therefore, the value for the homogeneity index/Weibull's modulus was set at 100. The value of the tensile strength for Y–TZP could not be found in the existing literature, but according to the manufacturer's information the flexural strength of Y–TZP was said to be almost similar to the value for the tensile strength, which they had verified in earlier finite element analysis. Therefore, the data for tensile strength in In the current study, the mechanical loading was solely static and carried out on immobile abutments and the simulated mechanical loading was simplified to a two-dimensional plane strain condition. This kind of modeling should have captured the basic failure mechanisms dealing with 3 Within the limitation of this study the following conclusions were drawn: There was a fairly good correlation between the fracture process results obtained using the R-T Numerical analysis using the R-T Cracks in 3 Based on the findings in the current study, the R-T This work was supported by the Kempe Foundation. The authors are also grateful to Prof. C.A. Tang, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China for his help.