The development of mineral phases, analcime, tobermorite and cancrinite, from the valorisation of a waste, is the main objective of this work. The waste considered is a biomass ash (BA) obtained from a fluidized bed forest combustor powered principally by eucalyptus bark residue in a paper company. BA is valorised positively by a hydrothermal treatment (HT) in an alkaline solution. This treatment is an eco-efficient process because it employs low temperatures to activate the BA and implies no emission of CO2 to the atmosphere. Through this HT process, the synthesis of tobermorite is optimized considering the results from different characterization techniques. In addition, the dissolution of chlorides through HT is observed, improving the reutilization of BA in cement-based materials. The results promote the reuse of BA waste and assess its incorporation in cement-based materials due to the high pozzolanic activity shown by the synthesized tobermorite phase (98% of fixed lime at 28days).The continuous industrial development is associated with an increase in waste generation that creates important environmental problems, such as the generation of tons of ashes from different industrial processes. Within this context, hydrothermal treatment (HT) may be noted as an interesting eco-efficient method increasingly used in the recycling and reuse of industrial waste ( Bioenergy is a renewable energy considered as having CO In order to enhance the possibility of biomass ashes reutilization, HT processes are employed in this work to obtain new materials with potential new applications. The biomass ash (BA) considered is the inorganic fraction of the ashes studied by The biomass ash (BA) from a fluidized bed forest combustor was provided by the CEASA Company in Spain and comes principally from the eucalyptus bark residue. BA is the inorganic fraction of the ash with a particle size below 500 The BA was submitted to a hydrothermal treatment (HT) were the ash is kept in contact with an activating solution (liquid/solid ratio of 10) during 4 Changes in the solid phase obtained from HT in different conditions were evaluated by several characterization techniques. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed with Philips PW 1730 equipment, with a graphite monochromator and Cu Kα1 radiation. The Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) characterization was carried out on a Nicolet 6700 equipment and KBr pellets containing 1 In order to determine the pozzolanic activity of selected materials, an accelerated chemical method optimized at the Institute of Construction Science “Eduardo Torroja” ( The crystalline phases in the BA and the hydrothermally treated ashes at 200 The main crystalline phases found in the BA are quartz (SiO After the HT at 0.5 The presence of portlandite in BA, detected by XRD, may be confirmed through Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) by the narrow absorption peak centred at 3642 The infrared absorption peak due to the portlandite phase disappears after the treatment, as detected by XRD. The 3430 and 1625 The carbonate absorption, specially the band at 1427 The infrared spectrum presents important changes in the silicate band (between 1200 and 800 The reactions induced through the HT processes at 200 After the hydrothermal processes, an endothermic peak below 250 After the hydrothermal processes the peak centred at 655–689 In order to further analyze the loss of chlorine from the raw BA through the HT processes, the obtained solids were analyzed by XRF. The results confirm a low percent concentration of chlorine equal to 0.41% after HT at 0.5 Apart from the compositional changes induced by the hydrothermal treatment, significant changes are induced on the specific surface area of the synthesized solid, especially at lower concentrations of NaOH. The values obtained after the HT at 0.5 and 1.0 The morphological aspect of the raw ashes and after HT obtained by SEM is shown in The BA morphology is totally modified by the hydrothermal treatment as shown in In summary, the results indicate that HT at lower concentrations forms a solid with simpler composition defined by the development of tobermorite and analcime. The major incorporation of Ca and Si for the formation of those hydrated phases is observed with a 1.0 Taking into account the previous results, the suitability of the starting BA and the BA hydrothermally activated in 1.0 As observed in In the case of the activated ash, BA-HT ( The hydrothermal treatment (HT) is an eco-efficient process that allows the valorization of the biomass ashes by the production of mineral phases. Analcime, tobermorite and cancrinite were formed by the HT at 200 BA and BA-HT show pozzolanic activity comparable to standard pozzolans employed in cement-based materials. This result confirms the possibility of a valorization of BA in construction materials as pozzolanic addition in the cement matrix. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the