The end of the 2000s commodity super cycle resulted in all-time high market values for most commodity based companies, followed by a rapid decline in the values post the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008. The period 2006–2015 was therefore an appropriate review period as it enabled reviewing changes in company value pre and post the GFC.
                  In order to determine the key drivers of company value, financial and production data of four diversified and international mining companies was analyzed. Each of the four companies had a different commodity mix. Due to its suitability for comparison of company value, the market based valuation approach was selected as the appropriate company valuation technique, using enterprise value (EV) as the value metric.
                  Eight potential value drivers were identified. These are production output; commodity price; revenue; earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) multiple; EBITDA margin; gearing ratio; net debt to EBITDA ratio; and return on capital employed (ROCE). The eight potential value drivers were analyzed firstly using graphical checks, followed by numerical determination of the degree of correlation between each potential value driver and EV using the Pearson correlation coefficient method to confirm the visual analysis. Hypothesis testing was finally done to investigate the strength of the relationships between the potential value drivers and EV.
                  This paper notes some key findings. Revenue, commodity price and EBITDA multiple are primary drivers of value across all four companies, despite their different commodity mix. Of these three drivers revenue is the strongest value driver. It was also noted that the two debt metrics, gearing ratio and net debt to EBITDA, only correlated with EV in times of declining commodity prices and revenue, indicating that value drivers can change with changing economic conditions. It is therefore important for mining companies to periodically identify key value drivers of company value during different economic periods and ensure that they measure their performance based on these.The 2000s commodities super cycle saw widespread growth for most mining companies as rising demand for commodities from emerging markets pushed commodity prices to all-time highs. This boom ended with the onset of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in 2008 and commodity prices started to decline to pre-2000 levels. Post the GFC, commodity prices have been recovering, As commodity prices changed pre and post the GFC, so did the market values of major mining companies. It is therefore intuitive to link changes in company value to commodity price changes only. However, there are other critical drivers of mining company value. For example for the period 2006–2015 the two diversified international major mining companies BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto increased in value by about 30%, while the other two diversified international major mining companies Anglo American and CVRD-Vale, declined in value by about 60% over the same period. This opposite movement in value was despite all the four companies being subjected to the same commodity price change regime. As recommended by  The period 2006–2015 was selected for analysis as an appropriate window period as it includes different economic conditions represented by pre and post GFC periods. By analyzing value drivers under different economic conditions, it is possible to identify if the value drivers change with changing economic conditions. For example, the period 2006–2008 was characterized by a commodity price boom which saw mining companies making extraordinary profits as commodity prices were increasing. This was followed by a commodity price downturn with the onset of the GFC in 2008 and subsequent recovery during the period 2010–2011. Then from 2011 to 2015 there was a steady downward trend in commodity prices that increased pressure on mining companies to reduce costs in order to adjust to the declining commodity prices. In order to determine the key drivers of company value, production and financial data of four international and diversified mining companies was analyzed. These companies are Anglo American plc, BHP Billiton Group, Rio Tinto Group and Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD-Vale). These four companies were selected as they represented over 40% of the total revenue of the top 40 mining companies for the 2006 calendar year ( Value is defined as the material or monetary worth of something ( According to   There are several factors that can drive EV for mining companies. Based on the preceding arguments on value creation, a number of different metrics were selected for analysis as potential drivers of company value. Revenue growth was analyzed in terms of volume (or production output) and price. Operating margin was analyzed using valuation multiples which For the mining industry, the basic calculation of revenue is production output (volume) multiplied by the corresponding commodity price at which the output is sold. Thus, the two potential drivers of value for mining companies is commodity price and production output. As argued earlier on, the change in company value is not linked to commodity prices alone. For example, the market capitalization of the top 40 mining companies in 2015 disproportionately changed with changes in commodity price (  Capital management and efficiency can be defined as There are three common measures of capital management and efficiency these being gearing ratio, net debt to EBITDA and return on capital employed (ROCE). Gearing ratio is a measure of a portion of the company's assets financed through debt, or the ratio of total debt to total assets. The gearing ratio indicates a company's degree of leverage and the higher the gearing ratio the more susceptible the company is to economic downturns as those experienced by mining companies during commodity price cycles. Net debt to EBITDA is an important measure as it shows a company's ability to pay back its debt. The higher the ratio, the more difficult it can be for a company to pay off its debt, or be able to take additional debt required to grow the business. ROCE is a measure of a company's profitability compared to the capital employed to achieve this profit. This is calculated by dividing the earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) by the capital employed. Capital employed is commonly defined as total assets less current liabilities. The higher the ROCE, the more efficient the company is in using available capital. When Mark Cutifani joined Anglo American as the CEO in 2013 he committed to achieving a ROCE of 15% in order to benchmark the company with the mining industry but with declining commodity prices this target slipped to a range between 5% and 15% for the period 2013–2016 ( A total of eight potential value drivers as indicated in The financial and production data for each company was collected from annual and interim financial reports and quarterly production reports. Production output and commodity price analysis was done using stacked area graphs while other potential value drivers were analyzed using linear graphs. All data was then indexed back to Q4 2005 in order to first visually analyze trends and then determine the strengths of correlations between the different value drivers and EV to confirm the visual observations. From the stacked area graphs, potential value drivers for each company were checked to see if any visual trends could be established that could be confirmed further through analysis using the Pearson correlation coefficient method. For the linear graphs the Pearson correlation coefficient analysis was done in Microsoft Excel. The Pearson correlation coefficient method is a widely used method for determining a correlation between two variables. It is most relevant when analyzing a linear relationship between variables, which all the potential value drivers were expected to have with EV. As summarised by The production output for each company was plotted on a stacked area graph to show the cumulative output from the different commodity segments per quarter as shown in  Since each company had a different commodity mix, it was necessary to also conduct correlation testing on commodity with production output for each of the four companies. This would enable to establish if production output of an individual commodity in the commodity mix was a sole driver of value or the commodity mix collectively drove EV. The table shows a general negative and low correlation between production output of each commodity and EV for each company. Therefore there is no general correlation between production output and EV for each commodity across the four companies.  Copper - US$/metric tonne; Nickel - US$/metric tonne; Aluminium - US$/metric tonne; Platinum - US$/troy ounce; Gold - US$/troy ounce; Iron ore - US$/dry metric tonne unit (dmtu). The cost and freight (cfr) price was used which means that the seller arranges for sea carriage of the product to the required port. Since indexed pricing is being used, then this price is suitable for all companies; Phosphate rock - US$/metric tonne; Thermal coal - US$/metric tonne. Two different prices are provided for thermal coal being Australian and South African prices. The Australian price is a free on board (FOB) price to Newcastle & Port Kembla. For South Africa it is FOB to Richards Bay Coal Terminal (RBCT). The Australian coal is of a slightly higher energy rating and as such attracts a slightly higher price. Both prices track fairly closely and since the four companies analyzed were exposed more to Australian production, the Australian thermal coal price was used; and Crude Oil - US$/barrel (US$/bbl). As reported by the World Bank the price is the equally weighted average of crude oil Brent, crude oil Dubai and crude oil US West Texas Intermediate (WTI). The World Bank only reports thermal coal prices however as many of the mining companies also produce metallurgical/coking coal this price was also required for the analysis. Since the majority of the production of metallurgical/coking coal is from Australia, the hard coking coal (HCC) spot FOB Australia price was used. This is the hard coking coal, free on board price and available from Due to the specific nature of the diamond industry, diamond prices are not reported by the World Bank or other commodity pricing databases. This is because diamonds are not traded as a bulk commodity and that they are non-fungible which means no two diamond carats are the same. As such their price is dependent on the unique characteristics of each stone as characterized by the four C's being colour, clarity, cut and carats. Thus, for the purpose of this study, the diamond pricing trends index was used. This index, published by a group called the Diamond Search Engine, is a representation of the current market pricing for diamonds. This is the average retail price per carat of loose diamonds from jewellers around the world (  In order to evaluate the impact of commodity price for each individual commodity on EV, it was then necessary to conduct correlation testing on commodity for each of the four companies. This would assist in establishing if commodity price of an individual commodity in the commodity mix was the sole driver of value or the indexed commodity price drove EV. The table shows that EV was driven by the price of nickel for Anglo American; iron ore and petroleum for BHP Billiton; iron and thermal coal for Rio Tinto; and nickel and bauxite for CVRD-Vale. The impact of commodity price for each commodity on EV indicates that no general correlation can be concluded from commodity price across the four companies. Revenue, as a combination of both commodity price and commodity production output was calculated as follows: Calculate the percentage that each commodity segment contributed to revenue for 2005 for each company (or in the case of CVRD-Vale 2010). This is calculated by taking the revenue for the individual sector and dividing it by the total revenue for the company; Calculate the indexed average quarterly commodity price compared to Q4 of 2005 (or in the case of CVRD-Vale Q1 2010); and Multiply the percentage revenue by the indexed production by the indexed commodity price. The revenues as calculated above were then plotted as stacked area graphs for each company and then tracked against EV for each respective company ( A visual analysis of In order to evaluate the impact of revenue for each individual commodity on EV, it was also necessary to test correlation between revenue from each commodity and EV for each of the four companies. This was done to establish if revenue from an individual commodity was the sole driver of value or the commodity mix revenue drove EV. The table shows that EV was driven by revenue from platinum for Anglo American; iron ore for BHP Billiton; iron ore and aluminium for Rio Tinto; and nickel for CVRD-Vale. The table shows that no general conclusion can be drawn across the four companies on the correlation between revenue for each community and EV. The two valuation multiples included in the analysis are EBITDA multiple and EBITDA margin.   There appears to be little visual correlation between the EV and the gearing ratio suggesting that gearing ratio is not a driver of EV. However, from 2011 to 2015 when prices were declining, the correlation appeared to be close for all the four companies. This would suggest that gearing ratio is only a value driver in times of declining commodity prices. In many cases this is when asset write downs are common and as such investors and companies are concerned with levels of debt, which can affect share price. For all four companies there did not appear to be a consistent correlation between net debt to EBITDA ratio and EV. As with gearing ratio, net debt to EBITDA ratio has a high negative correlation with EV during the times of declining prices (2010–2015) therefore, these two are particularly important in times of declining prices and revenues. More specifically, in times of declining prices, the net debt must be kept to a manageable level depending on company size and industry outlook, measured against value and company earnings. For all four companies, ROCE did not appear to have any correlation with EV, suggesting that ROCE is not a key value driver of company value. The Pearson correlation coefficients for each potential value driver for the four companies are shown in    From the coefficient values in  To test findings from both the visual analysis and the Pearson correlation coefficients established earlier in the paper, hypothesis testing was then conducted on all the selected potential drivers. In the statistical analysis the research hypothesis was that there is a relationship between each potential driver and EV. An alpha (α) of 0.05 was used in the significance testing which means that for any p-value which is less than 0.05 the study results are concluded to be statistically significant therefore the research hypothesis was accepted. Accepting the research hypothesis means that the particular potential driver was a driver of EV and rejecting the research hypothesis means that the potential driver was not a driver of EV for the period under analysis.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.39 and p = 0.08 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.16 and p = 0.5 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.62 and p = 0.003 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.43 and p = 0.06 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected. It can be concluded from these results that there is no statistical significance of the correlation between production output and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that production output is not a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.39 and p = 0.01 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.78 and p = 1.49E For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.83 and p = 2.10E For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.55 and p = 3.27E It can be concluded from these results that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between commodity price and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that commodity price is a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.89 and p = 4.51E For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.84 and p = 1.60E For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.91 and p = 9.14E For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.63 and p = 2.76E It can be concluded from these results that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between revenue and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that revenue is a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.63 and p = 0.04 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.42 and p = 0.22 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.64 and p = 0.03 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.63 and p = 0.03 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted. It can be concluded from these results that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between EBITDA multiple and EV for three companies which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that EBITDA multiple is a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.72 and p = 0.0002 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.09 and p = 0.69 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.12 and p = 0.6 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.14 and p = 0.56 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected. These results show that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between EBITDA margin and EV only for Anglo American and no statistical significance of the correlation for the other three companies. It can therefore be concluded that the is no statistical significance of the correlation between EBITDA margin and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that EBITDA margin is not a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.47 and p = 0.03 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.06 and p = 0.81 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.26 and p = 0.25 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.02 and p = 0.95 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected. These results show that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between gearing and EV only for Anglo American and no statistical significance of the correlation for the other three companies. It can therefore be concluded that there is no statistical significance of the correlation between gearing and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that gearing is not a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.66 and p = 0.03 which is less than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is accepted; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.02 and p = 0.95 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.46 and p = 0.16 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.4 and p = 0.24 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected. These results show that there is a statistical significance of the correlation between Net debt to EBIDTA and EV only for Anglo American and no statistical significance of the correlation for the other three companies. It can therefore be concluded that there is no statistical significance of the correlation between Net debt to EBIDTA and EV which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that Net debt to EBIDTA is not a driver of EV.  For Anglo American, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.60 and p = 0.051 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For BHP Billiton, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.18 and p = 0.63 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; For Rio Tinto, the correlation coefficient, R = −0.47 and p = 0.14 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected; and For CVRD-Vale, the correlation coefficient, R = 0.49 and p = 0.15 which is greater than 0.05; therefore the research hypothesis is rejected. It can be concluded from these results that there is no statistical significance of the correlation between ROCE and EV for all four companies which confirms the visual observations and the Pearson correlation coefficients that ROCE is not a driver of EV. Value creation is at the core of every business. Various approaches and metrics are used to measure company value with the market valuation approach and enterprise value (EV) being the most appropriate approach and metric, respectively. It is also important to identify appropriate value drivers within the control of company management in order for management to take appropriate actions to create value. However, some of the value drivers are applicable in certain economic conditions. In order to identify significant drivers of company value, eight potential value drivers were identified and analyzed on four major diversified international mining companies over a 10-year period spanning 2006–2015. From visual, Pearson correlation coefficient analysis and hypothesis testing, it was established that revenue, commodity price and EBITDA multiple are primary drivers of company value. It was also established that gearing ratio and net debt to EBITDA drove EV only in times of declining commodity prices. Thus, during periods of declining commodity prices, companies should manage their debt levels in relation to earnings in order to maintain or create value. It is therefore important for mining companies to periodically identify key value drivers of company value during different economic periods and ensure that they measure their performance based on these. 