Low temperature coal tar pitches (LTCTP) develop mesophase rapidly, due to the presence of high contents of heteroatoms and aliphatic groups The characteristics of the LTCTP used in this study (CTP1) are listed in Polymerisation reactions were carried out with formaldehyde (Paraformaldehyde 95%, Aldrich) in an experimental set-up described elsewhere The polymerisation products were carbonised in the same experimental set-up The types and contents of anisotropic material in the semi-cokes were evaluated by optical microscopy. A polarized light microscope Zeiss Axioplan was used, with an oil immersion 50× objective. Samples were embedded in an epoxy resin, left overnight, cut and polished for the examination of particle cross-sections. The optical textures were quantified with a semi-automatic point counter Swift, Model F (500 points). A Setaram TGA 92 analyser was used for thermogravimetric analysis. 10 mg of sample, an argon flow rate of 50 ml The polymerisation conditions are listed in Polymerisation occurs to a greater extent at 80 °C and 3 h with NaOH as catalyst (PT-80-3-B) than under more drastic conditions but without catalyst (170 °C for 6 h, PT-170-6). This is due to the double action of the catalyst: (i) catalysis of the condensation, (ii) release of formaldehyde from the initial paraformaldehyde. Without catalyst, this release is thermally promoted and occurs by 170 °C, but condensation is only catalysed by basic molecules present in the pitch itself. Also, the basic catalyst leads to higher polymerisation levels than oxalic acid (PT-80-3-B and PT-80-3-A, The samples polymerised with formaldehyde, especially under basic conditions, give rise to increased carbonisation yields ( Another effect of polymerisation with formaldehyde is the increased amount of mesophase formed during the initial stages of carbonisation. Thus, carbonisation at 2 h at 420 °C does not produce mesophase from CTP1; however, when CTP1 has been previously polymerised, it develops 37% mesophase (SC1 and SC4, After the polymerisation under acidic or basic conditions, additional mesophase is produced in the form of irregular-shaped particles, with no spherical mesophase being observed. Furthermore, in the presence of NaOH, a significant increase of the content of bulk mesophase can be observed ( In the semi-cokes obtained from CTP1 polymerised under acidic conditions, an increase in the amount of mesophase is also observed, although to a lesser extent than under basic conditions (SC6 and SC5, In summary, the polymerisation of a low temperature coal tar pitch with formaldehyde promotes the reaction of the phenolic compounds to form β-resins, increases the semi-coke yields achieved in carbonisation and decreases the coalescence tendency of the mesophase, although the formation of additional bulk mesophase is also promoted by polymerisation under basic conditions. Both the high viscosity and the enhanced thermal reactivity promoted by polymerisation determine the morphology of the mesophase. Thus, while spheres are observed in the semi-cokes from CTP1, the samples polymerised with formaldehyde lead to irregular-shaped mesophase particles. The authors thank the ECSC (European Coal and Steel Community), for financial support (Contract no. 7220-PR/043). The supply of the low temperature coal tar pitch from Coalite Smokeless Fuels is also gratefully acknowledged.