Froth flotation for beneficiation of printed circuit board comminution fines was investigated in this work, via reverse flotation under a scheme described as natural hydrophobic response. With no reagents, the scheme employed variation of kinetic parameters of airflow rate and impeller speed to optimize metallic enrichment of the sink. The impeller energy and aeration rate required to keep the pulp in suspension and avoid excessive turbulence were found to be much lower compared with conventional mineral flotation. The natural hydrophobic response was found to exist, and stable froth was observed even without the use of any frother. It was submitted that the dynamic froth stability observed is due to fine particle stabilization. Mass pulls obtained were high and cumulative mass pull under the varying kinetic regimes were found to fit very well to the general first order kinetics. The extents of fit, the sink enrichment and the recovery in respect of metallic values were assessed to evaluate the beneficiation performance. Many of the metallic elements were found to concentrate into the sink, while some prefer the froth phase. Notably, gold and palladium were among the best recovered to the sink; with about 64% recovery at enrichment ratio of 3.1 (676ppm actual assay) for Au. The flotation scheme proved effective for PCB comminution fines, and performance improvement also looks very feasible.End-of-life printed circuit board (eol PCB) assays far above many base and precious metals natural deposits ( A probable starting scheme advanced for this application was described as natural hydrophobic response ( However, with this unconventional sample, the usual range of kinetic operating parameters in conventional minerals flotation may not be invoked. Moreover, with no reagent collector to control, appropriate hydrodynamics condition will be critical to the flotation performance of the proposed scheme. Seeking appropriate kinetics to achieve efficient particle–bubble collision for hydrophobic attachment can be faced with the challenge of selectivity compromise due to entrainment, which can also be promoted by kinetics (such as by carry over with water for fine particles, particle morphology enhanced drag, and upward mass transfer under turbulence). Grade versus recovery analysis of target constituent under the varying kinetics will therefore be a good indicator for assessing a favorable regime. This translates to optimizing metallic enrichment with recovery to the sink under varying kinetic regimes. List of factors contributing to kinetics of particle removal by bubbles in a flotation cell include gas flow rate, bubble diameter, cell volume, turbulence dissipation energy, fluid and particle densities, kinematic viscosity, efficiency of collection (which consist of efficiency of collision, attachment, and stability subprocesses), and of course quantity of the particles to be removed that are present at a time ( Large assortment of populated eol PCBs, about 250 The −75 A 3.5 The concentrate mass percent (fraction of the feed remaining in the sink) was calculated as an inverse indication of the ratio of concentration for the reverse flotation. For a first check of the conformity of the response to flotation behavior, the cumulative mass fraction recovered to float for all conditions was fitted to the classical first order kinetics model in the form ( Without addition of any reagent, the pulp pH averaged 8.00 (δ Another possibility is that this froth results from fine particle stabilization. In this connection, it may be necessary to first address the frothing phenomena a bit broadly. Froth is formed on aerating a solution or a suspension if trapping of air (or gas) bubbles by the liquid film could be achieved. Froth is therefore a dispersed system, and in essence unstable: it will want to break down spontaneously to lower overall surface and energy ( With surfactant solutions, overall surface tension is lower, so also is the free energy difference accompanying surface reduction. This reduces the spontaneity of breakdown, giving a metastable two-phase froth. In pulps of surfactant solution (as in mineral processing), it is recognized that the stability of the three-phase froth is increased or decreased by solid particles in pulp, with particle size, shape and degree of hydrophobicity as the interacting factors ( From this standpoint, it is easy to see possibility of the observed froth resulting from fine particles stabilization. The sample contains about 65% passing 38  The extents of fit of the responses to Eq.  As these responses are based on the natural hydrophobic response, with no collector or frother, no treatment to alter hydrophobicity, the responses must be explained from the kinetic parameters variation. From the flotation cell operation, higher impeller speeds, at constant aeration, produce finer bubbles. Finer bubbles imply higher bubble surface area, lower buoyancy and increased residence time. Increased turbulent dissipation energy is also a direct effect of higher impeller speed. These will increase particle–bubble collision probability ( The performance across the category can also be resolved on this basis. Comparing E21C and E22B, the result reflects the interplay of superficial gas velocity and the superficial surface area rate of bubbles on recovery and rate. The higher buoyancy of the larger bubbles (at the lower speed) of E22B, and the larger flow rate reflects in the higher rate constant. But with lower residence time of the much larger bubbles, particle–bubble collision probability became lower after substantial mass is pulled, thus ending mass pull around 12  First considering the response of gold, the best recovery of 79% was obtained at the lowest ER of 1.72, under the conditions of E12A, while the best ER of 3.65 was achieved with a recovery of 51%, under E22C experimental condition ( For Ti and Pb, a careful observation of the responses in The response for Fe ( Attempting to explain these responses, for metallic particles that reports to the sink, this is as expected. Metallic particles will have high surface energy, be hydrophilic ( For metals preferring the froth phase, probable reasons can also be the size and shape in which particles occur. For instance, Al, Ca, and Mg from the oxides ( From the foregoing, it follows that the interacting mechanisms that can be responsible for the responses observed include: the projected natural hydrophobic response to float and hydrophilic preference for the sink; presence of hydrophobic material on an otherwise hydrophilic surface; particle morphology enhanced entrainment; and fine particle entrained in water to froth. The kinetic regimes investigated were seen to promote these factors differently as the responses vary with kinetic conditions. To one extreme, recovery can be compromised, and to the other, enrichment. The actual range of values for the kinetic parameters to give the most favorable regime to optimize the performance will of course vary to some extent between cells ( A novel application of froth flotation for beneficiation of PCB CF has been investigated. Response under natural hydrophobic condition was projected to differ among the assorted particles in the sample, and this was exploited by a kind of reverse flotation. The response was found to exist, and enrichment versus recovery to the sink could be optimized with variation in the operating kinetic regimes. Au and Pd, which are the major economic drivers of PCB processing, were among the elements best enriched into the sink. The results provide a basis to consider froth flotation as applicable for PCB CF beneficiation, and the natural hydrophobic response scheme effective in this connection. Performance improvement looks feasible and more study on the response observed also interesting.