A novel and clean process was developed to convert flue dusts of secondary copper smelters into value-added products. The process consists of three main steps: NaOH leaching, two-stage combined electrolysis, and deep purification of recycle solution. Initially, 80–92% Zn and Pb were dissolved in 5 M NaOH at 80 °C, whereas Cu was concentrated in the residue. Yates' algorithm was used to determine the main effects and interactions of the leaching factors. The leach solution was then electrolyzed at 100–250 A/m2 and high purity Pb (>97%) was separated from the alkaline solution. Subsequently, a pulsed current was introduced to obtain ultrafine zinc powders (∼30 μm) with the best performance occurred at T
                     on (current-on) = 15 ms, and T
                     off (current-off) = 10 ms. Finally, Cl and Al were precipitated by evaporation-condensation and CaO addition, respectively. The combination of alkaline media and pulse current enables the green route without distilled water washing and surfactant addition, thus minimizing effluent emissions. This environmentally friendly method has promise to treat other industrial wastes due to its low cost and simple design.Metallurgical industries generate vast quantities of different types of wastes such as electric arc furnace (EAF) dust, basic oxygen furnace (BOF) sludge, jarosite residue and flue dust of secondary copper smelting ( Usually, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are employed for treating such residues. The pyrometallurgical processes face the problems of generation of worthless residues and costly equipment investment as well as quite high energy consumption ( The flue dusts used in this work were obtained from the city of Fuyang, which is situated in Zhejiang, a developed southeastern province in China; it is one of the biggest national centers for secondary Cu industries. The composition of the dusts varies considerably, and it is dependent not only on the waste used, but also on the operating conditions. However, some general trends have been noted. For example, most of these dusts are rich in Zn, Cu, Cl, Pb, and Al. It is advisable to leach the dusts with caustic soda, because the chlorides will not be tolerated in the acid electrolyte, as even a very small amount can cause severe corrosion problems and thereby damage the electrolysis ( In addition, most of copper (>90%) is left in the residue when using this alkaline leach reagent. Furthermore, in the alkaline zinc electrowinning process hydrogen evolution on the cathode surface is even more impeded than the one in acidic electrowinning. Current efficiencies (CE) of 97–99% can thus be reached when high current densities are applied ( On the basis of the above analysis, a hydrometallurgical route is presented in this work, as shown in This work describes a novel and efficient method to extract Pb from an alkaline leaching solution of the sample. Attempt was also made to produce uniform and fine zinc powders with pulse current. Subsequently, we reported the techniques for removing Cl and Al from the resultant alkaline electrolyte. The sample was dried and homogenized before the leaching experiments, and its chemical composition is listed in Chemical speciation calculations were carried out using the MINEQL+ software (version 4.5) ( The proposed process consists of three main stages, including NaOH leaching, two-stage combined electrolysis, and deep purification of recycle solution. With this method, the stepwise extraction of Cu, Pb, Zn and Al was achieved. Moreover, ICP-OES, XRD, SEM-EDS (PHILIPS XL30), IC, particle size analyses (Malvern 3000), and electrochemical methods were used in this study. The leaching processes were carried out at 30–90 °C under atmospheric pressure. Specific amounts of flue dust samples were added into a glass reactor containing a given volume of 3–6 M NaOH solution, and then the reactor rotated with an orbital shaker for 1–2 h (15 rpm). A series of leach tests were run, and the effects of variables on zinc recovery were assessed using Yates' algorithm. Finally, the supernatant and the residues were analyzed by ICP-OES. In electrowinning, stainless steel electrodes were used as both anode and cathode. Moreover, the anode to cathode distance was kept at 3 cm and all electrowinning experiments were carried out at room temperature (30–50 °C). Current, cell voltage, and metal concentrations were recorded during the electrolysis, while at least two replicates were used for every measurement. Finally, the cathode CE was calculated from the mass gain obtained after electrolysis. Electrolysis of lead was attained by applying a low current density of (100–250 A/m Zinc powders were produced by pulse direct current. The current-on time ( A CHI600D electrochemical workstation was used for the polarization studies, and all the polarization measurements were performed in a three-electrode Plexiglas cell. A couple of stainless steel plates were employed as working and auxiliary electrodes, while reference electrode was a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) with an appropriate lugging capillary. All potentials were recorded with respect to SCE. Cyclic voltammetries were carried out by initiating scans at −0.5 V versus SCE at a rate of 5 mV s SEM and XRD were used to characterize the surface morphology and the preferred crystal orientation of zinc powders, respectively. SEM photograph was taken with scanning electron microscope at the required magnification at room temperature. The working distance of 25 mm was maintained. X-ray Diffractograms were obtained in the 2 In this process, zinc and lead were selectively dissolved in sodium hydroxide according to reactions NaOH could be regenerated during the following electrolysis section. However, large amounts of sodium hydroxide were needed in the leaching section due to the forming of a series of hydroxy-complexes. Taking Zn as an example, four different species can be found in the NaOH solution: Given the highest total zinc and lead concentration, the amount of soda hydroxide should exceed 2.7 M according to a rough estimate. In our previous experiments, the solubility of Cu and Al was found to be depressed by the presence of Zn and Pb. However, extremely high levels of copper in these flue dusts made it necessary to determine the optimum pH range for extracting Zn/Pb over Cu. Therefore, a computer simulation was performed using MINEQL+. The electrochemical recoveries of zinc and lead at a cathode occur in the alkaline media, with the following reactions: By the Nernst Equation (NaOH = 5 M, Zn = 35 g/L, Pb = 6 g/L): Although it seems that Eq. The voltammograms were initiated at −0.5 V/SCE, scanned in the negative direction and reversed at −2.0 V/SCE in the positive direction. The current increased progressively to the maximum value, where it was reversed. Thus, this gave rise to a decrease in current which subsequently reached zero and the current then became anodic corresponding to the dissolution of the deposited zinc and lead. Furthermore, lead was deposited before zinc, as indicated by the appearance of a cathodic peak at about −0.9 to −1.1 V/SCE. The height of the peak increased with Pb concentration in the electrolyte, it became non-appreciable at Pb concentrations of less than 1 g/L. Since in these circumstances, the crossover potential was equal to the metal/metal-ion reversible potential, it can be assumed that the equilibrium potential values for Zn/Zn Leaching of metals from the dusts is a function of leaching time, concentrations of alkaline solution, phase ratios, and leaching temperature. Firstly, dissolution of Zn and Pb proved to be insignificant below a NaOH concentration of 3 M, then steadily increased with increasing NaOH concentration, attaining a maximum at 4–5 M. Secondly, the temperature also strongly influences the extraction of zinc and lead. At room temperature, the maximum leaching of Zn and Pb (68–76%) is obtained when the initial concentration of NaOH in the leach solution is 5 M. The leaching efficiencies increased considerably to 80–92% at higher temperatures (>65 °C). No significant differences were found over the range of 80 °C–90 °C. Hence, a leach temperature range of 65 °C–80 °C was selected in order to avoid significant loss of NaOH at higher temperatures. In addition, lower phase ratios of solid to liquid improve the surface contact between the solution and the dusts thus facilitating dissolution of Zn and Pb. However, further decreasing the phase ratios would reduce the Zn and Pb concentrations in the resultant leach solution. Therefore, a phase ratio of 100–125 g/L was considered suitable. Furthermore, relatively longer contact time between the dust particles and the liquid was required to obtain maximum extraction of Zn and Pb. One and half hour was found to be sufficient; prolonging the leach times gave only small increase in dissolution. Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the leaching factors ( In this leaching process, together with Zn and Pb, Al and Cu may also be dissolved in strong alkaline solution. However, the solubility of Cu was found to be negligible in the presence of zinc and lead, and the concentration of Cu in leach solutions is lower than 0.5 g/L. The typical concentration of Al in leach solution was also depressed by the Zn and Pb, but it may be accumulated when the leach solutions are recycled. Hence, part of Al should be removed in certain stage of recycling. Under the optimum condition, the typical contents of the leach solution were (g/L) 35–40 Zn, 6–8 Pb, 0.3–0.8 Al, and 0.2–0.5 Cu. The dissolved copper is removed from the leach liquor by lead cementation at a Pb/Cu molar ratio of 2 within 15 min, and the residual Cu in the solution are 10–50 mg/L which is fully convenient for the following electrolysis of lead and zinc. According to the analysis and calculation in Section In such way 83–87.5% lead was recovered, and after dissolution lead deposits were analyzed using ICP-OES for purity with respect to the minor elements. Chemical analysis shows the purity of the lead deposits (∼97.18%) and the presence of only traces of copper (∼1.18%), zinc (∼0.72%) and aluminum (∼0.87%) elements. The result solution of low current density electrolysis contained Zn = 35–40 g/L, Pb < 1 g/L, Cu = 0.01–0.04 g/L, Al = 0.3–0.8 g/L. Hence, the cementation by adding zinc powders, were carried out to reduce the Pb to low levels (<100 mg/L), as presented in   The CE and the cell voltage were used to compute the PC, as discussed in the section The influence of Electron micrographs of the surface morphology of zinc powders obtained by direct electrolysis and pulse electrolysis are displayed in The solution resulting from pulse electrolysis contains Al (0.3–0.8 g/L) and Cl (4.5–7 g/L). They may be accumulated when the leach solutions are recycled. Maximum allowable concentrations of Al and Cl were found to be 7 g/L and 25 g/L in this process, respectively. Further increasing the amount of Al and Cl could affect adversely the process. At higher levels (>7 g/L), Al could decrease the electrolyte conductivity, thus inhibiting the zinc ion reduction, and consequently increases the cell voltage and PC. Thus, Al was separated from the electrolyte by adding CaO due to the following reaction: When sufficient CaO was added to make the molar ratios of Ca to Al in the solution equal to 1.8–2.0, 65–72% Al could be recovered from the solution within 4 h. Subsequently, an evaporation step was carried out at 90 °C. In this step, NaOH concentration was increased up to 450 g/L allowing the NaCl precipitation, and consequently 92–93% Cl was removed from the electrolyte. The concentrated electrolyte was recycled to the leaching. A new approach was suggested to treat flue dusts formed during secondary copper smelting, with the aim of maximizing metals recovery and minimizing generated residues. The method developed for processing the flue dust comprises several steps: Leaching of dusts using a 5 M NaOH solution at 100 g/L S/L ratio and at 80 °C for about 1.5 h. These conditions allow a high recovery of Zn and Pb, while minimizing the co-extraction of Cu. Electrolysis of leach liquor at current densities of 100–250 A/m Pulse current electrolysis of the result solution at Precipitation of Cl and Al when their concentrations exceeded 25 g/L and 7 g/L, respectively, which avoids the accumulation of Al and Cl when reusing the solution in the alkaline leaching stage. Integration of alkaline media leaching and two-stage electrolysis can make the whole process economically attractive due to the value-added by-products and environmental friendly due to the nearly-closed cycle. In particular, pulse current makes the zinc powder more uniform and finer, thus improving its marketability. Furthermore, this product could be an attractive material for organic synthesis, brass manufacture and the battery industry. This integration also allows a high level Cl in the electrolyte, simplifying the procedure. The proposed process might contribute to a more sustainable and cost-effective management for other industrial wastes such as hot galvanizing slag, spent catalyst and automobile shredder scrap, but these areas still deserve further attention. Moreover, future research is also needed that explores ways to reduce NaOH consumption and leaching temperature. This work was financially supported by Additionally, authors are thankful to the Department of Environmental Science and Technology, Tongji University for equipment support. Authors would also like to appreciate kind cooperation of Helena M.V.M. Soares in Porto University for extending necessary help.