Vertical displacement (VD) estimation is one of the most important topics in construction of an underground powerhouse cavern. This phenomenon commonly depends on excavation progress and corresponding geometrical, geological and geomechanical conditions of surrounding rock masses. Although many researchers investigated this issue, however, application of the new powerful predictive models is essential due to the topic complexities and limitations of previous methods. This study focuses on the estimation of VDs at the middle and key points on the roof and floor of a powerhouse cavern using the numerical analysis (NA), neural network (NN), fuzzy logic (FL) and statistical analysis (SA) models under various conditions. Rock geomechanical characteristics and geometrical variables of powerhouse related structures regarded as inputs in numerical analysis of VDs. On the basis of a large number of numerical simulations, a new predictive equation considering seven effective basic factors was fitted to predict the elasto-plastic vertical displacement at the key points on roof and floor of powerhouse cavern. Through the numerical analysis, an enough datasets was introduced to construct and develop the NN, FL and SA models. Based on the testing datasets, the achieved results from these models were compared with each other as well as with the results of NA-based equation using the relevant statistical indices. This comparison confirmed that the performance of FL and NN models are relatively better than the NA-based equation. Moreover, these three models are more relevant than the SA model. At the end of modeling, conducted sensitivity analysis proved that overburden depth, lateral stress coefficient are the most effectual variables on the VDs whereas the tensile strength is the least ones.Construction of powerhouse caverns and other related underground spaces leads to significant changes in the stress status around these structures. These stress changes can cause the considerable deformations and displacements that affect the stability of the openings. Vertical displacement or ground subsidence is one of the induced phenomena by disturbance due to construction of underground excavations particularly powerhouse caverns. Various factors including the drilling type and its related parameters, geometry of underground space, geological conditions and geotechnical characteristics of surrounding rock masses can affect the vertical displacements due to caverns excavation. As the vertical displacement value is greater than the allowable value, the surface subsidence is occurred which may damage the ground surface and subsurface structures. In other hand, high vertical displacements threatened the stability and safety of the opening. Therefore the vertical displacements must be estimated and controlled in order to prevent these damages and other related side effects. Nowadays, there exist various methods i.e., empirical, analytical, and numerical models to predict and control the vertical displacements around the underground openings. Du to importance of the issue, different numerical-based investigations conducted by the several researchers for estimation the vertical displacements and ground surface subsidence due to underground excavations. These studies are briefly discussed here. Li et al. [ Given the complexities of this issue and its related uncertainties, it is difficult to estimate the accurate vertical displacement in all points around the underground spaces by using the numerical methods. As an attractive alternative, different approximation predictive methods can be used in this field. In recent years, the powerful artificial intelligence techniques such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) and fuzzy inference systems (FISs) have been widely developed for estimation goals in geotechnics and rock engineering issues because of their high adaptability and reliable accuracy [ In this study, NA, NN, FL and SA models are developed to estimate the vertical displacement at the middle and key points in the roof and floor of a powerhouse based on the 12 different input effective variables. On the basis of the different numerical analyses, a predictive equation was fitted to estimate the elasto-plastic vertical displacement at the key points in roof and floor of a powerhouse cavern. Moreover, 1920 datasets were introduced thorough the numerical analyses and applied to develop and evaluate the NN, FL and SA models. Finally, performances of the three developed models along with the proposed NA-based equation were evaluated for determining the elasto-plastic vertical displacements in the roof and floor of powerhouse. The irregular shapes of the most underground structures and existence the discontinuous in their surrounding rock masses cause anisotropic, heterogeneous and non-elastic conditions in simulation their related problems. Due to these complex conditions, application of the closed-form analytical methods is limited to determine the stresses, displacements and fractures around these structures. In recent years, numerical analysis (NA) methods have been replaced for solving these problems as a powerful alternative. Accordingly, numerical methods have been widely used in modeling of the rock mass related problems. These applications were mostly focused on the rock mass behavior modeling at a certain point and/or investigate the stability aspects of the rocks. Numerical models can be commonly used to compute the redistributed stress field around the excavation, analyze the mechanical response of a jointed rock mass around an unsupported or supported opening and to predict the expected deformations caused by each excavation phase [ The theory of fuzzy logic (FL) and fuzzy sets were firstly introduced by Zadeh [ Neural networks (NNs) are the mathematical techniques which are modeled from the human brain. These models are commonly used for problems that cannot be easily demonstrated with a formula or equation. In recent years, NNs have been utilized for numerous tasks including pattern recognition, data mining, classification, forecasting and process modeling. The most important advantages of the NNs compared to the other modeling methods are their speed, simplicity and ability to model the multivariable problems in order to solve the complex relationships between the independent and dependent variables [ A specific neural network is commonly defined using the three basic components including transfer function, network architecture and learning law. Neural networks are firstly trained by processing a large number of input patterns and their corresponding output (s) [ Application of an appropriate activation (transfer) function makes the network be more versatile, powerful and capable tool to represent each complex nonlinear physical model. Numerous transfer functions (TFs) such as TANSIG, pure linear, LOGSIG, hard limit, positive linear, radial basis, triangular basis and soft linear can utilize between the neurons of different layers. Selection of the transfer function depends on the specification of a problem that the neuron must attempt to solve it. Even though the logarithmic sigmoid (LOGSIG) transfer function is the most familiar and effective ones, however, trial and error method is usually applied to determine the appropriate transfer function [ Statistical analysis (SA) is the most commonly used technique in developing the empirical models to introduce the predictive equations in the forms of linear, logarithmic, power and exponential. Multivariate regression analysis is one of the main statistical branches that commonly employed to model the studied problems in the most of sciences such as civil, geology and rock engineering [ Based on the finite element approach, the Phase 2 software [ As the powerhouse has high length, the plane strain condition was applied in the modeling. The rock masses was considered isotropic, homogeneous and quasi continuous with the elasto-plastic behavior which complies with the Mohr–Coulomb yield criterion. Two minor and major principal stresses act in the horizontal and vertical directions. The shape of powerhouses is assumed horse-shoe because this shape provides a relatively flat floor for the utilized equipment during the construction or excavation presences. Important characteristics of the rock mass surrounding a powerhouse cavern and the design parameters used as the input variables for NA modeling are listed in In this regard, Gale and Blackwood [ The achieved results and calculations of a large number of numerical analysis (about 3000 series) are given in According to Like the stresses (i.e., σ Based on the presented datasets in Due to lack of actual case studies in the fields of vertical displacement predictions around the power station caverns, the calculation results from the present analysis are compared with the results of the vertical displacement equation obtained from the Phase 2 software. Comparison results are given in To develop the intelligent and statistical models i.e., NN, FL and SA methods, sufficient numbers of dataset are commonly required in order to provide all of the modeling requirements. However, there are limitations in the availability of sufficient actual measured data because its measurement operation in the underground spaces is costly and time consuming. So it is necessary to utilize other approaches to introduce the related datasets for developing the novel models for prediction aims in these fields. As a result, the simulation outputs of the numerical analyses were applied in this study to introduce a suitable database for constructing and assessing the new predictive models. On this basis, 1920 valid datasets were prepared in which each dataset composed of 12 inputs and 4 output variables. The ranges of the modeling input and output variables in database along with their units, symbols and statistical characteristics are represented in In order to estimate the vertical displacements around a powerhouse cavern in this study, three new predictive models i.e., FL, NN and SA have been constructed and proposed on the basis of twelve influential input variables. Schematic presentation of the suggested models along with the incorporated input and output variables are depicted in As mentioned before, construction of a fuzzy logic-based model requires the implementation of four main steps including fuzzification, rules base development, inference algorithm selection and defuzzification process. Based on the trial and error process, it is found that the Gaussian membership function provides the best outputs for the current FL model. Accordingly, this type of membership function is selected for the fuzzification all of the input and outputs intervals. In the next step, the adequate fuzzy “if-then” rules have been developed to construct an influential fuzzy “rule base”. These rules have been built on the basis of the expert knowledge and discussed datasets in section 4. Based on this procedure, about 1100 valid rules were created in the “rule base” of under studied FL model. Generally, these rules represent the inherent relations between input and output variables of the FL model. Afterwards, a Mamdani algorithm or engine, the most powerful applied aggregation algorithm in the rock engineering fields [ according to their ranges in Back-propagation multilayer NN model was developed to predict the VDs values on the roof and floor of a powerhouse in this research. To reach the desired optimal architecture of the NN model, different networks were tested by using the trial and error approach. In this procedure, networks performance with different hidden layers and their corresponding neurons number, training functions, transfer functions, epoch numbers and learning rate values are examined by using the mean squared error (MSE) index. Accordingly, a network with least amount of MSE is selected as an optimum NN model. In the current study, numerous types of NN models were trained, tested and compared for selection of the optimum network in order to predict the VDs around a powerhouse. Some of these tested networks and their characteristics along with the obtained MSE are given in As represented in In the current research, the statistical analysis (SA) model was conducted by using the Minitab 17 statistical software package to predict the VDs in roof and floor of a powerhouse. On the basis of the prepared data discussed in section 4 and using the above-mentioned software, the relationships between the effective input variables and vertical displacements were obtained. Accordingly, predictive equations from the SA model to estimate the vertical displacements in the roof key point ( A numerical analysis-based equation and two soft computing-based models i.e., FL and NN along with a SA model were suggested to estimate the VDs in roof and floor of a powerhouse cavern in the current study. In the processing of proposed models, twelve influential variables including According to these criteria, performance of a model would be ideal and excellent while the values of After the models evaluation and validation in modeling process, it is necessary to conduct a sensitivity analysis for determining the most influencing variables among the inputs on the dependent (output) variable(s). Sensitivity analysis can be performed in two different ways. In a procedure, the influence of an input variable on the corresponding output can be achieved by keeping fixed values for the other inputs of the model and changing the values of it [ The impact intensity of input variables on the output depends on the amount of Assessment of the vertical displacement in roof and floor of the underground spaces i.e., powerhouses caverns is one of the critical issues in civil, mining and rock engineering. This parameter is very important in designing the required supports for underground spaces and estimating the possible induced subsidence due to these excavations. Therefore, the precise estimation of it can help the operation efficiency in constructing these structures. Estimation of the VDs has been studied in this research by using the four new models including NA, FL, NN and SA approaches. In these models, 12 inputs consisting