This chapter describes production of secondary copper—recovery of copper from scrap. It emphasizes the scrap recycling in general, major sources and types of scrap, and physical beneficiation techniques for isolating copper from its coatings and other contaminants. The purest copper scrap is simply re-melted and recast in preparation for manufacture and use. Less pure copper scrap is re-smelted and re-refined. Alloy scrap is usually recycled directly to make new alloy. Considerable scrap must be physically treated to isolate its copper from its other components. An important example of this is recovery of copper from wire and cable. It is done by: chopping the wire and cable into small pieces to liberate its copper; physically isolating its copper by means of a specific gravity separation (air table). Copper recovery from used automobiles and electronic devices follows a similar pattern, i.e.: Liberation by size reduction (shredding); isolation of copper by magnetic, specific gravity, and eddy-current separation. The copper from these processes is then re-smelted and re-refined. Old (obsolete) scrap is often discarded in landfills. There is, however, an increasing tendency to recycle this material due mainly to the increased cost and decreased availability of landfill sites. This chapter describes scrap recycling in general, major sources and types of scrap, and physical beneficiation techniques for isolating copper from its coatings and other contaminants.  Raw materials – ores from which primary copper is produced Primary production – processes described in previous chapters of this book Engineering materials – the final products of smelting/refining, mainly cast copper, and pre-draw copper rod, ready for manufacturing Manufacturing – production of goods to be sold to consumers Obsolete products – products that have been discarded or otherwise taken out of use Discard – sending of obsolete products to a discard site, usually a landfill. Obsolete copper products are increasingly being recycled rather than sent to landfills. This is encouraged by the value of their copper, and the increasing cost and decreasing availability of landfill sites. The arrow marked (1) in The arrow shows that this material is reprocessed directly by the primary producer, usually by running it through a previous step in the process. Off-specification copper is usually put back into a converter or anode furnace then electrorefined. Physically defective rod and bar is re-melted in the vertical shaft furnace and recast. The annual amount of home scrap production is not known because it is not reported. However, industrial producers try to minimize its production to avoid recycle expense. The arrows marked (2), (2a) and (2′) in The pathway taken by new scrap depends on its chemical composition and the degree to which it has become entwined with other materials. The simplest approach is to recycle it internally (2a). This is common practice with gatings and risers from castings. They are simply re-melted and cast again. Direct recycling has the advantages of (a) retaining the value of added alloying elements such as zinc or tin, which would be lost if the alloy were Similar re-processing is done for scrap copper tube and uncoated copper wire. Path (2a) is the most common recycling route for new scrap. As much as 90% of new U.S. copper scrap is recycled along this path ( If the new scrap has coatings or attachments that cannot easily be removed, or if the manufacturing facility cannot directly reuse its new scrap (e.g., a wire-drawing plant without its own melting facilities), then paths (2) and (2′) are followed. The secondary materials industries described in Specific activities of secondary materials industries are described later in this chapter. The final category of copper scrap (paths (3), (3a) and (3′) in Low Cu grades – old copper scrap is often mixed with other materials and must be separated from this waste Unpredictability – deliveries of materials and objects vary from day to day, making processing difficult Location – old scrap is scattered about the landscape rather than being concentrated in a specific location like primary ore or new scrap. The sources of old scrap have been divided into six classes (       Recovery of old copper scrap from waste streams depends on the type of waste, the location of the waste stream, and the price of copper ( Numerous investigations of material stocks and flows analysis (SFA) have been performed for various countries in the past decade. As a result, estimated total copper recoveries from waste materials have been reported for: Africa: 40% in 1994 ( China: 70% in 2005 ( Europe: 73% in 1999 ( Latin America and the Caribbean: 84% in 1994 ( USA: 49% in 1994 ( The Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries ( In addition, copper recycling often includes the treatment of Wire and cable are by far the most common forms of old scrap. It is these forms for which the most advanced re-processing technology exists.    Copper recovery from scrap cable by shredding (also known as chopping or granulating) has its origins in World War II when it was developed to recover rubber coatings (  The primary granulator also liberates any pieces of steel that may be attached to the scrap cable. These are removed from the product by a magnetic separator ( The partially chopped cable is then fed to a second granulator ( The final unit process in scrap cable and wire processing is separation of copper from insulation. This is normally accomplished using the difference between the specific gravity of the copper (8.96) and that of the insulating plastic and rubber (1.3–1.4). A ‘pure’ plastic fraction Copper A middlings fraction, which is returned to the second granulator for re-processing. The separator is most commonly an air table ( In larger chopping operations, elutriation or electrostatic separation are sometimes used as ‘cleaner’ steps to recover the last bit of copper from the plastic fraction ( Underground cable processing is complicated by the complexity of its construction, the flammability of its coverings, and the presence of aluminum or lead in the shredding product.  The first is the radiator, which is manually removed from the car before shredding. Most automotive radiators are now made of aluminum or plastic ( The second source of copper in Because aluminum and zinc are more easily oxidized than copper, the unseparated non-ferrous fraction (also known as Zorba) can be sold to copper smelters without complete separation. However, this eliminates the value of the aluminum and zinc and Two methods can be used to upgrade Zebra, both based on the difference in color of the copper, brass, zinc, and other metals in it ( Better efforts have been made over the past ten years to recover copper from the ferrous scrap stream produced by ELV shredding. This stream contains copper in the form of The final potential source of copper in Although it consists of a variety of items, the overall composition of electronic scrap can be divided into three categories: (a) plastic (~30% in 1991), (b) refractory oxides (~30%), and (c) metals (~40%). About half its metal content is copper. It also contains significant amounts of gold and silver. Copper smelting/refining is already set up to recover gold and silver, so it is a logical destination for treating electronic scrap. A potential problem with smelting electronic scrap is incomplete combustion of its plastic fraction and consequent evolution of organic compounds. However, high temperature oxygen smelting completely avoids this problem. A more serious problem is the declining metal content of electronic scrap. The producers of circuit boards (PCB) and other assemblies have learned over time to reduce the amount of metal needed in their products ( The result has been development of ‘minerals processing’ strategies for isolating the metals in electronic scrap. The approach is similar to that used for automobiles ( Disassembly to recover large items Shredding to reduce the size of the remaining material and liberate the metal Separation of metals based on differences in density and electrical conductivity. Shredding is typically done using low-speed, high-torque knife shredders ( However, shredding does not liberate metal that has been plated onto surfaces, such as printed circuit boards. In addition to copper, precious metals such as gold and silver also remain behind in this fraction, and this makes it worth recovering. As a result, the plastic residue from PCB processing is also frequently treated as a raw material. There are two general approaches for processing it, the The non-formal approach for metals recovery from PCB surfaces is a hydrometallurgical process commonly used in developing countries, particularly China and India ( The formal approach uses mechanical processing, and sends the residues to secondary smelters, which use it as feed in their process. The gold and silver report to the impure copper metal (along with any copper), and are recovered using the same flowsheet used About half the copper reaching the market today has been scrap at least once. Scrap is generated at all stages in the life span of a copper product, including production (home scrap), manufacturing (new scrap), and post-consumer disposal (old scrap). The purest copper scrap is simply re-melted and recast in preparation for manufacture and use. Less pure copper scrap is re-smelted and re-refined. Alloy scrap is usually recycled directly to make new alloy. Considerable scrap must be physically treated to isolate its copper from its other components. An important example of this is recovery of copper from wire and cable. It is done by: Chopping the wire and cable into small pieces to liberate its copper Physically isolating its copper by means of a specific gravity separation (air table). Copper recovery from used automobiles and electronic devices follows a similar pattern, i.e.: Liberation by size reduction (shredding) Isolation of copper by magnetic, specific gravity, and eddy-current separation. The copper from these processes is then re-smelted and re-refined. Old (obsolete) scrap is often discarded in landfills. There is, however, an increasing tendency to recycle this material due mainly to the increased cost and decreased availability of landfill sites.