Reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) with ultraviolet diode array detection (UV-DAD) was used for the simultaneous determination of four flavone C-glucosides, i.e. orientin, homoorientin, vitexin and isovitexin in several food systems fortified by the antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB), such as high temperature sterilized milk, sunflower seed oil and extruded rice cake for the first time. The method included extraction of flavone C-glucosides from AOB-fortified foods by methanol aqueous solution, deproteinating with saturated lead acetate solution and potassium oxalate, defatting with n-hexane and clean-up by solid-phase extraction (SPE) with Phenomenex C18 cartridges. Analytes were separated with Luna C18 5μm 250mm×4.6mm column using acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) acetic acid (pH 3.0) as mobile phase. Good results were obtained with respect to repeatability (relative standard deviation (RSD)<2.2%) and recovery (81.4–91.8%) which fulfilled the requirements defined by European Union (EU) legislation. The total amounts of four flavone C-glucosides were 12.56μg/100mL, 881.08μg/100mL and 1420.83μg/100g dry weight in AOB-fortified sterilized milk, sunflower seed oil and extruded rice cake, respectively. The method was successfully applied to the analysis of flavone C-glucosides in AOB-fortified samples. The optimized procedure could also be referenced for the separation of flavone C-glucosides in other fortified foodstuffs.Flavonoids, a large group of plant polyphenol secondary metabolites, are widely distributed in medicinal plants, fruit juices, teas and health beverage resulting in high human consumption Flavone Antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB), a pale brown powder extracted form bamboo leaves, was capable of blocking chain reactions of lipid autooxidation, chelating metal ions of transient state, scavenging nitrite compounds and blocking the synthetic reaction of nitrosamine testified by our previous study Although there have been different approaches to their analysis, the separation and quantification of the flavone The aim of this study was to optimize and validate a reliable high-performance liquid chromatography method for the analysis of the flavone Antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB) was provided by Zhejiang University Innoessen Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). AOB was prepared from the bamboo leaves of AOB-fortified high temperature sterilized milk was obtained from Anji Science Bio-product Co., Ltd. (Huzhou, China). AOB was added to milk before high temperature instantaneous sterilization with a fortification level of about 75 Acetonitrile and Water was purified with a Milli-Q system (Millipore, Bedford, USA). All solutions prepared for HPLC were passed through a 0.45 A vortex mixer WH-861 Minishaker (Taicang Science & Educational Instrumental Co., Jiangsu, China) was used to mix and homogenize AOB-fortified samples during pre-treatment. An ultracentrifuge with cooling system (Beckman J-20-XP Series, Krefeld, Germany) was employed for sample defatting and protein removal. The pH of the buffer solutions and samples was adjusted with a PHS-3C precision pH meter (Leici Instrumental Co., Shanghai, China). Solid-phase extraction was carried out on a VacElut vacuum manifold for 20 cartridges (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The chromatographic system consisted of a HP-1100 series high-performance liquid chromatograph from Agilent Technologies (Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a quaternary pump, on-line degasser, autosampler, automatic injector, column heater, and diode array detectors connected on-line. Chromatographic separations of flavone Orientin, homoorientin, vitexin and isovitexin stock solutions were prepared in methanol at the concentration of 850, 656, 640 and 544 Aliquots (20 Aliquots (10 Aliquots (10 Quantification was performed on the basis of linear calibration plots of peak area against concentration. Calibration lines were constructed using a range of concentrations of the standard, selected such that concentration in the sample was at the middle of the range. Each line is based on eight concentrations of standard. Identification of the different compounds was made by comparison of their retention times with those of pure standards. A Luna C Several experiments were carried out in order to optimize the sample preparation and the chromatographic conditions. Optimal conditions for response areas of the flavone It is necessary to choose the suitable precipitator for protein removing during the pre-treatment of samples because the protein components in milk and extruded rice cake samples may interfere the quantitative determination of analytes and inevitably make trouble for the HPLC column. Therefore, the difficulty of extraction procedure increases especially when emulsifier is added into the food product, e.g. milk. Proteins in foodstuffs are usually removed using isoelectric precipitation by a mineral acid such as perchloric acid, HCl or H Emulsification usually occurs under specific conditions especially in the present of fat matrix. In the present study, 50% (v/v) methanol aqueous solution was used for the extraction of flavone Four flavone The HPLC method was validated by defining the linearity, limits of quantification and detection ( The repeatability of the method was estimated for determination of both flavone AOB-fortified sample solutions spiked at the concentration of 1 Matrix-matched calibration curves were prepared using raw milk, sunflower seed oil and extruded rice cake fortified with four flavone  This work describes a HPLC methodology for the quantification of four flavone The authors are gratefully acknowledged to the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province of China for sustaining this research project (no. ZA0218).