A new coated-reactive reverse flotation method based on the generation of CO2 bubbles at a calcite surface in acidic solution was used to separate calcite from scheelite. The dissolution kinetics of coated and uncoated calcite were studied in sulfuric acid. The CO2 bubbles generated on the uncoated calcite particle surface are enough to float the particle. However, most of these bubbles left the surface quickly, preventing calcite from floating. Here, a mixture of polyvinyl alcohol polymer and sodium dodecyl sulfonate was used to coat the mineral particles and form a stable membrane, resulting in the formation of a stable foam layer on the calcite surface. After the calcite is coated, the generated bubbles could be successfully captured on the calcite surface, and calcite particles could float to the air-water interface and remain there for more than one hour. Flotation tests indicated that a high-quality tungsten concentrate with a grade of more than 75% and a recovery of more than 99% could be achieved when the particle size was between 0.3 and 1.5 mm. The present results provide theoretical support for the development of a highly efficient flotation separation for carbonate minerals.Calcite is one of the most common gangue minerals in mineral processing It is well known that calcite reacts with acid to generate carbon dioxide bubbles. However, the generation of CO Despite the improved separation of dolomite from apatite using the “Reactive Flotation” method, the underpinning mechanism has rarely been studied and remains unclear. In this study, the effects of a coating pre-treatment on calcite flotation from scheelite were investigated using a coating technique to pre-treat the minerals. The ability of calcite to produce bubbles, its dissolution kinetics data, and the changes in the calcite surface before and after the acid treatment were investigated. A high-speed camera, micro-flotation and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to define the mechanisms. The prospect of applying this coating pretreatment technology in calcite reverse flotation was discussed. The scheelite and calcite samples used in the experiments were prepared from handpicked crystals obtained from Malipo deposits in Yunnan, China. They were washed with distilled water and dried, before being crushed, sieved, and classified to obtain the desired particle size fractions. Mineralogical and chemical analyses and X-ray diffraction (XRD) (D/Max 2200, Rigaku, Japan) spectra indicated that the purity of the particles of each mineral exceeded 96% with only minor impurities present in the sample. The results of the XRD analyses are shown in Sulfuric acid (98% by mass), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, average M The dynamic process recording system used to capture the calcite and acid reaction consisted of a high-speed camera (MacroVis Eosens-300, Germany), a monocular microscope, a cold light source (XD-300-250W, China), and a computer. This system is shown in The reaction was carried out in a self-made transparent plexiglass trough, with a microscale placed at the bottom of the tank. The reaction process was recorded using a high-speed camera. The volume of the reaction solution was 100 mL, and the sulfuric acid concentration was 1% by mass. After the camera parameters were set up, coated or uncoated calcite particles of the desired size were added into the reaction tank, and the reaction process was observed on the computer display. Finally, the required video clips were selected and converted to images. A sample (10 g) of high crystallinity calcite particles with particle size between 5 and 10 mm were selected and placed into 500 mL of sulfuric acid solution with the desired concentration for 5 min. All the desorbed bubbles were collected through the drainage method and the volume of the bubbles was measured. The total area of these calcite particles was determined using a microscope. Subsequently, the volume of CO The surface morphology of calcite before and after the treatment with sulfuric acid (concentration of 0.5% or 1.5%) was measured using SEM (JSM 5600LV, Japan) equipped with a Noran Vantage 4105X energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector. Calcite particles (3–5 mm) with smooth surfaces were selected and added to sulfuric acid for 10 min, after which the particles were collected, air-dried, and used for SEM analyses. The coating agent consisted of a mixture of SDS and PVA in a ratio of 1:10. Before mixing, PVA flakes were gradually dissolved in de-ionized water at 90 °C with continuous mixing by a magnetic stirrer for 30 min, followed by the addition of a solution of SDS with the desired concentration to the PVA solution. The mixture was agitated for 10 min. A solution containing a certain concentration of the coating agent was prepared, and mineral particles were added to this solution for a conditioning time of 10 min. After conditioning, the particles were removed out and fed into a plexiglass trough equipped with a certain concentration of acid solution to carry out the reaction. Micro-flotation experiments with the artificially mixed minerals were conducted in a mechanical agitation flotation machine with a rotational speed of 80 rpm. The flotation apparatus is shown in When the calcite particles are exposed to acidic solutions, the following chemical reaction occurs: In this section, a calcite particle with a size of ∼4 mm was used for experiment, and the sulfuric acid was used at a concentration of 1%. The formation, growth, and desorption of carbon dioxide bubbles on the calcite surface were observed using the high-speed camera, and the images converted from the video are shown in Bubbles were not produced evenly on the surface of the calcite particle since the calcite surface was not uniform, with various active sites available for the reaction described in Eq.  According to the volume of bubbles generated on the calcite surface, the size of the largest particle that can float could be predicted. Simple calculations were used to estimate the particle size. For simplicity, the following conditions were assumed: the calcite particles are spherical with a radius The results in Coating technology allows raw materials to be wrapped with certain materials that slow the release of these raw materials. Coating can improve penetration and stability and reduce irritation Following the dissolution of calcite in the acid solution, three factors contributed to the rapid desorption of bubbles from the calcite surface. Firstly, the hydrophobicity of the calcite surface was low, leading to insufficient adhesion of the bubbles to the surface. Secondly, the rate of reaction between calcite and the acid was too fast, especially at the active sites. Finally, the high surface tension of the solution caused the generated bubbles to break easily. We used a coating agent to coat the particles with the aim of allowing the bubbles to be captured on the calcite particle surfaces and slowing down the rate of reaction between sulfuric acid and the surface. A mixture of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was selected to coat the calcite particles. The PVA can adhere to the calcite surface and form a stable acid-permeable/CO The effect of the sulfuric acid concentration and coating agent concentration on the volume of bubbles desorbed over 1 min was studied using a drainage method (  The reaction of coated calcite particles with sulfuric acid was recorded using the high-speed camera. The images converted from the video of carbon dioxide bubble formation and growth are shown in   Based on the results of the reaction between acid and calcite, artificially mixed minerals (with a scheelite-to-calcite mass ratio of 1:1, grading 38.2%) were prepared to investigate the separation performance further. The satisfactory flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals was attributed to the highly selective adsorption of bubbles on the calcite surface. The quality of traditional froth flotation depends mainly on the degree of adhesion of the particles on the bubble surface, that is, the degree of mineralization of the bubbles In this study, the coated reactive flotation method did not consider the surface properties of calcite and scheelite or the collision of bubbles and particles. In the acidic solution, from the beginning the bubbles and the calcite particles form a gas–solid complex analogous to that in traditional froth flotation, whereas no bubbles are formed on non-carbonate mineral particles. Thus, bubble mineralization is achieved with high selectivity and the separation is no longer dominated by mineral surface hydrophobicity, depending instead only on whether the mineral contains carbonate ions. The main challenge of this technology is to screen and identify more economical and effective coating agents for the fine calcite and scheelite particles, which would reduce their heterogeneous flocculation. The separation of calcite from scheelite is an important challenge, which we addressed using a coated reactive reverse flotation method. This method depends mainly on the capture of CO The CO The reaction is affected by the sulfuric acid concentration—the higher the concentration, the lower the bubble volume and the shorter the reaction duration. The hydrophobicity of the calcite surface, the reaction rate of calcite and acid, and the surface tension of the solution restrict the flotation of particles. The generated bubbles are successfully captured on the calcite surface using a coating agent consisting of a mixture of PVA and SDS. The membrane formed as a result of the added coating agent increased the reaction time and reduced the consumption of sulfuric acid. The flotation tests indicated that a finer particle size resulted in a worse flotation performance, especially under conditions where the coating agent was present at high concentrations. A high-grade tungsten concentrate (>75%) and high recovery (>99%) could be obtained using the coated reactive flotation method when the particle size between was 0.3 and 1.5 mm. The optimal concentrations of sulfuric acid and the coating agent were 1.5% and 3%, respectively. The present results are expected to be helpful for exploring the feasibility of the coated reactive reverse flotation method for separating calcite from scheelite, and providing theoretical support for the development of highly efficient separation flotation for the carbonate minerals. This work was financially supported by the key program of the