A sensor array with nine discrete sensors integrated on a substrate was developed for recognizing the species and quantity of explosive gases such as methane, propane, and butane. The sensor array consisted of nine oxide semiconductor gas-sensing materials with SnO2 as the base material plus a heating element based on a meandered platinum layer all deposited on the sensor. The sensors on the sensor array were designed to produce a uniform thermal distribution and show a high and broad sensitivity and reproductivity to low concentrations through the use of nano-sized sensing materials with high surface areas and different additives. Using the sensitivity signals of the array along with an artificial neural network, a gas recognition system was then implemented for the classification and identification of explosive gases. The characteristics of the multi-dimensional sensor signals obtained from the nine sensors were analyzed using the principal component analysis (PCA) technique, and a gas pattern recognizer was implemented using a multi-layer neural network with an error back propagation learning algorithm. The simulation and experimental results demonstrate that the proposed gas recognition system is effective in identifying explosive gases. For real time processing, a DSP board (TMS320C31) was then used to implement the proposed gas recognition system in conjunction with a neural network.Recently, as the usage of LNG and LPG gas has increased, the frequency of accidental explosions due to leakage has sharply increased. The ability to detect and precisely measure gas leakage is crucial in preventing the occurrence of such accidents. Accordingly, the development of sensors and systems that can selectively detect and determine the quantity of specific gases below the explosion limit, in situ, is urgently needed. Until now, there have been various reports on the use of different kinds of metal oxide sensors for detecting explosive hydrocarbon gases, which have offered many improvements from the perspective of stability For continuous use, without relearning, an electronic nose requires high reliability, stability, and sensitivity from the individual sensors that make up the nose. However, sensor responses tend to drift significantly when sensors are used over a long period of time resulting in poor selectivity and redundant pattern recognition. Therefore, the fabrication of more reliable and stable sensors, or the ability to adjust the pattern recognition routine according to variations in the sensor response is needed. Accordingly, nano-sized tin oxide materials were synthesized using the coprecipitation method and nine kinds of highly sensitive and stable thick film sensors were fabricated on a substrate. Using the sensitivity signals of the arrays and an artificial neural network, a gas pattern recognition was then implemented using a DSP (TMS320C31) board with the aim of classifying and quantifying specific explosive gases, including butane, propane, and methane below their explosion limit value. The priority for the reliable recognition of leaked explosive gases is the development of stable individual sensors that exhibit a high sensitivity to gases. Therefore, sensing materials that can satisfy the above conditions need to be fabricated and processed. It has been previously reported that reducing particles to a nano-size through the addition of Ca along with the spillover effect caused by adding the Pt catalyst enhances the sensitivity of sensing materials to gases even at low concentrations For preparing the raw materials, a solution containing SnCl The sensor array consisting of nine metal-oxide semiconductor gas sensors along with their dopants is shown in As shown in The microstructure of the basic sensing-film was investigated using transmission electron microscope (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) adsorption, and a voltage detecting method was used to calculate the sensitivity of the sensor To selectively determine the quantity of explosive gases below their low explosion limit (methane: 5.3 The XRD patterns of calcined SnO TEM photographs of this powder with and without Ca after being calcined at 600°C for 1 Xu et al. reported that a reduced particle size produces a significant increase in sensitivity Using the BET method, the nitrogen sorption curve for the base material was investigated, as shown in The response time of a sensor to a gas is directly related to gas detection and classification. Thus, the time response property of the sensor array to objective gases is very important. The time response curve of the sensor array to 4000 Different sensing patterns for the sensors are critical for conferring selectivity to a sensor array. The sensor responses tend to drift significantly when sensors are used over a long period of time resulting in poor selectivity and redundant pattern recognition. Therefore, the fabrication of more reliable and stable sensors, or the ability to adjust the pattern recognition routine according to variations in the sensor response is needed. For example, The possibility of classifying the species and quantity of a specific gas can be achieved by using a principal component analysis (PCA) that can map multi-dimensional data onto two- or three- dimensional axes with the minimum loss of information Using the sensitivity signals from the sensor array as multi-dimensional input patterns, a gas pattern recognizer using a multi-layer neural network with an error back propagation learning algorithm was then implemented The implemented gas recognition system is shown in The specific recognition results for the proposed explosive gas recognition system with 2000 To recognize the species and quantity of explosive gases under a low explosion limit, the sensor array with nine SnO Using the sensing signals from the sensor array along with a multi-layer neural network using an error back propagation learning algorithm, an intelligent gas recognition system with a DSP board was implemented in order to produce a real time recognition system for explosive gases such as butane, propane, and methane. Furthermore, the fabricated gas recognition system could precisely classify and identify the species and concentration of each gas in real time processing. In future, the implementation of a sensor array and system that can recognize continuously varying concentrations and specific gases in a mixture of gases will be attempted. Finally, a real time small-sized system that can consider environmental conditions like peripheral temperature and relative humidity will be designed to detect possible leakages of explosive gases and recognize the species and quantity of specific gases in gas pipes or workplaces.