Bauxite tailings are a major type of solid wastes generated in the flotation process. The waste by-products caused significant environmental impact. To lessen this hazardous effect from poisonous mine tailings, a feasible and cost-effective solution was conceived and implemented. Our approach focused on reutilization of the bauxite tailings by converting it to 4A zeolite for reuse in diverse applications. Three steps were involved in the bauxite conversion: wet-chemistry, alkali fusion, and crystallization to remove impurities and to prepare porous 4A zeolite. It was found that the cubic 4A zeolite was single phase, in high purity, with high crystallinity and well-defined structure. Importantly, the 4A zeolite displayed maximum calcium ion exchange capacity averaged at 296mg CaCO3/g, comparable to commercially-available zeolite (310mg CaCO3/g) exchange capacity. Base on the optimal synthesis condition, the reaction yield of zeolite 4A from bauxite tailings achieved to about 38.43%, hence, this study will provide a new paradigm for remediation of bauxite tailings, further mitigating the environmental and health care concerns, particularly in the mainland of PR China.Bauxite is a mineral that is composed of a metal coordinative centre, hydroxide(s) and/or oxides as ligands. Examples include aluminum hydroxide (Al(OH) Recently, attentions has been paid to reutilize bauxite tailings for producing refractory, construction material, absorbent material, alloy material and flocculant ( The overarching goal of this research was to recycle bauxite tailings to 4A zeolite and to reuse the materials to facilitate improvements in solid waste remediation, further enhancing effective disposal with lower environmental impact. A (atom and cost) economic route to convert bauxite tailings to valuable 4A zeolite was systematically investigated. These synthesized 4A zeolite under optimized variables was characterized by the state-of-the-art instrumentation to evaluate their crystalline phase and morphology. The measurement of calcium ion exchange capacity (CEC) of 4A zeolite with high capacity demonstrated that the mitigation of this solid waste can be achieved by converting bauxite tailings into an effective adsorbent of heavy metal ions. All chemicals, solvents, and reagents unless otherwise specified were obtained from the Chemical Manufacturer, PR China. Double-distilled, filtered ultrapure water was used where water-based solvents were necessary. All solvents were reagent or high performance liquid chromatography grade. The bauxite tailings (Zhengzhou, Henan Province, PR China), sodium silicate (Na In this section, we discussed three steps to remove metal cations and produce crystalline zeolite. The first step is application of wet-chemistry to remove water soluble ions, such as Fe As previously stated one of the impurities in bauxite tailings, Fe The reaction was performed at 100 After the first step of acid leaching, bauxite tailings residues were separately reacted with excess solid NaOH in a 200 At the end of this fusion process, the majority of the aluminate/silicate (Al After Alkali fusion, crystallization was carried out. Na To produce highly crystalline and well-defined zeolite, (iv) the molar ratios of SiO The prepared 4A zeolite through crystallization was characterized by the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Dmax-2500 diffractometer, Rigaku Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The copper (Cu) Kα radiation was used and operating current and voltage were controlled at 40 In order to characterize the adsorption capacity of heavy metal ions using 4A zeolite prepared from bauxite tailings, the calcium ion exchange capacity was measured. A certain amount (about 25 The calcium ion exchange capacity of 4A zeolite was calculated as following equation ( In the process of alkali fusion, three key synthesis variables, (i) alkali fusion temperature, (ii) fusion time duration and (iii) mass ratio of bauxite tailings/alkali significantly effect on the dissolution capacity of Al  It was found that the optimal conditions to be 500 After the alkali fusion procedure was completed, the resulting solution contained mainly soluble silicate, aluminate and alkali metals. Compared with the chemical compositions of 4A zeolite, the contents of SiO The XRD ( The SEM micrographs of specimens prepared in crystallization process under various molar ratio of SiO The second key variable during the crystallization process was found to be the molar ratio of H The SEM micrographs of reaction products in crystallization process under different molar ratio of H The third key influencing factor was crystallization time, which was found to affect not only on the crystallinity and the productivity of 4A zeolite, but also on its morphology and particle size. The XRD patterns and the SEM micrographs of reaction products in crystallization process under various crystallization times were shown in In summary, 4A zeolite was successfully prepared after alkali fusion process and crystallization process. The relationship of the dissolve capacity of Al In order to character the economical and ecological of the whole process, the calculation of reaction yield, as well as the mass balance of input and output from bauxite tailings to zeolite 4A is performed, and its schematic diagram was shown in As observed from In the Alkali fusion process, 77.80 In the crystallization process, 87.48 Based above calculation, about 28.26 Under the optimal synthesis parameters as mentioned above, the 4A zeolite was successfully prepared. The crystalline phase and microstructure characterization were collected by XRD and SEM ( Calcium ion exchange capacity (CEC) was employed to characterize the ion exchange capacity of 4A zeolite derived from the bauxite. The CEC ( 4A zeolite had been successfully synthesized from bauxite tailings and the synthesis variables were systematically investigated. During the alkali processing, the results indicated that the maximum dissolubility of SiO The