Titanium lattices produced using selective laser melting have received great interest as key elements in the development of bone substitute implants. However, as the inherent surface defects formed during the selective laser melting process are known to have a negative impact on mechanical and biological performances of the implants, it is crucial to modify the lattices at the surface level.
                  In the following work, we investigate the use of a chemical post-treatment for the surface modification of Ti-6Al-4V lattice structures. Triply periodic minimal surfaces, a promising set of unit-cells for hard tissue engineering, have been used for the design of the specimens. Incremental polishing was conducted and the evolution of both surface and morphological properties have been reported with an increase in polishing time. The method has been successful in removing partially melted powder adhering to the surfaces within the interconnected lattice networks and reducing the stair stepping effect brought about by the manufacturing process. Morphological characteristics were found to be consistent throughout the samples, which indicates an adequate penetration of the etchant. It was found that the potential reduction in structural strength may be mitigated by oversizing the struts in the design phase of the lattices.Selective laser melting (SLM), a powder-bed fusion additive manufacturing process, has enabled the possibility to manufacture complex interconnected porous networks, or lattices, with numerous applications including in the manufacture of biomedical implants. Applied to titanium alloys, these structures have notably led to the development of new biomaterials targeted at bone-tissue engineering, where relatively small pores are recommended [ Despite the near net shaping capabilities of SLM, surface irregularities remain an issue for as-built components, so post-processing is usually required to clean and smooth the surfaces. Common irregularities and defects include partially melted powder particles that adhere to the external surfaces caused by the physics of the melt pool [ In the context of small-sized lattices, these surface irregularities can negatively affect the performance of the material and the morphological mismatch can impact the mechanical properties [ Numerous methods have been proposed for the surface treatment of additively manufactured titanium alloys [ The effects of chemical polishing on the mechanical or biological properties of titanium lattices have been widely addressed, and comparisons between as-built samples and polished samples have been reported [ In this study, we investigate chemical post-processing for three additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V lattice geometries using hydrofluoric and nitric acid solutions for surface and morphological modification. The lattices designs are based on diamond, gyroid and Schwartz primitive unit-cells, which belong to the group of triply periodic minimal surfaces (TPMS), found to be superior to conventional strut-based unit-cells for biomedical application notably. The polishing method proposed consists of an incremental acid bath with constant rotational speed of the samples. Micro-computed tomography (μCT) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are used to give further insights into the evolution of the lattices' morphological characteristics with the polishing time, such as volume loss, homogeneity of polishing and surface modification. The lattices produced in this work were based on triply periodic minimal surfaces (TPMS), a set of three-dimensional mathematical equations that have no discontinuity on their surface and offer unique sets of properties compared to conventional struts-based lattices [ The samples were selectively laser melted with a SLM® 125 machine (SLM Solutions) using the set of parameters presented in In order to reduce the surface roughness and surface irregularities, chemical polishing was conducted for each specimen. The lattices were placed in 50 mL of an etchant containing 3.3% of HF (50%), 11.1% of HNO  In order to assess the surface modification from the acid polishing, we have opted for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and micro-computed tomography (μCT). SEM provided information on a small scale at the surface of the lattices while μCT helped understand the volume loss, homogeneity in material loss and potential damage. A Bruker Skyscan 1272 was used for the micro-computed tomography scans with the parameters presented in Selective laser melting was successful in producing the set of lattices designed for this study: a macrograph of the as-built lattices is presented in One of the resulting effects of chemical polishing is the loss in volume of the samples induced by the reduction in strut sizes. The graph presented in Similarly, the graph from The lattices' morphological characteristics are also being affected by the polishing treatment ( In order to investigate whether the polishing was accomplished in a homogeneous manner through the lattices, we have measured the minimal struts sizes after each polishing increment at different areas within the sample. The aim was to identify an eventual heterogeneous penetration of the etchant in the lattices that could lead to a different impact on the internal architectures than on the external exposed surfaces, as reported before [   The evolution of SLM-processed surfaces after polishing is known to be partly affected by the initial state of the surfaces [ During the 5 first minutes of polishing, the partially melted powder particles adhering to the surfaces are fully removed on each side of the struts. However, the roughness and irregularities on the surface are still significant, particularly for the downward facing surfaces, where the initial overhang zones remain. After the first 5 min, the upward facing surfaces do not change significantly, and stay relatively smooth with the increase in polishing time. On the other hand, the downskin surfaces are becoming smoother with an increase in polishing time. Despite the clear improvement of the downskin surfaces with polishing, there is still some signs of irregularities and roughness from the initial overhang after 20 min of polishing. As previously mentioned, an increase in polishing time may be possible with thicker designed struts. Although this could potentially reduce the remaining roughness of downskin surfaces, this would also most likely compromise the structural integrity of the structures due to the strut damage that we have observed after 15 min of polishing. As reported before [ The effect of polishing in one bath during 20 min in a row ( In spite of the discontinuity-free TPMS we used for the design of the samples, the appearance of sharp corners with increase in polishing time (notably visible in Apart from the various surface irregularities, the reconstructed TPMS match the idealized cells after each polishing increment, which suggests that the polishing is homogeneous through the interconnected lattice network. The conservation of the geometry is a significant advantage for the design of the CAD models. This implies that a simple oversizing of the struts sizes is a viable approach to obtain desired geometries with improve surface quality. While this comparison gives us a clear indication regarding the homogeneity of our polishing method, it should be noted that smaller topological variations that appear at the surface level cannot be resolved by the μCT scanner due to the rather limited resolution. SEM imaging however, reveals some “edge sharpening” that can be explained as the remains of stair stepping after polishing for over 15 min (cf. Based on the rationale behind the requirement for post-treatment, our polishing method was successful in removing the partially melted particles from the as-built surfaces. In terms of matching the morphological characteristics to the CAD models, oversizing the designed struts size may be a viable option: this approach was successfully used in the past [ Despite the limited literature on the topic, a recent study revealed that the fatigue resistance of cellular materials, or lattices, is strongly influenced by the inherent defects brought about by SLM [ In this work, we investigated the effects of chemical polishing on SLM-produced Ti-6Al-4V lattices from different designs. The significant, albeit expected discrepancies between the designed TPMS models and as-built samples emphasized the need for an efficient post-treatment. Using an incremental polishing approach with a solution of hydrofluoric and nitric acid, most surface defects were successfully removed from the lattices. The following findings were reported from the results: The loss in volume and decrease in struts size was consistent for the three geometries we have studied. With initial struts sizes ranging between 500 and 800 μm, significant metal removal occurs after 15 min of polishing with the specific concentration we have used for the etchant. Minor heterogeneities in the polishing were reported for the Schwartz primitive geometry, highlighting the importance of the morphological aspects' in determining the choice of polishing conditions. For the diamond and gyroid geometries on the other hand, a homogeneous polish was accomplished. Conducting specific polishing parametric studies to find the best conditions for a particular design is thus a crucial step in the development of new lattice-based material. While the chemical polishing did not fully remove the overhangs on the downward facing surfaces, significant improvements at the surface level were achieved, with full removal of partially melted powder particles and overall smoothing. The reduction in struts size brought about by the chemical polishing will most likely result in a reduction in structural strength. Oversizing the struts in the design phase could then be considered to counterbalance this loss in strength. Further work should be conducted to understand the impact of such treatments on fatigue life of lattices, specifically looking at the effect of remaining overhangs and potential improvement of oversized polished lattices compared to the as-built equivalent. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author, N. Soro, upon reasonable request.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of