Solvent extraction and stripping experiments have been performed to separate indium from gallium in sulfuric acid solutions. In the extraction process, the separation factor between indium and gallium decreased with pH and a maximum value of the separation factor was obtained by extracting metals from the mixed solutions with stoichiometric concentration of di-2-ethyl-hexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA) to extract both metals. It was found that aliphatic kerosene was superior to benzene as a diluent in respect of loading capacity. In the stripping process, the stripping percentage of indium decreased from 95% to 5% with pH in the pH range of 0.2–1.4, while separation factors increased with the pH of the stripping solutions. From simulation experiments for multistage countercurrent extraction, nearly complete separation of indium and gallium would be accomplished by a two-stage extraction.Several studies have been conducted on the reaction conditions for the extraction of indium and gallium In this study, the extraction behavior of indium and gallium from mixed sulfuric acid solutions using D2EHPA has been investigated. Variation of the separation factor with extraction conditions was obtained. From the stripping behavior of indium and gallium by sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid, the effect of pH and the nature of the stripping agent have been investigated. To test the applicability of solvent extraction for practical operation, simulation experiments for multistage countercurrent extraction have been conducted. Extraction reaction of metal with D2EHPA could be represented by In the aqueous phase, positively charged metal ions interact with anions. The alpha function ( Inserting The separation factor between indium and gallium is defined in Indium and gallium sulfate solutions were prepared by dissolving indium and gallium metal (Aldrich Chemical, purity of 99.9%) in sulfuric acid solutions. The pH of aqueous solution was adjusted by adding sulfuric acid. The D2EHPA was purchased from Mobil Chemical and aliphatic kerosene and benzene (Kanto Chemical) were used without further purification. Equal volumes of organic solution and aqueous solution containing indium and gallium were placed in a 100-mL separatory funnel and shaken mechanically for 30 min at 25 °C. The aqueous phase was separated after settling the mixture for 24 h. The concentrations of indium and gallium in the aqueous phase were measured by A.A. (Varian Techtron A.A.-1475). The concentrations of indium and gallium in the organic phase were calculated from mass balance. The pH of the aqueous phase was measured by a pH meter (Fisher Accumet pH Model 620). Mixed aqueous solutions in which the concentration of gallium was fixed at 0.5 g/L and that of indium was varied from 1 to 10 g/L were prepared to investigate the effect of the ratio of the indium concentration to the gallium concentration on the extraction behavior of both metals. These mixed solutions were extracted by 0.05 M D2EHPA in kerosene. The extraction results are shown in From these experimental results, it is believed that D2EHPA has selectivity for indium over gallium. This view was confirmed by conducting scrubbing experiments as follows. First, gallium sulfate solution in which the concentration of gallium was 0.5 g/L was extracted by 0.05 M D2EHPA. In this extraction experiment, 94% of gallium was extracted into the organic phase, which means that D2EHPA is a good extractant for gallium. When scrubbing this loaded organic phase by fresh indium sulfate solution in which the concentration of indium was 1 g/L, 99% of indium was extracted into the organic phase and 54% of gallium was stripped into the aqueous phase. For this experiment, the scrubbing reaction can be represented by: The effect of the concentration of D2EHPA was investigated by varying the concentration of D2EHPA from 0.025 to 0.2 M. In these extraction experiments, the concentration of indium in mixed aqueous solution was 1 g/L and that of gallium was 0.5 g/L. In The slopes of eq. pH vs. log The effects of the concentration of D2EHPA on the separation factor using kerosene and benzene as diluents are shown in The effects of pH on the separation factors at 0.05 M D2EHPA concentration are shown in In respect of extraction and separation factor, it is known from From the extraction experiments, it was observed that D2EHPA could extract indium selectively from the In–Ga mixed solutions, however, small amounts of gallium were still extracted. Therefore, stripping experiments for futher separation of the metals were conducted. The loaded organic phase was prepared by extracting indium and galium from the mixed aqueous solution (1 g/L of indium, 0.5 g/L of gallium) with 0.05 M D2EHPA dissolved in kerosene. Indium (99.9%) and gallium (26%) were extracted into the organic phase in this experiment. The pH of the stripping solution was adjusted by sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid. Stripping percentages of indium and gallium are shown in The variation of separation factor with pH in stripping experiments is shown in Batch simulation of a three-stage countercurrent extraction is shown in The concentrations of indium and gallium in both phases after each stage obtained from batch simulation experiments are summarized in For one-stage operation, the weight percentage of gallium in the aqueous phase is 82% and that of indium in the organic phase is 96%. The gallium in the organic phase, which is extracted from the first stage, is stripped into the aqueous phase through The following conclusions could be drawn from the solvent extraction experiments for the separation of indium and gallium. In the extraction stage, the distribution coefficients of indium and gallium increased with pH but the separation factors decreased with pH due to the difference in the complex formation behavior of both metal ion and sulfate ion. The distribution coefficients of indium and gallium increased with the concentration of D2EHPA, and kerosene, as a diluent, was superior to benzene in respect of extraction and separation. In the stripping stage, the separation factors increased with pH of acid solutions, and sulfuric acid, as stripping medium, was superior to hydrochloric acid in respect of separation factor. From the simulation experiments for the multistage countercurrent extraction, nearly complete separation of indium and gallium could be accomplished by a two-stage countercurrent extraction.