Guar gum was grafted with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) by microwave initiated method. The synthesis was optimized for highest percentage grafting, by varying the microwave irradiation time and monomer (methyl methacrylate) concentration. The various grades of grafted product (GG-g-PMMA) were characterized through standard physicochemical characterization techniques (intrinsic viscosity measurement, elemental analysis, FTIR spectroscopy & SEM morphology study). Further, flocculation efficacy of this grafted polysaccharide was studied by standard ‘Jar test’ procedure in 0.5% kaolin suspension, to assess its application as flocculating agent for wastewater treatment and mineral ore beneficiation. Correlation between percentage grafting and intrinsic viscosity was also studied for the possibility of using it as a tool to control the intrinsic viscosity in the final product. This leads to the possibility of application of the grafted product as superior viscosifier than guar gum.Guar gum is a natural non-ionic polysaccharide obtained primarily from the endosperm of beans of two annual leguminous plants, The Chemical structure of this polysaccharide has been the subject of many studies Unmodified guar gum itself is a highly important commodity and finds various uses in a diverse range of industries such as food, pharmaceuticals, personal care products, textile, cosmetics, paper, explosives, mining and oil drilling. The main functions of guar gum are as viscosifier, thickener, emulsifier, binding agent, stabilizer, gelling agent, natural fibre and flocculant. In this study, we have grafted polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) chains onto the backbone of guar gum, resulting in Polymethylmethacrylate grafted guar (GG-g-PMMA). The grafting has been done by microwave initiated method. Microwave initiated synthesis In case of Polymethylmethacrylate grafted guar (GG-g-PMMA) synthesized by microwave initiated method, we have precise control over percentage grafting. The percentage grafting in turn controls the intrinsic viscosity. This makes the grafted product a superior viscosifier than the raw material (guar gum). Further, GG-g-PMMA is expected to be a highly branched polymeric material (PMMA chains dangling from the guar gum backbone) with high hydrodynamic volume (i.e., intrinsic viscosity). Consequently, according to Singh's easy approachability model Guar gum was supplied by Dabur (India) Limited, Ajmer, India. Methyl methacrylate (99%) was purchased from Burgoyne burbidges and Co. (Mumbai), India. Acetone (AR grade) and Kaolin (extra pure) was purchased from C.D.H., India. All chemicals were used without further modification. Microwave initiated synthesis of graft copolymer refers to use of microwave irradiation alone to initiate the grafting reaction 1 Once the microwave irradiation for the intended amount of time was complete, the gel like mass left in the reaction vessel was cooled and poured into excess of acetone. The precipitated grafted polymer was collected and was dried in hot air oven. Subsequently, it was pulverized and sieved.  The synthesis parameters are summarized in Any occluded polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) formed by competing homopolymer formation reaction was removed by extraction using an ethanol–water (1:1 by volume) solvent system. The methyl methacrylate used had 30 Viscosity measurements of the polymer solutions were carried out with an Ubbelodhe viscometer (CS/S: 0.003899) at 25 The elemental analysis was undertaken with an Elemental Analyzer (Model Vario EL III, Elementer, Germany). The estimation of five elements i.e., carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen and sulphur was undertaken. The results are described in The FTIR spectrums of guar gum and that of GG-g-PMMA 4 were recorded in solid state (KBr pellet method), with a FTIR spectrophotometer (Model IR-Prestige 21, Shimadzu Corporation, Japan) between 400 and 4000 Surface morphology of guar gum and of various grades of GG-g-PMMA were analyzed in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in powdered form (Model: JSM-6390LV, Jeol, Japan). The SEM micrographs of guar gum ( Flocculation efficacies of various synthesized grades of GG-g-PMMA were studied by standard Jar test procedure All flocculation experiments were carried out in Jar test apparatus (Make: Simeco, Kolkata, India). The test protocol involved taking a measured quantity (800 GG-g-PMMA has been synthesized by microwave initiated method. Various grades of the graft copolymer were synthesized by varying the irradiation time and monomer (MMA) concentration as shown in The mechanism of free radical generation by microwave radiation had been hypothesized in our earlier study However, in case of bigger molecules or macromolecules with polar and not so polar bonds, on exposure to microwave irradiation; only the polar bonds tend to rotate. In other words, the microwave is absorbed only by the polar groups present (e.g.,–OH groups of the GG molecule) which then behave as if they were anchored to an immobile raft and its immobile localized rotations will occur. This partial rotation of the macromolecule results in severing of these bonds (–OH bonds), leading to formation of free radical sites. Once, the free radical sites were produced on the guar gum backbone, the acrylic monomer molecules (methyl methacrylate or MMA) gets added up through the usual chain propagation step of free radical reaction, thus resulting in the polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) graft chains. The free radical mechanism of synthesis of GG-g-PMMA by microwave initiated method has been summarized in A series of five grades of the graft copolymers have been synthesized by this method of synthesis. For the first three grades (GG-g-PMMA 1 to GG-g-PMMA 3), the monomer (MMA) concentration was varied, keeping the microwave irradiation time fixed. For the second set of two graft copolymers (GG-g-PMMA 4 and GG-g-PMMA 5), the microwave irradiation time was varied, keeping the monomer (MMA) concentration as optimized in the first set. Grafting ratio increased on increasing the monomer (MMA) concentration from 2.5 It is obvious from Thus, the optimized grade (in terms of percentage grafting and intrinsic viscosity) was synthesized with monomer (MMA) concentration of 5 Inhibitors such as hydroquinone (HQ) react with chain radicals to terminate chain propagation and the resulting hydroquinone radical is stable and cannot initiate further polymerization. The stability of the hydroquinone radical is because of the delocalization of electron charge density throughout the aromatic structure. The addition of hydroquinone to the reaction mixture in significant amount quenched the synthesis reaction, in the same way as witnessed in all types of free radical mechanism based graft copolymer synthesis The intrinsic viscosity was evaluated for guar gum (GG) and the various grades of GG-g-PMMA, as stated in It is obvious that the intrinsic viscosity of all the grades of GG-g-PMMA are greater than that of GG. This can be explained by the higher molecular weight of GG-g-PMMA than that of GG, due to the grafting of the PMMA branches onto the polymer backbone of the later. This is in good agreement with Mark–Houwink-Sakurada relationship (Intrinsic viscosity The results of elemental analysis for guar gum and that of the best grade of polymethylmethacrylate grafted guar (i.e., GG-g-PMMA 4) are given in As evident, the actual composition of the GG-g-PMMA 4 grade is practically same as that of the stoichiometrically expected composition. This confirms that PMMA chains have indeed got grafted on the guar gum backbone. From the FTIR spectrum of guar gum ( In case of GG-g-PMMA 4 ( It is evident from the SEM micrographs of GG ( Guar gum is perhaps the most widely used natural viscosifier, one important area of application being the food industry (as food thickener). Other viscosifier related applications of guar gum are in pharmaceutical industry (as low calorie thickener), textile industry (as a thickening agent for colour printing paste), ceramic industry, as thickener for battery electrolytes, printing inks etc. From Thus, intrinsic viscosity of GG-g-PMMA increases exponentially with increase in percentage grafting. The exponential relation is given as: The flocculation study in 0.50% kaolin suspension in ‘Jar test’ apparatus has been graphically represented in For both guar gum as well as the various grades of GG-g-PMMA studied, there is an optimal dosage at which the flocculation is maximum (i.e., the turbidity of the supernatant collected is minimum). Beyond this dosage, the flocculation decreases due to destabilization of the flocs formed by the excess polymers (flocculant). In all the cases, this optimal dosage is 0.6 According to bridging mechanism, when long chain polymers in small dosage are added to a colloidal suspension, they get adsorbed onto two or more particle surfaces and thus form a bridge between them. There should be sufficient unoccupied space on the particle surface so as to form the polymer bridging. This phenomenon is observed up to a particular dosage of polymer, beyond which flocculation diminishes; the process being known as steric stabilization. Thus, at lower dosages of polymer, no significant bridging occurs between the colloidal particles and hence flocculation remains low. Similarly at higher dosages of polymer, there is insufficient particle surface for attachment of the polymer segments leading to destabilization of flocs. Further, a strong correlation is evident between hydrodynamic volume of the macromolecule i.e., intrinsic viscosity ( Guar gum has been grafted by polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) chains, by ‘microwave initiated’ method of graft copolymer synthesis. The synthesis was optimized in terms of monomer (methyl methacrylate) concentration as well as microwave irradiation time. The grades of grafted product (GG-g-PMMA) were characterized by various physicochemical techniques (intrinsic viscosity study, elemental analysis, FTIR spectroscopy and SEM study). Further, it is evident that intrinsic viscosity of the grafted products increases exponentially with increase in percentage grafting (%