Fertilizer use and tillage affect both the general soil microbial community and specific N-utilizing microbial groups, but likely to varying degrees. To assess these impacts, soil was collected on three key dates from a long-term (26+ years), rainfed, continuous maize site where tillage (no-till and disk) and N fertilizer rates (0, 40, 80, 120, and 160kgha−1
                     yr−1) were applied. Microbial community changes were assessed using fatty acid methyl esters (FAME), and ammonia oxidizer (AO) changes were followed using quantitative PCR. Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) greatly outnumbered ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) based upon amoA gene copy (108 versus 104
                     g−1 soil, respectively), and both populations were dynamic across sampling dates. Over the long term, tillage had a differential effect; AOB were almost 10-fold lower in disk tillage plots, but AOA did not differ. N rate had no effect on ammonia-oxidizers abundance, but a moderate correlation (r=0.423) between AOB and N rate was observed. AOA correlated moderately (r=0.552) with water-filled pore space. In contrast, the biomass of various microbial groups was highly responsive to sample date, tillage, and N rate. This study found that long-term agronomic practices affected the overall microbial community more than the AO community, while short-term changes over a growing season were surprisingly dynamic for both AO and select groups within the general soil community.In response to economic forces, management innovations, and a greater awareness of potential negative environmental consequences, modern crop production has evolved from intensive tillage (plowing and disking) and fertilization practices to reduced tillage and highly-conserved fertilizer use ( A variety of agronomic practices including, reduced N fertilization, minimal tillage, and the use of nitrification inhibitors, help to reduce N loss from cropping systems. Most N This research study examines the effect of tillage (no-tillage and disk tillage) and N fertilizer application rates (0–160 Soil samples were collected at the University of Nebraska Haskell Agricultural Laboratory near Concord, NE (latitude 42° 23′′ N and longitude 96° 59′′ W). The study site has a mean seasonal temperature of 17.5 Soil samples (n DNA was extracted from approximately 500 The Standard DNA consisted of plasmid Invitrogen PCR 2.1 vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) carrying either AOA or AOB Fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis was performed on all soil samples taken over three sampling dates (as described above) to track changes in total microbial biomass as well as shifts in microbial community structure ( AOA and AOB abundance data was log transformed and analyzed using PROC MIXED in SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Inc., NC, USA) with a repeated measures design (plot was the unit of observation, and sample date was the repeated effect). An unstructured covariance structure provided the best fit for the model. All two- and three-way interactions (tillage, N rate, and sample date) were evaluated for significance. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were determined between AOA, AOB, N rate, and environmental factors (pH, EC and WFPS) by tillage treatment using PROC CORR in SAS. The probability level (p-value) in which the null hypothesis is rejected is FAMEs in nmol% were analyzed using canonical discriminant analysis using PROC CANDISC in SAS. This was used to characterize changes in microbial community structure with fertilizer gradient and tillage ( In this long term (26+ years) rainfed site cropped to continuous maize, soil organic C was not affected by disk tillage ( Repeated measures ANOVA determined that tillage ( AOA was consistently 3–4 orders of magnitude more abundant ( Total microbial biomass and bacterial biomass did not differ among N rates or by tillage but did differ among sampling dates ( Many published studies of AOA and AOB in soils found that AOA greatly outnumber AOB in magnitude ( A number of environmental and management factors may influence AOA dominance over AOB including the form and concentration of N ( No tillage systems are often characterized by increased soil organic matter, microbial biomass, and plant residues in near surface soil ( Although tillage induced clear shifts in microbial community structure ( We expected the long-term N rate treatment would have greater impact on the AO community compared to the greater soil microbial community, but observed the opposite: no significant impact on AO ( Substantial shifts in the broader microbial community were observed during the season as hypothesized ( Correlation analysis between AO abundances, environmental parameters, and N rate identified a number of factors that may affect AO abundances ( In the disk tillage treatment, AOB correlated most strongly with pH (r Soils at the Haskell Agricultural Laboratory site in Nebraska are slightly acidic (fertilized and unfertilized plots are pH 5.6 and pH 6.2, respectively). The lowest soil pH measured at this site was 4.6, and the acidity in some plots is likely exacerbated by long-term N fertilization treatment as demonstrated in similar soils ( AOA dominate at a long-term maize production site in Nebraska where tillage and N rate treatments were applied for 26+ years. However, AOA populations were surprisingly unaffected by tillage or N rate while less abundant AOB populations were affected by tillage and partially by N rate. Seasonal changes, over less than 10 weeks during the onset of a major drought, led to dynamic fluctuations in AO populations; AOA seemed to be most affected (there was a strong correlation between AOA abundance and WFPS), but AOB abundance was affected more by a combination of pH and tillage pressures. In the context of the larger microbial community, clear shifts in microbial community structure were attributed to N rate and tillage based on the abundance of specific FAME biomarkers. Many of the biomarkers showed sensitivity to N rate, but only fungal groups and a few select bacterial markers seemed affected by long-term tillage treatment. In accordance with the AO populations, almost all FAME biomarkers were dynamic over a 10-week period. Nutrient inputs, soil disruption and dynamic environmental variables affect microbial populations in sometimes unforeseen ways counter to the results of short-term laboratory incubations. Funding provided by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: