Thyme (Thymus vidgaris L.), rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis L.), black pepper (Piper nigrum L.) and cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.) in ground form were packaged in either air or 100% N2 and γ-irradiated at 3 different irradiation levels (7kGy, 12kGy, 17kGy). Total viable bacterial count, yeast and mould count, colour, essential oil yield and essential oil composition were determined. Microbial load was not detectable after 12kGy irradiation of all samples. Irradiation resulted in significant changes in colour values of rosemary and black pepper. The discolouration of the irradiated black pepper was lower in modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) compared to air packaging. Essential oil yield of irradiated black pepper and cumin was lower in air packaging compared to MAP. Gamma-irradiation generally decreased monoterpenes and increased oxygenated compounds, but the effect was lower in MAP. Overall, spices should be irradiated under an O2-free atmosphere to minimise quality deterioration.Spices are added to food in order to improve flavour and colour. Thyme, rosemary, black pepper and cumin are some of the most frequently used spices in Turkey. Turkey is one of the main exporter countries of cumin ( Irradiation is mainly used in spices for sterilisation purposes, but it can have adverse effects on quality of these products through oxidative reactions. For instance, loss of spicy aroma has been reported after irradiation of a meatball preparation containing ground beef and spice mixture ( A combination of irradiation with other preservation techniques (cold storage, heat, packaging, etc.) can decrease the adverse effects of irradiation on the quality of food products ( The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of both gamma-irradiation dose and the atmospheric composition during irradiation, on the essential oil content and colour along with total bacterial and yeast/mould count – of thyme, rosemary, black pepper and cumin. Unsterilised samples of thyme ( The spice samples were obtained in ground form and used as provided. No further size reduction or size classification was applied before any treatment or experiment. Packages of 200 A 10 The values of CIE Spice samples (100 A Varian 3800 GC instrument coupled to a Saturn 2000 The data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey multiple comparison tests using Minitab® 16 Statistical Software (Minitab Inc., State College, PA). Gamma-irradiation at ⩾7 Effects of gamma-irradiation on colour of the spices under MAP and AP are given in The yield of essential oil in black pepper was decreased by 17 The effect of irradiation appears to depend both on the dose and the spice variety. Differing results have been reported by several researchers. It has been claimed that irradiation increased volatile content of clary sage seed up to a given level, but started to decrease after this peak value ( Thyme and rosemary essential oils were mainly characterised by carvacrol and 1,8-cineole, α-pinene and verbenone, respectively ( Monoterpenes (α-phellandrene, α-terpinene and limonene), geraniol and carvacrol decreased, whereas 1,8-cineole increased upon gamma-irradiation in rosemary ( Monoterpenes such as α-terpinene (in thyme and rosemary), limonene (in black pepper and cumin), β-pinene, α-phellandrene, ρ-cymene, γ-terpinene (in cumin) were higher whereas sesquiterpenes and oxygenated components such as carvacrol (in rosemary and cumin), β-selinene, valencene, cadinene, caryophyllene oxide, spathulenol (in black pepper), β-caryophyllene, β-farnesene, acoradiene (in cumin) were lower in 100% N Total monoterpene content was decreased by irradiation in rosemary, black pepper and cumin essential oils ( It has been claimed that irradiation may cause oxidation and hydroxylation of terpenes with aromatic rings and initiate new compounds by structurally changing double bonds and functional groups ( Gamma-irradiation and O We acknowledge Bagdat Baharatlari Gida San. ve Tic. Ltd. Sti. (Ankara, Turkey) for donating the spice samples and Gamma-Pak Sterilizasyon San. ve Tic. A.S. (Tekirdag, Turkey) for irradiating the samples. Packaging material was supplied by Korozo Ambalaj San. ve Tic. A.S. (Istanbul, Turkey). This study was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 