The United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was established to provide guidance to protect workers from hazards in the workplace. After broadly adopting extant health and safety standards, OSHA promulgated an expanded standard for regulation of asbestos. This standard provided for regulation of six named minerals and practices to be followed. Since the initial establishment of asbestos regulation by OSHA, other elongate particles have been considered for evaluation. This discussion describes the evolution of the OSHA regulations for asbestos, what they cover and how other materials might be regulated if they are found to pose a health risk.As we investigate the various elongate mineral species as well as other elongate particles, we may discover or suspect that there are adverse health effects associated with exposure. When those exposures occur in the workplace, it is in the jurisdiction of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). OSHA (The Agency) has a pathway to regulation that includes evaluation of the hazard and estimation or measurement of the risk of exposure to provide an appropriate response. As OSHA's first expanded standard under the OSH Act 6(b) provision, the history of asbestos regulation provides useful information on the procedures that must be followed to establish regulation of any potentially dangerous substance or practice. The purpose of this brief discussion is to highlight the most important events in the development of the OSHA asbestos regulations Regulations aimed at protecting workers from exposure to asbestos reach back more than a century. While OSHA provides regulations and guidelines, The OSH Act provides that “Each employer (1) shall furnish to each of his employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees; (2) shall comply with occupational safety and health standards and all rules, regulations, and orders issued pursuant to this Act which are applicable to his own actions and conduct.” Section 6 of the OSH Act provides for the establishment of Occupational Safety and Health Standards. In order to establish an initial set of regulations, the Act provided that the Agency could adopt regulations and standards by authority of Section 6(a) of the Act: Under 6(a) rulemaking, OSHA established a PEL for asbestos of 12 fibers per milliliter. The term “asbestos” is a collective term for a group of minerals that have a fibrous growth habit. The current extent of the term, used by OSHA, is based upon the commercial terms in use at least as of 1964. Three broad groups have helped shape how the definitions are applied. Mineralogists have lobbied for precision and clarity in the definitions, hence the addition of the adjective “asbestos” to the minerals which do not have specific names which are applied to the fibrous growth habit. Some of this effort was directed through litigation. The legal system has narrowed the application of the regulations directing that the regulations apply only to the substances described in those regulations. Cooperative understanding is complicated by the proliferation of novel and unique definitions of identical terms, inclusions of previously unincluded elongate mineral or synthetic particles, measurement techniques and uninformed application of technical definitions. This has occurred because different stakeholders in the asbestos universe have vastly different training and needs. Health scientists strive to understand the disease-causing attributes of elongate particles, mineralogists generally strive for precision in the definitions, regulators are bound by traditional, legal and accepted definitions. This leaves the community in a quagmire of terms and ideas that are not equally understood between the various disciplines that are called upon for opinions in general research and in litigation. The OSHA regulations were initially developed using information from public hearings, submitted testimony and recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Asbestos Dust In May1971, The Agency published a list of permissible exposure limits (PEL) for substances given in the 1968 ACGIH TLV document. For asbestos, OSHA established a PEL of 12 fibers/cc. With the promulgation of the OSHA Asbestos standard in July 1972, 29 CFR 1910.93a, In this standard, a regulatory definition of asbestos fiber was given. “Asbestos Fibers” means asbestos fibers longer than 5 μm (where “asbestos” is defined as the six minerals as previously mentioned). Litigation also played a part in establishing consistency in the definitions. In the case Secretary of Labor v Borg-Warner Corporation, The Borg-Warner case raises some issues. One of which is the mineralogical definition of “asbestos.” If only the the size and shape criteria were used to define what particles are “asbestos” for purposes of the standard, that would include any elongate particle of any of the six regulated minerals, regardless of growth habit. However, elongate particles formed by mechanical comminution or grinding from non-fibrous habit growth minerals might then be included and counted as part of the fiber count. When, in 1986, this was explicitly stated in the OSHA asbestos standards, an injunction was filed enjoining the Agency from including the so-called “cleavage fragments” from fiber counts. The Agency studied the issue and in 1992 issued the following statement: This decision highlights one of the constraints within which OSHA regulates substances. OSHA cannot unilaterally add minerals or otherwise generally add to the existing standard without direct rulemaking. There must be evidence concerning the health effects of a substance before a regulation can be promulgated. OSHA can promulgate standards under authority of the OSH Act in what is known as 6(b) rulemaking, which can establish a regulation specifically for that substance. Alternatively, OSHA may use another section of the OSH Act known and the 5(a)1 section to regulate anything that does not have a specific standard that applies. This is known as the “General Duty” section of the OSH Act. In order to cite an employer using the OSH Act 5(a)1 section, four conditions must be met. The employer fails to keep the workplace free of a hazard to which its employees were exposed. The hazard was recognized. The hazard was causing, or was likely to cause, death or serious physical harm. There was a feasible and useful method to correct the hazard. The burden can be substantial in using the 5(a)1 section, but it has been used for citations in the workplace. Either of the two pathways listed above, 6(b) rulemaking or 5(a)1 General Duty could be used to address other minerals not historically included in the OSHA asbestos regulations. This might include other fibers such as, richterite, winchite, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), double walled nanotubes (DNTs), erionite, or others. Going forward, with research in the health effects of elongate mineral particles is an approach given by The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) along with others involved at the Federal level recognized the need for harmonization of terminology and a coherent scheme of research. This was embodied in the The OSHA regulations cover what they cover and are not extended to elongate particles not originally included in rulemaking. This does not make any statement about toxicity, carcinogenicity or teratogenicity of any material not directly included in the regulation. If sufficient data and an exposed occupational population is available to initiate direct rulemaking, a new or modified standard could be promulgated. If all four required elements of a 5(a)1 violation are present, any substance or process can be regulated. Note: The opinions expressed here are my own and do not represent an official statement by OSHA. Nothing in this presentation or paper establishes any regulation or requirement not included in published OSHA regulations.