Investigation of a breakage probability model published by Vogel and Peukert [Vogel, L. and Peukert, W., 2004. Determination of material properties relevant to grinding by practicable labscale milling tests. Int. J. Miner. Process., 74S, 329–338.] has led to a modification of their model to describe the degree of impact breakage, t
                     10. The modified model takes a form similar to the JKMRC prior art breakage model, but with particle size and breakage properties incorporated explicitly in the model.
                  The present breakage model was validated using eight sets of detailed drop weight test data on various types of ore and quarry material over a wide range of impact specific energies and particle sizes. The validation revealed that the present breakage model fits all the data sets well with fewer model parameters. The results from the validation study suggest the present breakage model has a fundamentally better structure for describing the effect of particle size on the breakage distribution function.In the existing AG/SAG model implemented in the software package JKSimMet, the breakage appearance function is modelled using an equation which describes the relationship between Previous work has found that the crack density of larger particles is much greater than that for smaller particles ( Research has been carried out at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) to model the particle size effect on ore breakage. While Banini's model remains to be comprehensively validated, a model describing the breakage probability has recently emerged in the literature ( Vogel and Peukert published a number of papers describing a model of breakage probability related to material properties and the method to determine the model parameters ( From dimensional reasoning, Rumpf derived an equation to describe the similarity of breakage of particles of similar shape but different physical properties. He quantified the similarity by the product of newly created specific surface Vogel and Peukert introduced two functions, the breakage probability The Weibull statistics are based on the principle of the weakest link in a chain. It gives the probability By relating Vogel and Peukert reason that in Eqs. In summary, two approaches from Rumpf's similarity consideration and the Weibull statistics of fracture mechanics have been combined in the Vogel and Peukert model. In this model, the impact breakage probability is determined by the product of initial particle size Despite Vogel and Peukert's claim that the same approach can be applied for the qualitative description of the breakage distribution function, no attempt was published by the authors. In modelling a comminution device, knowing whether or not a particle will break (breakage probability) is only part of the process. It is more important to know the particle progeny size distribution subject to breakage. However it is also more difficult to model the breakage distribution function than the breakage probability, since the breakage probability can be simply represented with a single number, while the breakage distribution function is a matrix. At the JKMRC, there is a long history in modelling breakage distribution using a single parameter Spline regression analysis can be carried out to describe each of the relationships Vogel and Peukert's breakage probability model was therefore modified to describe the breakage index Comparing the modified breakage distribution model (Eq. Over two decades, numerous drop weight tests have been conducted in Australia and abroad to characterise the impact ore hardness. These data have been used to fit the parameters The incentive leading to further investigation of the modified breakage distribution model is that the parameters of the two equations (Eqs. Clearly, Banini's model (Eq. Since the independent variables incorporated in the present breakage model are all available in the drop weight test database, the existing data can be used to fit the parameters of the new model. Therefore the existing drop weight test data are not redundant. Rather, they are still usable in the new JKMRC AG/SAG mill model currently under development. As noted previously, Banini conducted eight detailed drop weight tests covering a wide range of particle sizes and energy levels ( Banini's data were used to validate the modified breakage model (Eq.  The averaged The current version of the AG/SAG mill model implemented in the JKSimMet uses the size-averaged model parameters  For some materials that were claimed to be without a significant size effect (e.g. Gold ore 2 and Lead–zinc ore 3), Banini observed that the fitted Investigation of a breakage probability model published by Vogel and Peukert has led to the modification of the model to describe the degree of impact breakage, The present breakage model was validated using eight sets of detailed drop weight test data on various types of ore and quarry material conducted by The validation reveals that the modified breakage model fits all the data sets well. It requires only one set of model parameters to be calibrated for each ore type to obtain essentially the same fitting accuracy as the JKMRC prior art breakage model that would require four times as many model parameters (i.e. using size-dependent Since the present breakage model is similar in its form to the JKMRC prior art breakage model, parameters in the present model can be converted to the This work was conducted under AMIRA P9N Project. The financial support of this work and the approval to publish the paper by AMIRA and P9N sponsors are greatly appreciated.