Coating of micrometer-sized particles of salbutamol sulphate or sodium chloride with the amino acid l-leucine in the gas phase is described. A novel method to synthesize core particles and coat them with l-leucine simultaneously was carried out in an aerosol flow reactor. The coating was prepared via temperature-induced heterogeneous nucleation of l-leucine vapor on the 0.6–1.0 µm core particles, and subsequent growth of l-leucine crystals by physical vapor deposition. The core salbutamol particles were amorphous, whereas the NaCl core particles were crystalline. The l-leucine sublimation that took place at 140–195 °C depended on the identity of the core material due to (i) molecular interaction and (ii) phase mixing. The former was dominant with salbutamol/l-leucine particles and the latter was dominant with NaCl/l-leucine particles. During the vapor deposition, l-leucine formed a discontinuous coating layer of leafy-looking crystallites, with sizes from a few nanometers to hundreds of nanometers, pointing out from the core particle surface. The l-leucine deposition properties depended on the core morphology: l-leucine crystallites were distributed more evenly on salbutamol core surfaces than on salt core surfaces, where the crystallites were localized mainly on edges. The stability of coated salbutamol particles was retained during storage under humid conditions.In inhalation therapy, the effective transportation of drug powders deep into the lungs requires optimization of the properties determining powder flowability and dispersibility The modification of solid surfaces has been achieved with a wide range of technologies We demonstrate a novel process for coating micrometer-sized particles with the amino acid Salbutamol sulphate (Alfa Aesar, Germany), sodium chloride (NaCl; J.T. Baker, Holland), and In the aerosol flow reactor method, the production and gas phase coating of solid aerosol particles consists of the generation of droplets, drying of particles, and coating of dry solid particles with The sublimation temperature and the saturation ratio of The rapid cooling induced a sudden change in saturation conditions, causing the The number size distributions of the particles produced were determined with an electrical low-pressure impactor (ELPI; Dekati Ltd., Finland) and with a scanning mobility particle sizer (SMPS) equipped with a differential mobility analyzer (DMA; model 3081, TSI Inc. Particle Instruments, USA) and a condensation particle counter (CPC; model 3027, TSI Inc. Particle Instruments, USA). In ELPI, an oiled porous collection of substrates (Dekati Ltd., Finland) with stage aerodynamic cut-off diameters from 0.03 to 7.88 µm were used to avoid particle bounce. Particle density for all the particles was assumed to be 1 g/cm Gas-phase samples were collected by a point-to-plate electrostatic precipitator (In-Tox Products, USA) onto either plain or carbon-coated electron microscope copper grids (Agar Scientific Ltd., England). The morphologies of the particles were imaged with a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; Leo DSM982 Gemini, LEO Electron Microscopy Inc., Germany). The samples were sputter-coated with platinum in order to stabilize the particle under the electron beam and to enhance image contrast. The crystallinity of individual particles was investigated with a transmission electron microscope (TEM; Philips CM200, FEG/(S)TEM, FEI Company, The Netherlands). Surface analysis was conducted via X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS; AXIS 165, Kratos Analytical Ltd., UK). For clarity, the temperatures discussed here refer to the temperatures used in the heated part of the reactor where both the drying of droplets and the sublimation of First of all, the size distributions of pure salbutamol and NaCl particles remained the same within the temperature range of 100–200 °C. As discussed above, at a certain temperature, particle size distributions changed; i.e. Briefly,  The salbutamol/  The different localization and size of the  Particle coalescence, a commonly encountered problem with many pharmaceutical powders We have presented a novel gas-phase method of coating micrometer-sized particles using an aerosol flow reactor. Two types of core particles, salbutamol sulphate and sodium chloride, were coated by physical vapor deposition of the amino acid