Injection of a nano zero valent iron (nZVI) suspension in the subsurface is a remedial option for obtaining the in situ reduction and immobilization of hexavalent chromium in contaminated aquifers. Prerequisite for the successful implementation of this technology is that the nanoparticles form a stable colloidal suspension with good transport properties when delivered in the subsurface. In this study we produced stable suspensions of polyphenol-coated nZVI (GT-nZVI) and we evaluated their transport behavior through representative porous media. Two types of porous materials were tested: (a) silica sand as a typical inert medium and (b) a mixture of calcareous soil and sand. The transport of GT-nZVI through the sand column was effectively described using a classic 1-D convection-dispersion flow equation (CDE) in combination with the colloid filtration theory (CFT). The calculations indicate that nZVI travel distance will be limited in the range 2.5–25cm for low Darcy velocities (0.1–1m/d) and in the order of 2.5m at higher velocities (10m/d). The mobility of GT-nZVI suspension in the soil–sand column is lower and is directly related to the progress of the neutralization reactions between the acidic GT-nZVI suspension and soil calcite.In situ reduction of hexavalent chromium through the injection of appropriate reducing reagents in the contaminated aquifer is considered an attractive treatment option and many research efforts have been devoted to develop this category of technologies. A wide variety of materials have been tested as possible reductants appropriate for in situ injection, including Na However, contrary to the initial expectations, many studies indicated that nZVI particles presented limited subsurface mobility, due to rapid agglomeration under the action of attractive interparticle forces Since 2008 a number of researchers demonstrated that some plant extracts, like green tea, lemon balm, etc., with high antioxidant potential, could combine the capacity to reduce aqueous iron cations to the zero valent state with stabilizing/capping properties. As a consequence, these plant extracts could replace borohydrite, which is an expensive and potentially dangerous reagent, for the synthesis of nZVI, and provide simultaneously the stabilizing/capping protection, which is necessary for obtaining stable nZVI suspensions with satisfactory rheological properties The following chemicals were used: ferric chloride hexahydrate (>99.0%, Merck, Germany), calcium chloride (>99.5%, Merck, Germany), potassium bromide (Merck, Germany), hydrogen peroxide (30%, Carlo Erba), and hydrochloric acid (≥37%, Sigma–Aldrich). Also dry leaves of green tea (Twinings of London) were used as sources of polyphenols. The column breakthrough experiments were conducted using silica sand, as model porous medium, and mixtures of sand with soil from Asopos area. Silica sand was selected as an inert medium. Silica sand (origin Egypt) was obtained from Mevior SA. Sand grains are of spherical shape and particle size ranges between 0.1 and 0.4 The iron nanoparticles were produced by mixing GT extract with a solution containing 0.1 Transport experiments were carried using polyethylene columns, with 2.63 The experimental results, corresponding to the transport of bromide (tracer), as well as of total iron, Fe(tot), aqueous iron, Fe(aq) and iron nanoparticles, nZVI, through the sand column, are shown in the charts of Bromide transport (  As seen in Several researchers have described the removal of iron nanoparticles through the sand with the help of colloid filtration theory, as a process controlled by a first-order kinetics mechanism In the case of aqueous iron Fe(aq), the kinetic constant Column experiments and colloids filtration theory is often used to estimate the maximum travel distance of nZVI, in the field. Assuming that soil in the field has similar properties with the silica sand used during column experiments, Eq. He et al. The results corresponding to the transport of tracer and GT-nZVI through the mixture of sand and soil are given in The transport behavior of GT-nZVI suspension through the soil–sand mixture ( The evolution of pH and ORP in the effluents during the injection of GT-nZVI in the columns is presented in The main parameter dictating the different transport behavior of GT-nZVI in the soil–sand column, compared with its transport in the pure sand column, is the inherent alkalinity of soil, which is due to the presence of carbonaceous minerals, such as calcite CaCO On the other hand GT-nZVI suspension is acidic. To quantify its acidity, an amount of 10 During the column experiments the abrupt decrease of pH, which indicates the exhaustion of soil neutralization capacity, occurred when approximately 40 This volume of suspension is close to 560 Iron nanoparticles are attached to the freshly precipitated Fe hydroxides and removed from the fluid phase. It is thus evident that the travel distance of nZVI when injected in soils with calcareous matrix, as well as the amount of nanoparticles retained in the soil, are primarily dictated by the neutralization reactions. Taking as a rule of thumb that the field reactivity of soil calcite will be equivalent to approximately 50% of the nominal neutralization potential, it can be roughly calculated that a soil with NP The transport of GT-nZVI through the inert silica sand column was effectively described using a classic 1-D convection-dispersion flow equation (CDE) in combination with the colloid filtration theory (CFT). The calculations indicate that at low Darcy velocities, typical of the natural groundwater flowrates (<1 The research of Mystrioti Christiana has been co-financed by the