The molecular weight distribution of protein aggregates from raw meat and cooked pork products was assessed by size exclusion–high performance liquid chromatography (SE–HPLC). Electrophoretic analysis under reducing conditions showed that the high molecular weight SE–HPLC peak (peak 1) of the cooked products contained protein aggregates in addition to high molecular weight muscle proteins, while the second peak (peak 2) still contained aggregates and <50 kDa proteins. The protein aggregates composition was investigated by HPLC–tandem mass spectrometry. Different classes of proteins were identified and the cooked products showed a more complex composition and organization, according to the muscle structure and the technological procedures, respectively. The key role of actin in the building of the protein networks was also confirmed. The different multi-protein systems found in the cooked products suggest protein re-organization in heat-induced supramolecular structures, which might be responsible for the texture and the structural properties of the final products.In the course of human culinary history, mild or severe thermal technological processes have been developed to preserve raw meat. Besides increasing the storage time, heat treatments improve meat sensory properties ( In the light of the vast variability in the protein structure (stability, net charge, presence of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues) and the chemical-physical characteristics of the medium, there are endless possibilities for the re-organization of proteins in these types of supramolecular architectures, which also affect the functional and structural properties of the protein networks (  The aim of this study was a specific investigation of the effect of heat treatment on the protein organization in cooked products compared to raw matter, through the assessment of the MW distribution of protein aggregates by size exclusion liquid chromatography (SE–HPLC) and evaluation of the composition of fractionated protein aggregates by proteomics. Traditional meat products were selected for this study. Six samples each of cooked ham, “mortadella di Bologna”, würstel and raw pork were purchased at local markets. To study meat protein aggregates from raw and cooked samples, we adapted the conditions previously used to separate polymeric protein aggregates from cereal-based products ( Briefly, proteins were extracted from the ground samples of raw and cooked meat products (1 g) with 10 mL of DRB containing 1 mM of Pefabloc® (Sigma) as the protease inhibitor. The suspension was vigorously shaken for 30 min and then centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 The resulting pellet was re-suspended in 10 mL of the same buffer and sonicated thrice for 30 s at 300 W (Microson Ultrasonic cell disruptor; Misonix Inc., Farmingdale, NY). After centrifugation (10 min, 10,000 For mass spectrometry analysis, “Total” proteins were extracted from ground meat samples (1 g) in 10 mL of the same buffer as described above, shaken, vortexed and sonicated for 30 s and then centrifuged (10 min, 10,000 All extracts were filtered through a 0.45-µm PVDF filter prior to size exclusion liquid chromatography (SE–HPLC) separation. SE–HPLC was performed using an Agilent 1100 Series liquid chromatograph (Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with a Phenomenex Biosep SEC-S 4000 column (300 × 7.8 mm; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Each sample (20 μL) was injected onto the column and the separation was monitored at 214 nm. The mobile phase was 50% acetonitrile ( In the SE–HPLC chromatograms, high MW protein peaks (peak 1, peak 2 and peak 3) of SDS-extractable and SDS-extractable with sonication fractions were considered as the free (FPA) and the linked protein aggregates (LPA), respectively. Two additional peaks at lower MW (peak 4 and peak 5) were detected for both the extracts. The total extracted protein aggregates in raw and cooked meat products were calculated as the sum of the FPA and LPA total peaks area, allowing a gross estimate of the total protein extractability for each sample. The contribution of each protein fraction (free and linked) on the total extracted aggregates was given as a percentage by: Furthermore, the contribution of individual high MW peak on both FPA and LPA total area (peak 1 + 2 + 3) was also evaluated and calculated, as follows: and Nitrogen content of pellets obtained after the extraction of the LPA was estimated through the application of the Kjeldahl method and it was converted into protein content using a factor of 6.25. The analyses were carried out by an automatic digestion unit and through an automatic distillation and titration system (VELP Scientifica Srl, Usmate, Italy). Three measurements for each sample were performed. SE–HPLC fractions of protein aggregates were manually collected, concentrated in a Speed-vac (Savant SPD 1010; Thermo Fisher Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), lyophilized and stored at −20 °C. An aliquot of each polymeric protein fraction was re-suspended in 6 M guanidine HCl, 50 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0) containing 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). After reduction of disulfide bonds (55 °C, 1 h), cysteines were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) for 40 min in the dark. Proteins were desalted using prepacked Econopak (Biorad, Milan, Italy) G25 size exclusion columns, quantified with the Bradford assay and digested overnight at 37 °C with proteomic grade modified trypsin (Sigma), using a 1:50 enzyme to substrate ( SE–HPLC fractions were diluted (1:1 HPLC–electrospray ionization (ESI)–high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography instrument (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides from SE-purified protein fractions were diluted in 0.1% ( Mass spectra were elaborated using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher), restricting the search to the Mammalia protein database extracted from Uniprot. The search was then refined, restricting it to the The results from six independent samples for each product were compared by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). A Duncan’s multiple range test, with the option of homogeneous groups ( Meat protein aggregates were assessed substantially according to the conventional procedure used for the study of wheat polymeric protein ( For each sample, the chromatographic profiles obtained according to the two-step extraction procedure are shown in The distribution of the protein aggregates in the raw and cooked products was more precisely evaluated by determining the contribution of each peak to the total area of FPA and LPA ( The introduction of the sonication step to extract proteins from the pellets after the first extraction step, in order to obtain the linked protein fraction ( Possible residual proteins in the pellets after the linked protein fraction extraction were determined by the Kjeldahl method. Indeed, a protein residue was found and quantified, as reported in We used principal component analysis (PCA) (XLSTAT Base 2018, Addinsoft) to investigate the relationships among the high and low MW protein fractions and the technology of production. Two factors were extracted, named F1 and F2, explaining 45 and 37% of the total variance respectively, with a cumulated explained variance of 83% ( Moreover, cooked ham samples were placed in the upper part of the diagram, having a high positive correlation with component F2 and a negative correlation with F1. This suggested that the production processing affected cooked ham more than protein denaturation, as actually in this quarter almost all the peaks were from the free protein fraction and, especially, we noted the aggregates at high MW (peak 2) and low MW monomers (peak 5). This finding for the cooked ham confirmed the partial denaturation of the muscle protein because of the intact structure of the muscular fibre (i.e. sarcomere). Therefore, only the soluble fraction (i.e. the sarcoplasmic, soluble part of myofibrillar and connective proteins) aggregated. Würstel samples were placed in the positive quadrant of F1 and F2, owing to the combined effects of production processing and thermal treatment. Finally, mortadella samples showed a positive correlation with F1 and an almost zero correlation with F2. The SE–HPLC fractions were individually analysed by SDS–PAGE under reducing conditions. The electrophoretic patterns of cooked products were compared to the sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar proteins of raw pork (lane 1 and lane 2), as shown in The identification of the total proteins, which eluted in the collected peaks after chromatographic separation, was assessed using a shotgun proteomic approach. In The number of the identified proteins for mortadella and würstel was higher than raw pork and cooked ham, denoting higher protein variability in the composition of the emulsified sausages. This hypothesis was supported by the presence of a discrete number of other proteins in these products, including collagen, proteoglycans (e.g., lumican, decorin, tuftelin, fibromodulin) and proteins with typical functions. In addition, two milk proteins, α The lists of proteins identified in the SE–HPLC peaks of the individual products are reported in Generally, food is constituted by multi-protein systems, whose native supramolecular organization depends on the conditions of the medium and on the interaction with other constituents. The architecture of the food protein systems can be significantly affected by the technology. Muscle fibres are organised in supramolecular assemblies arranged in aligned myofibril, in order to accomplish their physiological role ( The supramolecular organization in raw pork and in cooked pork products was different and was assessed by evaluating the MW distribution of protein aggregates and identifying the proteins involved in their formation, using proteomics. The application of a two-step extraction procedure allowed us to obtain a more efficient extractability and the sonication provided a supplementary energy to release those proteins and/or aggregates strongly associated to the food matrix. The evaluation of the peaks area of the high MW aggregates (FPA and LPA) pointed out the differences between the raw matter and the transformed products. The overall chromatographic results of the raw pork, showing a minor presence of protein aggregates and the lowest values for both FPA and LPA, were due to the native muscle protein organization in an insoluble and stable supramolecular architecture (sarcomere) ( The production of cooked ham involves that the whole anatomical cut is put in the mould, pressed and cooked. With this step all soluble meat proteins, including the structural proteins from the tenderisation process, are trapped into the myofibrillar network, a well-ordered pre-defined structure, that is a more accessible system, mainly characterised by disulfide bonds and hydrophobic interactions ( The PCA analysis also confirmed that two main factors could explain the differences in the cooked meat products protein aggregates: thermal denaturation and processing conditions. In the comminuted products, the linked protein aggregates (LPA) were more represented, while in the cooked ham samples the free protein aggregates (FPA) were predominant, confirming only a partial protein denaturation. In addition, raw meat contained only a negligible part of protein aggregates, deriving from the native supramolecular muscle organization. Further information was derived from the influence of the technological processes, the raw meat and the cooked products being located in different quarter of the diagram. Amongst the cooked products, the comminuted were located in the same quarter, which was different from that of cooked ham, highlighting the role that the comminution combined with heat treatment had in the formation of completely different heat-induced protein architecture. The composition of the protein aggregates of cooked products was deduced observing both number and nature of the involved proteins. As demonstrated by SDS, the actin band, detected in both the high MW peaks, seemed to have a crucial role in the building of the heat-induced supramolecular structure of the cooked products, confirming the findings of Cooked ham showed a protein pattern quite similar to that of raw pork, according to the ordered structure of the product, with a higher number of proteins in peak 2 rather than in peak 1, as could also be inferred from the chromatographic ( Heat treatment induces the formation of large protein aggregates organised in multi-protein systems, as assessed using proteomics. The combined use of SE–HPLC, electrophoresis and proteomics provided information about the nature of the aggregates formed in different cooked pork products as a function of the state of the raw matter and processing. The structural organization resulting from our findings consists of coagulated sarcoplasmic proteins enclosed in the inner part of the myofibrillar network, through covalent and/or non-covalent or tight hydrophobic bonds. A more complex protein arrangement machinery occurs in comminuted products, as a consequence of the involvement of different classes of proteins in an emulsified matrix. The supramolecular protein organization in a tight structure can account for the texture properties of cooked comminuted products. Further investigation could be undertaken to assess how these supramolecular structures could entrap or release nutritionally interesting or bioactive components. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. The authors thank the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  