The dissolution behavior of silver in ammoniacal solutions in the presence of bromine, iodine and hydrogen peroxide as oxidants has been studied. The effect of concentrations of ammonia and oxidants, and pH of the solution on the rate of dissolution of silver powder was investigated.
                  Silver dissolution was greatly affected by the ammonia concentration as well as concentrations of oxidants. The higher the concentration of oxidants, the greater the silver dissolution. However, high concentrations of halogen based oxidants resulted in precipitation of silver unless sufficient ammonia was also present. It was also noted that the silver dissolution is a strong function of pH of the solution. The optimum values of pH were found to be in the range 9–10. This behavior was explained in terms of the thermodynamic stability data of silver (I) complexes with halogen-based oxidants as a function of pH.Silver is a very important metal used in a wide range of applications such as photographic materials, coinage, jewelry, electrical and electronic products, catalysts, brazing alloys, dental amalgam, and biocidal pharmaceuticals. In order to increase the life cycle of raw materials it is very important to find a suitable process for recovering silver from scrap. The most common, versatile, efficient and inexpensive extraction method currently used is the cyanide method. This process is widely used for metal recovery but possesses a lethal toxicity and a high chemical consumption during the recovery process ( Ammonia exhibits selectivity with regard to silver leaching and can be used for most ore types ( It was found that iodine was an effective oxidant for silver dissolution when ammoniacal solutions were used ( When bromine is added to water, many species including bromide (Br Distribution of bromine bearing species has been calculated using thermodynamic data ( Likewise, iodine forms the aqueous species: iodide (I The distribution of various iodide-bearing species was calculated using “goal-seek/solver” in the Excel spread sheet. In these calculations the iodine concentration was kept constant at 0.052 mol/dm Many metals can form passive oxide films which can compete with complexation of the halogen species ( The distribution of silver species in ammonia solutions as a function of pH ( The effect of the total ammonia in solution on the total dissolved silver (I) is shown in Silver powder (purity 99.99%, 0.1 g, 40 μm) was added into a 500 ml of solution containing ammonia and oxidants including bromine, iodine, and hydrogen peroxide. The concentrations of ammonia and oxidants, and other conditions used in this study are given below: Ammonia (NH Bromine (Br Iodine (I Hydrogen peroxide 30% (H Temperature: 25 °C The ratio of the concentration of ammonium bromide or ammonium iodide to that of bromine or iodine was kept at 4/1. Sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide were used to adjust the pH of the system. Unless otherwise stated, only the 40 micron size fraction was used in the current presentation. Microtrac laser particle analyzer VSR was used to confirm the particle size of the silver powder. A direct leaching process was implemented in all experiments. The concentration of silver ions in the solution was measured by an atomic adsorption spectrophotometer, Perkin–Elmer model 5500. Experiments were conducted to see the effect of the concentration of ammonia in solutions maintained at different pH values in the range 4–10.5. The hydrogen peroxide concentration was held constant at 0.0188 mol/dm The effect of the three oxidants, hydrogen peroxide, bromine and iodine on the leaching behavior of silver powder was studied. The concentration of these oxidants was changed from 0.0188 to 0.075 mol/dm It was noted that silver dissolved in ammoniacal solutions with the aid of bromine or iodine was subject to precipitation over prolonged leaching ( Silver was found to be readily dissolved in ammoniacal solutions with the three oxidants hydrogen peroxide, bromine and iodine tested in this study. The dissolution behavior as a function of pH follows closely the metal complex speciation predicted from thermodynamic analyses. The maximum dissolution occurred at pH 9.8. Iodine was found to be the best oxidant among the three oxidants tested.