 Precipitation of dissolved metal ions in water by the addition of a suitable precipitant, which form a sparingly soluble compound has been known and applied in many areas for several centuries. Most commonly, the precipitant could be an alkaline compound like sodium or calcium hydroxide to precipitate metallic hydroxides, a soluble sulfide like sodium sulfide. Other precipitants are a soluble sulfate to precípitate those metals (e.g., lead), which form sparingly soluble metal sulfates or a soluble chloride, which precipitates those metals which form sparingly soluble chlorides (e.g., silver and mercury as mercurous). Specific conditions have to be met to achieve selective precipitation of any desired components. It will be discussed in this Section. Dissolved metal ions in solution can be precipitated as insoluble or sparingly soluble compounds. Most of the common heavy metal ions, Fe, Cu, Zn, Ni, etc. in metallurgical effluents can be precipitated as hydroxides, sulfides, carbonates or phosphate. Precipitation as hydroxide using sodium hydroxide or lime (calcium oxide) and sulfide (using a soluble sulfide like sodium sulfide) is most common in effluent treatment mainly for economic reasons. In addition to the removal of metal ions, one of the main objectives of effluent treatment is to selectively precipitate the individual metal ions by control of pH. This is based on the variation with pH of the solubilities of hydroxides and sulfides. Selective precipitation by pH control is the basis for one of the methods of metal recovery from effluents.  The equilibrium constant, known as  which leads to pOH = 7.16 and pH = 6.84. When the pH is raised to 6.8, cupric ions are precipitated, practically completely. When similar calculations are made for Mg Based on the solubility products data and the thermodynamic calculations explained before, hydroxide precipitation diagrams ( The precipitation of metal ions as sulfides follow the same principle of solubility products, in this case, of metal sulfides. The solubility product is the equilibrium constant of the dissociation of metal sulfide: M which is rearranged to On the basis of this equation, and from the known values of solubility products (  Hydrogen sulfide is a gas, which dissolves in water, and is dissociated as a weak dibasic acid in two stages: The equilibrium constants for these reactions are expressed by the following equations: and  The equilibrium constant of the overall reaction H (expressing activities in terms of molar concentrations)  This is a useful relationship, which enables the sulfide ion concentration to be determined by measuring pH. The data in Using the same relationship the sulfide ion concentration is also expressed on pH scale in the precipitation diagram (  Recovery of metal ions from solution by ion exchange process has been used for many years in process industry. Ion exchange phenomenon has been known for over 150 years. Natural clays, usually aluminosilicates were used to adsorb metal ions by exchange of sodium or potassium ions of the clay minerals. Their application was, however, limited to the bulk removal of metal ions. The metal ions thus adsorbed could not be recovered. Development of synthetic resins starting with the phenol-formaldehyde condensation product in the 1940s, marked a significant advance in the application of ion exchange technology as it led to the development of recovery of the adsorbed material by a process of elution, which is essentially, desorption of metal ions from the resin. Synthetic ion exchange materials commonly used are put in four categories as shown in Strong acid resins are produced by introducing sulfonic acid groups into the 3-dimensional hydrocarbon backbone structure of a polymeric resin. Weak acid resins are based on a carboxylic acid grouping achieved by synthesis of a polymer. Ployacrylic polymers usually serve the purpose. Strong base resins are made by introducing a quaternary ammonium grouping onto the hydrocarbon backbone of the resin. Weak base resins are similarly made by the inclusion of a tertiary ammonium group. Strong acid and strong base resins can exchange ions over the entire pH range and can split the salt: for example, Weak acid resins respond on dissociation of the carboxylic acid grouping and usually exchange in alkaline solution, for example,  Weak acidic or basic reins are more advantageous for recovering the adsorbed metals by a process called elution. The metal ions are recovered by passing a strong electrolyte like NaCl through the resin. The metal ions are displaced by sodium ions and the resin is regenerated. If the resin is an acidic resin, that is, the exchangeable ion is hydrogen ion, a strong acid is used as eluant to desorb the metal ions and regenerate the resin. Ion exchange resins show good selectivity with respect to metal ions. It depends largely on the structure of the resin and specifically on the ionic radius and ionic charge density of the metal ions. An ion of higher charge density tends to displace an ion of smaller charge density. Trivalent ions are preferentially adsorbed, then divalent ions. Within ions of the same charge selectivity is governed by bond strength. This is determined by the electrovalent characteristic of the metal ion. Metal ions which are more electrovalent bind more strongly and are preferentially adsorbed. For example, copper is more electropositive than zinc; as a result, from an effluent containing dissolved copper and zinc, cupric ions are preferentially adsorbed. A selectivity coefficient can be defined by applying the laws of mass action to the ion exchange process:  Some qualitative affinities of a sulfonated copolymer of styrene and divinyl benzene given by  Dividing the metal loading by the equilibrium concentration produces the distribution coefficient. The ratio of two distribution coefficients produces the separation factor for those two metals. It should be noted that the separation factor does not include the ionic charges in the resin and thus it differs from the selectivity coefficient explained before. The separation factor is, however, all that matters when considering a practical application of a resin. An additional set of useful data can be obtained from the saturation profile experiment by plotting the metal loading as a function of its equilibrium aqueous concentrations. This plot is called ion exchange isotherm. It provides the process engineer with the basic information for the designing of the ion exchange process. A typical ion exchange isotherm is shown in   As an example,   Differences in metal ion selectivities among different chelating exchangers are related to the metal-ligand stability constants. This is a thermodynamic equilibrium constant corresponding to the dissociation of a complex into the free metal ion and the ligand. Such constants are known for many widely used chelating compounds; see Martell and Smith (1988). However, the constants for newly synthesized ligands are not known. In such cases, selectivities have to be experimentally determined by measuring the separation factors as explained before. In this class of cationic resins, described by The action of redox resins has been demonstrated by laboratory studies, and they may have some specific applications for the recovery of metals from dilute effluents, but no industrial application has been reported. A principal property of ion exchange resin is its exchange capacity. It is the number of ionogenic groups per gram of resin free of sorbed solutes and solvents. For example, monosulfonated styrene-divinylbenzene copolymers shown by the chemical formula consists mainly of the units -CHCH The One method of experimentally determining the resin capacity is by titration of the resin with an acid or base. A more precise method is to monitor the metal ion concentration in the effluent, c during sorption step. This is plotted as a ratio of the influent metal concentration c  In the elution step where the resin is regenerated, the adsorbed ions are displaced from the resin by passing an excess of electrolyte, which is called eluant. A plot of metal ion concentration against the volume of the eluate (the solution leaving the column) is referred to as elution curve shown in Ion exchange is carried out in columns. In the sorption process the effluent containing metal values is passed through a bed of resin. The metal ions to be recovered enter the resin phase. When the bed gets saturated with the metal ion in the feed, the outcoming solution will carry the unadsorbed metal ions. This is the breakthrough point when the flow of feed should be stopped. In the next, elution stage, a small volume of the eluent solution is passed through the column and the metal ions are removed from the resin. The bed is then washed to remove loosely held ions. A concentrated solution of the desired metal ions is obtained which can be processed further to recover the metal, and the resin regenerated by washing. Ion exchange may be carried out under equilibrium conditions. A certain volume of a solution is contacted with a certain weight of the resin and shaken long enough till equilibrium is reached. The uptake on the resin is defined by distribution coefficient,  Ion exchangers are usually made in the form of beads or spherical particles of 0.5–2.0 For the ion exchange process to be economical it is necessary for the resins to be regenerated and reused for several cycles. As mentioned under ‘Practical Considerations’ in many systems, where the resins are used in a column, after the elution step the resin is washed and regenerated. There are, however, examples, especially in the use of chelating resins, where the resin is mixed with an effluent solution and mechanically stirred to promote metal uptake. In such cases, it becomes necessary to separate the resins from the slurry and then recover the adsorbed metal. This has been attempted by conditioning the resin with a surfactant, which makes the surface hydrophobic and separating the resin by flotation technique (described in In the separation technique of solvent extraction a solute is transferred from one liquid phase to another immiscible or partially miscible liquid, which is in contact with the first phase. The aqueous phase contains the metal which is to be concentrated into the organic phase. The principle was originally applied in analytical chemistry where dilute aqueous solutions were concentrated using an extractant in the organic phase. A well known example (in chemical analysis) is that of extracting copper in low concentration using 8-hydroxy quinoline, represented by Another significant application of solvent extraction was in nuclear industry to separate uranium as uranyl nitrate in diethyl ether. Presently, solvent extraction is used for a wide range of metals including copper, nickel, cobalt, chromium, uranium, vanadium, molybdenum, tungsten, tantalum, niobium, hafnium, zinc, zirconium, rare earth elements and platinum group metals (PGM). (  By extraction the organic solvent is loaded with the metal to be recovered, and the aqueous phase called raffinate, which is either disposed off as waste or can be further processed. The loaded solvent from the extraction may be scrubbed by treatment with a fresh aqueous phase to remove the contaminating impurities. The scrubbed organic solvent is then stripped, usually by a strong acid like sulfuric acid, to remove the metal to be recovered. After stripping, the organic solvent is recirculated back into the extraction process. The principles governing separation of metals by solvent extraction will be briefly discussed. Full details describing derivations of different concepts and how they apply to various solvent extractant systems can be found in the book by Ritcey and Ashbrook (1979) and several reviews ( A measure of the efficiency of separation by solvent extraction is the distribution ratio of a metal between an aqueous phase and an organic phase. This is called extraction coefficient, designated E, or the distribution coefficient, D. It is defined as Metal concentrations in each phase are determined by quantitative chemical analysis of the metal, in whatever form, simple ionic form or complexed with the extractant compound. Both phases are separately analyzed to check mass balance. All solvent extraction studies are based on this basic principle. In addition to recovering metal values from effluents, solvent extraction has also been applied for separating metals from a complex mixture. Feasibility of such separation depends upon the ratio of distribution coefficients E Ideally, an extractant should have the following features: Ability to extract the metal at the required pH. Selectivity for the metal to be recovered and to reject undesired components. Acceptable rates of extraction, scrubbing and stripping. Solubility in the organic phase and very low solubility in the aqueous phase. Stability throughout the three principal stages. In practical reality, these criteria are often incompatible and it becomes necessary achieve a balance between them. This is illustrated by a few examples.  Acidic extractants are those in which hydrogen ions or protons of the extractant are exchanged for metal ions, as per the following equation: The equation implies, the reaction is governed by the pH of the system. As will be discussed further, pH is the principal control variable, which influences both extractability of metals as well as separation or two metals by acidic extractants. The percent extraction of metals is usually given at the equilibrium pH of the solution. In addition, for the purpose of comparing the extraction of various metals by a specific acidic extractant, the order of extraction is expressed in terms of pH Several carboxylic acids with long branched hydrocarbon chain have been used as solvent extractants in hydrometallurgical separations. Two prominent members are versatic acids, which are synthetically produced and naphthenic acids obtained from distillation of crude petroleum. Versatic acids are represented by the general formula, They are highly branched aliphatic monocarboxylic acids. Other members with similar structures are Versatic 10, 13, 1519 and SRS-100 (De, 1971). Naphthenic acids are a group of cyclic monocarboxylic acids having the general chemical structure, The product from crude petroleum has a molecular weight of about 170–330 (Fletcher and Wilson, 1961) Phosphinic, phosphonic and phosphoric acid derivatives extract many metals depending upon the equilibrium pH. The acids have the formulae:  Its special advantages are chemical stability and good kinetics of extraction, good loading and stripping characteristics, low solubility in the aqueous phase, selectivity in the extraction of many metals, and its availability on a large scale. Another widely used solvent extractant is di(2,4,4-trimethylpentenyl) phosphinic acid, with the structural formula, This is a phosphinic acid derivative and is commercially sold with the name Cyanex 272. Phosphonic acid derivatives are available under the name PC-88A. An example is 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester,   Extraction of metals by D2EHPA from a sulfate system, as a function of pH is shown in The order of extractions of metals for the three phosphoric acid derivatives, at a given pH, is as follows: ( The relative shift in the position of Co and Ni in these three extraction orders is reflected in the separation factor (β Co/Ni) as shown in   Although the main mechanism in the action of acid extractants is that of cation exchange, coordination bond formation through the phosphoryl oxygen is also known to occur in some cases. Other factor to be considered are the solubility of the reagents in aqueous phases and steric effects. In most cases, long alkyl chain length decreases solubility, but it may also result in lower metal loading due to steric effects. For mildly acidic solutions, a large number of acidic extractants in the categories of carboxylic and organophosphorus acid have been evaluated. The acidic reagents (HA) extract metal cations (M This equation indicates that the thermodynamic efficiency of such exchange reaction of any specific cation would depend upon the pH of the aqueous solution, which in turn is related to the acidity of the organic reagent, stability of the metal complex and extraction constant. Thus the higher the values for acidity of the extractant (pK), stability of metal complex and extraction the lower will be the value of pH This extraction order suggests that if cobalt is associated with unwanted elements such as Fe, Cu, Cd, and Zn, these elements will get extracted prior to cobalt and their separation can be achieved by suitable control of pH. However, separation of impurity like nickel will be a more difficult proposition based on pH control alone. Carboxylic acids, in general, are therefore not widely used in the separation of cobalt on account of higher pH (5–6) requirement for cobalt extraction, poor separation factor with respect to nickel, poor extraction kinetics and loss of solvent due to its higher solubility in the aqueous phase. The difference in pH The pH Phosphoric acid esters, for example, tributyl phosphate, (CH There are very few examples of the application of basic extractants in metal separations. These are based on secondary alkyl amine, R The action of chelating reagents is based on coordination bond formation with the metal ion, similar to that discussed for chelating ion exchange resins. Chelating agents contain donor groups, which form bidentate complexes (two ligands bound to one metal atom). Based on the chemistry, selective chelating extractants have been synthesized As an example, extraction of copper has been done by 8-hydroxy quinoline for many years as the nitrogen atom in the cyclic structure donates a pair of electrons to form coordinate bond with cupric ion. Another widely used chelating extractant is 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone oxime, known as LIX extractant.: It is an oxime derived from a ketone, by reaction with hydroxylamine, NH Another group of chelating extractant is derived from 8-hydroxy quinoline and is known as Kelex 100. Its formula is as follows: The formulae are shown above The order of extraction of metals by Kelex 100 is given by Ritcey and Lucas (1974): Cu(II) > Fe(III) > Ni(II) > Zn(II) > Co(II) > Fe(II) > Mn(II) > Mg(II) > Ca(II), in the pH range 0–6. The data are represented in  Many other formulations of solvent extractants of different classes are listed in the book of Ritcey and Ashbrook (1984). The stripping process is the reverse of extraction and carried out using strong sulfuric acids solutions. The first stage of extraction is the protonation of acid solutions. This results in the recovery of metals as a concentrated sulfate solution. The extractant is often dissolved in an organic solvent called diluent, usually a hydrocarbon. The nature of the diluent has a great influence on the extraction process as it can change such factors as the ratio of extraction, scrubbing and stripping, the metal ratios and the rate at which the aqueous and diluent phases separate after extraction. The choice of the diluent depends upon the metals which are to be extracted. A diluent which strongly solvates the extractant probably tends to remove this reagent from the interface. Accelerators are catalysts added to accelerate the rate of attainment of equilibrium. The mechanism of their action is not fully understood. Many of the accelerators have groups, which rapidly react with the metal ion. The complex formed between the metal and the accelerator may be readily transferred from the interface to the organic phase. Further details may be found in the review by Many metals are recovered from effluents by electrochemical process, based on the principle of cathodic reduction of metal ions at the cathode of an electrolytic cell. The process can produce a coherent solid or be obtained in the form of a powder using high current density. The equilibrium or reversible potential of a metal ion/metal system is expressed by the Nemst equation: E = E° + RT/zF ln  For systems, which establish their reversible potentials rapidly the activation overpotential is usually small. Such systems include metals in the first and second group of the Periodic Table like copper, silver, cadmium and zinc. Most transition metal systems are considered irreversible. In such cases, greater activation overpotentials are observed. A consideration of redox potential values for various metals can help to determine the feasibility of selective deposition of metals from a complex effluent. In practice, it is Another factor to be considered in electrodeposition is hydrogen evolution. On a platinized platinum surface hydrogen overpotential is negligible; that is the basis of the standard hydrogen potential 0 In eletrowinning process cathodic reduction is used to recover the desired metals from electrolyte solutions. In most effluent systems the electrolytic solution is an aqueous effluent. In these cases, the anodic reaction is usually oxygen evolution: If the metal salt dissolved is sulfate, as is usually the case with most mineral and metallurgical effluents, the sulfate ions get discharged at the anode, the sulphate radical rapidly reacts with water and oxygen is evolved at the anode: Chlorine may also be evolved if the effluent metal salt is a chloride: The anode in aqueous electrowinning should be a completely insoluble metal. Lead alloys containing 5–10 % antimony have been widely used. They get corroded to a small extent by anodic oxidation, which causes some contamination. This is not usually a problem with dilute effluents, but it could be serious in higher acid concentrations. It can be minimized by the addition of anodic depolarizers to the electrolyte, which decreases the anodic overpotential of the oxygen evolution reaction, Co(II) ions have been used for this purpose (  The cathodes used in aqueous electrowinning are often made of thin sheets of the same metal that is being deposited. Where this is not feasible as for example in zinc electrowinning, pure aluminum cathodes are used. The zinc deposited is stripped either manually or by automatic stripping machines. The technique, referred to as In each electrolytic cell, cathodes are arranged alternately with anodes. The cathodes and anodes are electrically connected together, but separately in parallel. The cells are connected in series, the cathodes of one cell being linked to the anodes of the adjacent cell; see Energy consumption is determined by various factors associated with the electrolytic process. First one is The  where F is the Faraday constant, A the relative atomic mass. By putting the numerical value of F, this equation can be simplified to The energy consumption per unit mass of the metal recovered is an important factor in assessing and comparing economics of electrolytic processes. An electrowinning cell of novel design has been described by  Thus far, this new design cell has been applied for the electrowinning of zinc from acid and alkaline solutions. High grade product is obtained in a single step. Many other advantages have been claimed, including production of high surface area powder, ability of the cell to be operated in a wide variety of acid or alkaline electrolytes, lower decomposition potential for zinc in zincate than sulfate solutions, ability to handle chlorides, which is difficult for conventional zinc plants due to cathode corrosion and chlorine gas evolution and high current density (500–600 Electrochemical principles are applied to oxidize or reduce ionic components of an electrolyte where the ions exhibit variable oxidation states and oxidation or reduction could be a step to recover desired metal or an anionic species. For instance, extraction of iron from reclaimed battery acid is done by electrolytic reduction of iron from the +3 oxidation state (ferric iron) to +2 oxidation state (ferrous iron). This facilitates ion exchange recovery as ferrous lasts are more soluble and ferrous iron does not get precipitated as hydroxide at pH below 8. A circular design cell for this purpose has been described ( The cell consists of two compartments, a cylindrical outer anode compartment containing a lead anode and an inner cathode compartment, also containing a lead electrode. The two compartments are separated by a semipermeable anion selective membrane, which prevents the transfer of iron to the anode, which would cause reoxidation. Granulated graphite is introduced into the cathode compartment for improved current distribution and increased contact area, which improves current efficiency. The same investigators have developed a cell for industrial operation. This is a three-compartment cell consisting of a central flow through cathode compartment and two stationary anode compartments, separated by anion selective membrane. The electrodes are solid lead plates. Larger cells can be constructed consisting of a series of alternate anode and cathode compartments separated by anion selective membranes. The principle of this technique may also be considered for the electrolytic reduction of metals where they occur in their higher oxidation states. For example, permanganate (Mn  With the cell potential, E° = 0.337 − (−0.440) = 0,777  Introducing the numerical values of the standard potentials ( For a cementation process to be practical the cell potential should be at least 0.3 The electrode potentials are very different in complex ionic systems (as compared to the simple systems listed in The two electrode systems are and  The possibility of impurity contamination in cementation reaction should be considered. When the cell potential is high, there could be contamination by the metals which are less electropositive than copper, but more electropositive than iron. For example, if the solution also contains nickel ions, the copper deposit may be contaminated with nickel as some of this metal would also be displaced by iron. Such possible contamination can be minimized by controlling the quantity of iron metal mixed to the stoichiometric level. A kinetic study of cementation reactions of several metal ions by aluminum has been described by By leaching a soluble component from a solid is extracted using a solvent, called leachant. In waste processing and recycling it is the process by which a metal compound (e.g., hydroxide, oxide, carbonate, etc.) occurring in a waste rock or sludge is chemically dissolved producing a concentrated solution of the metal compound, from which the metal may be recovered by one of the techniques described in Some of the principal factors to be considered in leaching operation are the following: Chemical and physical character of the material to be leached. Corroding action of the reagent on the materials of construction of leach vessels. Selectivity for the desired constituent to be leached. Feasibility of regenerating the leaching agent. This is very important both from economic as well as environmental points of view. Selectivity of a leaching agent toward a specific component in a waste material depends upon several factors including concentration of the leaching agent, temperature and contact time. The importance of each will be considered. Concentration of the leaching agent: In some cases a certain minimum concentration of the leaching agent is adequate and no benefit is derived by increasing the concentration. For example, most carbonates can be dissolved by acid at moderate concentration. However, in many other cases the dissolution rate can be enhanced by increasing the concentration of the leaching agent; for example, most of the heavy metal oxides and hydroxides require higher concentration of acids.  Contact time also has to be regulated and optimized for selectively leaching a desired component. Extended contact period between the solvent and the solid may results in an increased percentage of undesired components in solution. For example, in the leaching of a metal oxide from a waste rock, the oxide is preferentially leached, but extended contact time would cause leaching of silicates, which will introduce aluminum and alkaline earth metals in the leach solution. Leaching agents are chosen based on the chemical reactivity of the components occurring in the waste rock or sludge. The following are the most commonly used leaching agents for treating waste rocks and sludges. Water alone is adequate to leach the water soluble components like sulfites or other sulfoxyl salts (sulfate, thiosulfate). Sulfoxyl salts are produced by the atmospheric oxidation of sulfides present in the waste material. Water also dissolves some sulfides in the presence of air or oxygen under pressure and at about 150 Sulfuric acid is the most commonly used leaching agent. It is the least expensive of all mineral acids and has only minor corrosion problems when it is used, and is effective to leach most oxides, hydroxides, carbonates and sulfides. It is used dilute, moderately concentrated or concentrated depending upon the teachability characteristic of the component to be leached. Selective leaching by sulfuric acid is possible in the treatment of sludges containing different metal hydroxides. This is done by pH control. In this context leaching is opposite of precipitation of metal hydroxides. The metal hydroxide with highest solubility is leached at highest pH, that is it requires lowest concentration of sulfuric acid, whereas the hydroxide with least solubility requires low pH and higher concentration of the acid. The hydroxide precipitation diagram ( Titanium minerals dissolve at high acidity, and if dissolved they also hydrolyze when the acidity decreases. Other refractory material such as zirconium, niobium, and tantalum oxides and siliceous minerals are not dissolved. If carbonates are present in the material they should first be removed with a dilute acid as they cause frothing problem with concentrated acid.  Nickel ammine ion is represented by the following structure: The arrows represent co-ordinate bond formed by a lone pair of electron of nitrogen donated to the nickel atom. This does not affect the two positive charge of the nickel ion. Cobalt ammine has a similar structure except that there are 6 ammonia groups co-ordinated with a Co atom. In place of ammonia organic amines have been used as the organic ammines have greater stability. Ammines are soluble compounds with the metal dissociated as cation. Metal can be recovered by electrodeposition explained in A great advantage of solubilizing as ammines is that nontransition metal hydroxides (like magnesium and calcium hydroxides and ferric hydroxide) are not solubilized since those metals do not form ammines. This makes it possible to selectively leach cobalt and nickel hydroxides. Some examples will be described in the Chapter Metal Recycling Some base metal salts are used as leaching agents to dissolve sulfides. For example, ferric sulfate reacts with a metal sulfide producing soluble metal sulfate: The leaching is based on the oxidation of sulfide sulfur to sulfate by ferric ions. Ferric salt is reduced to the ferrous state. It can be regenerated by oxidizing by air and recycled. The example described in When electron transfer is involved, the reactions are electrochemical in nature. An oxidative leaching process may be regarded as an electrochemical cell in which the Another example is leaching by cupric chloride. From Cuprous chloride is sparingly soluble under these conditions, but its solubility increases with chloride concentration as complex ions It should, however, be noted that the values in  As the reaction progresses the potential will decrease leading to the reaction slowing down and eventually coming to equilibrium. One way of maintaining the required potential is reoxidize the reduced species as it forms. This may be done by anodic reoxidation, that is by applying an anodic potential or by an oxidant such as oxygen. Bubbling in air may be adequate in some cases. Microwave pretreatment has been used to make it easier to leach some of the tailings, which contain minerals that are not readily leachable. By this treatment some of the minerals are chemically transformed. For example, in gold tailings, goethite is converted to hematite by microwave treatment ( Microwave assisted leaching has been applied for the processing of metallurgical slag. Details will be described in There are several methods practiced in hydrometallurgical leaching. The choice of the method mainly depends upon the value of the metal content in the material and cost factors. The principal cost for leaching metallurgical waste is preparing the feed to a satisfactory degree of particle size to facilitate ease of leaching. When the material is already ground, as in the case of sludges, this is not an issue as the material is already in the finely ground state. In the case of waste rocks, grinding is often required. An often used method of leaching for finely ground material involves agitation. In addition to sludges and finely ground rocks, it is also applied to granulated alloy scrap, alloy turnings and borings. The large surface area of the feed material ensures high rate of leaching. The agitation minimizes the thickness of diffusion layer and maximizes the gas-liquid interfacial area in the case of gaseous reactants. Leaching can be carried out at elevated temperature up to 100° C for rapid rate. High pressure leaching is sometimes chosen where the cost is justified by the economic value of the product. Several forms of autoclaves are available for high temperature, high pressure leaching. A horizontal pressure vessel ( Six principal factors governing the rate of a leaching process have been listed by Habashi (1970). Rate of leaching increases with decreasing particle size of the material since the smaller the particles, the larger is the surface area per unit weight. In the leaching of sludges the particles are already ground to a fine size, therefore, this factor is not of concern. It applies to waste rocks as they have to be ground to a satisfactory degree of liberation. If a leaching process is diffusion controlled it will be influenced by the speed of agitation. If, however, it is chemically controlled, it will not be influenced by agitation, provided that enough agitation is done to prevent the solids from settling. Increasing temperature increases leaching rate. However, temperature effect is much less significant for a diffusion- controlled process than for a chemically controlled process. Rate of leaching increases with increasing concentration of the leaching agent. The concentration should, however, be controlled to an optimum level to maximize selectivity; see Section Rate of leaching increases with decreasing pulp density, that is, when a large volume of leaching agent is added to a small volume of solids. If an insoluble product is formed during leaching, the rate depends on the nature of this product. If it forms a non-porous layer, the rate greatly decreases. If, however, the solid product is porous, the rate is not affected.