Low alloy abrasion resistant steel is an indispensable material used in the machinery manufacturing industry. In order to further improve its wear performance without increasing its hardness, a series of low alloy wear resistant steel reinforced with TiC particles was developed. The microstructures were characterized by SEM and TEM. The three-body abrasive wear behaviour of experimental steels has been studied using dry sand rubber wheel testing machine under different applied loads, abrasive particles, and rubber wheel rotation speeds. The results showed that the microstructure of the TiC-reinforced low alloy abrasion-resistant steel consisted of a martensite matrix and nano- and micro-sized TiC particles. Although the TiC particles consumed the C element in the matrix, thus reducing the hardness and strength of the experimental steels, the wear resistance did not decrease. The wear resistance of TiC-particle-reinforced steels was proportional to the density of the TiC particles. Furthermore, the worn surface morphology indicated that the abrasive wear mechanism of TiC-reinforced experimental steels was mainly plastic deformation, fracture, and fatigue, which is different from the micro-cutting observed in traditional low alloy abrasion-resistant steel. The different wear mechanism will aid in improving the wear performance of the steels.Wear is the most common failures in industry. The development of new abrasion-resistant materials to effectively reduce wear has received much more attention with the development of industry. Low alloy abrasion-resistant steel is widely used in the mining, engineering, and metallurgical fields for its advantages of low cost, good overall performance, and production flexibility [ In the past few decades, many researchers have been committed to improving the wear resistance of materials with carbides, oxides, or nitrides without increasing the hardness. Previous studies [ Wear performance is not an inherent characteristic of materials. The wear behaviour of materials can be affected by wear conditions. For example, Thakare et al. [ In this work, a low alloy abrasion-resistant steel reinforced with TiC particles was processed by controlled rolling and controlled cooling (TMCP) and a two-step heat treatment. The microstructure, mechanical properties, and three-body abrasive wear behaviour under different wear conditions of the experimental steels were investigated. The wear mechanism of the low alloy abrasion-resistant steel with different contents of TiC particles under different wear conditions was also discussed. The chemical compositions of the experimental steels are listed in The metallographic samples were polished according to the standard metallographic procedure. The morphology of the particles was observed using non-erosion samples, and the microstructure was studied after etching with 4% nital (4 ml HNO The Brinell hardness of all samples was measured using a KB3000BVRZ-SA hardness tester under a load of 3000 kg, and the average value of 10 measurements was reported. The tensile specimens were prepared as per the GB/T 228.1-2010 Chinese standard with a gauge section of 5 mm in diameter, a gauge length of 25 mm, and a parallel length of 40 mm. The tensile tests were repeated three times on an AG-X 100 kN tensile testing machine for different Ti content steels at room temperature with a crosshead speed of 1 mm min The abrasive wear behaviour of materials is closely related to the wear conditions, which can be affected by applied loads, abrasive grits, and wear speeds. Hence, the abrasive wear resistance of the experimental steels under different applied loads, sizes of silica sand, and rubber wheel rotation speeds was investigated. Three-body abrasive wear tests were carried out using a commercially made, dry sand rubber wheel wear testing machine ( The morphologies of the particles in the experimental steels with different Ti contents, before and after hot rolling, are shown in The microstructures of all steels after hot rolling followed by the two-step heat treatment are shown in The microstructures of the experimental steels with higher Ti contents were relatively fine, which may be related to the nano-sized precipitation in matrix. Thus, we observed the nano-sized TiC precipitation in all steels by TEM, as shown in    The 3D-topography and SEM morphology of the worn surface of experimental steels under an applied load 45 N, 100 r/min rubber wheel speed, and different abrasive particles (212–425 μm and 125–212 μm) are shown in  From The observation of longitudinal sections of the worn sample surfaces is an effective method to analyse the wear mechanism and the effect of particles on wear.  The microstructure of the TiC-reinforced low alloy abrasion-resistant steel consists of martensite matrix, and nano and micrometre-size TiC particles. With the content of Ti increasing, the content of TiC particles increases, but the macro-hardness and strength of the steels decrease. The nano-sized precipitation effectively refines the microstructure of the experimental steels. The wear mechanism of the traditional low alloy abrasion-resistant steel (0.015Ti steel) was mainly micro-cutting, which did not transform with the changing of wear conditions. However, with the content of TiC particles increasing, the wear mechanism of TiC-reinforced experimental steels transformed from micro-cutting to plastic deformation, fracture, and fatigue. As a result, the TiC particles-reinforced low alloy abrasion-resistant steel exhibits better wear performance. The TiC particles uniformly distributed in the martensitic matrix effectively resisted micro-cutting, as evidenced by the fractured sand tips. Furthermore, the fractured sand tips acted like TiC particles to protect the matrix from wear, which led to less mass loss. The authors acknowledge the support from The