The challenge of estimating mine-wide subsidence and linkages to seismicity over tabular deposits is addressed by a special finite element technique (dual node–dual mesh). Subsidence and mine-induced seismicity begins near the face when caving occurs and propagates to the surface as extraction reaches a critical extent. Thus, the challenge is to obtain details at the face at the meter scale and also at the surface over the whole mine at the kilometer scale. Interactions between old and new sections of a mine are automatically taken into account with this technique. The finite element method is well established technology based on fundamentals of physical laws, kinematics and material laws. With this technique, no empirical “scaling” or fitting computer output by input data “adjustment” to mine measurements is necessary. Capability is demonstrated for doing practical whole-mine subsidence analysis from first principles. Mine-induced seismicity is shown to correlate well with face advance and element failure.Seismicity associated with coal mining has been under study for several years by a team at the University of Utah. Team members include mining faculty, research geophysicists and students from the Departments of Mining Engineering and Geology & Geophysics. Mines in central Utah that have been studied include the Trail Mountain Mine the Beehive Mine, also known as the Des-Bee-Dove, and the Crandall Canyon Mine Seismicity associated with coal mining in central Utah has been of interest for many years and includes studies in the Book Cliffs to the east of Price, Utah, where mining is still active and to the northwest This study concerns a fourth underground coal mine in the southern portion of the Wasatch Plateau coalfield, hereafter referred to as the MINE. Focus is on mining from 2004 to 2008 with the objective of examining mining in relation to seismicity. The problem is to relate strata mechanics to seismicity associated with mining. Seismic events observed as mining proceeds are associated with mining but may not be caused by mining. However, events in close proximity to an active longwall face may be reasonably assumed to be mining induced. Close proximity means within a zone of influence of the face, a distance equal to the face length for a single, isolated panel or to the cumulative face lengths in case of adjacent panels. Four panels, each with a face length of 300 Whole mine analysis of strata-bound tabular deposits (e.g., coal, salt, trona) is a challenge of scale, regardless of the numerical method. When stratigraphy is taken into account, the popular finite element method is the most practical. The reason is to account for all the different rock types present. However, the extent of a finite element model is limited by an element aspect ratio required for numerical reliability. In a coal seam with a mining height of 3 A dual node–dual mesh technique meets the challenge of scale where a large mesh at the kilometer scale allows for interactions amongst sections of a mine and a dual mesh allows for details at the meter scale of a working face. The program is a special version of UTAH3 that has been in use for many years. Dual nodes and dual meshes have been used in past studies, but were linked for the first time in our mine-induced seismicity studies As with all finite element models, preprocessing input data (mainly mesh generation) and post-processing output data (mainly presentation of results) are major components of model effort. Mesh generation must be consistent with topography, stratigraphy, jointing and strata properties. An equilibrium and consistent premining stress field is essential. Results include surface subsidence, extent of yielding indicated in element safety factor distributions, and correlations with observed seismicity. Computational effort is nearly automatic once input data are prepared. Mesh generation begins with a download of the surface topography from the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission. The file used in our work has a point spacing of 10  As shown in Mesh construction begins with the topographic map and is extended above and below the surface terrain according to the geologic column for the MINE. Mesh generation includes representation of mining geometry and stratigraphy. In this regard, the seven longwall panels mined between 2004 and 2008 are outlined in Panel face width is approximately 280 As shown in Stratigraphy refers to the major geologic formations present. Formations include a variety of rock types, but nevertheless show differences in properties. Jointing makes strata more compliant and weaker than intact rock, of course; properties of most importance are elastic moduli and strengths. The MINE was considered dry, so hydraulic conductivities were not needed. Geology of coal fields in Utah is described by Doelling Three joints sets were taken into consideration Because the mesh is too large (over 16  Nonlinear yield conditions limit the range of purely elastic deformation in each stratum. Yield criteria used in the study have anisotropic forms and are All strength constants are computed from uniaxial strength data. Rules of flow are associated; the yield criterion and plastic potential are the same. This type of criterion takes into account the intermediate principal stress and reduces to the well-known Drucker-Prager criterion in case of isotropy and an exponent A local (element) safety factor ( All strata property sets are considered variable in nature. Variability makes properties uncertain in a test specimen before testing and in the MINE at any particular location. For this reason, statistical distribution of properties in In Statistical distribution of laboratory test specimens may be mapped back to the source location of samples, usually drill core, in the field as with these data. This mapping then allows one to observe spatial variability in situ. Incorporating spatial variability into the finite element model is then a step toward greater realism in analyses of strata mechanics. Gravity forces were first applied to the large mesh that contained over 16 million three-dimensional cuboid elements. Excavation to current topography followed. Results of the topographic cut are illustrated in Computer output is voluminous, especially in the case of 10–15 Yearly subsidence progress is certainly of interest, although not shown. However, yearly face advance and seismicity are presented. An important reason for this selectivity, in addition to computer output, is the mine study data show only yearly progress. A sequence of longwall panel mining was then done, beginning with the premining stress field provided by the topographic cut. Displacements from the large mesh were applied at the boundary of the smaller but more refined dual mesh to take into account the effects of the rock mass outside the dual mesh.   There are several possible reasons for the underestimation, although based on first principles. One reason is simply numerical–that is, mesh point spacing that is too great to allow for accurate estimation. For example, if a surface subsidence trough varies by several meters over a distance, say, of 10 The actual surface subsidence profile is “bumpy” in that subsidence is about 0.3 Another reason for the discrepancy is physical. If the mechanics of subsidence are associated with vertical joints and graben formation accompanied with vertical shearing and plug-like or chimney subsidence as suggested by Maleki, then a complex material model with explicit accounting of joint effects is needed rather than a simple elastic model limited by strengths An alternative to a complex caving model is to require complete seam level closure. This specification is done by specifying a 100 percent relative displacement between roof and floor. Complete closure seems likely over panels 280  The extent of yielding ground in the big mesh is shown in Observed seismicity during the 2004–2008 period is shown in Not too surprisingly, the number of events correlates well with face advance, a proxy for production, as shown in For general interest, One would also expect the number of failed elements in the finite element model to correlate with cumulative face advance. That is indeed the case, as shown in the Application of a new dual-node–dual mesh finite element technique to strata mechanics was made to several underground coal mines in central Utah. Mines include longwall, room and pillar and barrier pillar mining methods. Topography, stratigraphy, jointing and variability in elastic moduli and strengths were taken into account in a new study of the MINE in Utah. Comparisons of MINE observations of surface subsidence with computed subsidence are in reasonable agreement. Key findings based on first principles rather than “scaling” demonstrate a capability for doing whole-mine analyses, thus allowing for interactions between all sections of a mine while taking into account topography, stratigraphy, strata properties variability and mining sequences. High correlations ( Financial support for “Analysis of Mine Seismicity and Geotechnical Modeling for Improved Safety in Underground Coal Mines” by