Incorporating certain functional groups or atoms into surfactant molecules can have a dramatic impact on the surface activity of the chemicals. This paper summarizes how the introduction of sulfur atom into polyalkylene oxide frother molecules increased metal recovery, both copper and molybdenum, in the flotation of porphyrry ores. Both hydrophile–lipophile balance (HLB) numbers and collector/frother/mineral interactions are considered to play a role in enhancing recovery.Although a new reagent might result in an increase in mineral recovery of only about 1% over traditional reagents, this small improvement is of great ecomonic importance for industrial operations that process 50,000 to 100,000 tonnes of ore daily. At such high throughput rates, relatively small improvements in mineral recovery can result in the production of significant additional tonnes of minerals daily. As is well known, the surface activity of any surfactant is determined by its chemical structure, and incorporating certain functional groups or atoms into the molecular structure of the surfactant will strongly influence its properties. The present paper shows how the modification of frother molecules can enhance the recovery of copper and molybdenum in the flotation of sulfide ores. As summarized by While a large number of compounds have foaming or froth-producing properties, the frothers most commonly used in commercial froth flotation are compounds containing a nonpolar water-repellent group and a single polar, water-avid group such as hydroxyl (OH). Typical of this class of frothing compounds are mixed amyl alcohol, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC, [(CH The objective of this paper is to summarize laboratory results obtained by adding a sulfur atom to polyalkoxylated molecule of various configurations. These reagents, which were synthesized in the Dow Chemical laboratories, are sulfur analogs of Dowfroth 250® (methyl-terminated polypropylene glycols) and Aerofroth 65® (hydrogen-terminated polypropylene glycol). The flotation results were obtained at the Dow Chemical, Pittsburgh, CA ( Two different ores were used in this investigation. One was an Arizona porphyrry copper ore that assayed 0.88% total copper (including 0.12% oxide copper) and 0.015% molybdenum. The second was a Peruvian copper ore that assayed 0.81% copper and 0.02% molybdenum. For each experiment, a 500-g ore sample was crushed to −10 mesh (1.65 mm) and then further ground in a rod mill with 300 ml of distilled water until substantially all the material passed through 65 mesh (208 μm). The slurry from the rod mill was transferred into a Denver laboratory flotation cell, where an initial amount of collector (Dow Z-200®, a dialkylthionocarbamate, CH The flotation cell was operated at 1800 rpm, with air being metered into the cell at a rate of about 2.8 l/min, and froth removed with an automatic paddle. After turning on the air, a first concentrate was produced with 2 min of flotation time. Additional Z-200® collector was then added to the slurry along with additional frother and the slurry was conditioned for 1 min without air, and floated again with air for 2 more min. This conditioning/flotation procedure was repeated twice using sodium isopropyl xanthate on the prior underflow, yielding a second combined (scavenger) concentrate. The concentrates and tailings were analyzed for copper and molybdenum. Results from replicate experiments were averaged. In the first series of tests conducted with the Arizona copper ore, a dialkyl thionocarbamate (Dow Z-200®) (0.006 kg/tonne) was used as the primary collector and sodium isopropyl xanthate (0.0025 kg/tonne) was used as the secondary collector. For each of the tests with different sulfur-modified frothers, reagent consumption and copper and molybdenum recoveries are summarized in The effectiveness of the various sulfur-containing frothers can be demonstrated by comparing the improvement of their results over those obtained with the commercial standard, MIBC, even at substantially lower dosage rates. In the molecular formulas of the reagents shown in A series of experiments was carried out to look for a direct comparison of oxygen-vs.-sulfur analogs as frothing agents. In all of these tests, 0.015 kg/tonne isopropyl ethyl thionocarbamate (Z-200®) was used as the collector at pH 10.75 for the flotation of the Peruvian ore. The results are summarized in Several experiments were then run with the Peruvian ore to compare the sulfur and oxygen analogs of mixed ethylene oxide/polypropylene oxide frothers. The frother molecules contained one ethylene oxide unit in addition to four (average) propylene oxide units. The results given in In another set of runs, the dosage of the sulfur-modified Dowfroth 250®-type of frother was investigated. In this series of tests with the Peruvian ore, the primary collector was 0.006 kg/tonne Z-200® with 0.00,075 kg/tonne sodium isopropyl xanthate as secondary collector. The results given in Next a sulfur-containing series of propylene oxide frothers was prepared and compared with MIBC, using the Arizona copper ore for the flotation tests. These frothers are analogs of hydrogen-terminated polypropylene glycol frothers (Aerofroth 65®). The results in Still next, the oxygen and sulfur analogs of mixed alkylene oxide reagents were prepared and the flotation results with the Peruvian ore are compared with one another at different dosage levels. Flotation was carried out at pH 10.4 with 0.016 kg/tonne of Z-200® as collector. The results reported in With two different copper ores, the chemical structure of the frother has a definite effect on copper and molybdenum recovery. The trend is consistent, but is somewhat dependent upon the ore. Dowfroth 250® and Aerofroth 65® are superior to MIBC, but the inclusion of one or two sulfur atoms in these reagents further enhances the recovery of copper and molybdenum during flotation. In recent review articles It is known that within a certain range, the lower the HLB number of a surfactant, the higher will its surface activity be. In It should be pointed out that although Dowfroth 250® has a higher HLB number than MIBC, it has a higher surface activity. There might be two reasons responsible for this seemingly abnormal phenomenon. First, Dowfroth 250® has a much higher molecular weight [264] compared to MIBC [102] and this higher molecular weight may lead to a more viscous, and hence more stable, froth layer. Second, there is only one –OH group in MIBC and this group will interact with water molecules to form an oriented monolayer at the surface; but in Dowfroth 250®, there are several oxygenated units in the molecular chain and each unit can interact with water molecules through hydrogen bonding, causing the molecules to tend to lie flat at the surface, possibly increasing the viscosity of the froth. The dependence of the surface tension of aqueous solutions on frother concentration using results from The sulfur analog of Dowfroth 250® was successfully mill trialed at a large Arizona mill in comparison to their cresylic acid frother. Successful mill trials were also performed at Climax. However, frother production was terminated with Dow's exit from their mining chemical business in 1979. The introduction of the sulfur atom into the molecular structure of the frothers was not a routine act. It should be pointed out that the introduction of one or two sulfur atoms into the Dowfroth or Aerofroth molecule might help the frother to interact somewhat at the mineral/water interface and thereby enhance the recovery of the mineral. The sulfide linkage was selected for not bonding as strongly as, for example, the thiol bond, which would make the reagent less likely to act as a depressant. Two guidelines should be followed for designing and synthesizing of flotation frother. First, a hydrophobic grouping might be incorporated into the molecular structure of the frother to lower the HLB number and to improve its surface activity. Second, the nature of the bubble might be improved through a proper arrangement of alternative oxygen atoms with alkyl groups on the molecular chain. The authors wish to thank Professor Douglas W. Fuerstenau for his input in writing this paper.