Numerous methods for generating electric charge on material surfaces through friction and contact have been applied in many industries. Triboelectric charging is one of these methods that achieve this phenomenon by frictional charging. The resulting electric field can be manipulated to control the directional path of falling particles. In a triboelectrostatic separator, particles are charged by the triboelectric effect before electrostatic separation.
                  The purpose of this work is to develop a new system to provide the required electric potential to the electrodes of a separator by triboelectric charging, and to use the resulting charge for mineral separation. Experimental studies mainly covered the investigation of the effect of varying belt/roller combinations, belt speeds, brush lengths, and electrode surface areas on triboelectric charge generation. Belts were selected from wool, polyester, polyethylene/acrylic, PVC, nylon woven, nylon, and fiber/nylon materials. Additionally; teflon, polyamide, aluminum, polyoxymethylene and polyethylene rollers had been used. Following the investigation of operational parameters, mineral separation tests were performed with artificially prepared samples by using the designed setup.
                  The results showed that static electric charge can be increased to a maximum of ±35kV on an electrode by tribocharging. Investigation of the operational parameters proved that increasing the belt speed causes an increase in surface charge, and the measured surface charge increases with an increase in the width of harvesting brushes. Furthermore, the separation test results revealed that non-conductive and conductive particles can be separated in an electrostatic separator using the high voltage directly produced by tribocharging.Electrostatic separation, which covers electrostatic, electrodynamic, and triboelectric separation, utilizes electrical conductivity differences between the mineral particles for separation. This method is defined as the sorting of charged or polarized particles by using the combination of attractive/repulsive forces of electricity, gravity, and centrifugal forces in an electric field Triboelectric charging of solids has been a well-known process for a very long time. The triboelectric effect (also known as triboelectric charging) is a type of contact electrification in which certain materials become electrically charged after they come into contact with a different material Electrical charging of materials by the tribocharging effect is mainly dependent on the molecular structure of these two different materials. The molecules of different materials have varying amounts of positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons, while a molecule with an equal number of electrons and protons yields a neutral state, implying that it is neither positively nor negatively charged. When two dissimilar materials come close enough, an electrical bond forms between their molecules. When the bond is formed, electrons move from one molecule to another according to their structures. This action deteriorates the electrical balance in both types of molecules. After the two materials separate, electrons do not return to their original positions. The material that accepts electrons becomes negatively charged while the material that gives the electrons becomes positively charged. The theory of triboelectric charging has been presented in detail previously In this study, a new system for triboelectrostatic separation to provide the required electric potential to the electrodes of a separator by triboelectric charging was introduced. Experimental studies covered the tests for determining the operational limits of the equipment along with the actual separation tests of artificially prepared samples. There are two main types of electrostatic separators which are used in the mineral processing industry, and the working principles of both are immensely similar. These are electrodynamic separators (also known as high-tension rollers) and electrostatic separators According to the Coulomb's law, an electric force between two charged objects is directly proportional to the amount of charge on the objects. In addition, it is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between the two objects. In its simplest form, Coulomb's law is given as the quantity of charge on object 1 (particle) [C], the quantity of charge on object 2 (electrode) [C], the distance between the two objects [m], Coulomb's law constant. It is approximately 9.0 Since In the triboelectrostatic separator purposed within this study, a belt running between two rollers produces continuous electrical charge on the contact surfaces by tribocharging. The conductive brushes harvest this charge and send it to a plane shaped metallic electrode. The specified materials were used to produce a static charge on the special electrodes similar to the Van de Graff The main differences between conventional electrostatic separators and the proposed system is the method of HV production, which is required in order to produce an electric field. While the conventional systems use transformers, this system produces the required static electric charge by friction which is produced by a relatively small electric motor. HV power suppliers used in the industrial operations are known for the space required for installation, low efficiency resulting with high heat losses and high installation costs. When they are used in high power applications such as electrostatic separation, HV power suppliers require additional components like large transformers to handle the power. Therefore, overall size and complicity of the HVs increase resulting with a challenge when they used in combination with electrostatic separators. Using additional components eventually increases the overall operating cost considerably. Although the triboelectric charging may be an alternative for HV generation, it is also important to note that considering the scale of the separator presented in this study, a compact, solid-state HV supply is sufficient for generation of the required charge. That being underlined, the method discussed within this work has the potential to be used for the production of electric potential without transformers, unlike conventional electrostatic separators in the mineral separation and recycling industry. The new design is composed of a tribo-electric production unit and a separation unit. The general layout of the tribo-electric production unit which was designed to produce, harvest, and collect the electrical charge is given in The second part of the experimental setup is the separator. This part is similar to the conventional drum-type electrostatic separator. It includes a conductive drum with an adjustable driving mechanism and a vibrating feeder. The electrode of the separator which is charged by the tribocharging unit is placed against the drum. The size and the material type of this electrode can be changed, and its position can also be adjusted during the separation process. The electricity production unit was connected to the separation unit with a conductive wire. This provides charge for the electrode with the harvested electricity. The amount and the polarity of the electric potential collected on the electrode were adjusted by adjusting the roller speed and the selection of roller and belt materials. The feed material was heavily mixed for a pre-determined time interval in a plastic box, and particles were charged with tribo-electric. Then, this material is fed on to the turning drum via a vibrating feeder, and the drum directs the particles into the electrical field present in front of the electrode. Particles with a similar charge as that of the electrode were repelled and the other particles were attracted. Therefore, the moving particles are collected in different trays and separated according to their charges. The experimental studies covered sustainable electricity production with various conditions and separation tests with the purposed triboelectrostatic separator. The effect of various materials and operational parameters on the electricity production was investigated. Following, separation tests were carried out with artificially prepared samples in order to investigate the separation performance of the separator using tribocharging. During the experimental studies, different design parameters of the purposed tribo-electric separator were investigated. These parameters were roller type, belt type-which were selected from different sides of the triboelectric series, belt speed, and the size of the metal electrode. Primarily, the change in electrical charge on the surface of the metal electrode was investigated under varying conditions. Charge measurements were performed with a static electricity meter. This device measures the magnitude and polarity of static charge on a surface. The measured charge density depends on the size of the metal and the distance between the metal object and the device. The strength of the electrical interaction is defined as a vector quantity and has both magnitude and direction. Technical properties of the static electricity meter used for static electric measurement through the experimental studies were given in Experimental studies covered static potential measurements at three different distances with varying belt types, and roll types. Dimensions of the plane shaped electrode were changed and static electric was measured under different belt speeds and brush widths from a moderate distance. All these design parameters were changed in order to measure how it would affect the static electric load on the electrode. Aluminum electrode dimensions were also changed in the following tests in order to measure the effect of the electrode area on static electric load ( Diaz and Navarro In mineral separation tests, artificially prepared magnetite-quartz mixtures were used. Pure quality feed samples and a narrow size fraction were preferred to eliminate the effects of feed characteristics on the separation performance. Quartz and magnetite samples were collected from actual industrial operations. The magnetite sample used in the experiments was completely magnetic and further purified by a hand magnet. Quartz sample was also collected from a high-quality glass-grade quartz sample pile. % Fe magnetite recovery [%], total amount of concentrate [grams], magnetite grade in concentrate [%], total amount of feed [grams], magnetite grade in feed [%]. Following the sample selection, magnetite and quartz fractions − The electrical charges through each separation stage were also measured continuously with a static-electric meter and found to be unchanged through rougher and cleaning stages. The parameters listed in It is important to measure potential limits of the purposed setup with different belt and roller configurations at varying distances. Although purposed setup was designed for lab scale, single separator's capacity was measured up to 10 The measured average potentials varying with the roller and belt configurations at 5, 10, and 15  At each measurement, the electrode was first grounded and discharged, and then the driving mechanism was turned on. The turning belt starts to produce electricity and the potential on the electrode surface reaches a certain level in a few seconds and stays constant. The potential on the electrodes A, B, and C having different dimensions were tested under varying belt speeds. Parameters listed at The potential changes on the electrode C were tested under varying belt speeds and brush widths. In the experimental setup, more than one brush can be used to harvest the electricity generated by the belt and rollers. Brush width was changed by adding more brushes to the system. Therefore, one, two, and three brushes were placed to the nearest point of contact of the belt and the roller, having a total length of 19 Overall mineral separation test results were presented in A step-by-step and repeated test procedure was applied in rougher, scavenging and cleaning stages. However, the static electric charge can be used in parallel electrodes for extra scavenging and cleaning stages. Consecutive separation stages can be designed and the required static electric potential can also be provided to parallel electrodes from the same tribocharging unit. In this study, a new method to produce high voltage (static electric charge) which is required for electrostatic separation of conductive and non-conductive particles by tribocharging was investigated. The tribocharging system was first established, and then the effects of different design and operational parameters on the produced static electric charge were studied. The results indicated that the friction of two different materials from opposite sides of the triboelectric series provides a sufficient static electric charge for an electrostatic separator. The static charge can be produced to a maximum of ± The polarity and the amount of the static electric charge can be controlled by changing the operational parameters such as the types of belts and rollers, speed of the belt, electrode sizes, and brush sizes. This provides the separation of different minerals in the mining industry and materials in the recycling industry. The results showed that the static electric charge can be increased up to ± The separation test results also revealed that non-conductive and conductive particles could be separated in an electrostatic separator using the high voltage produced by tribocharging. In most of the industrial plants, there are continuous belts or belt conveyors. Selecting the suitable materials for the conveyor and its rollers produces the required high voltage needed for a separator instead of large transformers. In addition, this charge can be used in the separation of conductive and non-conductive particles. On the other hand, high voltage produced in this system will be safer than the charge produced by a transformer because of the very fast damping current. The authors kindly acknowledge the financial support of TUBİTAK (The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey). There is not a potential conflict of interest, including any personal or other relationships with other people or organizations within the three years of beginning the submitted work, which could inappropriately influence or be perceived to influence their work. All credits on this study belong to its authors. Acknowledging the financial support from TUBİTAK is the only condition that was deemed necessary by this institute so that there were no conflicts of interest. TUBİTAK (The