A constrained model predictive control (MPC) strategy is proposed to deal with the problem of optimizing flotation column operation using secondary variables. Froth depth, collection zone gas hold-up and bias rate are selected as secondary variables to be controlled whereas tailing, wash-water and gas flow rate are used as manipulated variables. The control problem was formulated in order to minimize the tracking error of the gas hold-up and bias rate by maintaining gas flow rate, wash-water flow rate and bias rate within their operational limits. In particular, a strategy was conceived to optimize the column flotation process based on establishing an unreachable high set point for the gas hold-up (which is equivalent to maximizing the bubble surface area available for particle collection at a given flotation reagent dosage and thus recovery), while simultaneously satisfying operational constraints (such as ensuring a positive bias rate to prevent gangue entrainment and therefore concentrate grade deterioration). Several other operational constraints on wash-water, gas rate, gas hold-up and bias rate were considered, their use being justified from a processing point of view. Since this study deals with the hydrodynamic characteristics of flotation columns, a pilot flotation column working with a two-phase system is sufficient to demonstrate the advantages of using predictive control for this process optimization.The metallurgical performance of a flotation column is determined by the valuable-mineral concentrate grade and recovery, often called primary variables. Whereas the first of these two variables can be measured on-line using an X-ray on-stream analyzer (OSA), the latter must be estimated from steady-state material balance, which strongly limits its use for regulatory control purposes. Moreover, the long sampling times of these OSA devices, usually multiplexed, favour the use of a cascade control to reject the frequent disturbances occurring in this type of process. Although real-time optimization (RTO) offers a direct method of maximizing an economic objective function, steady-state assumptions limit the optimization frequency, often leading to suboptimal economic performance ( In this work, the following secondary variables have been selected: (a) the froth depth (  Recently developed techniques for measuring some gas dispersion variables in flotation processes ( Gas hold-up is usually modified in plant practice by manipulating the gas rate, because it is simple and low-cost procedure which provides an effect rapidly. Although frother type and concentration also affect gas hold-up, pulp chemistry (collectors, frothers, activators, etc.) is usually kept unaltered in mineral processing plants, unless ore characteristics or throughput change. Thus, no effort was made in this work to use it as a manipulated variable to modify gas hold-up. Gas flow rate is often limited in practice by various operating conditions, for instance, by the amount of bias rate required to ensure hydraulic entrainment reduction (and thus concentrate grade deterioration). Another similar situation might arise from the fact that excessive gas flow rate could lead to interface loss and/or the presence of large gas bubbles at the froth surface commonly referred to as ‘burping’ ( Other operational constraints must also be taken into account in flotation column operation. For instance, an excessive wash-water rate ( Predictive controllers are now more accepted in many industrial plants, and several successful applications have been reported ( Despite the important role played by process control in improving many process operations, relatively few applications to industrial flotation columns have been reported. Among those mentioned in technical literature, those based on expert rules seem to be the most popular (  Considering that decentralized control is often preferred in the mineral industry because of its ease of implementation, fault tolerance and re-tuning simplicity, Another decentralized control was reported by In the present paper, a constrained multivariable predictive controller was implemented in a pilot flotation column working with a two-phase system (water–gas mixture, no solids). Considering the fact that a change of 50 cm in froth depth only leads to a 5% change in the collection zone volume, for a 10 m collection zone height, the impact of froth depth on column optimization is not obvious and therefore its value was fixed at 80 cm in order to damp-down gangue entrainment. The problem was formulated so as to minimize the tracking error of gas hold-up and bias rate by maintaining the gas flow rate, wash-water flow rate and bias flow rate within their respective operational limits. To reflect the recovery-grade trade-off by using secondary variables, a high gas hold-up set point was imposed (high enough not to be reached, as suggested by ( The column set-up used for this work is located at COREM (Mineral Processing Research Consortium) pilot plant in Québec City, Canada. The column is made of 5.1 cm internal diameter polycarbonate tubing for a total height of 732 cm. A cylindrical porous stainless-steel sparger (38 cm To measure froth depth and gas hold-up, the pilot flotation column is instrumented with 15 stainless-steel conductivity electrodes. Nine of these electrodes are 5.1 cm external diameter by 1.5 cm height rings, flush-mounted inside the column wall at 10 cm intervals, for measuring the conductivity profile in the upper part of the column, across the interface. The remaining six electrodes, all ring type having 2 cm external diameter and 1 cm height, are installed in pairs (5 cm apart) in flow-cells installed in the wash-water, column feed pipes and in the lateral branch of the gas hold-up sensor, for measuring the conductivity of the corresponding streams. Wash-water is added at the top of the column using a peristaltic pump and its flow rate is measured using a turbine flow meter. Column feed and tailings are handled with peristaltic pumps and their flow rates are measured by magnetic flow meters. Local control loops (PID) are implemented to regulate feed, tailings, wash-water and gas flow rates at their respective set points. Data acquisition is performed by a SCADA software (iFIX The method used for froth depth estimation is based on the semi-analytical procedure developed by Perez ( The gas hold-up in the column collection zone can be derived from Maxwell's equation for electrolyte mixtures ( Bias rate is estimated from the prevailing volumetric fraction of wash-water just beneath the froth zone( To relate the bias rate to the fraction of wash-water just underneath the interface, the following empirical relationship, is used:   As will be explained in the next section ( Continuous process models described as first-order lag plus dead-time systems were identified using the MatLab The input–output relationship is represented by a discrete-time linear time-invariant system: These dynamic models were obtained under constant froth depth, controlled by the manipulation of the tailing flow rate. Since the effect of wash-water flow rate on collection zone gas hold-up proved to be negligible, for simplicity it was assumed to be zero for the rest of the work.  As anticipated in the previous section, since the control of froth depth does not represent a major problem it was decided to use a simple PI controller, as is often the case in industry. For the remaining two secondary variables, gas hold-up and bias rate, a MIMO model predictive control scheme (Eq. Based on the receding horizon principle, a predictive control law is obtained at every sampling time – – Δ – – – The output predictions are the sum of deterministic and stochastic predictions: Deterministic predictions ( The GlobPC formulation ( The following notations are used in The following MPC parameters were chosen by simulation: The following three figures present the result of the various control tests conducted on the pilot column running under this control approach. Set points are indicated by dashed lines whereas constraints are represented by dashed-dotted lines.  It can also be noticed (  Finally, if a small positive bias rate is not enough to ensure an adequate concentrate grade, an upper level constraint on the gas rate or equivalently on the gas hold-up (assuming constant pulp chemistry) could be implemented. The use of this approach in a three-phase system working in a 6 in. diameter by 8 m height column is part of an ongoing CRD-NSERC research project. The column will be installed at a partner concentrator where it is going to be fed with a given plant slurry stream. Although new system identification tests need to be conducted, it is expected that the underlying dynamic characteristics will hold. For instance, the integrating dynamic characteristic between froth depth and tailing flowrate will prevail even though solid percentage affects the total height pressure over the tailing pump. Recent studies conducted by the authors showed that gas hold-up gas rate dynamic relationship varies with frother concentration. However these variations can still be handled using an appropriately designed linear time-invariant controller. Concerning the use of conductivity based sensors, this sort of instruments have been extensively plant-tested by McGill mineral processing group ( A combined PI and multivariable predictive control strategy was implemented in a two-phase (water–gas) pilot flotation column. The froth depth was regulated using a PI controller while a predictive controller was formulated as the minimization of the tracking errors of the gas hold-up and bias rate, keeping several operating constraints between their upper and lower limits. In particular, a high set point of gas hold-up was established in order to maximize the bubble surface area available for particle collection, while maintaining the bias rate above a minimum value required for froth cleaning. Other practical operational constraints such as upper and lower limits in the wash-water, gas flow and gas hold-up were similarly taken into account. The proposed strategy may indirectly help optimize flotation column operation by using secondary variables, avoiding the assumption of steady-state conditions in standard real-time optimization methods.