A modified solvent impregnated resin (MSIR) was prepared by impregnation of sec-octylphenoxy acetic acid (CA-12) on styrene–divinylbenzene copolymer support (HZ818) after nitration of the benzene rings present in its structure. The MSIRs were characterized by thermogravimetric and Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis. The adsorption behavior of indium(III) on MSIRs was examined by batch and column method in hydrochloric acid medium. It was shown that optimal pH for indium(III) adsorption was 3.0. The adsorption isotherms were found to follow Langmuir model at different temperatures, and the maximum adsorption capacity enhanced with increasing temperature. The value of enthalpy change was positive, indicating that the adsorption of indium(III) with MSIRs is endothermic. Kinetic data indicated that the adsorption of indium(III) was in a good agreement with the pseudo second-order rate equation. The MSIRs sustained adsorptivity well after three recycles comparing with the SIRs.Indium and its compounds have numerous industrial applications, and they are extensively used in the manufacture of liquid crystal displays, semiconductors, low-temperature solders and infrared photodetectors ( Most studies related to the extraction of indium(III) have employed solvent extraction or ion exchange process ( Recently, application of impregnated resins has been developed as a technological alternative to extract indium. The impregnating technique offers a facile method to prepare sorbents for separation and recovery of indium ion ( Different approaches have been applied to stabilize SIRs, and the main method is to provide the protective barrier on the SIRs to prevent loss of the extractant ( In this study, the styrene–divinylbenzene copolymer support (HZ818) firstly was modified after nitration of the benzene rings present in its structure, and sec-octylphenoxy acetic acid (CA-12) was impregnated to the above modified support by dry technique. Hence, modified solvent impregnated resins (MSIRs) were prepared. Then the adsorption and elution behaviors for indium(III) from hydrochloric acid solution with the MSIRs were investigated by batch and dynamic method. Sec-octylphenoxy acetic acid (CA-12) was supplied by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd, China. Its purity approximately is 95%. The molecular structure of CA-12 is shown in HZ818 support (styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer) was obtained from Shanghai Huazhen Polymer Co., Ltd, China. The specific surface area and pore volume of porosity for the adsorbents are 718.8 The concentration of indium ions in solution was determined spectrophotometrically with a UV-2550 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). Before nitration, HZ818 support was kept in ethanol for 4 The two kinds of resins were prepared using a dry impregnation method. A known amount of HZ818 support (nitrating or not nitrating one) was immersed in 50 In order to determine the amount of impregnated extractant in resins, the impregnated extractant on a known amount of resin was completely eluted with ethanol. Considering the extractant investigated in this study is an acid, the amount of eluted extractant was titrated with NaOH solution titration ( Infrared spectra were recorded on a Nicolet MAGNAIR 550 (series II) spectrophotometer. Test conditions: potassium bromide pellets, scanning 32 times, resolution are 4 In the batch method, 25 The column was prepared by filling 300 HZ818 is an adsorbent based on polystyrene divinylbenzene copolymer. It has excellent physical resistance, hydraulic characteristic and thermal stability. In addition, its benefits include high porosity, low polarity, and large surface area. Therefore, it was selected as an appropriate adsorbent for impregnation of low polarity reagents. Thermogravimetry analysis curves in  Solution pH is known as one of the most important factors that can affect the protonation of the functional groups on the adsorbent surface as well as the metal chemistry. In order to investigate the effect of pH on the adsorption of indium(III) on the MSIRs, the adsorption experiments were carried out by varying the initial pH of the solution over the range of 1.4–3.4, and results are shown in The influence of temperature on In(III) adsorption was investigated at different concentrations, and the adsorption capacity and affinity of MSIRs for In(III) was determined with two isotherms models (Freundlich and Langmuir). Freundlich isotherm model proposes a nonlinear adsorption with a heterogeneous energetic distribution of active sites, accompanied by interactions between adsorbed molecules. The general form of this model is ( The Langmuir model represents one of the first theoretical treatments of nonlinear adsorption and suggests that uptake occurs on a homogeneous surface by monolayer adsorption without interaction between adsorbed molecules. In addition, the model assumes uniform energies of adsorption onto the surface and no transmigration of the adsorbate. The Langmuir isotherm is represented in the following equation ( The linearized plots of The thermodynamic parameters of the adsorption process were determined from the experimental data obtained using the following equations ( Where The Gibbs free energy of adsorption ( The effect of contact time on the adsorption of indium(III) onto SIRs and MSIRs was performed by contacting 60 Generally, the adsorption mechanism with impregnated resin is similar to solvent extraction with similar extractant. The adsorption mechanism with CA-12 has been investigated in liquid–liquid extraction ( The pseudo-first-order rate constant As shown in To make resins competitive and efficient for metal recovery, it is important to verify their reproducibility and reliability. Therefore, the recycle performances of MSIRs and SIRs were investigated through several adsorption–elution cycles. In previous work, it was found that the adsorption rate of MSIR (1:2.5) was benefit in comparison with MSIRs, hence MSIR (1:2.5) was used. The result was shown in   A novel modified solvent impregnated resin (MSIR) was prepared by nitration of the benzene rings present in its structure before the impregnating process. This treatment gave rise to obtain an impregnated resin with considerable better properties in comparison with the conventional SIR. The MSIR exhibited some benefits such as faster adsorption rate, excellent stability, especially MSIR (1:2.5). It could be recycled three times without any decrease of adsorption capacity. The optimal pH for the adsorption of indium(III) was found to be 3.0. The adsorption isotherms were found to follow Langmuir isotherms at different temperatures. Maximum adsorption capacity increased with temperature, indicating the adsorption is endothermic. The adsorption kinetics of indium(III) was in a good agreement with the pseudo second-order rate equation. This project was supported by the