Extension in the northeastern Betics took place along two main directions, corresponding to a minimum of two successive orthogonal extensional systems with N–NW and W–SW sense of shear, respectively. Strain was strongly localised within weaker metapelites and gypsum, leading to the development of several extensional detachments, which accommodated the thinning produced by extensional ramps and listric faults within the stronger carbonate rocks. Extension along several detachments led to the preservation in a single thinned section of layers representative of different crustal depths of a previously thickened upper crust. The N- to NW-directed extensional system was formed by brittle to brittle–ductile detachments, which were active during the Upper Oligocene and Lower Miocene, coeval to vertical ductile thinning of underlying greenschist-facies metamorphic rocks. The W- to SW-directed extensional system, active during the Middle and Upper Miocene, shows multiple slip surfaces, which transferred displacement to a brittle detachment with a ramp-flat geometry that stepped down into the footwall of the previous NW-directed system. The geometry of both extensional systems was determined by the rheological heterogeneity of the studied crustal section. Further Upper Miocene extension was accommodated by radial extension with a dominant set of SW-directed listric faults, which tilted the aforementioned detachments and exhumed them in the core of km-scale elongated extensional domes.Low-angle normal faults (LANFs) have contributed to the exhumation of previously thickened crustal sections, during both syn- and post-orogenic extension (e.g. Several extensional systems that detach within low-angle mylonitic shear zones and exhume greenschist-facies rocks have been identified in the Alboran domain. These detachments form the present boundaries between the metamorphic complexes of this domain ( The main detachment of the older extensional system locally bounds the two structurally highest complexes of the Alboran domain, the Alpujarride and Malaguide complexes ( This paper presents new structural data on the geometry and tectonic evolution of sequential systems of LANFs, which thinned the Malaguide–Alpujarride crustal section in the northeastern Betics. The resulting structure differs from typical core complexes, where the related shear zones place the highest-grade rocks of the footwall in direct contact with the sedimentary cover or the lowest-grade rocks of the hanging-wall. In the northeastern Betics the presence of multiple detachments means that the modes of crustal extension are influenced by the contrasting rheological properties of a multilayered upper crust. Furthermore, we analyse the tectonic relationships between the LANFs and a later system of high-angle listric faults that truncated and tilted them during Upper Miocene extension. Finally we consider the implications that the resulting geometry has in the interpretation of rifted margins. The Gibraltar Arc was formed by oblique collision of several crustal domains during the Upper Oligocene–Lower Miocene ( From bottom to top, the ACD comprises the Nevado-Filabride, Alpujarride and Malaguide poly-metamorphic complexes ( The Alpujarride rocks were exhumed during the Burdigalian ( NW/SE convergence between Africa and Iberia during the Upper Miocene and the Quaternary ( The metamorphic basement in the northeastern Betics is formed by tectonic units of the Malaguide and Alpujarride complexes ( Two Alpujarride units that represent former thrust sheets outcrop in the studied area; from bottom to top, they are the Pintada and Cortada units ( The Cortada unit is also formed by a Permo-Triassic metapelite and a Triassic carbonate formation, respectively ( The oldest foliation in the Cortada-unit metapelites is a relic schistosity (S Both schistosity and crenulation cleavage are affected by outcrop-scale asymmetric folds (F HP/LT mineral associations have been described in Alpujarride rocks of the eastern Betics, including Mg-carpholite bearing assemblages formed at 400 °C and 8–10 The Malaguide complex in the northeastern Betics comprises at least five tectonic units that represent the remnants of thrust sheets. We have differentiated them in two groups according to the metamorphic grade and structures observed in their Permo-Triassic formations: the Lower-Malaguide units have phyllites or slates and underwent anchizonal metamorphism, and the Upper-Malaguide units have diagenetic shales ( The Lower-Malaguide units comprise a quartzite–pelite formation of Permo-Triassic age ( The Upper-Malaguide units show a Carboniferous greywacke formation, a Permo-Triassic formation that includes conglomerates, quartzites and shales; a Triassic carbonate formation and a Mesozoic–Tertiary marine sedimentary cover ( The main foliation in the lowest Malaguide unit is an anastomosed slaty cleavage (S A primary foliation (S The S The Permo-Triassic formations of the Upper-Malaguide units do not show any penetrative planar fabric and illite crystallinity analyses indicate diagenetic conditions ( Extensional structures thinning the Alboran domain in the northeastern Betics occur distributed from outcrop to map scales, and show variable directions of extension. The majority of these structures indicate, however, W- to SW- and N- to NW-directed extension ( The listric faults and ramps, which cut the stronger carbonate and quartzite formations, detach into low-angle fault zones, within the underlying weak pelites or gypsum layers ( At the outcrop scale, low-angle normal faults greatly extend the lithological sequences, for example at locality Y ( We have grouped the aforementioned extensional structures into two main systems based on their kinematics and relative age relationships: (1) An Upper Oligocene–Lower Miocene extensional system with mostly N–NW or S shear sense that is especially well preserved in the Malaguide units and (2) a Middle–Upper Miocene system formed mostly by W- to SW-directed detachments and associated listric faults that cut down into the Alpujarride complex. The main structures included in this extensional system are two extensional detachments located in the contact between the Upper- and Lower-Malaguide units and at the top of the lowest Malaguide unit, respectively. These structures show discontinuous outcrops, having been cut and displaced by other younger faults, so it is not possible to analyse the large-scale geometry of this extensional system. The contact between the Upper- and Lower-Malaguide units places Permo-Triassic red shales and conglomerates on top of Triassic carbonate rocks and slates. Hence, it has been interpreted as a thrust surface with top-to-the-north sense of shear in Sierra Espuña ( In Sierra Espuña lenticular metric-scale bodies of carbonate ultracataclasites are found within the shear zone ( We have reinterpreted the above shear zone as an extensional detachment, because (1) there is a general omission of the Palaeozoic rocks typically found at the base of other Upper-Malaguide units; (2) there is an abrupt change from diagenetic shales in the hanging wall to anchizone slates in the footwall, indicating a small metamorphic-grade gap ( Other structures included in this extensional system are found deeper in the structural pile. In Sierra Espuña the boundary between the two Lower-Malaguide units is a brittle–ductile NW-directed detachment ( Strain was strongly localised within the main detachments, which show a thickness of several metres of clay gouge, foliated carbonate cataclasites and gypsum mylonites. The foliated carbonate cataclasites exhibit layers of brittle dolomite breccia alternating with layers of ultracataclasite with an extreme particle size reduction ( If, as proposed by previous authors, the Alpujarride S The end of the isothermal decompression P–T path in the Alpujarride complex has been dated as 24–19 Ma (e.g. The S–SSW- and NW-directed detachments are faulted and tilted both in Sierra Espuña and in Sierra de la Tercia by an extensional system that shows mostly W–SW sense of shear. This extensional system consists of several detachments at different structural levels and associated listric faults. For instance, in the Sierra de la Tercia the basal detachment forms the boundary between the Alpujarride and Malaguide complexes before cutting down towards the southwest with flat-ramp geometry into the Alpujarride complex, greatly thinning the Cortada unit ( The WSW-directed low-angle normal faults outcropping in Sierra de la Tercia truncate the oldest (Burdigalian–Serravallian; The activity of two orthogonal extensional systems has produced extensional horses and riders along the two main directions of extension. At the hectometre scale, e.g. at locality X ( Variable amounts of extension in two perpendicular directions generally produce a ‘chocolate-tablet structure’. This is observed in the study area where unusually the ‘pieces’ are bounded by low-angle normal faults. This geometry has been described in other areas of the Betics, such as in northern Sierra Nevada ( The interference between extensional systems in the northeastern Betics is responsible for the controversy concerning the nature and kinematics of the boundary between the Alpujarride and Malaguide complexes. Although presently there is a general agreement about the extensional nature of this boundary ( Upper Miocene high-angle normal faults cut the aforementioned extensional detachments, commonly cutting out whole units of the Alboran domain. For example, in the southeastern border of Sierra Espuña, a high-angle S- to SE-directed fault omits the lowest Malaguide unit (cross-section 5–5′, Upper Miocene faults form the present boundaries of the Lorca basin. The two largest sedimentary depocentres found in the Lorca basin, to the north of Lorca and to the south of Aledo (cross-section A–A′, The Malaguide complex together with the highest Alpujarride unit underwent protracted extension from the Oligocene to the Upper Miocene, with only a few structures indicating probable shortening. These structures are asymmetric folds and associated crenulation cleavage, which affect the Alpujarride main foliation, and late Miocene–Quaternary folds and strike-slip faults. As discussed by Locally the Alpujarride–Malaguide crustal section outcropping in the northeastern Betics is approximately 1 km thick and it includes at least six former thrust sheets metamorphosed between lower-greenschist facies (300–350 °C; During HP/LT metamorphism (6 The Alpujarride–Malaguide crustal section was extended by at least two sets of pervasive brittle structures, including low-angle normal faults, extensional shear fractures, veins and joints at all structural levels with predominantly N–S to NW–SE and E–W to SW–NE directions of extension. In both extensional systems outcrop-scale faults are observed to detach on larger faults, finally accommodating extension along the principal detachments that bound the main tectonic units (cross-section 1–1′, The sequential activity of extensional detachments affecting a crust without rheological contrasts could probably result in a similar structure to the one observed in the northeastern Betics. However, the low angle observed between the internal reference surfaces of the Malaguide and Alpujarride units and the extensional detachments, together with the evident rheological contrasts between different rock types, suggest that the latter play an important role in the geometry of the studied extensional systems. A dominant set of SW-directed listric normal faults and other W-, S- and SE-directed faults, truncated the low-angle normal faults during the Tortonian, cutting out units of the Malaguide–Alpujarride crustal section. The listric faults break out in NW/SE and WSW/ENE oriented borders of the topographically uplifted ENE/WSW-oriented antiformal ridges, producing elongated domes that emerge within the Neogene sedimentary depocentres developed in the hanging-walls of the listric faults. These small domes (10–16 km long) formed by the combined effect of extension and orthogonal shortening ( The amount of extension produced by the Upper Miocene extensional system is smaller than the one accumulated previously and preserved within its extensional riders. However, if the resulting structure were observed in reflection seismics of a rifted margin the only visible extension would be related to the late listric faults (e.g. The CICYT Spanish projects REN2001-3868-CO3-01/MAR, REN2001-3378 and FEDER funds of the UE supported the field and laboratory research. José Miguel Martı́nez and an anonymous reviewer are thanked for their thorough and constructive reviews of the manuscript. Tim Reston suggested some improvements to the manuscript.