This chapter examines the theory and technology applied for the production of manganese ferroalloys. The focus is on smelting of ferromanganese, silicomanganese, and manganese metal in electric furnaces with different process types. The properties of manganese as well as its major compounds, minerals, and ores are presented. Agglomeration methods used to prepare ores for smelting are described. Refining techniques for low-carbon manganese ferroalloys are discussed, and postprocessing operations are outlined, together with tapping and casting processes. Additionally, the energy balance of manganese alloys smelting is outlined, and some potential hazards of the smelting technology are discussed, together with their preventive actions.Introduction to Manganese Ferroalloys History and Background of Manganese Properties of Manganese and Its Compounds Properties of Manganese Interaction of Manganese with Oxygen and Carbon Interaction of Manganese with Other Elements Manganese in Oxide Systems and Slags Manganese Ores Processing and Reduction Manganese Ores Agglomeration Processes Manganese Ferroalloys Manganese Alloy Specifications Impurities in Manganese Alloys Smelting Technologies for Manganese Alloys Basics of Reduction Processes Outline of Industrial Practice Technology of Ferromanganese High-Carbon Ferromanganese Production Production of Commercial Silicomanganese (FeSiMn) Post-Tap Hole Processing for FeMn and SiMn Production of Manganese Metal Refining Operations for Low-Carbon Manganese Ferroalloys Production of Low-Carbon Ferromanganese Production of Low-Carbon Silicomanganese Manganese Ferroalloys Postprocessing Casting Crushing and Sieving Nitrided Manganese Ferroalloys Energy Use in Manganese Ferroalloys Processing Potential Hazards of Operations Acknowledgments References  Because about 90% of all manganese produced is consumed in the steel industry, the world demand for manganese depends directly on the needs of the steel industry, which is typical for most ferroalloys. There are numerous grades of steel, and each grade requires a different amount of manganese. The average unit consumption of manganese per ton of steel is currently about 10 kg. There is some direct consumption of manganese ores and sinter in the blast furnaces where pig iron is produced, but manganese is mainly consumed in the form of ferromanganese, silicomanganese, and manganese metal. Only about 5% of the manganese used in steel production is introduced into the blast furnace. There are four modifications of manganese known at ambient pressure: complex cubic structure α-Mn ( Manganese is added to steel for the following reasons: it is used as an alloying element to improve strength, toughness, and hardness; it is used for sulfur control whereby it combines with sulfur and controls the morphology of sulfides; and, lastly, it is used for oxygen removal. Manganese stabilizes the austenite in steel, although it is less potent than nickel. It lowers the temperature of austenite transformation into ferrite and improves the response of steel to quenching. The effect of manganese in forming austenite is improved by combining it with nitrogen, which is also an austenite-forming element ( Manganese plays a key role in steels because of its ability to combine with sulfur: manganese sulfide avoids the hot shortness of the steel and prevents the interstitial liquid formation of iron sulfide. Manganese is a milder deoxidizer than silicon and aluminum but enhances their effectiveness due to the formation of stable manganese silicates and aluminates. Silicomanganese (SiMn) is a more effective deoxidizer than is the case with individual additions of ferrosilicon and ferromanganese. Deoxidation with silicomanganese results in cleaner steel as the liquid manganese silicate formed coalesces and thus separates more easily from the melt, compared to solid SiO Manganese forms several oxides, of which only monoxide (MnO) is stable at high temperatures. The unstable higher oxides MnO Reduction of MnO to liquid metallic manganese is far more difficult than reduction of FeO to iron; and reduction of MnO to form solid manganese, analogous to the sponge iron formation in the Fe-O system, is not practically possible. The Mn-C equilibrium phase diagram is shown in In the Mn-Fe system, manganese stabilizes austenitic structure forming a large area of FCC γ–(Fe, Mn) ( Manganese and silicon are completely miscible in the liquid state. The minimum eutectic temperature at the Mn-rich side is 1038°C at X With phosphorus, manganese forms several stable phosphides such as Mn With sulfur, manganese forms two stable sulfides, MnS and MnS Nitrogen and manganese form rather complex equilibria ( From the point of view of manganese ferroalloys processing, one of the most important systems is Mn-Fe-Si-C, as it eventually forms the basis of all manganese alloys. These alloys are high-, medium-, and low-carbon ferromanganese, often abbreviated to HC-, MC-, and LC-FeMn, as well as silicomanganese (SiMn) and to some extent metallic manganese (>96% Mn). Pure manganese has a high vapor pressure in its liquid state (above 1246°C), although the boiling point is 2060°C, so the addition of iron, silicon, and carbon has an appreciable effect on decreasing Mn vaporization at temperatures used for production and refining processes.  Manganese monoxide forms two compounds with silica: rhodonite MnSiO The main slag elements when producing FeMn and SiMn alloys are Mn-, Si-, Ca-, Mg-, and Al- oxides. Calculated liquidus projection relations for the ternary MnO-SiO In many manganese ferroalloys smelting and agglomeration processes, basic fluxes like lime or dolomite are often added. This shifts phase equilibria and leads to new, important phase fields. Examples of calculated phase and liquidus relations for the MnO-SiO Manganese occurs in nature in the form of minerals. More than 300 minerals are said to contain some manganese, but only a small number have high manganese content. The manganese mineralogy is complex because manganese occurs in divalent, trivalent, and tetravalent states. The most common manganese minerals are oxides, carbonates, and, appearing less frequently, silicates and sulfides ( Braunite and braunite II are common complex silicate minerals usually occurring in association with bixbyite, hausmannite, and pyrolusite in deposits such as the Postmasburg and Kalahari manganese deposits of South Africa where braunite is the principal manganese mineral. Rhodochrosite is a common carbonate mineral in various ores. There are only a limited number of workable deposits of manganese ores. The most important land-based manganese ore deposits are located in the Republic of South Africa, Australia, Gabon, Brazil, China, India, and in the Commonwealth Independent State (CIS) countries of Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Georgia. The manganese ores are characterized by their content of manganese, iron, and various impurities. The main types of ores are metallurgical (>35% Mn; high-grade ores with a manganese content above 48% are within this category), ferruginous (15% to 35% Mn; high levels of iron), and mangano-ferrous ores (in fact, iron ores with 5% to 10% Mn). The metallurgical ores are mainly used for direct production of high carbon ferromanganese and silicomanganese alloys, whereas the last two categories are used especially in blast furnaces for adjusting the manganese content of produced pig iron. There might be a substantial variation of ore composition even within the common deposit. For example, Georgian Tchiatura-oxide type ores have 15% to 43% Mn, 13% to 58% SiO Metallurgical grade ores are produced from open pit and underground operations by conventional mining techniques. Ores are crushed and screened, and washed if necessary. Heavy media separation can be used for ores with a high content of silica and alumina gangue. The average manganese recovery in this operation is usually between 60% and 75%. Metallurgical grade manganese ores contain typically 40% to 50% manganese. Another important parameter is the manganese-to-iron ratio (Mn/Fe), which is required to be >7.5 by weight for the production of standard ferromanganese alloy with 78% Mn. Extra iron might always be introduced as steel chips and recycled scrap. There are also limitations on alumina and silica contents, as excessive slag formation in the furnace increases the electric energy consumption. Ores and concentrates with more than 10% SiO Most of the mines have sinter plants, where fines are agglomerated. Sintered material is well suited for use in ferromanganese furnaces because it is mechanically strong and thermally stable, allowing the gas to disperse evenly throughout the preheating and prereduction zone. The sintering also results in saving energy if the ore is of the carbonate type. If, on the other hand, oxide-type ores are sintered, most of the beneficial heat from the exothermic A blend of manganese ores is, in most cases, used when manganese ferroalloys are produced either in electric submerged arc furnaces or in blast furnaces. The choice of ores depends on chemical and physical properties as well as on economic factors. After mining, ore is crushed and screened into various particle size fractions ranging from fines (<6 mm) to lump ore (<75 mm). The proportion of fines is often as high as 30% to 70% of the total. Screened ores are upgraded by various methods to produce concentrates. The most common physical separation methods are washing, high-intensity magnetic separation, separation by gravity concentration, and separation by flotation, which makes use of the different surface properties of the minerals. An example for particle size distribution for Nikopol ore concentrates is shown in Experience has shown that smooth and efficient operation of manganese ferroalloys smelting furnaces is achieved when close sizing control is practiced on the raw materials. The raw materials must secure good permeability for the gas to be distributed through the burden. Fines in the raw materials are particularly detrimental, causing poor charge porosity, which will result in high power consumption per ton of alloy, excessive fume and dust losses, and low productivity. Alloy producers prefer lump and agglomerated ores. High-quality fines are often agglomerated, normally by the use of a sintering process either at the mine or at the customer’s plant. Sintering, pelletizing, and briquetting are three principal technologies used for the agglomeration of ores and concentrates. Pelletizing is a more difficult process for manganese ores than for most iron ores. It requires higher temperatures (>1150° to 1250°C) to produce strong enough manganese ore pellets, which makes it a more expensive process. On heating of green pellets, manganese dioxide (MnO Briquetting is of less importance for conventional concentrates but is of some interest for agglomeration of manganese-bearing wastes and undersized ore and carbon materials at the production plant. The sintering and pelletizing processes are associated with high capital investment and the high cost of grinding and burning. Briquetting is, in contrast, a cold bonding process and consequently less capital intensive than pelletizing, and it does not need extra milling of materials. Bitumen, cement, molasses, and lime, alone or in combination, have been tested as binders for making briquettes. Reasonable results have been reported for briquetting of concentrates with 3% to 6% humidity (using 7% to 10% lignosulfate as a binder) when pressing at 9 to 10 MPa and drying at 130° to 140°C ( Agglomeration by sintering has become the leading technology for processing manganese ore. Phase transformations in manganese sinter are not as well known as respective ones in iron ore sintering, which are hindered by a lack of reliable information of the equilibria in complex oxide systems. For instance, in the СaO-MnO-MgO system the solid phase is only of the monoxide type (MeO), but in the presence of MnO there is a miscibility gap leading to separation of CaO-rich and MgO-rich solutions ( The traveling grate technology is the traditional way to produce manganese sinter, such as at the TEMCO ferroalloy smelter plant (Australia), Samancore Manganese Mamatwan mine (South Africa), COMILOG manganese mines (Gabon), and Vale mines (Brazil). This equipment is most suitable for larger capacities. Alternatives are the new steel belt sintering technology developed for smaller capacities (Outokumpu Corp., Finland) or stationary pan sintering (Vale in Mo i Rana, Norway and previously also by Eramet Sauda, Norway). The down-draught sintering in stationary pans is an old established practice capable of producing good-quality sinter for smaller tonnages. Sintering and pelletizing upgrades the manganese content of the ore through the loss of oxygen from manganese oxides and other volatile species as bound water and carbonates. An example of nonfluxed and fluxed compositions of agglomerates is shown in Agglomerate compositions similar to those shown in The primary use of manganese is in the steel industry where manganese is added mainly in the form of ferroalloys. Several different types of manganese alloys have been developed and are being marketed ( Ferromanganese FeMn, high- (HC), medium- (MC), and low-carbon (LC) Silicomanganese SiMn (or ferrosilicomanganese FeSiMn) Metallic manganese Mn Nitrided manganese alloys (nitrided manganese MnN and silicomanganese SiMnN) High-carbon FeMn is the traditional form of manganese added to steels, but its application is mostly limited to unalloyed and low-alloyed carbon steels. Medium and low carbon ferromanganese are used where the carbon content must be controlled and cannot be reduced after the addition of the ferroalloy. These grades are mainly produced by oxygen refining of high carbon ferromanganese and by a silicothermic process involving the reaction between silicon in crude SiMn alloy and manganese ore. The consumption of refined alloys with reduced carbon content is increasing due to increasing production of low carbon steels. In 2010, the worldwide production of refined ferromanganese (< 2% C) was 1.5 Mt. The use of silicomanganese is expected to advance at a faster rate than high carbon ferromanganese consumption. Silicomanganese adds less phosphorus, carbon, aluminum, and nitrogen to the steel compared to a mixture of standard high carbon ferromanganese (HC FeMn) and ferrosilicon with 75% Si (FeSi75). Standard quality silicomanganese (SiMn) is used in most silicon and manganese-containing steels where the combination of carbon, Metallic manganese is produced by two methods: electrolytic and electrothermal. Electrolytic manganese is the purest form of manganese and has a minimum content of 99.8% Mn. This hydrometallurgical method is not considered here. Electrothermal manganese is produced by the reduction of de-phosphorized manganese slag melt with silicon from crude SiMn in the presence of flux (lime). For this purpose, SiMn has a limited amount of iron ( The trend toward the production of higher-quality steels with fewer impurities increases the pressure on producers of manganese alloys to improve the quality of their products by tighter specifications on harmful elements—particularly carbon, sulfur, and phosphorus (see Manganese ores will always contain some iron oxides. Reduction of the iron oxides in the ore is probably almost complete when the temperature reaches 1200°C. The product will be a carbon-saturated iron alloy with an increasing content of manganese at increasing reductions in temperature. The last reduction step, MnO → Mn metal, will take place in the liquid state with MnO being dissolved in the oxide melt and the produced manganese metal continuously dissolved in the liquid carbon-saturated Mn-Fe-C metal. Both MnO and SiO Besides manganese oxides and silica, the manganese ores normally also contain Al As follows from the Fe-Mn-Si-C system equilibria (e.g., see The important factors that control the degree of manganese reduction are the slag basicity, which in practice is expressed as (CaO+MgO)/(Al Carbonates present in the charge or added as flux decompose between 300° to 900°C. The higher manganese oxides that predominate in manganese ores (MnO The manganese reduction reaction is highly endothermic and will consume approximately two thirds of the supplied electric energy for HC FeMn production and one third for SiMn production. The CO gas will heat the descending raw materials in the furnace. Because a reduction of the higher manganese oxides with CO gas is exothermic, these reactions will contribute to the temperature increase in the prereduction zone. Manganese ferroalloys are commercially produced by the carbothermic reduction of manganese oxide ores in submerged arc furnaces (SAFs). The blast furnace process is still marginally used for high carbon FeMn production, where the coke serves as a reducing agent as well as an energy source. Blast All manganese ferroalloys are processed, in principle, by either the discard slag method (sometimes called the flux process) or the duplex (also known as the flux-less) method. These two methods are not, however, directly dependent on the number of added fluxes but rather on the final basicity of the slag. Both can be realized with or without fluxes, depending on the raw materials. The first method is quite similar to the blast furnace practice and it aims to reduce manganese into the alloy in one stage, usually with assistance of basic fluxes (CaO, MgO) or using a basic ore decreasing silica activity in the slag and increasing the activity of MnO. For high-carbon ferromanganese discard slag practice (flux), manganese recovery is ~80%, and about 15% to 20% MnO remains in the slag, which is dumped, as it is not economical to recover more manganese at such concentrations. The second method, the duplex process, is more common. There is normally a blend of several ores to achieve a required composition of produced metal and slag. The tapped slag will contain as much as 30% to 50% MnO. The MnO-rich slag is reprocessed for the production of silicomanganese or metal manganese in the second stage ( The interior of a furnace producing high carbon ferromanganese consists of two main zones: the top prereduction zone (low temperature) and the lower coke bed zone (high temperature). In the prereduction zone, raw materials are heated through heat exchange with ascending hot gases, and solid-state reduction of higher manganese oxides to MnO by CO gas takes place. Due to the exothermic nature of these reactions, temperature increases lead to melting of the partially reduced manganese ore ( Due to the different densities of coke, slag, and metal, the various layers are often described in the literature as consisting of separate layers. However, from excavations of single-phase pilot-scale furnaces and industrial furnaces, it has been proven that coke is present all the way down to the metal layer, due to the weight of the above located charge materials. The slag-to-coke ratio in the coke bed increases with decreasing distance to the metal layer. Also, vertical columns of almost pure slag have been found in the center of the coke bed. The structure of this zone may vary from “dry coke” (with no slag) to coke lumps more or less evenly dispersed in the slag, which hence have no mutual contact. The shape and size of the coke bed may also vary from horizontal layers to bell-shaped and conical shapes depending on raw materials, slag chemistry, and most of all on the preceding furnace operation (i.e., whether the coke volume in the furnace is increasing, decreasing, or is in a stable state). The electrode tips are normally located around the upper level of the coke bed, and the current distribution is mainly determined by conditions in this zone. If raw materials are changed in type, the existing ore inside the furnace will be replaced much faster than the existing coke. Depending on the coke bed volume, a complete change to new coke in the furnace may take several weeks. The generation and transfer of heat in the furnace determine the performance. Electric energy must be converted into heat in those regions where the thermal energy is mainly consumed. Enough energy should be supplied For normal furnace operation, the electrodes are submerged relatively deep in the furnace, and due to the large difference in electric resistivity, most of the current will run through the coke bed. The main part of the electric energy is dissipated in the coke bed area close to the electrodes. This means that the rate of raw material flow and metal production is at its maximum close to the electrodes, where also the gas flow rate will be high. Despite the turbulence and high temperature gradients in the reaction zone, it has been found during the excavation of furnaces that the slag composition changes gradually throughout the coke bed; hence, it is believed that the horizontal movement of coke, slag, and gas is very small. Commonly, bulk manganese alloys are produced in three-phase submerged arc furnaces, which have a three-electrode (Søderberg type, or self-baking) circular or a six-electrode rectangular geometry. Most of the modern production of manganese alloys takes place in covered furnaces rated from 20 to 90 MVA power capacity ( Examples of the construction of the last two furnaces described in The raw material mix is transported to hoppers above the furnace from where it is fed by gravity through chutes passing through the furnace cover. Produced slag and metal may be tapped simultaneously from the same tap hole, or separately in different slag and metal tap holes arranged at a vertical distance of 0.5 to 1 m. When high-phosphorus (>0.2% P) manganese ores are utilized, it is not usually feasible to remove phosphorus at the stage of ore-dressing or agglomeration. In this case, the electrometallurgical method is sometimes used first to reduce phosphorus and iron from the oxide melt with a minor amount of coke into a by-product metal, leaving most of the manganese in the refined slag, which then will be used for further processing into FeMn, SiMn, or metal manganese. The process is carried out in circular closed furnaces ( High carbon ferromanganese is commercially produced by the carbothermic reduction of manganese ores, primarily in electric submerged arc furnaces. The produced metal typically contains around 72% to 82% Mn and 7% C (see Examples of HC FeMn smelting by flux and flux-less processes are shown in Optimized ferromanganese furnace operation assumes a necessary high load, a minimum of coke and energy consumption, stable and expected metal and slag composition with a high yield of manganese and minimized greenhouse gases, and noxious compounds emissions. Whereas the power consumption is If the correct mixture of ores and fluxes fails to be added, this will be easily detected by the slag and metal analyses and may be corrected relatively quickly. However, if the added quantity of carbon is incorrect, this may not be readily noticed. Even with good chemical analyses and weights of raw materials, there can easily be 1% to 2% inaccuracy in the carbon quantity added. In a 40 MW FeMn furnace producing 400 tons of HC FeMn per day with a coke consumption of 330 kg coke per ton of alloy, a total of 132 tons of coke will be added every day. With an inaccuracy rate of 2%, the furnace may be “undercooked” or “overcooked” by ±2.6 tons/day. After 2 weeks of “overcoking” there will be a buffer of more than 35 tons of coke in the furnace. Hence, even if a good mass balance is calculated, this is only one of several necessary means to secure the right quantity of raw materials. Silicomanganese (SiMn) is also produced by the carbothermic reduction of raw materials in electric submerged arc furnaces of the same type as used for the production of HC FeMn. The size of the SiMn furnaces is usually in the range 15 to 63 MVA (actual power 13 to 57 MW), giving 80 to 340 tons of alloy per day. Operation of the SiMn process differs from the FeMn process, as higher process temperatures are needed to attain the wanted silicon specification content in the metal (see In addition to manganese slag, Mn ore (agglomerate), and coke, other components of the charge are quartzite, FeSi or Si-melts, or off-grade qualities. The ratio of raw ore to Mn slag varies from plant to plant, depending on the ore quality and availability (for high-grade ores with low phosphorus production, the use of MnO-rich slag might not be required). The major flux used is dolomite or dolomite-limestone. During smelting, iron and manganese oxides are reduced first, as in the HC FeMn process, but the reduction of silicon requires higher temperatures (1600° to 1650°C). Carbon-saturated alloys are in equilibrium with either graphite (<20% to 23% Si) or SiC (at higher silicon concentrations), whereas a major amount of carbon is combined into Nowotny’s phase (Mn,Fe) Although the use of high-MnO slag with low phosphorus might ensure lower phosphorus content in SiMn, an excess supply of the slag is not feasible as it has a relatively low melting temperature compared with Mn-ores. Therefore, a too The economy of silicomanganese smelting is enhanced by minimizing the Mn loss as metal inclusions and MnO dissolved in the slag. The discarded slag from the SiMn process normally contains 5% to 10% MnO for the best practice ( Both ferromanganese and silicomanganese furnaces are tapped every 2 to 3 hours. Even for duplex practice, there is a substantial amount of slag ( By the use of a skimmer, the flow from the furnace is blocked in such a manner that slag and metal are forced in different directions. In cascade tapping, a ladle for metal and one or more slag pots are placed in series, so that the flow from the furnace cascades from one container to the next. Separation occurs as the metal stays in the ladle, whereas the slag passes on to the pots. At the end of the tap, some slag remains in the ladle. The remaining slag has to be removed (e.g., by tilting the ladle and dragging off the slag with a manual or mechanical rake). The typical temperature of the slag when it leaves the furnace is 1400° to 1500°C for HC FeMn and 1550° to 1650°C for SiMn (~19% Si). The metal temperature is ~50°C lower in both cases. The liquidus temperature at which the metal starts to solidify is for all alloys in the range of 1200° to 1300°C. For HC FeMn, the temperature interval between tapping and solidification is limited to For manganese metal (see The first stage is very similar to the smelting of HC FeMn in large furnaces by a process like the one described above, and it includes production of HC FeMn (<0.70% P) and high-MnO slag (36% to 38% Mn, 20% SiO This solid slag is mixed with quartzite, coke, and dolomite flux to produce SiMn. Again, the chemistry of the process is similar to that used for the production of commercial SiMn, but here the attention is paid to iron, carbon, and phosphorus control. Due to this limitation, self-baking electrodes cannot be used and are substituted by graphitized electrodes; also, furnace lining is made of magnesite instead of carbon blocks ( The charge for SiMn smelting consists of 800 kg of slag, 270 to 290 kg quartzite, and 340 to 360 kg of coke. During smelting, the yield is about 60% for Si and 83% to 85% for Mn. Target silicon content in the alloy is >25% Si, normally 27% to 29% Si. Slag formed in this stage has up to 10% to 11% MnO and is partially recycled in commercial SiMn and FeMn smelting. The last stage includes mixing of liquid MnO slag, crude SiMn, and flux (CaO). Here, manganese oxide is reduced by silicon: MnO The process is carried out in a tilting furnace (see The resulting metal manganese has 96% to 97% Mn, <0.15% C, <1.2% to 1.4% Si, <2% Fe, <0.02% S, and <0.05% P. The slag from this stage has a rather high manganese content (11% to 14% MnO) and high basicity, which leads to excessive slag dusting upon cooling. This is due to phase transformation β–2Са·SiO In some cases, the desulfurization of metal manganese is being carried out. The usual sulfur content in manganese is only 0.01% to 0.02%, but for several applications this is too high. For example, the processing of iron-free vibration-damping alloy Mn-Cu-Ni (75% Mn) or magnetic shape memory (MSM) alloy Ni-Mn-Ga requires less than 0.001% to 0.005% S in manganese. For sulfur removal, molten manganese is treated by using a synthetic slag (40% CaO, 20% Al Low-carbon ferromanganese (LC FeMn) alloys are preferred, for example, for the production of low-carbon and other special grades of steel where close control of carbon is essential. Two principal methods of producing LC FeMn are in commercial operation. The first method includes the silicothermic reduction of manganese ore and MnO-rich slag, and its chemistry is very similar to that in the processing of metal manganese described previously. The second method involves blowing of the high carbon FeMn alloy with oxygen The first method utilizes SiMn as a reductant, and its composition determines the final carbon concentration in the alloy. It appears that SiMn with more than 22% Si at 1500°C is required to produce LC FeMn with a maximum of 0.8% C. Lime flux is added to increase basicity (CaO/SiO In the second version of the process, the SiMn is reduced outside of the furnace, in the ladles ( Because the silicothermic reduction of slag is exothermic, the heat of the reaction is normally sufficient to cover the heat losses in the process. Any iron oxides in the manganese ore/slag will also be reduced, consuming silicon. An iron-free slag with a high content of MnO will give the highest content of Mn in the final alloy. As Due to thermodynamic conditions, 25% to 30% MnO in the final slag is necessary to obtain a final metal with 0.5% C and less than 1% Si, which might be the upper limit according to alloy specifications ( In this process, HC FeMn alloy (~7% C, <1% Si) is decarburized by blowing the metal in its liquid state with oxygen gas or with oxygen-argon mixtures. This manganese oxygen refining (MOR) process is in many ways similar to the basic oxygen steel process (BOF) where liquid cast iron is decarburized by blowing with oxygen in a converter. One important difference is the process temperature: due to the high affinity of manganese for carbon and oxygen, the necessary temperature of the manganese refining process has to be >1750°C, which is 200° to 250°C higher than is needed for the steel process. The much higher temperature leads to several challenges, such as refractory attack, casting of superheated metal, and slag-metal separation. Another problem encountered is the high vapor pressure of manganese leading to excessive evaporation and oxidation by excess oxygen. Oxidized manganese is collected mainly as Mn The MOR method allows practical achievement of ~0.5% to 1% C in the alloy if the temperature reaches 1800°C and CO pressure reaches 1 atm. Oxygen dilution with argon should be considered if further decarburization is desirable. The decarburization of ferromanganese takes place by three different mechanisms in sequence, summarized in It is believed that manganese is lost by evaporative mechanisms. The manganese vapor is oxidized to MnO mist by oxygen that was not consumed for CO formation. As the process continues, the manganese loss decreases gradually and reaches a minimum at the end of the first stage of decarburization. During the second stage, the rate of manganese loss increases slowly. Finally, after transition to the third period of decarburization, the loss of manganese again increases quickly with time ( For required SiMn alloys with less carbon than usually obtained from the standard process, the effect of decreasing carbon solubility while increasing silicon content is utilized. Instead of separate smelting, LC SiMn is made by adding FeSi to standard SiMn in the ladle. As the silicon content in the melt increases, the equilibrium shifts toward the formation of silicon carbide (SiC). Although it is possible to add FeSi or other silicon sources into the furnace, this might lead to unstable furnace operations. On the other hand, the ladle method increases the expenditure of FeSi due to losses of SiC to the slag. Thus, the plant optimum might be a combination of these two methods. Manganese ferroalloys can be poured from the casting ladle either over the lip or through a bottom gate. Top pouring allows higher rates but has no good control on the captured unwanted inclusions of slag and carbides. Bottom tapping is the opposite: the flow rate is low and can, with the more sophisticated variants of gates, be throttled and stopped. Slag and carbides remain in the ladle, as they, due to lower density, tend to float in the opposite direction of the downward metal stream. The drawback is a somewhat higher cost of the equipment and occasional difficulties with opening the gate, but lip pouring is always a possible option. High-carbon FeMn and SiMn alloys usually undergo layer casting, where the liquid metal is filled into a casting bay for a number of subsequent taps. Metal fines are used as the bed material, and new layers are cast on top of the preceding casts. With a bay area adjusted to the tap size and provided that this is fairly constant, it is possible to obtain a quite even thickness of the layers with the requested size in one direction. When full, the casting bay is emptied by a wheel loader and prepared for a new series. The method is suitable even for large tonnages. The metal may require some cooling before the bay can be emptied and reused. Refined qualities are usually cast and stored separately according to the analysis for each tap, and for this purpose casting in sand molds is suitable. This is a series of interconnected forms prepared in, for example, olivine sand. The liquid metal is filled from one end; optionally a skimmer between the first two forms can prevent slag and carbides from contaminating the rest of the set. Compared to layer casting, the thickness of the metal tends to increase and become more difficult to adjust even with careful preparations, and the cooling time is longer as the sand is a good insulator. Special attention should be given to superheated metal (e.g., MOR-treated FeMn with temperatures exceeding 1750°C). Removal of the large amount of surplus heat puts extraordinary demands on the casting equipment, and manganese fuming is considerable from the large surface of the cast. When sufficiently cooled the metal blocks are removed from the molds by crane equipment or a wheel loader with forks. Notably, the timing of this Other methods used to some extent involve chill cast and mold conveyors (3 to 10 m/min moving speed). These options require more sophisticated equipment and thus involve higher investment and operating costs. They are also more vulnerable and more often likely to be out of operation. However, they offer rather fast cooling and an even thickness of the metal, and the cast can be made thinner. Special cast iron molds are usually used, and the efficiency of this method is strongly affected by the lifetime of the molds. For meeting the customer’s demands in respect of the sizing of ferroalloy lumps, respective crushing and sieving procedures are utilized. Usually jaw and cone crushers in combination and roller crushers are used. The latter can be used for materials that already have the right size in one direction. Besides eliminating the secondary crusher, a notable feature of the roller crusher is that it generates fewer fines ( Unavoidably, any crushing process gives a fraction of undersized material, which to a limited extent is sold, possibly at a discount. For manganese alloys the size limit of fines is usually set to 10 mm, although some customers accept fines as small as 4 mm at a full price. The remaining fines can be used as bed material or coolant additions in the ladle, or they can be recycled as feedstock on the furnace.  An alternative “net shape casting” technique was developed to eliminate the need to subsequently crush the metal, similar to the process of granulation (water atomization) of ferrosilicon. The control of the flow rate of metal that enters water and a sufficient water amount to be present as coolant agent are critical parameters to monitor. For example, Elkem ASA developed a similar method for granulation of SiMn (“Mansil”). The granules produced are dense discs with a diameter up to 30 mm and thickness up to 10 mm. This was found to be close to the optimum size when considering the rate of dissolution of the alloy in liquid steel. The mechanical strength of these granules is high due to the rapid solidification, and the macrosegregation tends to be lower than with traditional casting methods. Finally, the fraction of undersized material (−3 mm) with this method can be as low as 3%. Nitrided manganese and silicomanganese (see As nitrogen solubility in liquid manganese is much lower than in solid (particularly γ-Mn), the production method is based on the solid-state reaction of manganese with nitrogen. Crushed in a nitrogen atmosphere, manganese (< 2 mm) is first put into trays and evacuated at 200°C and <150 Pa. Hydrogen contained in manganese is released, which makes higher active surface areas of the powder beneficial for the next reaction with nitrogen. Then the temperature is raised to 800°C and pure nitrogen gas is entered into the furnace. The reaction of nitrogen with manganese is exothermic, and the temperature in the manganese layer increases to 900° to 950°C with partial sintering of the grains. The product is cooled down in a nitrogen atmosphere and the whole process time is about 70 h ( Nitrided SiMn (14% to 25% Si) is used for similar purposes. Nitrogen here is usually present as complex nitride Mn As in all electrothermal ferroalloys processing, the costs of manganese ferroalloys are directly correlated with the specific energy consumption (kWh/ton of alloy) due to a higher tonnage but, of course, also related to the cost of electrical energy. From the point of the reduction process, the largest energy demand would be imposed when MnO is the only manganese oxide in the raw materials, as the reduction reaction is highly endothermic. On the other hand, reduction reactions of the higher manganese oxides (MnO The addition of carbonate ores leads to higher energy consumption, as might be expected. Carbonates are normally present as the added fluxes (CaCO From the point of view of heat transfer in the process, higher temperature of the materials leaving the furnace would naturally require higher specific energy consumption. A rough estimation might be made as +50 kWh for an additional 100°C of tapped slag and metal temperature and +70–80 kWh for additional 200°C in off-gas temperature. In silicomanganese smelting, more energy is required to reduce silicon, and the higher the % Si in SiMn, the higher the specific energy demands. For example, energy cost to produce 18% of silicon in the metal is about the same as the cost to produce 100% Mn. Hence, the cost of producing SiMn with 18% Si from oxides is about twice the cost of producing FeMn. Adding metal (cheap Other energy flow sinks are usually heat losses from the equipment (~20% of total) and cannot be significantly exploited. However, it is possible for the plant to control material losses: a 5% loss of metal in the slag will increase the apparent energy consumption by 5%. Besides the chemical enthalpy of the metal, the next major form of energy that can potentially be recovered is chemical potential in the gas, especially CO and hydrogen. In closed furnaces this value may be quite high, and many producers sell the gas directly as a by-product. The most challenging issues for recovering this energy are the dust in the gas and the relatively low and varying temperature in the off-gas. In The latent heat of slag and metal is usually lost to the surroundings as the metal and slag are cooled and solidified. However, some plants heat water with this energy, which is exploited in adjacent fish farming and the heating of houses, streets, and facilities around the plant. Some elements of risk are always attached to high temperature smelting and reduction processes. They could be of a general nature, such as accidents caused by metal and slag penetration through furnace and ladle linings, and danger of CO gas poisoning, CO gas explosions, and hot metal-water explosions. The production of HC FeMn in closed furnaces involves special hazards Virtually all reported serious eruptions have been traced to a set of conditions that resulted in a hangup or bridging of the charge materials so that their normal downward movement was interrupted or retarded. As electric energy continues to be supplied to the furnace with little or no movement of the charge due to the bridging, a cavity forms under and around the electrode, particularly after tapping of the furnace. When conditions change, allowing the bridge to collapse (usually during or shortly after a tapping), large quantities of unreacted mix may enter the superheated cavity. The effect of the sudden contact between relatively cold raw materials and the hot liquid slag is an instantaneous dissociation of oxides, carbonates, and moisture, followed by explosive reactions evolving oxygen, CO, and hydrogen. These reactions can be extremely violent, and as they normally take place rather deep in the furnace charge, large amounts of hot materials may be thrown out of the furnace by the gaseous reaction products. Industrial experience has shown that such dangerous situations may arise when the furnace condition prevents an even distribution of the escaping gases in the charge and an even regular downward movement of the raw materials in the furnace. Excessive moisture in the charge materials, particularly if present with excessive fines, will tend to intensify the densification of the charge, promote mix segregation, and inhibit uniform downward movement of the charge. Any leakage of water into the furnace has the same effect, so moisture control is a vital item to monitor closely. Bridge formation and blocked raw material movement may also be a result of excessive amounts of alkalis (Na, K) and zinc in the charge materials. ZnO is reduced in the furnace hot zone and gaseous Zn is formed. Zn vapor condenses in the colder part of the charge mix normally as ZnO. Banks and bridges are formed, and the flow of materials becomes nonuniform. Occasionally, the area under the bridge may be overheated and the bridge collapses, bringing some of the unreacted raw materials directly into the superheated zone. A similar circulation of alkalis (i.e., K To minimize the causes for densification and bridge formation (minimizing the effect of a bridge collapse if it occurs), the chemical composition of the raw materials is of major importance, especially the content of higher oxides and carbonates in the charge. The type of ore influences largely the amount of gas The choice of reductants is clearly also of high importance for the prevention of explosions in furnaces. The number of fines in the reductants is probably of even higher importance than the content of ore fines for gas permeability and thereby for the general furnace condition and specifically for the bridging mechanism in the charge. Coke fines normally carry much more moisture than do ore fines, and coke dust itself represents an explosion hazard through the possibility of ignition. When ferromanganese is produced in open furnaces, the operator can estimate the risks of eruptions by visual observation of the charge condition and mix-flow from the hoppers. Through easy access to the charge surface, the operator may be able to direct corrective intervention, such as the breaking of crusts and the distribution of charge on the furnace surface. With the introduction of closed furnaces, the operator’s visual contact with the furnace top has been removed, taking with it the possibility of direct corrective intervention. Also, the furnace units have gradually grown in size, thereby dramatically increasing the severity of blows and eruptions when such events take place. Much of the material in this chapter is taken from the book