Purpose
                  We evaluated the performance of a novel dual pulse lithotriptor for extracorporeal lithotripsy.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  A piezoelectric lithotriptor was modified to produce pairs of successive (tandem) shock waves. Four kidney stone models were exposed in vitro to 500 single shock waves with a standard lithotriptor. Another set of stones was exposed 1 at a time to 250 pairs of shock waves with the tandem lithotriptor. The time delay between the first and second shock waves was increased in steps of 50 microseconds between 100 and 600 microseconds. Four stones were used per delay, ie 44 phantoms were fractured with the tandem system. Rabbits were used in vivo to demonstrate that the novel device does not produce more tissue trauma. Five rabbits were exposed to shock waves generated by the new device, 5 were treated with the standard system and 5 served as the sham treated group. Renal damage caused by the 2 systems was compared 1 week after shock wave application.
               
                  Results
                  Enhanced fragmentation efficiency was achieved at a delay of 250 microseconds. In vivo results indicate that the dual pulse shock wave generator does not produce more kidney tissue damage.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Tandem lithotriptors may improve the quality and rate of stone comminution without increasing tissue damage. The device enhances cavitation induced damage to kidney stones. Extensive in vivo experiments will be important to evaluate the new design.Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is efficient therapy for the treatment of ureteral and renal calculi, although it has been demonstrated that new SWL technology does not result in better treatment outcomes. If a second shock wave is sent shortly after the stable phase of the bubbles, their collapse can be intensified, increasing stone damage. This was reported by several groups using 2 electrohydraulic shock wave generators, combined electrohydraulic and piezoelectric shock wave generators or hybrid ellipsoidal reflectors. We studied the performance of a novel dual pulse (tandem) lithotriptor. This new lithotriptor generates 2 successive shock waves with an adjustable time delay to enhance cavitation induced damage to renal stones. A standard piezoelectric lithotriptor was used as basic equipment for this study. A Piezolith 2300 lithotriptor (Richard Wolf GmbH, Knittlingen, Germany) was modified into a tandem shock wave lithotriptor. A new pulse generator triggers 2 discharge circuits. Two capacitors remain charged until the trigger is fired. Two similar shock waves can be generated successively, separated by 50 to 950 microseconds. The modified system may be operated in manual or repetition mode and it can be used as a standard or as a tandem lithotriptor. The water inside the tub was degassed and heated by the lithotriptor water treatment system. Technical details of the tandem shock wave lithotriptor have been described previously. Pressure measurements were made at focus F with polyvinylidene fluoride needle hydrophones (Imotec GmbH, Würselen, Germany) using a FOPH 2000 fiber optic hydrophone (RP Acoustics, Leutenbach, Germany) at a voltage of 7.5 kV. Ten waveforms were registered with the conventional lithotriptor. With the tandem system 10 measurements were done at each selected time delay between 50 and 900 microseconds. The time delay was increased in steps of 50 microseconds. The fiber optic hydrophone had a large signal-to-noise ratio, mainly caused by laser hopping and impurities in the lithotriptor water tank. Additionally, when the fiber was not exactly parallel to the focal axis, peak broadening altered our measurements. Because of this, we used the polyvinylidene fluoride hydrophone, which had previously been calibrated with the FOPH 2000, to do most pressure measurements. Fragmentation studies were performed with AST 109 spherical artificial stones (High Medical Technologies, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland) with a mean dry weight ± SD of 1.6 ± 0.1 gm and a diameter of 15 ± 0.1 mm using the standard and dual pulse lithotriptors. AST phantoms have been used worldwide to evaluate fragmentation efficiency. The maximum stress and strain of these wetted artificial stones is about 2.3 and 0.7 MPa, respectively. Their computerized tomography attenuation values are approximately 420 and 740 HU for dry and hydrated stones, respectively. Four kidney stone models were exposed 1 by 1 to 500 single shock waves with the standard lithotriptor. Another set of stones was exposed 1 at a time to 250 pairs of shock waves with the tandem lithotriptor. Time delay was increased in steps of 50 microseconds between 100 and 600 microseconds. Four stones were used per delay, ie 44 phantoms were fractured with the tandem system. Single and double pulses were administered at a fixed repetition frequency of 1 Hz. Each model was fastened at focus F inside a small polyethylene bag. Fragments were strained through a 1.0 × 1.0 mm mesh after shock wave exposure. The material left on the mesh was heated at 50C for 4 hours, stored in a sealed container and weighed 2 hours after leaving the oven. For each delay we determined the fragmentation coefficient, defined as FC = (W A total of 15 female New Zealand rabbits (Biotinox, S. A. de C. V., Mexico City, Mexico) with a body weight of 2,500 to 2,700 gm were cared for and observed daily under the supervision of a veterinarian during 4 days before treatment. The animals were anesthetized with an infusion containing 5 ml ketamine (500 mg), 2 ml acepromazine maleate (20 mg) and 1.6 ml xylazine (160 mg) at a dose of 1 ml/kg bodyweight. A 1 ml maintenance dose was given hourly. The fur at the shock wave entrance site was shaved. Each rabbit was placed in the lateral decubitus position on the treatment table and positioned to focus shock waves on the parenchyma of the left kidney. The right kidney was not exposed to shock waves. The position was verified using ultrasound scanners. The number of shock waves and the discharge voltage (7.7 kV) were based on previous tests. Five rabbits received 300 standard shock waves and 5 received 150 tandem shock waves at a frequency of 0.75 Hz. The remaining rabbits served as the control group. These animals underwent the entire procedure. The only difference was that they were not exposed to shock waves. Bilateral nephrectomy was performed in all rabbits 7 days after shock wave exposure or sham treatment. The rabbits were sacrificed with intravenous injection of 150 mg/kg sodium pentobarbital (Anestesal, Pfizer S. A. de C. V., Estado de México, Mexico) 7 days after shock wave exposure or sham treatment. All procedures were done according to the Guide to the Care of Experimental Animals of the National Autonomous University of Mexico. After bilateral nephrectomy the kidneys were photographed, placed in neutral buffered formaldehyde (10% paraformaldehyde fixative) and sliced into 3 mm pieces. Fixed kidney samples were cut at the site of the tissue lesion, paraffin embedded, serially step sectioned at 8 μm wide, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and examined under a light microscope. Tissue damage was classified into 4 grades, similar to the technique used by Eisenberger et al. Contingency tables were built for each response variable that was qualitatively evaluated in this study. For 2 × 2 contingency tables (2 treatments by 2 lesion extent categories) we tested the null hypothesis of no dependence of the percent distribution on treatment using Fisher’s exact test. For 2 × 3 contingency tables (2 treatments by 3 lesion extent categories) the Pearson chi-square test was used. Mean peak positive and negative pressures recorded with the standard lithotriptor were about 38 and −18 MPa, respectively. No statistical difference was observed between these values, and the corresponding positive and negative peaks of the first shock wave generated with the tandem lithotriptor. Small craters were observed on stone surfaces facing the incident shock wave. FC varied with the delay between shock waves. No significant difference in FC among the 4 stones in the same group was noted at any delay. The most efficient fragmentation was observed at 200 microseconds (FC = 40.7%) and at 250 microseconds (FC = 41.7%). The coefficient of variation for fragmentation at 200 and 250 microseconds was 0.05 and 0.04, respectively. The difference between the results obtained at these 2 delays was not statistically significant (p >0.01). The administration of 500 single shock waves resulted in a fragmentation coefficient of about 33%. All shock wave treated kidneys showed macroscopic morphological changes ( Previous in vitro studies characterizing the performance of dual pulse shock wave generators We elucidated if tandem shock wave lithotripsy produces more or less tissue damage than standard SWL. To our knowledge this is the first in vivo study to evaluate tissue damage due to piezoelectric dual pulse shock waves. The effects of SWL on rabbit kidneys have been studied by several groups, indicating that this is a valid animal model. Our in vivo results indicate that the tandem shock wave generator does not produce more kidney tissue damage than the standard lithotriptor. Considering that fewer shock waves would be necessary when using dual pulse lithotriptors, SWL tissue damage could be decreased. Since the delay between shock waves can be varied continuously, our modified lithotriptor could be used to adjust time delays according to stone size, shape, location and composition. It is known that cavitation has a prominent role in stone comminution, although it also may produce tissue damage. Fortunately fluid spaces in soft tissue are small and tissue does not have many cavitation nuclei. Since tissue is inhomogeneous and anisotropic, cavitation bubbles would have a different behavior from that observed in fluid surrounding the calculus. Furthermore, because bubble expansion in vivo is constrained by the tissue, bubble collapse is less violent than in water or urine. The basic physical principles described and tested in our study could also be applied to standard electrohydraulic lithotriptors. Composite reflectors Tandem lithotriptors may improve the quality and rate of stone comminution during SWL without increasing tissue damage. To prove the safety of this technique in the treatment of urinary stones in humans more in vivo studies are needed. Oscar Hernández, Arturo Méndez, Edgar Méndez and René Preza provided technical assistance. Agustín Aboytes, Joaquín Aguilar Bobadilla and Helmuth Busch provided advice. Rabbits were cared for at the Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Dewimed S. A. de C. V. provided the Piezolith 2300 shock wave generator.