We investigate the relationship between the price of oil for domestic companies and main economic activity in Russia, measured as the price-adjusted output of agricultural production, mining, manufacturing, production and distribution of electricity, gas and water, construction, transport, retail and wholesale trade. In addition, we use indices of industrial production, mining, production, and the production and distribution of electricity, gas and water separately to examine the effects of oil price changes on various activities. We find that oil prices are procyclical and lead the business cycles. Considering the response to oil price shocks, we find that positive shocks in oil prices have had a positive and statistically significant impact on almost all types of Russian economic activity. Taking into account possible structural changes led by the economic crisis in Russia in 2008–2009, we find a negative response to a positive shock in oil prices in eight months both for main economic activity and mining. Examining causual relationships, we find the domestic oil prices do Granger cause main economic activity, industrial production and manufacturing which is consistent with the cyclical properties.Russia is one of the world’s leading producers and exporters of oil and natural gas. Oil and gas sector products accounted for more than 65% of Russian exports before the fall in mineral prices in 2015, and made up more than half of Russian export in 2017–2018. Russia’s main competitors in the global oil and refined oil market are Saudi Arabia and other OPEC countries, note that the United States has taken the lead in this market ( Among studies on the impact of oil prices on macroeconomic and financial indicators in Russia, it is worth to mention papers on the impact of oil prices on the Russian stock market ( However, the literature mainly considers the effects of world crude oil market prices on the Russian economy. We contribute to the literature by examining the interrelation of crude oil prices in the domestic market with the level of economic activity in Russia. Prices for crude oil in the domestic market depend upon prices in the global market, of course, but also depend upon fiscal policy and exchange rates. We examine the effects of changes in oil prices for domestic companies on various types of economic activity in Russia, considering main economic activity, industrial production, manufacturing, mining and production and distribution of electricity, gas and water. To address the issue, we use several modern econometric tools. In section We use monthly data for output and the real domestic prices of oil for various sample periods depending on availability of comprehensive data. The Russian Federation State Committee on Statistics (here and after Rosstat) measures the domestic price of oil as the average purchase price of crude oil for domestic companies. The average purchase price takes into account the influence of both the price factor and changes in the terms of purchase, the ratio in the acquisition of resources with different quality characteristics and different price levels, seasonality, etc. Rosstat provides data on oil prices at monthly frequency only since 2009: 01, and before that at quarterly frequency. So we use low to frequency quadratic conversion method for the period 2000–2008. The dynamics for domestic oil prices follow the dynamics of global prices (see As can be seen in We obtain a measure of the real price of oil by deflating the average purchase price of crude oil for domestic companies by the consumer price index (CPI). We study monthly time series data for Russia over the period from January 2000 to December 2018 (a total of 228 observations); see The quality of the data from the Russian official statistics has been repeatedly criticised by Russian and international experts ( The price of oil for the domestic market affects the price of gasoline and other motor fuels, which in turn will change the costs for companies in all sectors of the economy. There is evidence in the literature that this influence is asymmetric ( To investigate the cyclical behavior of crude oil prices, we use the Industrial Production Index (IPI) for Russia, obtained from the OECD database. To examine the oil price relation with various economic activities we use various indices. The index of main economic activity is the price-adjusted output of agricultural production, mining, manufacturing, production and distribution of electricity, gas and water, construction, transport, and retail and wholesale trade (see Industrial production accounted for almost 30% of GDP in 2018 with mining accounting for almost half of total industrial production according to Rosstat data (see We investigate the cyclical properties of oil prices, using the new Hamilton argues that this method is a better alternative to the popular HP filter as it “offers a robust approach to detrending that achieves all the objectives sought by users of the HP filter with none of its drawbacks” ( Having cyclical components of the logs of all the variables (main activity index, industrial production index, manufacturing, mining, electricity, gas, and water supply as well as the domestic oil prices), we calculate the correlation coefficient ρ(X In The results, shown in The crude oil price drives the cycle of main economic activity by four months, industrial production, as well as manufacturing by two months. Note that oil prices lead the business cycle in the mining industry by six months. As can be seen from  To proceed further we need to check our variables for (weak) stationarity. We utilize the ADF test ( Note that the hypothesis of a unit root in the time series for oil prices is rejected by the ADF and DF-GLS tests. The hypothesis that oil prices are stationary is not rejected by the KPSS test. So in what follows, we use the oil price series in log levels (multiplied by 100 for convenience) and consider it as a stationary time series. There is a contradiction between the results from the ADF and DF-GLS tests for the growth rate of industrial production. The KPSS test supports the hypothesis that this series is stationary. To make a decision we also conduct the Philips-Perron test ( We get similar results for the growth rate of manufacturing production. The null with the KPSS test (that the series is stationary) is not rejected at the 1% level for the growth rate of mining production. However, the ADF and DF-GLS tests suggest that this time series is stationary. In this section, we test the hypothesis that crude oil price shocks cause changes in industrial production and other economic activities. A shock to the real price of oil not only directly affects the oil price, but also is transmitted to economic activity ( We run bivariate VAR models investigating the impulse responses of each of 5 measures of economic activity to positive oil price shocks. As the oil price series is stationary, we use this variable in levels. For economic activity we use the logarithmic first difference. Thus, we assume that different types of economic activity Industrial production and manufacturing production were highly affected by the 2008–2009 crises (see The model consisting of equations We explore the sequential modified likelihood ratio LR test to check whether to keep the dummy variable in the model or not. The LR statistic is We check for three restrictions: For each The last statement implies that the vector of innovations is contemporaneously correlated with full rank matrix We assume that innovations are contemporaneously correlated and have a common component which cannot be associated with a specific variable. In order to interpret the impulses, it is common to apply a transformation P to the innovations so that they become uncorrelated: We utilize the Cholesky transformation, attributing all of the effect of any common component to the As a first step we consider the model (3a) and (3b) with As a next step we use the selected lag order to check whether the model (4a) and (4b) better fits the data. We check for three restrictions (6) considering the impact of the crisis on economic activities. We use the modification of LR-test for small samples (5). Results are summarised in Based on the likelihood ratio test we reject the hypothesis that the crisis does not have an additional impact on our variables. We utilize the preferred models for each We plot the responses of the 5 measures of economic activity to one standard deviation shock to the real domestic oil price (see We find that the growth rate of main economic activity, industrial production, manufacturing and mining increase on impact in response to an unanticipated increase in the real oil price. The effect is very short (the low bound of the confidence interval crosses the zero line in 4 months for the main economic activity, for the other activities the effect is even shorter). However, the growth rate falls later and returns to the baseline level within 12 months for total industrial production and manufacturing. The negative effect on the main activity and mining lasts longer. We want to emphasize that we consider the real oil price in the domestic market. The growth rate of electricity, gas and water supply is neutral to an unanticipated increase in the real oil prices. Rising oil prices in the global market lead to higher prices in the domestic market, albeit smoothed by tariffs and taxes. The Russian economy benefits from increasing oil prices in the global market through money inflow, increasing investment and consumption. However, the budget rule for the Russian federal budget expenditures first applied in Russia in 2004, last modification was made in 2018, implies restrictions on government expenditures and thus mitigates the impact of fluctuations in oil&gas revenue on economic activity. On the other hand, rising oil prices in the domestic market lead to a decrease in economic activity. It is consistent with the shown above impulse response function, positive response to unexpected positive shock in oil prices changes to negative and then dies out. We carry out pairwise Granger causality tests for preferred models using results reported in It is known that Granger causality tests are very sensitive to lag length. To address whether oil prices Granger cause the economic activity and avoid uncertainty in choosing the lag length, we run ADLX(p,q) regressions for each type of economic activity in Russia We run 720 regressions to choose the optimal lag order p For each VARX From these results we can conclude that oil prices Granger-cause industrial production and manufacturing activity in Russia which is consistent with the results reported in section As we already mentioned, Granger causality tests are very sensitive to lag length. So we run 144 OLS regressions The results are summaries in Having chosen the optimal lag length (p*,q*) in Thus, the current price of oil in the domestic market helps to predict changes in the main economic activity, industry and its sectors, except for the electricity, gas and water production and supply sector. It can help in policy decision making. However, the nonlinear relationship between oil prices and economic activity should be taken into account. Rising in domestic oil prices caused by global prices swelling boosts economic activity in the next period from the supply side. But from the demand side, we expect decease of economic activity, which is shown by the impulse response function ( The relationship between the price of crude oil and the level of economic activity has attracted considerable attention in the literature, especially for advanced economies. Russia is one of the world’s leading oil producers and exporters, and the Russian economy is rather sensitive to price fluctuations in the global oil market. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between oil prices in the domestic market and the level of different types of economic activities in Russia. The domestic oil prices tend to follow the global prices but also are affected by fiscal and monetary policy in Russia. We use different approaches known in the literature to address this issue. First, we investigate cyclical properties of local oil prices. Our results indicate that oil prices are procyclical and lead the cycle of all considered types of economic activities in Russia. We also can conclude, that industrial production leads the cycle of main economic activity, but lags the cycle of mining. Then we utilize a bivariate VAR model to examine the effect of oil price shocks on the level of economic activity. We find that positive oil shocks lead to an increase in the growth rate of main economic activity, industrial production, and manufacturing in Russia. However, the effect is rather short and the growth rates fall later and return to the baseline level within one year. Our results, for the most part, are consistent with the results of previous studies by Our findings regarding the causal relationship between oil prices and growth rate of economic activities show that changes in real oil prices help to predict changes in the growth rate of main economic activity, industrial production, manufacturing and mining, and are consistent with our findings from the cyclical correlations investigation. Our results are in general consistent with the recent evidence by We have no conflicts of interest.