In recent years, the kinetics and mechanism of chalcopyrite dissolution in different media have been the focus of much investigation since a fundamental understanding of the phenomena would help to resolve the problems that challenge the implementation of a hydrometallurgical processing alternative. The addition of polar organic solvents has been found to have a beneficial effect by depassivating the chalcopyrite surface. The present article describes chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of alcohols, such as 2-propanol and methanol, in an acid solution at different temperatures with distinct oxidants (H2O2, CuSO4 and O3). For both alcohols, the temperature was found to be a very important variable in the process. For 2-propanol, copper dissolution by hydrogen peroxide fits the shrinking core model controlled by chemical reaction in the temperature range up to 40°C with an activation energy of 42kJmol
                        −1. At higher temperatures, the peroxide rapidly decomposed and the copper extraction ceased. In contrast to the straightforward kinetics in peroxide, the dissolution behavior using cupric ion and ozone as oxidants displayed a complex mechanism, initiating with the solid phase transformation upon reaction with the cupric ion to form an iron-free phase, which later was oxidized by the ozone. A reaction scheme is proposed according to the different phases formed during the leaching process, identified using ultraviolet and atomic absorption spectroscopies, as well as X-ray diffraction. Methanol was found to stabilize the cuprous ion and allow the formation of roxbyite (Cu2S2–6Cu2S), which is essential to achieve high copper extractions.Chalcopyrite dissolution at moderate conditions has been a significant challenge, due to the passivation that occurs upon oxidation in acid solutions. In the majority of processes proposed, strong oxidants, frequently the ferric ion in chloride or sulfate media, and elevated temperatures are necessary to achieve high copper extractions ( The − The leaching experiments were performed in a 1 All leaching tests employed 140 Chalcopyrite leaching with polar organic solvents requires the use of an oxidant to reach the necessary solution potential ( The initial peroxide concentration is a sensitive variable in mineral dissolution processes. For this reason, leaching tests were carried out on the chalcopyrite with 2-propanol/sulfuric acid solutions, varying the hydrogen peroxide concentration at 50 To confirm that the low extraction was due to peroxide decomposition, the same experiments were performed at a lower temperature (40 Experiments were performed in the limited temperature range between 25 and 50 Since chalcopyritic iron is simultaneously removed in this leaching process (data not shown here), the chalcopyrite is expected to react leaving only a very porous layer of elemental sulfur in its wake. For that reason, the shrinking core model with chemical reaction control was used to analyze the experimental data ( The experimental results are plotted as a function of Eq. An Arrhenius plot of the slope values (ln [slope] versus 1/T) is shown in The principal disadvantages of using hydrogen peroxide are its elevated cost and its instability at high temperatures. For this reason, more convenient oxidants were employed: CuSO An alternative polar organic solvent that stabilizes Cu(I) is methanol, which is less expensive than 2-propanol. In the previous section, the oxidant concentration was shown to greatly affect the chalcopyrite leaching rate. The same solution and conditions as in the last series of experiments (0.2 The improvement in chalcopyrite dissolution with polar organic solvents may be associated with the stabilization of the cuprous ion ( Samples of the leaching solution at different times from the experiment with 0.035 As mentioned previously, in The behavior of iron extraction throughout the leaching process is quite interesting. In the peroxide experiments, the iron dissolves at a rate and in stoichiometric proportions similar to those of copper (data not shown). However, with cupric sulfate and ozone, the iron dissolution is continuous from the onset of the experiment, although in a lesser proportion relative to the copper extraction ( With the evidence of these phases, the following three step reaction mechanism is proposed. In the first stage, the cupric ion oxidizes a sulfide with the chalcopyrite structure, forming the copper-rich roxbyite phase (Cu In the second stage, roxbyite is oxidized by the ozone in the acidic organic (R) medium, methanol in this case. The copper is dissolved as Cu(I), stabilized by the methanol. The sulfur in the roxbyite structure is oxidized to its elemental form (Reaction The Fe Therefore, the overall reaction for this system, suggested by The present study shows the beneficial role of alcohols in oxidative chalcopyrite leaching. The leaching kinetics in 2-propanol acidic media, using peroxide as the oxidant, obey the reaction controlled shrinking core model with an activation energy of 42