Biodegradation of organic flotation collectors, namely sodium isopropylxanthate, dodecylammonium acetate and sodium oleate in solution, was studied using Bacillus polymyxa. The biodegradation has been assessed under different conditions, namely during growth, in the presence of the cells, metabolite or an active culture. Xanthate biodegradation was found to be better in the presence of an active culture or metabolite, while the biodegradation of dodecylammonium acetate was more efficient during bacterial growth. The efficacy of biodegradation of sodium oleate was the highest using an active culture. The growth of the organism could be successfully achieved in the presence of the organic collectors. The surface chemical changes brought about by the interaction between the minerals, namely galena, quartz or calcite and collector, metabolite or cells served as indicators of the biodegradation process. The biological stripping of the adsorbed collector reagents from mineral surfaces was also confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy.The froth flotation process continues to be the workhorse for the beneficiation of base-metal sulphides, oxides and industrial minerals. In this process, several organic and inorganic reagents are employed to make the mineral surfaces either hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Although these reagents have a high specificity for a given mineral surface and are utilised in relatively low dosages, excess and unreacted concentrations of these reagents end up in the plant effluents. The degradation of these xenobiotic organic chemicals has now become a challenge in wastewater treatment. This is primarily due to their low concentrations and the inability to degrade them by conventional procedures. Environmental problems associated with flotation reagents in mineral processing plant water have been well documented In the present investigation, the biodegradation of typical organic flotation collectors, namely sodium isopropylxanthate, dodecylammonium acetate and sodium oleate, has been studied using A pure strain of Flotation reagents, namely sodium isopropylxanthate, dodecylammonium acetate (DAA) and sodium oleate, of commercial grade, were used in this study. Sodium isopropylxanthate was dissolved in acetone and recrystallised with petroleum ether before use. Hand-picked pure mineral samples of galena, quartz and calcite were obtained from Alminrock Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India. The growth of Exactly 90 ml of sterilized medium (with 2% sucrose), containing different concentrations (50, 100 and 200 ppm) of sodium isopropylxanthate, DAA or sodium oleate were taken in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks and the pH of all the solutions adjusted to 7. Ten milliliters of a fully grown culture along with the cells were then added to the flasks. After inoculation, the samples were incubated in a Remi rotary shaker at 240 rpm at 30 °C. The bacterial growth was monitored by direct microscopic counting using a Petroff-Hausser counter and the pH changes during growth were also recorded at regular intervals of time. Sufficient cell biomass was generated by repeated growth of A blank was maintained without adding the collector reagents. Totally, seven to eight flasks were maintained in each case and the experiments were replicated. All the flasks were incubated at 30 °C in a Remi orbital shaker at 240 rpm. At each interval of time, one flask was removed and analysed for the residual concentration of xanthate A batch culture in the presence of different concentrations of flotation reagents that had reached the stationary phase (≈48 h) was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 20 min to separate the cells from the metabolite, followed by filtration of the supernatant through sterile 0.2 μm Millipore membrane filters. The total protein content in the metabolite was estimated by the Bradford's method For these experiments, the mineral samples were ground to below 5 μm using a Retsch mortar grinder. Electrophoretic mobilities were measured for 0.1% mineral suspensions using the model 3000 Zeta Sizer manufactured by Malvern Instruments, Worcs, UK. The average value of five readings has been reported. The relative standard deviation values were below 5% and typically in the range of 2–3%. Zeta potential changes as a function of pH (2–11) were determined for minerals such as galena, quartz and calcite under different conditions as detailed below: (a) In the absence and presence of collector reagent: In these tests, 1 g of the mineral sample was agitated with 100 ml of 10 ppm collector reagent for 0.5 h in a Remi rotary shaker at 240 rpm. Subsequently, 10 ml aliquots of the suspension were each made up to 100 ml and the pH adjusted to a desired value in the range of 2–11 and allowed to equilibrate for 1 h. The zeta potential values of the dilute suspension were then determined as a function of pH. (b) Presence of collector reagent and/or cells: In these experiments, 1 g of the mineral was initially agitated with 100 ml of 10 ppm collector reagent for 0.5 h in a Remi rotary shaker at 240 rpm. The mineral suspension containing the adsorbed collector was filtered, rinsed with distilled water. The residue was then agitated with sufficient cell biomass and made up to 100 ml with distilled water such that the cell number was ≈10 (c) Presence of collector reagent and/or metabolite: The metabolite (cell-free) obtained from a culture after 6 h of growth was agitated with 1 g of the mineral sample for 24 h in a Remi rotary shaker at 240 rpm. The pH of the metabolite was around 3.5. The same procedure as described earlier was followed for the samples interacted with both collector and metabolite, before recording the zeta potential values as a function of pH. Fourier transform infrared spectra of different minerals in the presence of collector reagents, before and after interaction with bacterial cells/metabolite, were recorded using a Perkin Elmer Model FT-spectrum-1000 instrument, operating in the 4000–400 cm The growth curve of The growth studies carried out in the presence of 50, 100 and 200 ppm of sodium oleate show no lag phase, while it takes about 3 h for the attainment of stationary phase in the case of 50 ppm and 4 h in the case of 100 and 200 ppm. The final pH at the end of stationary phase was found to be 3.5 for all the concentrations of oleate studied. The maximum cell number obtained was 10 The biodegradation of the flotation reagents from aqueous solutions was studied under different conditions, namely during growth, in the presence of the metabolite, cells or an active culture.  The biodegradation of DAA under different conditions as a function of time is portrayed in  Assaying of the protein and polysaccharide contents was carried out for the characterization of the metabolite, produced by the bacterial action on the different flotation reagents used in this study. The feasibility of bioremoval of the different flotation reagents adsorbed onto selected minerals was also examined. Towards this end, electrokinetic studies were carried out on the minerals before and after interaction with the collectors and/or metabolite or cells to ascertain the surface chemical changes that are brought about. The zeta potential of galena in the absence and presence of sodium isopropylxanthate and or metabolite as a function of pH is portrayed in The results of the zeta potential measurements carried out on galena in the presence of xanthate and /or cells as a function of pH are shown in The zeta potential of quartz in the absence and presence of DAA and/or metabolite as a function of pH is depicted in The results of zeta potential measurements on quartz before and after interaction with DAA and/or cells are portrayed in The zeta potential of calcite before and after interaction with oleate and/or metabolite is shown in  The mineral samples containing the adsorbed collector reagents were examined before and after interaction with the metabolite or cells, by FTIR spectroscopy to ascertain the efficacy of bioremoval of the collectors adsorbed onto the minerals. The spectra are reported elsewhere The FTIR spectrum of galena after interaction with xanthate revealed absorption bands of lead xanthate at 1201, 1089 and 1017 cm In the case of quartz-DAA system, the amine peak at 3429 cm With respect to the calcite–oleate system, the peak at 3419 cm The results of this investigation confirm the removal of organic flotation reagents from sulphide, oxide and carbonate mineral surfaces and from the bulk solution using a heterotrophic organism. Further, the biomodulation of mineral surfaces, as revealed by the electrokinetic studies, could serve as an indicator of the bioremoval process. The biodegradation of the flotation reagents by heterotrophic organisms could also facilitate better leaching by chemolithotrophic autotrophs, particularly for sulphide minerals. From the results of the present investigation, the following major conclusions can be arrived at: The growth of The efficiency of biodegradation of xanthate can be arranged in the following sequence of decreasing order: The efficiency of biodegradation of DAA can be arranged in the following sequence of decreasing order: The efficiency of biodegradation of sodium oleate can be arranged in the following sequence of decreasing order: The protein content of the metabolite produced by bacterial interaction with the flotation reagents can be arranged in the following order of decreasing magnitude: The amount of polysaccharide generated due to bacterial interaction with the collectors can be arranged in the following decreasing order: The observed zeta potential changes in the mineral samples highlight that the collector reagents are desorbed to varying extents from the mineral surfaces in the presence of the bacterial cells or metabolite. FTIR spectroscopic studies provide evidence in support of the bioremoval of the collectors from the mineral samples. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received under the Indo-Swedish STINT programme to carry out this research work.