This study illustrates a density functional theory (DFT) based approach to design the amine collectors with regards to their interaction with the quartz surface. Mechanism of interaction of primary aliphatic amines and their ether and ester derivatives with the quartz surface has been established. Hydrogen bond geometries and adsorption energies as calculated using DFT reveal that ester amines are stronger surfactants compared to the ether amines and primary alkyl amines. Simulation studies carried out for the different amines with number of carbon atoms varying from 10 to 18 suggest that increasing the number of carbon atoms in the alkyl chain enhances the interaction, but not beyond C14 for primary amines and C16 for its ether and ester derivatives. Presence of both ether and ester group in the alkyl chain facilitates its interaction strength. Adsorption strength of C12 amine containing both ether and ester amine is almost equivalent to that of C16 ester amine.Flotation is considered to be one of the most efficient mineral processing processes. The separation of minerals is based on the selective adsorption of collector molecules on the desired mineral surface thereby rendering it hydrophobic. As a result, the hydrophobic solid particles attach to the air bubbles dispersed in the aqueous media, rise to the surface layer, and then get easily skimmed off. Phenomena related to the adsorption of the collector such as the amount of adsorption, orientation of the adsorbed species, and the natures of the adsorbed layer affect the flotation process. Therefore, it becomes very important to understand the fundamentals of the collector-mineral interaction while developing a tailor-made collector. Molecular modeling studies involving density functional theory, molecular mechanics, and semi-empirical approaches have opened a new door for developing mineral specific reagents. Prediction of structures, energies, and possible interaction of molecules help in studying the underlying physical and chemical phenomena involved in a process. These calculations can be used to determine the change in energy for various possible mineral-collector interactions and thereby establish the most favorable interaction. Therefore, molecular modeling techniques can actually help a researcher to develop collector molecules even without going for expensive experimental trials. Pradip and coworkers ( Flotation of quartz using amine based cationic collectors is well known and important from the mineral processing point of view. Mechanism of long chain alkyl amine adsorption on quartz has been studied in detail in the past. Fuerstenau and Somasundaran proposed that, in acidic conditions, amines are almost totally ionized and the resulting ammonium ions, below the critical micelle concentration (CMC), get physiosorbed at the negatively charged silicate–water interface mainly through electrostatic interaction ( These days, conventional quartz collector such as primary aliphatic amines and their acetates and hydrochloride salts are being replaced by its ether derivatives. Insertion of the polar group ( Based on the above literature survey, it appears that a large number of quantum-chemical studies have been performed on a variety of reagent-mineral systems to provide an accurate quantitative description of the surfaces and related molecular interactions. It follows, that a strong computational chemistry approach should be very much helpful in developing the amine based reagents for quartz flotation. However, to the best of our knowledge, no systematic molecular modeling studies have been carried out in order to study the effect of various possibilities that would arise while developing a reagent for quartz. The present paper deals with the density functional calculations of adsorption of long chain amines, and its ether and ester derivatives over quartz surface. The results have been validated against the quartz–amine mechanism proposed in the past ( The spin restricted DFT calculations were carried out using the DMol The surface cell was created by cleaving the bulk unit cell of quartz at the desired cleavage plane and using 3 layers of Si The total adsorption energy (Δ Dissolution of quartz in water depends on many factors such as pH, temperature, pressure, surface structure, and structural modifications. Different surfaces of quartz have very different structural features and they are identifiable by the surface hydroxyl groups while in contact with water. These hydroxyl groups influence the surface chemistry of quartz ( The nonhydroxylated quartz (1 It is known that alkyl amine, when dissolved in water, gets protonated depending on the pH of the slurry. At neutral or acidic pH, a major part of it gets converted to the ammonium ion by accepting a proton from water. However, still some part of the amine remains in its molecular form. Therefore, adsorption on the surface silanol can be both through cationic and molecular adsorption. Hence separate DFT calculations were performed by docking dodecylamine (C Interaction energies for the molecular adsorption of C Further simulations were carried out to understand the mechanism of C It is evident that the interaction of C Difference between the interaction of the alkyl amine and its derivatives is more pronounced, when the cationic adsorptions are considered.  Addition of a proton to the amino group, which shares its electron lone pair, results in less electron density around N. Alkyl groups attached to the quaternary N, which are electron donating in nature, stabilize it through inductive effect. Hence longer the alkyl chain, more stable is the ammonium ion. Alkyl ammonium ion with less number of carbon atoms is not stable. Therefore, with the increase in the alkyl chain length, the amino-silanol attraction increases. However, it is expected that increasing the chain beyond a certain number of C atoms would not make any significant difference. This is mainly due to the electron donating capacity of the alkyl chain which does not change much after a certain length. The present work supports this phenomenon and the change in interaction energies with respect to the increase in the chain is illustrated in It is observed that, in case of primary alkyl amines, increasing the number of carbon atoms from 10 to 14 causes an enhancement in the interaction energy from −318.75 to −425.89 The results of DFT calculations show that the presence of an ether or ester group in the primary alkyl chain enhances the adsorption of amines on the quartz surfaces. Hence further calculations were carried out in order to study the combined effect of both these groups together on quartz surface. Here ester and ether groups were preferably introduced to the C Geometric optimization of the five ions with the quartz surface resulted in different geometry and interaction energy. We have studied the adsorption behavior of long chain amines and its ether and ester derivatives on the quartz surface using density functional calculations. Based on the literature input and initial calculations, quartz (1