Vitamin C and polyphenol content as well as total antioxidative activity were investigated in fresh leaves of kale; in leaves after blanching or cooking; and in frozen and canned leaves. In 100g fresh matter, kale leaves contained 384.9mg polyphenols and 112.1mg vitamin C, with a Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) level of 1175μM Trolox. Of the polyphenols identified in kale leaves, ferulic acid occurred in the highest amount (240.44mg/100g, constituting 62% of total polyphenols). Freezing was a better method of preserving kale leaves since the loss of nutritive constituents was lower than in the case of canning. Depending on preliminary processing and storage temperature, after one-year storage frozen leaves contained 82.9–171.3mg polyphenols and 39.3–65.4mg vitamin C, with TEAC at the level of 501–681μM Trolox in 100g. In canned leaves these values were: 91.3–94.1mg polyphenols, 16.1–19.3mg vitamin C and 268–293μM Trolox.Diet can play an important role either in precipitating or preventing diseases. Vegetables, and Vegetables contain many antioxidant compounds. Polyphenols constitute the largest group of these biologically active constituents. Vitamin C and polyphenols are commonly recognised as a major naturally occurring nutrients and antioxidants in diet. Epidemiological studies have shown a correlation between an increased consumption of phenolic antioxidants and a reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and certain types of cancer. Processing and preparation, especially thermal treatment, which are applied prior to consumption, may affect these phytochemicals. Vitamin C is one of the most sensitive vitamin. For this reason it is often used to evaluate the influences of food processing on vitamin contents ( Many people have no opportunity to eat fresh vegetables every day and frequently use frozen vegetables, mainly for convenience, time-saving and practical reasons ( The aim of the present work was to investigate qualitative changes in kale leaves after preliminary processing and preservation by freezing and canning. The level of selected antioxidative constituents, namely vitamin C and polyphenol compounds, formed the criterion for evaluation. The investigation covered raw kale leaves, leaves after preliminary processing (blanching and cooking), two kinds of frozen products; one obtained using the traditional method (kale leaves blanched before freezing) and the other a convenience type food product (kale leaves cooked to consumption consistency before freezing); and two kinds of canned products: from cut and from ground leaves. Both frozen and canned products were evaluated directly after processing and after one year of storage. The material investigated consisted of fresh kale ( A single harvest was carried out 14 The freezing of kale leaves was preceded by technological procedures: washing, cutting into strips 2–3 In variant I, kale was blanched in a stainless steel vessel for 2.5 The material from blanched and cooked samples was packed in 500 The canning of vegetables using the sterilization method was preceded by the following technological procedures: washing; blanching; cutting into strips 2–3 The vitamin C content was determined as the sum of ascorbic acid (AA) and dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA) using the spectrophotometrical method ( Phenolic compounds were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a liquid chromatograph equipped with a Merck-Hitachi L-7455 diode array detector (DAD). The 0.5 Antioxidant activity (TEAC) was evaluated by means of spectrophotometric method as well as the ABTS Statistical analysis allowing a comparison of the content of antioxidant compounds was carried out using single-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the basis of the Snedecor Fresh kale leaves contained 112.1 The content and stability of phyto-chemical compounds in food after processing is essential in evaluating the nutritional value of vegetables rich in these constituents. Thermally processed vegetables have for a long time been considered to have a lower nutritional value than fresh produce. This is based on the fact that vitamin C and other thermo-labile compounds may lose their activity due to oxidation or in consequence of leaching into the water during home cooking or industrial processing, such as blanching ( Compared with the raw material, the levels of vitamin C, polyphenols and antioxidative activity in cooked kale leaves were reduced by 57%, 73% and 45% respectively. The losses of different polyphenol constituents were also significant, ranging from 64% for caffeic acid to 82% for The various effects of cooking on antioxidant capacity can be observed in different vegetables. In some vegetables, boiling can contribute to the suppression of oxidation by antioxidants due to the thermal inactivation of oxidative enzymes ( Most vegetables are seasonal crops and in order to ensure their availability all the year round, various preservation methods have to be used. Canning and freezing are the most frequently used techniques in vegetable processing. Freezing is a highly efficient method of keeping vegetables for longer storage periods with the original characteristics mostly undisturbed. The process of freezing kale leaves did not significantly reduce the level of analysed antioxidants or their antioxidative activity (  The results of the present work show that sterilization of kale leaves brought about a marked decrease in the content of total polyphenols (50% on average), accompanied by losses in individual polyphenol constituents, ranging from 32% (ferulic acid) to 67% (quercetin) ( After one year of storage, the total content of polyphenols in frozen kale was on average 12% lower than that found in frozen products directly after freezing ( If frozen foods are handled and processed properly, their nutritive value can be retained during storage. If enzymes that accelerate the oxidation of vitamin C are inactivated by blanching, freezing causes negligible losses of vitamin C in vegetables. Blanching as the pretreatment ensures good preservation of frozen products and very good stability of the vitamin ( As in the case of polyphenols and vitamin C, a mean 12% decrease in TEAC was also recorded after one year of storage. In MB frozen products it was an average of 652 One-year storage of canned products increased losses in vitamin C and TEAC of 40% and 24% respectively compared with products directly after sterilization ( However, losses of individual polyphenol constituents were lower in the canned products evaluated ( Modern societies expect food products to be not only convenient but also healthy and nutritious. Freezing can be regarded as a safe method of preserving vegetables since no chemical preservatives are used in the process. Freezing is among the most frequently used methods of preserving plant raw materials both in the food industry and in households. The advantage of canned vegetables, however, is that the final product can be used without any preparation other than being briefly heated. The drawback undoubtedly lies in the considerable losses of nutritive constituents which pass into the brine and the loss of thermo-labile vitamins during high temperature thermal processing. The results of this paper show that freezing is a better method of preserving kale leaves since the loss of nutritive constituents is lower than in the case of canning. After 12 This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education (Project No. N312 3267 33, 2007/2009).