Since ultra-fine Ti(C,N) has large surface and high activity, preparation of high performance cermets using ultra-fine Ti(C,N) powders is very difficult at the present. In the paper, deoxidation process of ultra-fine TiC0.7N0.3 powder is carried out firstly, and the oxygen content of ultra-fine TiC0.7N0.3 powder can be decreased from more than 1wt% to 0.06wt%; milling technology of ultra-fine TiC0.7N0.3-based cermet is studied in the paper, the results show that the optimum milling time is 45h and the ball to powder weight ratio is 15:1, and the dispersant helps to achieve a homogeneous distribution of the ultra-fine powder; during vacuum sintering of ultra-fine cermet, pores tend to form, hence NT6B shows relatively lower properties than NT6A. After HIP process (1350°C, 90min, 70MPa), the porosity can be largely decreased. The prepared ultra-fine cermet has typical core–rim microstructure, finer grain size and enhanced properties.Ti(C, Despite all these advantages, Ti(C, The oxygen content in ultra-fine TiC Method 1: One kilogram ultra-fine TiC Method 2: One kilogram ultra-fine TiC After the deoxidation processing, ultra-fine cermet NT6B is prepared with 0.13 After milling the pulp is dried in vacuum drying equipment and specimens of 6.5 Oxygen content in ultra-fine TiC  In the atmosphere, H  TiC and TiN both crystallize in the NaCl-type structure and they can form a complete series of Ti(C The lattice parameters of TiC and TiN are 4.3274 Generally speaking, milling is to achieve a homogeneous distribution of the binder and hard phase. Secondly, it is used to comminute the powders. The milling speed, powder amount, shape and content of milling bodies, solid to liquid volume ratio, milling time and ball to powder weight ratio, all have an effect on the milling. In the paper, the former 4 factors are fixed, and the effect of milling time and ball to powder weight ratio on the milling are mainly investigated. The properties of cermets made with various milling variables (milling time and ball to powder weight ratio) are shown in From On the other hand, milling energy will increase with ball to powder weight ratio, and milling effect is enhanced. However, excessive increase of it will result in increase of the activity of powder mixture, and the oxygen will be absorbed easily. The oxygen content is detrimental to the properties of the cermet. Therefore, when the ball to powder weight ratio increases from 10:1 to 20:1, the properties increase first and then decrease. 15:1 is the optimal ball to powder weight ratio in this paper. It is reported in Ref. The properties of cermets NT6A and NT6B after vacuum sintering are shown in The relatively low property of ultra-fine cermet NT6B than NT6A is due to large number of pores in it. Pore with a size of 100 In this paper, 0.13   The core–rim microstructure can also be seen in cermet NT6A fabricated with 3 According to the above two figures, cermets have very complicated microstructures. In order to understand the composition of all phases, EDS is employed for analysis of chemical compositions of fixed points, and the result is shown in It is obvious that the HIP process has a dramatic effect on decreasing pore size. Supposing that the external pressure in HIP processing is  After deoxidation processing, the oxygen content in ultra-fine raw powders can be decreased from more than 1 The optimum milling time is 45 During vacuum sintering of ultra-fine cermet, pores tend to form, hence NT6B shows relatively lower property than NT6A. After HIP process (1350 The authors are grateful to Zigong Cemented Carbide Corp., Ltd. of China for supply of materials. Thanks are also extended to Sichuan University for the use of facilities.