In this work the possibility to substitute pork backfat with extra virgin olive oil (EVOO), adsorbed on whey protein-based crumb or white bread crumb, in typical Italian salami is addressed. Five types of salami were manufactured, under the usual commercial conditions, by replacing 0 (Control), 60% and 100% of pork backfat with whey protein-based crumb (WP60–WP100) and white pan bread (PB60–PB100), respectively, soaked in EVOO. Results highlighted that pH, weight loss, colour parameters and microbial counts did not show statistically significant differences between the Control and the modified salami. On the other hand, malonaldehyde was slightly lower in PB100, PB60, WP100 and WP60, compared to the Control. Chemical composition was significantly affected by formulations. Modified salami presented a better fatty acid profile showing lower saturated and higher monounsaturated fatty acids than control. Furthermore in all modified salami atherogenic and thrombogenic indices displayed the lowest values. The Control showed the highest values for Warner–Bratzler Shear, hardness, cohesiveness, gumminess and chewiness. Sensory evaluation of WP60 did not show significant differences compared to the Control, whereas PB100 and WP100 were unacceptable for taste.Dry fermented sausages are meat products with a high fat content, which is visible when the product is sliced. Commercial sausages usually contain up to 30% fat ( There are several techniques to reduce the cholesterol level of meat products. It is possible to replace fat with non-meat ingredients such as soy proteins ( Olive oil is the most monounsaturated vegetable oil. It contains 56.3–86.5% monounsaturated fatty acids, 8–25% saturated and 3.6–21.5% polyunsaturated fatty acids ( The aim of this work was to evaluate the effects of partial and total substitution of pork backfat with extra-virgin olive oil using whey protein based crumb and white pan bread to reduce the water activity and to obtain a structure similar to conventional products. The effects of the new proposed strategies on the microbiological, nutritional, textural and sensorial quality of typical Italian salami were studied. Five formulations of salami were prepared in a sausage factory (Carni SUS, Foggia, Italy) under industrial conditions. The control was produced using 90% pork meat and 10% pork backfat (Control). Other formulations were produced with a substitution of pork backfat with 60% and 100% of whey protein based crumb (WP60–WP100) and white pan bread (PB60–PB100), respectively, soaked in extra-virgin oil for 30 To prepare the salami, unfrozen pork meat (about 25 Samples from each formulation were taken for analysis on day 0, 6, 8, 10, 13, 15, 17 and 22. Sensory, colour, nutritional and mechanical properties were evaluated at the final time (22nd day). Three strings of salami from each formulation were weighed just before the salami were put into the ripening room. Weight losses were expressed as the difference (%) between the initial and the weight measured at each sampling time. 10 10 Colour measurements were performed with a Chroma Meter CR-400 (Konica Minolta, Osaka, Japan), according to the standard conditions of the Commission International d’Eclairage (CIE). The samples were sliced with a thickness of 1 Lipid oxidation was measured as thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) by a modified version ( Each sample was thawed and ground to homogeneous consistency using a food processor. Moisture, protein, lipid and ash contents in each sample were determined according to Lipids were extracted according to Mechanical properties were tested using two different instrumental measurements, ten parallelepipeds for each sample (1 Texture profile was analysed using a modified compression device that avoids transversal elongation of the samples. Each sample underwent two cycles of 80% compression, force by time data was used to calculate the following parameters: hardness (N), cohesiveness, springiness (mm), gumminess (N) and chewiness (N/mm). A consumer panel composed of students and staff of the University of Foggia (80 persons) was interviewed for sensory analysis. Evaluation was conducted in individual booths (located away from the sample preparation area), under red-filtered incandescent lighting to avoid bias due to potential colour differences among samples. Each sample was assigned a five-digit random numbers and to each consumer five slices (1.5 Microbiological data were used as discriminant variables to run cluster analysis between the Control and the other modified salami. The single linkage rule was used as the “amalgamation method”, and the dissimilarity among the different samples were evaluated by means of Xlstat 2007. The chemical, nutritional, mechanical and sensorial data were analyzed using the GLM procedure of the Statistical Analysis System package ( As reported in the literature, during drying salami lose weight. The weight losses depend on the temperature and relative humidity of the ripening room, the air velocity inside the room and the ripening time, the degree of comminution of the meat mixture ( As shown in The substitution of pork backfat with EVOO had no effect on lactic acid bacteria counts ( Gram-negative bacteria are generally considered as an undesirable microflora in traditional salami. With regard to micrococci and total bacterial count growth, (data not shown) an increase was recorded at the first ripening time that remained relatively constant. Therefore, neither the ripening time nor the replacing of pork backfat with EVOO had statistically significant effects on both microbial groups. The TBARS values of the samples increased during ripening period ( Chemical composition of both Control and modified salami was shown in  The percentage of fat replacement affected the sensory colour, odour and taste of modified salami, as shown in  It is technologically possible to replace the pork backfat in Italian typical salami with EVOO. The use of olive oil as partial substitute of pork backfat is an interesting way to produce more healthy products by changing the fatty acid profile of dry salami. In fact, from a nutritional point of view, our research presented a better fatty acid profile in modified salami with respect to the Control, because of the lower atherogenic and thrombogenic indices, as well as the higher PUFA/SFA ratio. Moreover, our results suggested a significant modification of WBS and textural parameters giving more tender products. In addition, TBARS values were slightly lower in all modified salami compared to the Control. Sensory evaluation indicated that WP60 showed colour, odour and taste characteristics comparable to commercial salami, while salami with 100% of fat substitution were unacceptable for taste. This work was financially supported by Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze, Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica e l’Assessorato Bilancio e Programmazione Regione Puglia by the programme “Accordo di Programma Quadro in Materia di Ricerca Scientifica della Regione Puglia – Progetto Esplorativo – Title: “New production and packaging systems to obtain cured meat-based products”.