In this study, a novel batch sliding window (BSW) based singularity mapping approach was proposed. Compared to the traditional sliding window (SW) technique with disadvantages of the empirical predetermination of a fixed maximum window size and outliers sensitivity of least-squares (LS) linear regression method, the BSW based singularity mapping approach can automatically determine the optimal size of the largest window for each estimated position, and utilizes robust linear regression (RLR) which is insensitive to outlier values. In the case study, tin geochemical data in Gejiu, Yunnan, have been processed by BSW based singularity mapping approach. The results show that the BSW approach can improve the accuracy of the calculation of singularity exponent values due to the determination of the optimal maximum window size. The utilization of RLR method in the BSW approach can smoothen the distribution of singularity index values with few or even without much high fluctuate values looking like noise points that usually make a singularity map much roughly and discontinuously. Furthermore, the student's t-statistic diagram indicates a strong spatial correlation between high geochemical anomaly and known tin polymetallic deposits. The target areas within high tin geochemical anomaly could probably have much higher potential for the exploration of new tin polymetallic deposits than other areas, particularly for the areas that show strong tin geochemical anomalies whereas no tin polymetallic deposits have been found in them.Volume The total amount of metal in V The density of metal in V Area The total amount of metal in A The density of metal in A Local singularity index Window size Positive weight in the weights of evidence modeling Negative weight in the weights of evidence modeling Presence of a prospect Absence of a prospect Presence of an evidence theme Absence of an evidence theme Contrast of the weights of evidence modeling Student's t-statistic value The variances of W The variances of W Numbers of unit cells or pixels of Numbers of unit cells or pixels of Numbers of unit cells or pixels of Numbers of unit cells or pixels of Singularity has been considered as one of the most important properties for non-linear natural processes or systems in various branches of earth science such as cloud formation ( In order to overcome the disadvantages in traditional SW based singularity mapping technique, the purpose of this paper is mainly dressed on a procedure to improve SW approach in its accuracy of computation, and a batch SW (BSW) method was therefore developed in this study. It will show that the BSW method was a robust approach for singularity analysis. The concentration values of stream sedimentary geochemical data of tin, i.e. the predominant ore forming element of tin polymetallic mineralization in Gejiu distinct, Yunnan, China, were used to illustrate the implementation of the BSW based singularity analysis approach and a comparison study of BSW and SW in geochemical anomaly identification was conducted. The general principle and procedure of the SW approach can be summarized as follows. In the multifractal context, the singularity phenomenon of hydrothermal mineralization can be characterized by power-law models. For convenience but without losing generality, in a three dimensional space, assuming that To estimate α value in a given position of a two dimensional geochemical map, it defines a set of square windows with center fixed on this position and sizes In terms of multifractals, singularity index α also known as Hölder exponent, is essentially the fractal dimension of a measure (e.g. average concentration of geochemical element) within the measure unit (e.g. local range of Suppose that a two dimensional rater geochemical map has been created based on element concentration values of geochemical samples in a specific study area. The procedures and practical implementation of BSW based singularity mapping approach can be summarized as follows ( define estimate the average concentration values using RLR method to fit the scatters of ( repeat steps (2)–(3) until find the minimum value of RMSE derived from step (4). The corresponding value of α and maximum window size are regarded as the singularity index and the optimal size of the largest window for singularity analysis of the estimated location, respectively. move to the next position, repeat steps (1)–(5) until the singularity index values for all possible locations within the studied geochemical map have been obtained. In terms of robust statistics, robust linear regression (RLR) is a form of regression analysis approach designed to circumvent some limitations of classical linear model (i.e. the method of least-squares (LS)), where the regression error is usually assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation ( The Student's The study area used as example for this study is the Gejiu mineral district, which is located south of and about 200 In the current study, a total of 1921 stream sediment samples were collected and analyzed by the Chinese National Geochemical Mapping Project as part of the Regional Geochemistry National Reconnaissance (RGNR) Project, which has been carried out since 1979 and covered most of the land surface of China including Gejiu distinct. The sampling density is one site per km Based on the raster map of tin concentration values obtained by inverse distance weighted interpolation method ( To illustrate the determination of optimal maximum window sizes for singularity value estimation in BSW based singularity mapping method, 13 different locations were selected on the map as shown on Furthermore, student's Finally, we use the singularity map derived by BSW method to delineate potential tin polymetallic mineralization areas. In In this paper, a batch sliding window based singularity mapping method has been proposed. The new approach could automatically determine optimal size of largest window and uses robust linear regression that is insensitive to outlier values for local singularity mapping. Therefore, it can overcome the disadvantages in traditional SW based singularity mapping technique: (1) a fixed maximum window size should be empirically predetermined by applicants; and (2) least-squares (LS) linear regression method that is used for fitting power-law relationships on log–log plots is sensitive to outliers. The BSW approach is a useful tool for singularity mapping. It can not only improve calculation accuracy for singularity exponent value due to it determines the optimal maximum window size automatically, but also smoothen the distribution of singularity index values since it utilizes the RLR method for linear regression that is not sensitive to outlier values. In the case study, tin geochemical data have been processed by BSW based singularity mapping approach. The student's This research was financially supported by the