Hybrid materials contain polysaccharide based network and biomimetic calcium phosphate are potentially appropriate for bone repair and drug release. Novel hydrogel composed of carboxymethyl cellulose backbone grafted with crosslinked poly(dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) CMC-g-PDMAEMA was subjected to biomimetic calcium phosphate mineralization through simulated body fluid. Infrared spectroscopy (IR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) confirmed calcium phosphate mineralization while X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) results suggested that the deposited phase contains mineralized component of bone, hydroxyapatite. CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogels before and after calcium phosphate mineralization were investigated as a drug carrier and the results showed significant efficiency of the mineralized hydrogel to deliver bovine serum albumin (BSA). These results indicated that CMC-g-PDMAEMA/calcium phosphate could serve as a new class of multifunctional hybrid materials for various biomedical applications.Three-dimensional hybrids are interesting substrates in the field of biomaterials as bone substitutes Polysaccharides have been emerging recently as building blocks for preparing different kinds of hydrogels for biomaterial applications CMC sodium salt (>99.5%) with high viscosity was purchased from Fluka BioChemika. Dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate monomer (Merck) and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (Sigma-Aldrich) were used without any purification. Simulated body fluid chemicals were analytical grade and used as received without further purification. All solutions were prepared using double distilled water. CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogel was prepared as reported in our previous work Biomimetic mineralization of calcium phosphate onto CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogel was carried out by immersing the disk samples (10 The swelling kinetic of the CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogel before and after mineralization was measured in two consecutive buffer solutions (pH 2.1 and 7.4, similar to that of gastric and intestinal fluids respectively). The swollen weights were determined, after removal of the surface liquid using tissue paper, by the following equation: The loading of BSA in CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogel before and after calcium phosphate mineralization was accomplished by imbibition. Cubic peace of the dried hydrogel was immersed in a glass vial with 10 Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) was done on a Thermo Nicolet FT-IR Nexus 470 with a diamond crystal. Spectra were recorded from 500 to 4000 Scanning electron microscopy was done on Model Quanta 250 FEG (Field Emission Gun) attached with EDX Unit (Energy Dispersive X-ray Analyses), with accelerating voltage 30 Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images were taken with a JEOL JEM-2100 electron microscopy at 100K× magnification, with an acceleration voltage of 120 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with an Empyrean Powder Diffractometer (Cu K Thermogravimetric analysis was done on a PerkinElmer TGA7 thermogravimetric Analyzer under nitrogen from 20 to 800 Few studies have carried out to investigate the capability of cationic polymers for the formation of calcium phosphate particles The structural changes of crosslinked CMC-g-PDMAEMA before and after mineralization process were confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy as shown in A previous study shows that biomimetically grown calcium phosphate using polycarboxylate hydrogel has been suggested to develop as hydroxyapatite crystal phase. The current study addresses the structure assignment of biomimetically calcium phosphate in the presence of grafted polycation copolymer using the same simulated body fluid concentration and the same condition as in the previous work Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to elucidate the shape, size and crystallinity of biomimetic formed calcium phosphate. The XRD curve for CMC, as shown in Actual inorganic content and thermal stability of the hybrid were estimated by Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).  Hydrogels are a useful candidate for drug release due to the biocompatibility, large surface area, and pH-dependent. Mineralized hydrogel with homogeneous micro sizes inorganic is preferred for drug delivery because of their improved efficient and homogeneous distribution of drugs as well as their capability to control sustained release of drugs compared with the original hydrogel The release behavior of loaded BSA, as a model drug, from CMC-g-PDMAEMA before and after calcium phosphate mineralization, in both simulated gastric fluid (pH 2.1) and simulated intestinal fluid (pH 7.4) medium was investigated as shown in This paper shows that CMC-g-PDMAEMA hydrogel can be used as efficient templates for the biomimetic calcium phosphate mineralization under physiological condition. The results showed that the mineralized microspheres are mainly composed of bone like hydroxyapatite. CMC-g-PDMAEMA/calcium phosphate hybrid showed lower swelling% compared with the pure hydrogel in different pHs (2.1 and 7.4) which may be a result of the limiting extension of the polymeric network after calcium phosphate mineralization. The in-vitro BSA release showed that calcium phosphate mineralized hybrid possess capability to sustained drug release. These results offer to promise multifunctional hybrid material for bone tissue regeneration. The authors acknowledge the financial support of