In this study, the effect of input parameters on the performance of the artificial neural network (ANN) has been investigated to predict the surface tension of the 33 non-ionic + ionic liquids binary mixture. To achieve this purpose, in this work, 8 various approaches for input parameters are considered. Physical properties such as temperature, reduced temperature, critical temperature, critical pressure, critical volume, molecular weight, acentric factor and critical compressibility factor as well as two different mixing rules have been used to prepare various input parameters approaches. The root mean square error (RMSE) of the most accurate approach, obtained for all 1537 data points regarding 33 binary mixtures, is 7.88 × 10−3. Furthermore, five different other intelligence methods such as ANFIS, ANFIS-ACO, ANFIS-DE, ANFIS-GA, and ANFIS-PSO have been applied to estimate the surface tension of the concerned binary mixtures based on the best input parameters. The comparison between the results of the ANN and five other methods show that the ANN method has the best accuracy.The surface tension of a liquid mixture in the interphase with vapor is a key property for several industries such as oil, gas and chemical plants [ Ionic liquids (ILs) are one of the chemicals that has been into attention by scientists and engineering in the recent two decades. ILs are salts created of an asymmetric organic cation and a symmetric inorganic anion. These types of materials have the ability to be liquid at near or below room temperature, which is called room-temperature ionic liquids (RTILs). Due to their special properties such as very low vapor pressure, unique permittivity, good solubility, high thermal stability and etc., they are represented as new candidates for various applications in chemical process, reactor engineering, flow and transport, separation and gas solubility. To develop new processes based on the pure ionic liquids or relevant mixtures, the knowledge of physical and chemical properties of systems such as density, viscosity, melting point, solvent properties, vapor pressure, and surface tension is important. Obviously, the properties of ionic liquids and their mixtures can be determined by experimental measurement, but the experiment has many drawbacks, including time-consuming, costly and health problems. Therefore, many researchers are attempted to use various methods to calculate the different properties of ionic liquid and their mixtures. Surface tension is one of the properties which is calculated by various methods. As a general classification, the estimation of surface tension is usually carried out by Parachors approach, empirical models, Group Contribution methods, Corresponding State Theory or thermodynamically rigorous approaches such as Butler equation or density gradient theory [ Artificial intelligence methods such as artificial neural network (ANN) and fuzzy systems (FS), genetic algorithm (GA) and etc., are the general correlating tools which their applications have notoriously increased in different scientific fields [ Some researchers are attempted to predict the surface tension of pure ILs by various heuristic methods. For instance, Lazzús et al. [ The input parameters are one of the important items in using intelligent methods. It is important to mention that, density which used as input parameters in the mentioned works [ In this paper in order to estimate the surface tension of the IL binary mixtures the six heuristic methods have been used. In the following sections, each method is briefly introduced. Neural networks are an intelligent approach inspired by the human-brain data analysis. A neural network contains three major parts, that they are the rule of learning, the architecture of the network, and transfer function [ Fuzzy inference system (FIS) is able to simulate inference procedure and linguistic features of human understanding without using accurate quantitative investigation. In this method, the human process of decision-making is intelligently imitated by a combination of ANN and FIS. In conventional ANN, just weight quantity alters throughout the learning phase, whereas in a neuro-fuzzy decision-making system, the learning capability of ANN is coupled with the reasoning process of FIS [ ANFIS usually utilizes a combination of back-propagation for the purpose of learning the presupposition parameters and the least mean square for determination of resulting parameters. A stage of the learning process has two steps: the first step involves the propagation of input patterns and applies the iterative least mean the square process to evaluate the optimal ending parameters, whilst ancestor parameters are supposed not to change for the present phase throughout the training set. Furthermore, the second step involves in the repeated propagation of patterns and in this epoch, back-propagation is utilized to adjust the ancestor parameters, whilst the ending parameters are maintained. This process is followed by iteration (see Then adaptive neural network and its operationally identical to the FIS are presented in GA is an evolutionary and global search algorithm and is quite a strong optimization approach for complicated search domain. John Holland established this technique in early 1970 by inspiring from natural genetic and Darwin's evolutionary hypotheses [    PSO is a heuristic algorithm-based approach which was introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart [ DE algorithm was introduced by Price and Storn [ The main controlling parameters in DE are the number of population (N), probability of crossover (CR) and scaling factor (F). The main steps of the DE algorithm are shown in The ant colony optimization that was announced by Dorigo [ Gathering a large number of experimental data with various conditions is an important stage to find the best network architecture and optimum network parameters. Therefore, a database consisting of 33 binary ILs systems with 1537 experimental binary surface tension data points at atmospheric pressure. All of these 1537 data points are experimental and were collected from the NIST Standard Reference Database [ To explore the effect of input parameters on the results of the ANN, The entrance variables which are considered in this study can be selected from the temperature or the reduced temperature, molecular weight, acentric factor and critical properties of the mixtures such as critical temperature, critical pressure, critical volume, and critical compression factor. These variables have been chosen because they were included in other models presented in the literature [ As earlier mentioned in the introduction section, in this work, because of the reduction of input parameters and the simplicity of calculating, the properties of the mixture instead of pure properties are used as input parameters. To calculate the properties of a mixture from the pure properties the two various mixing rules are investigated as following, In this work, several approaches are used to find the best set of input parameters as shown in In this research, a Multi-Layer Perceptron ANN which is known as MLP ANN was adopted to predict surface tension of the binary mixtures containing ionic liquids. An appropriate selection of input data for training, validation, and testing of the model is crucial. In this study, virtually 70% of input data are considered for training, 15% for validation and the others for testing the model and training, validation and testing data sets were chosen randomly. Also, in order to have an effective training phase in soft computing methods, normalization of data sets was carried out to the domain of [0,1] by Equation In which x is an input variable, The results of the using ANN for evaluation the surface tension of ionic liquid binary systems based on various approaches as squared correlation coefficient (R In order to better compare the accuracy of the various approaches, the results of the eight approaches as R In Also, the performance of the ANN model based on approach 8 using several random initial values of training, validation and testing data are investigated and the results are given in supplementary material. The results show that the random selection of data has little effect on model accuracy and an optimal amount of accuracy can be achieved by acceptable numbers of attempt. Finally, sensitivity analyses are applied to the best model inputs (approach 8). Sensitivity analysis is done on the ANN outputs using cosine amplitude method (CAM) [ Each element (X So, each data pair can be considered as a point in m-dimensional space, where each point requires m-coordinates for a full description. Each component of the (r Eq. In this section, five other heuristic methods namely, ANFIS and ANFIS-ACO/DE/GA/PSO are applied to predict the surface tension of the binary ILs systems, and the results compared with the ANN approach. The input parameters of the methods in this section are considered similar to the best approach (approach 8) of the previous section as follows: The results of the five various intelligence methods, as well as ANN approach, to predicting the surface tension of the binary solutions consisting of the ionic liquid is given in In this study, for the first time, an attempt has been made to investigate the effect of input parameters on the performance of ANN for estimation of the surface tension of non-ionic + ionic liquids binary mixtures. To achieve this aim, an extensive dataset consisting of 33 binary ILs systems with 1537 binary surface tension data points at atmospheric pressure has been collected. Also, in this work, 8 various approaches for input parameters are considered. The results of approaches 1 to 5 show that using linear mixing rule for pressure and non-linear mixing rules for temperature and critical volume leads to better accuracy. Also, temperature as input parameter instead of reduced temperature improves the results. The most accurate results are obtained when the temperature, critical factor, critical pressure, molecular weight, and critical compressibility factor with linear mixing rule along with critical temperature and critical volume with non-linear mixing rule ( The sensitivity analysis results of these parameters show that all of the mentioned parameters have an undeniable impact on model output, however, their order of influence are as follow; Furthermore, five different heuristic methods namely ANFIS, ANFIS-ACO, ANFIS-DE, ANFIS-GA, and ANFIS-PSO have been applied to estimate the surface tension of the concerned binary mixture based on the best approach. The results of these five methods show that the accuracy of them are as follows: ANFIS > ANFIS-PSO > ANFIS-GA > ANFIS-DE > ANFIS-ACO. The comparison between the performance of the ANN and five other methods show that the ANN method has the best accuracy. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at