The homogenization theory of mammoth silos is investigated in order to establish the homogenization efficiency of mammoth silos. These silos, where homogenization is achieved by intersecting multiple layers during reclaiming of the silo, e.g., by inclining the screw conveyor, can be used for large-scale homogenization of both cohesive and free-flowing materials and are therefore an alternative for blending piles.
                  The presented homogenization model and the calculation of the homogenization efficiency in mammoth silos depend on two variables: the volume distribution and the input properties of the bulk material to be homogenized. The silo geometry and the chosen stacking and reclaiming method determine the first variable. The second variable, time series representing the input properties of a material flow, depends on the material to be homogenized. This paper focuses on modeling input properties and shows that higher order ARMA(p,q) models are required for describing these input properties, instead of the frequently assumed AR(1) models in literature. It does not concentrate on the comparison of predicted and simulated output variances.
                  Conducted simulations of the homogenization efficiency with both ARMA and AR(1) models are found to be very encouraging because the standard deviation of the output properties is reduced on average by a factor 5, i.e., the standard deviation of the output properties is reduced to 20% of the standard deviation of the input properties.Mammoth silos have proven to be able to store and handle large amounts (up to 100,000 m This paper describes the concept of homogenization of bulk material in mammoth silos. First, the current working principle of mammoth silos is briefly explained, followed by the homogenization theory of mammoth silos. From this theory, it follows that the homogenization efficiency is dependent on the volume distribution and the input properties of the bulk material. Therefore, these two factors will be explained further with emphasis on the importance of modeling of the input properties. Furthermore, some homogenization results based on simulations with different models of the input properties are presented, however, no comparison between predicted and simulated output variances is given. A discussion concerning the importance of modeling the input properties concludes this paper. The storage capacity of mammoth silos ranges from 1000 to 100,000 m The current working principle is as follows To date, no large-scale upgrading of bulk material as in blending piles is implemented in mammoth silos. Adding the homogenization feature to mammoth silos will mean: (a) the first possibility for storing and homogenizing both free-flowing and cohesive bulk material, and (b) homogenizing in mammoth silos can become competitive with homogenizing in blending piles. The mammoth silo has several advantages compared to a blending pile The objective of homogenizing is to improve the properties of a flow of bulk material over time so that the quality of the product is constant and the processes ahead can be tuned. In general, this means striving for a smoother signal, where fluctuations of the resulting time signal are characterized by a smaller standard deviation compared to the input signal. This is shown in The box in   The characteristics of the homogenization process should be researched in order to predict the homogenization capacities of the mammoth silo, and to detect how the characteristic parameters of the bulk material properties are improved. An absolute measurement for the homogenization rate is the dimensionless ratio of standard deviation of the output property and input property. This number solely provides the total result of the homogenization process, or in other words, the change of the frequency density distribution towards lower frequencies. This is why In order to achieve homogenization using mammoth silos, new stacking and reclaiming methods have been developed The horizontal stacking method (left part of In order to derive the homogenization theory for mammoth silos, a schematic presentation of stacking method 1 and reclaiming method 3 Projection of slice As can be seen from  The output property The input flow can be thought of as bulk material spread out on a belt conveyor divided in The theory derived in the next section is applicable to all methods, if and only if the following assumptions are met: the volume of the the volume of an input part the property per input part is discretized and a value is attributed to a layer; the volume of the the output element equals a slice; the input properties are a realization of a weak-stationary and ergodic random process and do not change during storage (see As introduced by Because of assumption 7 and the mammoth silo being a closed system, the average property of the output The terms Rearranging terms and applying the principle that the expectation of a linear function of random variables equals the linear function of the expectations leads to transformation of Due to the geometrical origin of The ACF is defined as the normalized ACVF: The variance of the output property is defined as:  The variance of the slice is represented by This unbiased estimate of the variance of the output stream is applicable in the whole range of numbers of layers and slices. This is in contrast to the biased estimate of the variance that is less precise mainly at low numbers of layers and slices. Combining Applying the assumption that the slices have equal volume (assumptions 1 and 6), As can be seen from both volume distribution, i.e., the number of layers intersected by the conveyor during reclamation input properties, i.e., the fluctuations of certain physical or chemical material properties in the input flow modeled by the ACF The reduction of the standard deviation of a silo content is expressed as a number, which is a function of the standard deviations per slice A simplified model of a stacking and reclaiming method in mammoth silos is used Determination of the ACVF of the output using The correlation depends strongly on the slices considered, this means that the homogenization process is strongly nonstationary. When the volume distribution is considered, The ACVF for the complete homogenization process cannot be given directly because of the difference between ACFs depending on the absolute position of slices This effect is deteriorating when the differences in volume distribution are taken into account. With reference to In fact, it can be concluded that in mammoth silo operation the analytical ACF of the output is dependent of the slices involved and is therefore nonstationary, as is shown in From the example in Besides the volume distribution itself, A constant reduction of the standard deviation of the slices can be achieved by keeping the number of intersected layers constant. This can be done by decreasing the maximum reclaiming angle or to increase the silo height so that the silo is divided in three parts. The top and bottom parts are like the situation in For modeling input characteristics of blending piles, the following assumption is often used: The fluctuations of a property in the input flow are assumed to be a realization of a weak-stationary and ergodic random process First, a weak stationary signal is a signal that is independent of absolute time. So, by repeating the process producing this signal, it is of no difference when the process starts or when the sampling commences. This is the case when, for example, random signals are generated. Second, an ergodic random process characterizes a time series that is independent of the number of repetitions of the process and can be put together out of drawing from the different time series resulting from the repetition of the process. When a process meets these demands, time series can be generated out of one sampled time series. As previously mentioned are time series representing the input properties that demand homogenization in order to upgrade the input signal. As we have seen in An exponential decreasing ACF (corresponding with a first-order autoregressive model AR(1)) is often used for modeling of the input properties: The corresponding first-order autoregressive model (AR(1)) equals The use of an exponential decreasing ACF is mainly based on publications of Modeling of the input properties should be done with care considering the discussion above. Of course the number and variety of intermediate processes depend on the type of industries. Modeling only using an exponential decreasing ACF or AR(1) will probably not cover all materials, so higher order ARMA( Here, an example of the goodness of fit of two ARMA models on the data of QCL is given. We have chosen to fit two models on content Although the fit of AR(1) does not seem to be sufficient for the modeling of the time series, it might be adequate to make a reliable estimate of the homogenization efficiency. When this can be confirmed and a probability interval can be determined, the modeling of several time signals can be simplified. The simulations presented here were performed to demonstrate the influence of several different generated time series models on the homogenization result: the reduction of the standard deviation. The results are based on 160 repetitions of the simulations with the following silo configuration: stacking and reclaiming method=1.3 maximum reclaiming angle=35° silo height=19 m silo diameter=36 m number of layers=1140 number of slices=1140 one layer corresponds with 14 tons of material, and each generated data point from the ARMA model represents the average property of one layer. A typical result of the simulations concerning the course of the input and output properties is shown in The results of the simulations are presented in From The presented homogenization model and the calculation of the homogenization efficiency in mammoth silos depend on two variables: the volume distribution and the input properties of the bulk material to be homogenized. The silo geometry and the chosen stacking and reclaiming method determine the first variable. The second variable, time series representing the input properties of a material flow, depends on the material to be homogenized. In homogenization theory of blending piles, stochastic time series were modeled by a negative exponential auto correlation function (AR(1)). However, in this paper, it is shown that higher order ARMA( Conducted simulations with both ARMA( The findings of this paper are restricted to the conducted simulations presented here. Further research concerning the influence of modeling input properties on the homogenization efficiency should be done, as well as comparing homogenization results of different stacking and reclaiming methods. We would like to thank AVEBE and Ian Kidd of QCL for providing field data. We are also grateful to Svetlana Borovkova of Delft University of Technology for her help on modeling this field data. In this appendix, the variance of a data set existing out of When the number of data points (both The variance of the whole data set equals: Inside the square brackets, the variance of the Applying the unbiased estimate of the variance, The unbiased variance of the entire data set equals: Inside the square brackets the unbiased variance of the