This chapter deals with the estimation, determination and distribution of minerals existing in a sample of an ore body during and after an operation that involves their separation and concentration when one or more minerals exist in the ore. Methods adopted for batch and continuous commercial plants are indicated and possible errors in such determinations are indicated. The correct procedures for estimating grades and concentrations are illustrated with examples and solutions of problems, Also, methods for examining the efficiency of operation by the solution of mass balance equations of single and two-phase systems are indicated.The objective of all mineral processing operations is to concentrate the minerals of interest and reject the unwanted material associated with the ores. The process is often complex as seen in the previous chapters since minerals exist both physically and chemically combined with each other. Ideal clean separation of the mineral from the unwanted fraction, known as On repeated treatment, some of the middlings find their way to the concentrates and some report to the tailings. Thus, both the concentrate and the tailings are diluted resulting in a loss of grade of the concentrate. To what extent this loss of grade can be accepted would depend on the economics of the process. The scheme of operation usually followed is represented by Each stream has, therefore, to be assessed to determine the mass and the concentration of the mineral of interest. This chapter deals with the method of assessing the distribution of minerals in the concentrate, middlings and tailings streams and the economic recovery of mineral or minerals present. The first step in analysing the constituents of each stream is to obtain representative samples of the streams. The methods of sampling, the sample size and the errors involved have been discussed in Initial qualitative assessment of the raw material forming the feed stream to a separating process is done by identifying the minerals present under an optical microscope. To get a better idea, X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), electron probe microanalyser For estimating quantitatively the presence of elements in continuous operating stream, wet analytical chemical methods are most reliable. However, this is a slow process. To speed up the determinations and to get an equally reliable result, atomic adsorption spectro-photometers or inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometers are used where a solution containing the metal ion of interest is aspirated in a flame (AAS) or a plasma (ICP) in which the metal ion is converted into a free atom vapour. A monochromatic light beam is directed through the flame and the amount of radiation of a specific energy level is detected. This electron energy level is specific for an element which helps to identify it. A calibration curve with known amounts of the element and flame intensity helps in quantifying the presence of each element. In operating plants where analytical results are required with least delay, attempts have been made to analyse the composition In wet streams, as in grinding circuits, continuous quantitative analysis of more than one element in a stream is obtained by the use of on-stream or in-stream analysers. Here, a radio-active source is used to irradiate elements present in a stream (or slurry). Several elements can be detected and quantified simultaneously. For details, any text book on instrumental analysis can be consulted. In some operations the feed stream is from a single supply of ore from one mine when sampling and assaying is relatively easy, but in most cases ores from several sources form the feed to a commercial process. In such circumstances either each source is separately sampled and blended at pre-arranged proportion (according to grade and availability) or a composite sample is analysed. It is a general experience that in industry a sampling error of ±2% is acceptable. We need to be clear about the definition of terms used in assessing the different streams in a process. The weight of an object is the effect of gravity acting on the mass of the object and is equal to the mass × gravitational acceleration = In a mineral processing operation, the throughputs and capacities of units are expressed as tonnes/h or tonnes/day. These tonnages invariably refer to the dry tonnes passing through a process, even if the process is treating a slurry of solid and water. This is principally due to the fact that it is the solid that contains the valuable mineral and hence the mass of this component is of the most concern. A slurry is a suspension of solids in a liquid. It is also referred to as It can also be expressed on a volumetric basis (mass = volume × density) and is often referred to as percent solids, usually by mass or also by volume. Thus the % solids of the slurry, by mass, can be written as Thus, a 30% solids slurry by mass means 30 g (or kg or tonnes) of solids in 70 g (or kg or tonnes) of water. The concentration may also be expressed as the pulp or slurry density; that is, if %S is the percent solids by mass in the slurry (also written as %S w/w) and That is, The percent solids in a slurry will most often be quoted as mass % rather than volume % since mass is the property of main concern. Percent solids in some cases is used interchangeably with Additional slurry properties can be calculated in the following manner: Grade refers to the concentration of a mineral in a stream and is expressed as a percentage. It is determined by chemical assaying and may be expressed as For a number of ores, such as base metal ores, grade is quoted in terms of the contained metal rather than the mineral. For very low grades, the units are more appropriately expressed as parts per million (ppm or g/t) or parts per billion (ppb). One part per million is equivalent to 0.0001% (i.e., 1% = 10,000 ppm). Recovery describes the amount of mineral or metal of interest that is present in the concentrate in relation to that present in the feed stream. This is usually expressed as a percentage and written as Thus if we take 100 kg of a feed stream containing 2.5% nickel and if 20% by mass of the feed stream forms the concentrate, then the mass of concentrate is 20 kg. If the grade of nickel in the concentrate equals 10%, then 20 kg of concentrate will contain 0.1 × 20 = 2 kg of nickel. Hence, Ni recovered is 2/2.5 × 100 = 80% by mass. The concept of distribution can be seen from the following illustration. In the above example, only 80% of the mineral present has been accounted for in the concentrate, the rest of the mineral must be in the tailings, neglecting the existence of a middling product. Since the mass of the concentrate is 20 kg, then the mass of the tailings must be 80 kg. Let us assume that chemical analysis indicated that the nickel in the tailings was 0.6%. The nickel distribution between the concentrate and tailing product streams is then calculated as illustrated in Thus, 80% of nickel has been recovered into the concentrate and 19.2% lost in the tailings.  Material balance estimations are one of the most useful and powerful methods of assessing the efficiency of unit and integrated operations. In continuous operations, it is used to calculate recoveries and distributions of valuable components at the end of the monthly accounting period or for estimating quantities in streams (mass or assay) that cannot be easily measured. Results from a mass balance are strongly influenced by the accuracy of stream sampling and assaying. Where difficulties arise in the balancing of a circuit, it is The basic principle involved is the conservation of mass. For a process at equilibrium or However, in actual practice, during a continuous operation, a steady state is difficult to maintain with feed variations and process hiccups. Therefore, it will be more correct to rewrite Equation The units are in mass or mass rates, either of the total material or of the constituent of interest. That is Water can be one of the constituents used in a mass balance for a wet process. Also, in a size separation unit such as a screen or classifier, the mass in specific size fractions can be used in place of For a material balance to provide meaningful data, several samples need to be taken and the variance of errors needs to be established. Errors originate not only in the procedure of sampling but also in the method of measuring. Napier-Munn et al. Error = 1% for >9% (by mass) in a √2 size fraction. Error = [0.1+ actual %] × 10 Where the mass balance of multi-component system is concerned, the error of each component is more difficult to establish. For an acceptable representative stream, the sum of the squares of errors in each size fraction should be minimum. This would give the best fit of mass split. A material balance may now be reliably estalished. Consider the two-product process in The errors in each stream will not be the same but will have to be determined against the variance of each size fraction. The best fit, In an operation where the interest is to recover a mineral in a single concentrate, the set-up is usually called a two-product system, producing one concentrate and one tailing stream. To calculate the recovery of the metal or mineral, the material balance method is applied. The resulting formula is known as the To derive the formula let us assume that in an operation, samples are taken simultaneously from feed, concentrate and tailing streams and that the weighted average corrected analysis of each stream is Feed stream Concentrate stream Tailings stream For a two-product process, the material balance will be Input mass of feed = Output mass of concentrate + Output mass of tailings. Similarly for the component metal From Equations Equation By definition, Equation Equation  A gold ore containing 20 ppm gold was fed to a ball mill in a concentrator at the rate of 200 t/h. The concentrate analysed 400 ppm and the tailings 0.15 ppm Au. Calculate the recovery and distribution of gold. The given data indicates: Recovery, The distribution of gold in the streams is best illustrated in the following table: The units of assay can be any mass-based concentration unit as long as the same unit is used throughout, for example, ppm, g/t or mass%. When a process produces three output streams such as an additional middling or second concentrate stream, then the mineral or metal distribution can be calculated using the same principle as that of the two product formula. Such situations frequently occur in metallurgical plants. The recovery formula is generally known as the To illustrate the method, the presence of only two metals (A and B) is considered here for a metallurgical circuit involving crushing, grinding, classification and flotation. In each unit process, the feed is considered the concentrate from the previous process. Let us assume that the masses and concentrations of the minerals (metals) in the three streams are as given in Considering the overall material and metal balances of the system, the following equations apply: As before, eliminating The application of the method is best understood by  A copper-zinc ore was fed to an integrated mineral processing system at the rate of 250 t/h. The final products were a copper concentrate and a zinc concentrate and tailing. Analysis of each stream was Determine the mass flows in the two concentrate streams and the recovery of metal in each product stream. To determine the masses of copper and zinc concentrate streams, Equations  A spreadsheet such as Cells D6, D7 are the unknown concentrate masses Cell D8 is the feed minus the concentrate masses. Recoveries in cells I6:J8 are calculated in the same manner as in A lead–zinc ore was treated at the rate of 100 t/h to an integrated system to produce concentrates of lead and zinc minerals. A closed circuit was chosen so that the middling produced was re-treated. The average lead and zinc concentrations in each stream were Determine the mass flowrates of the product stream and the distribution of lead and zinc. Using the two product formula: A judgment will need to be made as to the reliability of the analytical techniques and/or the sampling procedures before deciding on the accuracy of the calculated values. The distribution of the metals is calculated in a similar manner to The premise in the methods of assessing the streams so far has been that the circuits were open, that is, maximum product was obtained at reasonable rates in the concentrate. In actual practice, it is found that all concentrates do not satisfy the required specifications of size and concentration. Hence, the concentrate has to be treated to separate the unwanted fraction. The When a classifier returns the coarse fraction of its feed material to the mill, then the total load to the mill is increased and is the sum of the new feed stream plus the coarse returns. Thus, in a closed circuit system, the circulating load This can be written as The circulating load Bond In both cases, the same general formula applies. By a balance of the mass in size interval Thus if      then the circulating load for the circuit in In the case of the circuit in For the circuit in To determine the circulation ratio      Then applying Bond’s concept, the circulation load (ratio) would be When more than one circulating load is operating in an integrated circuit, the mass balances have to be established for each circuit.   An integrated circuit consisted of a crusher, grinding mill and a classifier. The circuit produced 4800 t of ground ore per day. The underflow from the classifier was returned to the mill for re-grinding. The classifier feed contained 45% solids (by mass) and the classifier underflow and overflow streams contained 80% and 20% solids, respectively. Calculate the circulation ratio and the circulating load. Determine the liquid/solid ratios in each stream. Liquid/solid ratios of:    Equation Circulating load = 100 + A rod mill was integrated with a hydrocyclone and produced a grind at the rate of 250 t/h. Samples taken simultaneously from the discharge of the rod mill and the overflow and underflow streams from the hydrocyclone gave the following results. Calculate the circulating ratio and circulating load. Let us choose arbitrarily the following three sizes: −4 + 2.0 mm, −1000 + 420 μm, −210 + 105 μm instead of all the eight sizes to illustrate the principle of calculations. Calculate the circulation ratio for each screen interval chosen. Thus For size −4.0 + 2.0 mm For size −100 + 420 μm For size −210 + 105 μm Average The circulation load is then = 100 + 411 = 511% A practical but rapid and approximate method to determine the circulating load in a grinding mill and classifying circuit is to determine the percent (by mass) of −75 μm material in the classifier feed (mill discharge) and classifier overflow and classifier underflow streams. Then for feed mass flowrate,      Then the circulation ratio is given by Other screen sizes could be chosen for the calculation as shown in  A calcite sample is ground in a mill in close circuit with a hydrocyclone. Samples were taken from the cyclone feed, overflow and underflow streams and their solid/water ratios determined as 0.40, 0.14 and 3.33, respectively. Calculate the circulating load of the circuit. An iron ore company milled ore at the rate of 150 t/h in a ball mill in closed circuit with a classifier. The underflow (course) stream was re-circulated to the mill till a steady value was obtained in the cyclone overflow stream. The specific gravities of each stream were measured as Mill discharge stream to classifier = SG Product overflow from classifier = SG Product underflow from classifier = SG Establish a mass balance and derive an expression for the circulating load. A copper sulphide ore was crushed and milled in close circuit with a classifier. The overflow from the classifier fed a rougher cleaner flotation circuit at the rate of 500 t/h. The ore assayed 2.75% Cu. The re-circulating load in the flotation circuit was 270%. The overall recovery was 76% at a grade of 92%. Calculate: Mass flowrates of the cleaner concentrate and rougher tailings, Grade of copper in the rougher tailings. The screen analysis of feed, product and tailings from a classifier were The classifier was fed with ground silica at the rate of 50 t/h. Estimate: Mass (tonnes) of dry ore per day in the classifier underflow, Mass (tonnes) of dry ore per day from the classifier overflow.