In this paper, the influence of the depressant foenum-graecum (FGM) on the flotation of a nickel sulfide ore which contains hydrophobic talc and chlorite was systematically investigated through single mineral flotation, bench-scale and industrial-scale flotation tests. The flotation results indicated that FGM had excellent depression selectivity for talc and chlorite minerals and little depression effect on copper–nickel minerals. Compared with the conventional depressant carboxymethyl cellulose, the FGM scheme increased the recovery of copper in Cu–Ni concentrates over 25% and nickel in Cu–Ni concentrates over 16% as well as simplified the structure of flotation process. In addition, the adsorption mechanisms of FGM on talc and copper–nickel minerals were studied by adsorption, zeta-potential and FTIR measurements, which further demonstrated that the adsorption of FGM on talc was much stronger than that on pentlandite, FGM could selectively adsorb on talc surfaces through chemical adsorption while a weak hydrogen bond or electrostatic attraction occurred between FGM and copper–nickel minerals.Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), guar gum and other polysaccharide polymers have been widely used in the processing of many Cu/Ni sulfide ores to depress hydrophobic gangue minerals ( In the present study, a type of foenum-graecum product was introduced in the Cu/Ni sulfide ore (containing talc and chlorite) flotation. Foenum-graecum (FGM) is taken from the endosperm of the common foenum seed and is a high molecular weight polysaccharide. It owes its blood sugar and blood lipid controlling action to the presence of a unique galactomannan polysaccharide gum, often used in medicine, food additives, chemicals, etc. ( In this investigation, the depressant FGM was simply used to depress talc and other magnesia-bearing minerals. The depressing performance of FGM was compared with CMC and guar gum in the flotation separation of copper–nickel minerals from a complex Cu/Ni sulfide ore (containing hydrophobic talc and chlorite), in the Yanbian Copper–nickel Mine. The experimental part included flotation tests on single and mixed model minerals as well as a real ore sample. Meanwhile, the selective adsorption mechanism of FGM on both sulfide and gangue minerals were investigated by adsorption, zeta-potential and FTIR spectroscopy. The pure chalcopyrite (CuFeS The Cu/Ni sulfide ore for bench-scale flotation was from the Yanbian Copper–nickel Mine. The results of chemical analysis of the ore are listed in The depressant foenum-graecum [FGM, structure (C Single mineral flotation tests were conducted with FGM as depressant (purity > Bench-scale flotation tests used FGM, dextrin, guar gum and CMC as depressants, sulfuric acid and sulfurous acid as pH regulators, SIBX and ammonium dibutyl dithiophosphate (ABDTP) as collectors, and terpenic oil was used as frother. All reagents used in bench-scale flotation tests were of industrial grade. Tap water was used for the flotation tests. Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine. The impeller speed was fixed at 1800 In the bench-scale flotation tests ( For the adsorption tests, 1.0 The zeta-potential measurements on chalcopyrite, pentlandite and talc were carried out using a Coulter DELSA440S II Type electro-kinetic instrument. KNO The FTIR reflection spectra were obtained using the Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (type NEXUS 470). The experimental procedure with powdered samples was as follows. 1.0 The industrial-scale flotation was performed in the Mineral Processing Plant at the Yanbian Copper–nickel Mine. The experimental system Q1 used FGM as depressant. The flotation flowsheet and some flotation conditions of industrial-scale tests are shown in The effects of different depressant on the flotation recovery of talc are presented in The effects of FGM concentration on the floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and talc were conducted at pH Based on the flotation results mentioned above, the mineral mixture flotation tests were conducted at slurries pH    The infrared spectra of FGM, talc and FGM adsorption on talc at slurries pH  Based on the results of adsorption mechanism analysis and single mineral flotation tests, it was concluded that the depressant FGM had strong chemical adsorption on talc, but hydrogen bond adsorption on both chalcopyrite and pentlandite were weak, which inferred that the flotation separation of copper–nickel minerals from Cu/Ni sulfide ores which contains hydrophobic talc and chlorite was possible by using FGM as depressant. Under the flotation conditions of rougher pH On the basis of the optimized open circuit tests, the locked cycle tests were carried out (bulk Cu/Ni flotation followed by Cu/Ni separation). The flotation flowsheet (the optimum flotation time for rougher stage was 5.5 It is evident from the results in The depressant FGM was selected in the industrial-scale flotation tests performed in the Mineral Processing Plant of Yanbian Copper–nickel Mine. The flotation flowsheet and some reagent conditions are described in  The results of single mineral flotation tests indicated that the pure talc had a good natural floatability in a wide pH range, and the depressant FGM could effectively depress the easy-floating/easy-sliming talc, while FGM had a weak effect on the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite and pentlandite. FGM had excellent selectivity adsorption onto talc minerals. Chemical adsorption was seen between FGM and talc, and a weak hydrogen bond or electrostatic attraction occurred between FGM and copper–nickel minerals, which explained the single mineral flotation results. The bench-scale locked cycle tests indicated that FGM had a good depression performance for hydrophobic talc and chlorite. Compared with guar gum, the FGM increased the recovery of copper by 5.43% and nickel by 2.43%. Meanwhile, compared with CMC, the FGM increased the recovery of copper and nickel by 6.94% and 7.89% respectively. The industrial data obtained from the Mineral processing plant of Yanbian Copper–nickel Mine indicated that FGM was a powerful depressant and had excellent selectivity depression for talc and chlorite minerals. Compared with CMC, the FGM achieved a significant decrease in the depressant consumption by half as well as increased the recovery of copper and nickel by 25.73% and 16.01% respectively. The authors acknowledge the support of the