In the Segura area, Variscan S-type granites, aplite veins and lepidolite-subtype granitic aplite-pegmatite veins intruded the Cambrian schist-metagraywacke complex. The granites are syn D3. Aplite veins also intruded the granites. Two-mica granite and muscovite granite have similar ages of 311.0±0.5Ma and 312.9±2.0Ma but are not genetically related, as indicated by their geochemical characteristics and (87Sr/86Sr)311 values. They correspond to distinct pulses of magma derived by partial melting of heterogeneous metapelitic rocks. Major and trace elements suggest fractionation trends for: (a) muscovite granite and aplite veins; (b) two-mica granite and lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins, but with a gap in most of these trends. Least square analysis for major elements, and modeling of trace elements, indicate that the aplite veins were derived from the muscovite granite magma by fractional crystallization of quartz, plagioclase, K-feldspar and ilmenite. This is supported by the similar (87Sr/86Sr)311 and δ18O values and the behavior of P2O5 in K-feldspar and albite. The decrease in (87Sr/86Sr)311 and strong increase (1.6‰) in δ18O from two-mica granite to lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins, and the behaviors of Ca, Mn and F of hydroxylapatite indicate that these veins are not related to the two-mica granite.
                  The occurrence of amblygonite–montebrasite, lepidolite, cassiterite, columbite-(Fe), columbite-(Mn) and microlite suggests that lepidolite-subtype granitic aplite-pegmatite veins are highly differentiated. Montebrasite shows a heterogeneous Na distribution and secondary lacroixite was identified in some montebrasite areas enriched in Na. Unusual Mn>Fe cassiterite is zoned, with the alternating darker zones being strongly pleochroic, oscillatory zoned, and containing more Nb and Ta than the lighter zones. Inclusions of muscovite, apatite, tapiolite-(Fe), ixiolite and microlite are present both in lighter and darker zones of cassiterite. It shows exsolutions of columbite-(Fe), columbite-(Mn,Fe) and columbite-(Mn), particularly in darker zones.The mineralization processes related to granites, pegmatites and hydrothermal veins involve the enrichment of rare elements (e.g., Be, Ta, Li, Sn, Bi, W, Mo, Cu) and volatiles in late residual magma, or their enrichment in volatile phases in the final stages of magmatic crystallization ( The aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura are REL-Li pegmatites and belong to the LCT family (sensu The Segura area, located in central Portugal, close to the Portuguese–Spanish border ( The Segura pluton is exposed over an area of about 4 The mineralized quartz veins fill late- to post-tectonic Variscan faults. Nowadays it is difficult to recognize the mineralized veins, because they generally occur in the old mines, which were in operation from 1949 to 1953. The granitic rocks from Segura contain quartz, microperthitic microcline, albite, muscovite, apatite, zircon, monazite, rutile and ilmenite. The two-mica granite also has biotite, chlorite (after biotite), sillimanite and tourmaline and the aplite veins also have tourmaline. The muscovite granite contains secondary gormanite ( Quartz is euhedral to subhedral, shows undulose extinction and has multiple fractures. There are different generations of quartz. The last quartz generation occurs along microcline and albite fractures. Microperthitic microcline with cross-hatch twinning is subhedral to anhedral and is locally associated with tourmaline and replaced by later secondary muscovite. Subhedral orthoclase crystals were found in muscovite granite. Subhedral plagioclase is albite with compositions of An Biotite from two-mica granite is subhedral and pleochroic with γ, β (dark reddish brown) Subhedral tourmaline occurs in two-mica granite (4 Subhedral montebrasite, 3 Euhedral crystals of cassiterite ranging from 6.2 Lepidolite from lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins was separated using a magnetic separator and heavy liquids. A purity of about 99.8% was estimated by petrographic examination of the mineral separates. The principal contaminant is zircon. Major and trace elements of granites, aplite and aplite-pegmatite veins were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence at Southampton Oceanography Centre in Southampton, UK, with a Philips Magic ProPW 2540 VRC Spectrometer, using the method of Zircon and monazite separation was carried out by a combination of magnetic separator and heavy liquids. The grains to be analyzed were selected by handpicking under a binocular microscope. Zircon was treated with chemical abrasion (3 days annealing at 900 Strontium isotope analyses in whole rock samples were determined by thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) with a Finnigan Mat 262 at the Geochronology and Isotopic Geochemistry Facility of the University of the Basque Country/EHU, Spain. The external precision (1 The minerals were analyzed for major and minor elements on a Cameca Camebax electron microprobe at LNEG, Portugal and a JEOL JXA 8600 electron microprobe at the Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, UK. Some mineral analyses, backscattered electron images and X-ray mapping, were also obtained on a JEOL JXA-8500F electron microprobe at LNEG, Portugal. Analyses were conducted at an accelerating voltage of 15–20 Dating of zircon and monazite from a representative sample of two-mica granite (sample GTM) and zircon from a sample of muscovite granite (sample GM) was carried out using the ID-TIMS U-Pb method ( A sample of two-mica granite contains an abundant population of elongated euhedral zircon prisms, free of cores and with prominent {2 The muscovite granite contains much less zircon, and most of the crystals are turbid and opaque indicating widespread metamictization and alteration. Five of the best available grains were analyzed. The data are concordant but show some spread along the Concordia curve that is attributed to some Pb loss ( The average chemical analyses of major elements and selected trace elements of granites, granitic aplite veins and aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura are presented in Selected samples from granites, granitic aplite veins and lepidolite-subtype granitic aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura were analyzed for Rb–Sr and oxygen isotopes, which are listed in Microcline compositions are uniform among all the granitic rocks (Or Potassium feldspar has in general a higher average P Representative compositions of analyzed muscovites from granitic rocks of Segura are given in Primary lepidolite is the main Li-bearing mineral from the lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins ( Topaz from lepidolite-subtype granitic aplite-pegmatite veins has a homogeneous composition, Al The formula of tourmaline can be written as: Apatite is the most abundant phosphate mineral in the Segura granitic rocks. Hydroxylapatite occurs in both granites and lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins, but two-mica granite and muscovite granite contain fluorapatite as well, with less Ca than coexisting hydroxylapatite ( Amblygonite–montebrasite minerals can be the most representative phosphate mineral in some pegmatites (e.g., In general, the analyzed cassiterite has Nb The analyses of cassiterite from lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins are plotted in the (Sn,W,Ti)–(Nb,Ta)–(Fe,Mn) triangular diagram ( Chemical compositions of tapiolite-(Fe), ixiolite and microlite inclusions in cassiterite and exsolved columbite-(Fe), columbite-(Mn,Fe) and columbite-(Mn) from cassiterite of lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins are given in The chemical data suggest equilibrium between host cassiterite and columbite exsolutions. Microlite inclusions are Ta-rich, with Ta/(Ta The Variscan granitic rocks from Segura are peraluminous with a molecular ratio Al Two-mica granite and muscovite granite are not genetically related to each other, as suggested by major and trace elements of whole rocks and of muscovites ( The aplite veins cannot be related to the two-mica granite, as shown by major and trace elements of granitic rocks and muscovite ( Major elements were used to test whether the aplite veins can be derived from the muscovite granite magma by fractional crystallization, using a least-squares regression method. The sample of muscovite granite with the lowest SiO Strontium, Ba and Rb are the most representative trace elements of granitic rocks and were also modeled. Their contents in the residual melt were calculated with two equations, one for perfect (or Rayleigh) fractional crystallization and another for equilibrium crystallization. We used the concentrations of Sr, Ba and Rb in the muscovite granite sample with the lowest SiO Variation diagrams for major and trace elements of granitic rocks and muscovite suggest fractionation trends from two-mica granite to lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins, but with a gap ( Trace elements Rb, Li and Sn, which increase with fractional crystallization, of lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura were compared with those of similar aplite-pegmatites from the Iberian Massif in Portugal and Spain. The Segura aplite-pegmatite veins are less evolved than those from Gonçalo, Barroso-Alvão and Fregeneda-Almendra, because they have lower Rb, Li and Sn average contents ( Lepidolite-subtype aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura contain muscovite, lepidolite, topaz, hydroxylapatite, montebrasite and microlite ( Rare occurrences of cassiterite with Mn In aplite-pegmatite veins from Segura, F is retained in muscovite, lepidolite, topaz, montebrasite and microlite. Melt evolution resulted in increased fluorine activity, as shown by the microlite composition. In situ magma fractionation is associated with rare-element-enriched and Li-bearing minerals as found in granitic pegmatites from Separation Lake area, Ontario, Canada ( Thanks are due to Prof. Machado Leite (S. Mamede de Infesta, Portugal) for electron microprobe facilities; Prof. R. Nesbitt and Prof. I.W. Croudace (Southampton, UK) for the XRF facilities; Prof. B.J. Wood (University of Bristol, UK) for the EUGF-Bristol research facility given to I.M.H.R. Antunes to use the electron microprobe; Prof. Gil Ibarguchy (University of the Basque Country, Spain) for the isotopic Sr determinations, Prof. A. Cuesta (University of Oviedo, Spain) for the Rb and Sr whole rock contents and Prof. F.J. Longstaffe (University of Western Ontario, Canada) for the oxygen isotope analyses. Financial support was provided from the