Fracture of bilateral capitulum humeri is a very rare injury. We present a case of a 38-year-old woman, affected by a shear fracture of bilateral capitellum after a motorcycle accident. Intervention was carried out through a lateral approach on both sides and direct fixation of the fragment with headless screws. Consolidation was achieved and no signs of avascular necrosis occurred at 24 months of follow-up. The patient returned to her previous activities with no functional limitations. To the best of our knowledge, only four cases are reported describing different types of treatment and postoperative period of cast immobilization. According to our review of the literature regarding capitellar fractures, we preferred an immediate postoperative rehabilitation of the elbow, following the stable osteosynthesis.Fractures of capitulum humeri in the coronal plane are rare injuries, accounting for nearly 1% among all elbow fractures. A 38-year-old female fell onto both her outstretched hands after a motorcycle accident. Clinical examination at the emergency department in our hospital found diffuse swelling of both elbows, together with intense pain and impairment of any elbow joint motion. Radiographs in the AP and lateral planes showed a bilateral fracture of the capitellum humeri without evidence of elbow dislocation ( A lateral approach was performed bilaterally with the elbow already been flexed at 90°. Skin incision began 2 cm proximally to the tip of the lateral epicondyle and extended distally and for approximately 4 cm towards the Lister's tubercle. We used the superficial interval between the extensor digitorum communis and the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis, as described by Kaplan. At the deep level, we proceeded by splitting the lateral annular ligament complex, remaining anterior to the LCL. No LCL avulsion and/or disruption were detected at any of the two sites. Particular attention was paid in order to preserve the LCL and the posterior interosseous nerve. At this point, there was no need to release the lateral ligamentous complex from the distal aspect of the humerus to achieve a better visualization of the fracture. An excellent exposure of the capitellar fractures was achieved showing no impact and/or fragmentation of the capitulum humeri. Debridement of the free capitellar fragment was performed, removing any residual fibrous tissue and hematoma. The fragments were reduced in direct visualization, held with a dental pick and then temporally fixed with the guide wires of the mini Acutrac (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR, USA) headless screws. Definitive osteosynthesis from anterior to posterior, with one headless Acutrac mini compression screw was realized at both sites, achieving a stable and anatomical reconstruction of the articular surface with screws buried underneath the cartilage. During the procedure, the tip of a guide wire used for temporary fixation was previously broken and intentionally left into the distal right humerus, resulting in no interference with fracture's definitive osteosynthesis. Upon fixation, elbow joint was tested in varus/valgus stress under fluoroscopy and found to be stable in both sides. Postoperative radiographic exam confirmed anatomic reduction of the capitellar fractures and the correct hardware positioning ( Clinical and radiographic evaluation was performed at 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months after surgery. At each follow-up ROM in flexion/extension and supination/pronation was recorded. After 6 months and during the final follow-up, the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score was also obtained. At the first month flexion/extension range was found to be 100°–5° on the right and 95°–10° on the left. Supination/pronation was measured 120° on the right and 110° on the left elbow. After the second month, the fracture site was considered healed, based on radiographic appearance of the fracture and absence of pain on movement in both sides during clinical evaluation. ROM in flexion/extension was found to be 140°–0° on the right and 130°–0° in the left. Supination/pronation was measured at 180° on both sides. Three months after surgery, there was 145° of flexion with full extension on the right (0°–145°), and 135° of flexion and full extension on the left side (0°–135°) ( Type 1 fractures were found to be the most common (84%) among capitellar fractures. ORIF with headless compression screws has shown good to excellent results. In the case of a delayed diagnosis associated with a high risk of complete osteonecrosis, excision of the fragment could be recommended. Alternatively, ORIF should be the best option using bone graft augmentation. Shear fracture of bilateral capitulum is an extremely rare event. After meticulous research in the English literature, only four cases were identified. Acharya et al In our case, ORIF with headless screws offered a stable fixation to the osteochondral fragment in both sides. Early physical rehabilitation beginning from the second postoperative day was protected with a hinged brace for the first month. Clinical recovery was found more promising in our patient comparing to ROM reported for bilateral fractures by the first three authors. In conclusion, in accordance with most of the authors, we believe that ORIF of capitellar fractures adopting headless screws is the best way to achieve a stable and anatomic reconstruction in order to restore an early joint movement. In our opinion, if reduction and satisfactory stability of the fragment is achieved, rehabilitation should be started within the second postoperative day. In the very rare case of a bilateral injury, this concept appears mandatory with the purpose to offer immediate functional autonomy in the patient's daily living activities.