This work describes the development of a process for the recovery of Eu and Y from cathode ray tubes (CRTs) of discarded computer monitors with the proposition of a flow sheet for the metals dissolution. Amongst other elements, europium and yttrium are presented in the CRTs in quantities – 0.73w/w% of Eu and 13.4w/w% of Y – that make their recovery worthwhile. The process developed is comprised of the sample acid digestion with concentrated sulphuric acid followed by water dynamic leaching at room temperature. In the CRTs, yttrium is present as oxysulphide (Y2O2S) and europium is an associated element – Y2O2S:Eu3+ (red phosphor compound). During the sulphuric acid digestion, oxysulphide is converted into a trivalent Eu and Y sulphate, in solid form, with the liberation of H2S. In the second step, metals are leached from the solid produced in the acid digestion step by dynamic leaching with water. This study indicates that a proportion of 1250g of acid per kg of the sample is enough to convert Eu and Y oxysulphide into sulphate. After 15min of acid digestion and 1.0h of water leaching, a pregnant sulphuric liquor containing 17gL−
                     1 Y and 0.71gL−
                     1 Eu was obtained indicating yield recovery of Eu and Y of 96% and 98%, respectively. Both steps (acid digestion and water leaching) may be performed at room temperature.Devices containing cathode ray tubes (CRTs), such as computer monitors and TV tubes, have been replaced by new technologies such as LCD display, plasma, LED and other flat screen technologies. As a result, there has been a concern about how to deal with the growing electronic waste being generated ( There is a general consensus that a major problem concerning the disposal of CRTs devices is the large amount of lead present in them as well as the limitation in reusing their glass components in other applications ( Among the parts that a CRT is composed of (neck, funnel and the glass of the panel), the panel glass used in the front screen that shows the image, contains a small amount of lead (between 0 and 4 Besides the presence of hazardous metals, panel glass contains a luminescent material, also called phosphors, based on rare earth ions or rare earth host lattices ( In a previous work ( The aim of this paper was to describe a much simpler process to recover Eu and Y from CRTs and highlight the parameters involved in the process, including the mechanism for metals dissolution that was not mentioned before. The coating powder used in this study was obtained by manually scrapping the inner surfaces of computer monitor panels – an average of 300 monitors are necessary to provide 1 The concentration of Eu and Y was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry Kevex Sigma (model X 9050) ( The percentage of recovery of Eu and Y was calculated by difference in weight of the metal in the initial sample and the remaining in the residue after leaching. As the dissolution of Eu and Y was very similar in all of the investigated parameters (variations of less than 1% in the percentage of dissolution), they were regarded together in the discussion. Replications prepared from randomly chosen experiments indicated an experimental error of 3% at a 95% confidence level for both steps. Although the experimental procedure was similar to that described in our previous publication ( Preliminary experiments aiming the dissolution of europium and yttrium from computer monitors screen coating powder were carried out by hydrochloric and sulphuric acid leaching. The leaching experiments were performed in beakers, under mechanical agitation and controlled temperature by a thermostatic water batch. The parameters investigated were reaction time, temperature and solid percentage. The acid digestion experiments were carried out in beakers by adding concentrated sulphuric acid (H The acid digestion product was leached using water as leaching agent. The leaching experiments were carried out under mechanical stirring (500 The X-ray diffraction indicated zinc sulphide (ZnS) (JCPDS 005-0566) and yttrium oxysulphide (Y Preliminary leaching experiments using hydrochloric and sulphuric acids carried out under critical conditions indicated a low rate of Eu and Y dissolution. In these experiments, the performance of sulphuric acid was better than that of hydrochloric acids. When HCl was used at 90 In the study of the investigated parameters effect on Eu and Y dissolution by sulphuric acid digestion, the acid digestion product was leached by water using 3.0 h of reaction time and 10% of solids at 25 After a few minutes (∼10 The chemical reactions involved in acidic digestion process can be represented by the following equations: The simple sulphates of trivalent rare earths, Y The influence of the acid/sample ratio on Eu and Y dissolution was investigated in the interval between 750 and 2000 The results of the experiments where these variables were investigated indicated that in reaction time varying from 0.5 The percentage of solids was investigated at the interval between 10 to 40 It can be observed that when the process is conducted with 16 and 23 For the percentage of solids of 23%, the percentage of Eu and Y that were not leached was reduced by scrubbing from 63% to 6.8% and from 44% to 5.5%, respectively. However, for 10% of solids, the reduction in the percentage of Eu and Y that were not leached was not very significant, being reduced just from 9.6% to 5.5% for Eu and from 5.8% to 4.7% for Y. So, when a percentage of solids of 10 The influence of leaching time on the dissolution of Eu and Y was investigated within an interval between 0.5 and 3 The results obtained in the acid digestion and water leaching steps indicated the technical viability of recovering Eu and Y from the CRTs of discarded computer monitors. It was observed that 15 After the overall process, there is a reduction of approximately 50 The flow sheet proposed for the recovery of Eu and Y present in the powder coating of computer monitors screens is presented in The study indicates the technical viability of the recovery of Eu and Y present in the coating powder of the inner surfaces of panel computer monitors. The recovery of Eu and Y can be done by employing sulphuric acid digestion followed by water leaching. The main factors influencing Eu and Y dissolution are the acid/sample in the digestion step and the solid percentage in the leaching step. The water used in the second scrubbing can be reused in the leaching step, minimizing water consumption and increasing the metals content in the liquor. The process developed presents innovative aspects concerning the recovery of Eu and Y from the coating powder scrapped from panels of computer monitors, using a much simpler process than others cited in literature. The innovative aspects are: (i) sulphuric acid digestion at room temperature (25 At the conditions cited above, and using a sulphuric acid/sample ratio of 1250 The authors acknowledge CNPq and FAPEMIG for financial support. Sincere thanks to CDTN’s technicians who were involved in this work.