The decomposition of pyrite and marcasite in a nitric acid medium heated by microwave energy has been investigated. It was found that microwave exposure could effectively improve the leaching kinetics of both minerals. Marcasite had a substantially higher decomposition rate than pyrite. The decomposition rate increased with an increase in leaching temperature and concentration of acid and with a decrease in particle size. Only 5–7% of the dissolved sulphur was transformed into elemental sulphur. A kinetic study showed that the decomposition of both minerals was controlled by chemical reactions on the surfaces of particles.Although pyrometallurgical technologies have been widely applied to liberate locked gold particles from refractory gold ores, hydrometallurgical pretreatment is also widely accepted The potential applications of microwave energy in mineral processing were mainly investigated after 1970. They included the pretreatment of ores and concentrates, leaching, reduction, liberation, heating and treating of slags and wastes, and ore chemical assay Concentrated pyrite and marcasite samples have been used to investigate their decomposition in a HNO In each trial, 0.2 g of pyrite or marcasite was used. The sample was added into 25 mL HNO In the microwave field, the solution sample was rapidly heated to a designated temperature. The temperature inside the reaction vessel was automatically monitored by regulating the microwave power output according to a feedback control signal. The sample was leached with microwave energy for a set time. The leached particles were subsequently washed with deionised water and dried at a temperature of less than 50 °C so that elemental sulphur is stable Experiments were carried out at a leaching temperature of 80 °C. The concentrations of HNO For marcasite, when HNO When compared to pyrite, it was demonstrated that marcasite was much more readily decomposed in the experimental conditions. In a 2-M HNO Experimental results also showed that naturally hydrophobic elemental sulphur in a gel state was formed during leaching. Microwave radiation could not prevent the formation of sulphur at the studied temperatures. The elemental sulphur aggregated on the surfaces of the decomposed particles. Generally, less than 5–7% of the sulphur was transformed into the elemental sulphur when pyrite and marcasite were fully dissolved by a nitric acid solution. It appeared that there was slightly more elemental sulphur formed during the leaching of marcasite, compared with pyrite. On average, 5.1% of the sulphur was transformed into the elemental sulphur from pyrite, compared with 6.3% from marcasite. It was also shown that the formation of the elemental sulphur did not prevent the complete decomposition of the minerals. Microscopic examination showed that the aggregation of elemental sulphur only partially covered the reacted particles; therefore, the HNO Experiments concerning the effect of temperature on the decompositions of pyrite and marcasite were carried out in a 2-M HNO A similar leaching trend between pyrite and marcasite was found when the reaction temperature was increased. However, marcasite showed a markedly higher decomposition rate than pyrite. At 70 °C, only 41% of the marcasite was decomposed by microwave leaching in 10 min. Moreover, when the reaction temperature was raised to 90 and 110 °C, the decomposition extent increased to 94% and 100%, respectively. Elemental sulphur was formed in the investigated temperature range. An increase in temperature failed to diminish the formation of elemental sulphur. Pyrite and marcasite with various particle sizes, 20–63, 90–125, 180–250 μm, were used to investigate the effect of particle size on chemical decomposition. These samples were leached in a 2-M HNO The decomposition of sulphide minerals in an acid system is a heterogeneous reaction For surface reaction control: For product layer diffusion control: For mixed control: These constant are given in the following equations: The data given in This magnitude of activation energy may support the theory that the leaching of pyrite and marcasite is controlled by the chemical reaction on the particle surfaces The data that are associated with the effect of nitric acid concentration and particle size on the decomposition rate of pyrite and marcasite were also analysed with the shrinking core models. Again, these data agree well with the chemical reaction control model. When marcasite and pyrite are leached in a 0.25- to 4-M HNO The oxidation of pyrite and marcasite in a nitric acid solution is as follows The nitric oxide (NO) that is formed during oxidation can rapidly react with oxygen to form nitric dioxide (NO These reactions are very fast because of the high solubility of NO In comparison with a conventional leaching system heated by electrical energy under identical conditions Microwave heating is a volumetric and selective heating process. In a microwave field, microwaves will penetrate into the solution to lead to efficient volumetric heating. Therefore, microwaves should have an effect on the localised reactions between solid mineral, which may preferentially absorb microwave energy, and solvent. Local overheating taking place on individual particles may improve reaction kinetics and result in the rupture of the particles to produce fresh surfaces The study into the reaction kinetics shows that there is no significant difference in the reaction activation energy when leaching system was heated by microwave energy in comparison with the conventional energy; the reaction activation energy was 50 and 55 kJ/mol for pyrite and marcasite, respectively Experimental results have indicated that the decomposition of pyrite and marcasite was highly dependent on the temperature and the concentration of nitric acid. The temperature dependence of the reaction rates suggests that the reactions of pyrite and marcasite with HNO Experimental results also demonstrated that marcasite had a significantly higher reaction rate than pyrite. The difference in the reaction rate between marcasite and pyrite might result from a difference in their crystal structures, although they have a similar chemical composition It is widely accepted that the elemental sulphur is detrimental to the recovery of gold from refractory gold ores and concentrates. Five to seven percent of the total sulphur was transformed into hydrophobic elemental sulphur when both the minerals were completely decomposed. The formed elemental sulphur did not impede the complete decomposition with prolonged leaching time. The elemental sulphur, however, interfered slightly with the dissolution rate of pyrite and marcasite. Experimental results also indicated that chemical instability had less influence on the formation of elemental sulphur in comparison with the reaction rate. Microwave radiation failed to diminish the formation of the elemental sulphur or to dissolve the formed elemental sulphur. Because microwave energy can give selective and rapid volumetric heating, the combination of conventional decomposition of sulphides in an acid medium, in particular, in a nitric acid solution, with microwave heating could be a potential alternative for the treatment of ores. (1) In a nitric acid solution, pyrite and marcasite can be decomposed rapidly. The reaction temperature and the concentration of HNO (2) Marcasite had a substantially higher decomposition rate than pyrite. (3) Microwave energy could promote the dissolution of marcasite and pyrite, compared with conventional thermal conductive heating, such as electricity energy. (4) Kinetic investigations showed that the decomposition of both minerals in a nitric acid medium is controlled by chemical reactions on the surfaces of particles. (5) Five to seven percent of the decomposed sulphur was transformed into elemental sulphur during the leaching of both minerals in the microwave heating system. The authors express their sincere thanks to the financial support from School of Chemical Engineering, The University of Birmingham, the ORS Foundation and RIO TINTO Technology and Development.