This paper examines fine grinding techniques in current use in the pharmaceutical industry. Experimental results are given for fine grinding of vitamin C, chosen as a model substance representative of pharmaceutical products, using eight different grinding mills chosen amongst those in current use in the pharmaceutical industry. The results are evaluated in terms of product quality expressed as particle size and distribution and also in terms of operating criteria applicable in the pharmaceutical industry such as ease of setting up, ease of cleaning, and investment cost. The main conclusion reinforces and quantifies current practice of using pancake mills that are preferred for ultra fine grinding as they are simple to use, can treat high feed rates and are easy to clean.In recent years and particularly in the pharmaceutical industry, product quality criteria have become more and more draconian, imposing specifications involving finer particles and closer control on the mean particle size, or the width and cut-off of the particle size distribution. Additional requirements are for the particle shape and surface properties of powders, which go towards the end use consumer requirements. The past 10 years have also seen the development of new grinding technologies as well as significant improvements to existing methods. Nevertheless, size reduction by grinding has remained an essentially empirical science, but one needing a better understanding so as to meet new technical and economic requirements. The theory of grinding has mainly been developed in the mineral industry as a response to needs for maximising production capacity and minimising energy use for low value added products ( Grinding operations in the pharmaceutical industry are generally limited to three or four main types of equipment, the choice between which is usually based on experience and limited by the fact that more fundamental approaches have been developed for the mineral industries. It is difficult to take into account the properties of organic materials and the process needs of the pharmaceutical industry. In this industrial area, the main factor of choice is the ability to give a certain product quality, in terms of fineness of particle size or specific surface, without causing physical or chemical changes such as amorphisation. Further criteria are the ease of determining operating parameters and ease of cleaning so as to eliminate contamination which are both specially important in multi-product installations. Finally investment costs must be borne in mind though they could be secondary in the case of high value added products. The experimental investigation presented here is based on comparative grinding tests using vitamin C, a low-cost model pharmaceutical product for which much information is available in the literature. This substance is non-toxic, easy to remove by conventional cleaning and readily available at a reasonable price, making it suitable for pilot plant tests. It is a good analogue of many pharmaceutical powders where fine particle size is required to improve dissolution, chemical reactivity and the homogeneity in powder mixtures, etc. Two families of grinding mill have been tested: air jet mills and impact mills. The main details of the equipment used are given in Vitamin C is used in this investigation as a non-toxic model pharmaceutical product having mechanical properties typical of organic powders. It is available in large quantities at a reasonable price and does not pose problems of cleaning the equipment. The main physical properties are as follows: Crystalline particles with size The ground powder produced in the various tests has been characterised by the methods given in These measurements indicate that: the median diameter determined by the Insitec in line laser diffraction instrument is not identical to that determined by the Malvern laser diffraction instrument but the two methods are well correlated by a straight line relation such that This result has also been confirmed by other results with different products. For all grinding methods, the specific surface of the ground product is inversely proportional to the median diameter. See For all grinding methods the bulk density of the products decreases as the specific surface increases (see These results confirm the coherence of the different methods used for characterising the ground products. The mill comprises a flat cylindrical grinding chamber with a ring of air nozzles each set at an angle to the circumference of the chamber. These jets form a so-called grinding circle and a free vortex, which plays the role of a selector by pushing the un-ground particles outwards and sucking the fine ground particles to the centre of the chamber. After leaving the grinding chamber the product goes through a cyclone to separate the coarse particles (recovered in a container) from the fine product (recovered in the filter). A priori, the main operating parameters are as follows: The gas pressure used for grinding and the solids feed rate determine the specific energy used for grinding ( The geometry of the nozzles The number of nozzles The angle the nozzles make to the tangent at the circumference To evaluate the grinding performance these latter three parameters were kept constant and the grinding pressure and the solid feed rate were varied. The results shown in The oval ring mill has an oval vertical grinding-chamber divided into two parts. A lower part where grinding takes place and an upper part where classification occurs. Particles are introduced in the lower part of the mill using a Venturi feed system and breakage is caused by the air jets projecting particles at one another. In the upper-part, centrifugal force pushes the coarse particles to the outside of the chamber to be recycled in the grinding section. The fine particles go to the inside of the grinding chamber ring where they exit and are collected in a filter. A priori, the main operating parameters in this type of mill are the same as those important in the spiral jet pancake mill described above. Experimental results are given in A low-pressure regime dominated by fragmentation, and a high-pressure regime dominated by attrition where pressure has a less marked effect. This mill has a cylindrical grinding chamber of diameter 100 mm fitted in its lower part with a cone having three 2 mm air jets pointing at each other. Fragmented particles are carried to a “squirrel cage” type turbo selector, the speed of rotation of which can be varied between 18,000 and 20,000 rpm, which is located in the upper part of the mill chamber. Solid is introduced in the mill by a screw feeder, the product leaving the mill through the selector is collected in a cyclone and the transport air is further filtered to recover ultra-fine particles. The air jets form a fluidised bed of particles in the chamber and grinding occurs by projection of particles against one another. These particles are then carried upwards by the current of air to the turbo selector which only allows particles less than a certain size, determined by the speed of rotation, to leave the grinding chamber. Particles larger than the cut size are excluded by centrifugal force and return to the grinding section. The mill used in the tests also has an Insitec on line laser diffraction instrument, which gives continuous determination of the particle size distribution and also a measure of the solids flow rate from the attenuation of the light beam. A priori, the important operating parameters of this type of mill are: The air pressure at the grinding nozzles, the solids feed rate, and the speed of rotation of the turbo selector. Experiments performed by varying these parameters show: The specific surface of the product depends on the air pressure used for grinding ( In the range used here (1 to 10 kg/h) the solids feed rate has little influence on the specific surface of the product. The particle size is essentially controlled by the classifier that compensates the feed rate effects by recycling coarse particles in the grinding zone of the mill. It should be noted that with some products this mechanism can affect the particle morphology whilst still respecting size specifications. Moreover, the recycling of coarse particles causes an increase in the mill hold-up. This behaviour is also observed up to a feed rate flooding value when overflow of the classifier occurs. This importance of the influence of the classifier explains the pertinence of the ( The Insitec on line measuring system showed that the instantaneous product particle size In addition, it is found that the time required to establish a continuous operating regime depends on the solids feed rate and indications are that there is a solids hold up in the mill of about 240 g. A pin mill comprises two disks fitted with overlapping pins. One of the disks (stator) is stationary the other (rotor) rotates with a high peripheral speed of up to 150 m/s. Product is introduced by a feed screw in the centre of the mill and leaves by the periphery to a collecting filter. The main operating parameters varied in the experimental programme were the speed of rotation and the solids feed rate. In addition, the feed solids particle size was varied by making several passes through the same mill and the effect of the size of the mill was examined by using three different mills.  It is found that the solids feed rate has only a very minor effect on product quality that with respect to the speed of rotation. It is also found that, after two passes through the mill, the product quality remains essentially constant. In the case of a fixed hammer mill the feed is to the centre of the mill where it is thrown at a selector grid by the centrifugal force created by the rotating blades. The particles are ground by successive impacts on the blades or between the particles and the grill. Peripheral speeds are in the range 50 to 100 m/s. Fixed hammer mills require high air ventilation to eliminate heat created by grinding. A priori the important operating parameters are, the peripheral speed of the rotor, the solids feed rate, the air flow rate and the characteristics of the selector grill: size and shape of the holes and free area of the holes. The parameters varied in the experimental programme were the solid flow rate, the speed of rotation of the rotor, the type of grill and the hole size. Results given in The type of pin mill with dynamic selector used is a Micron System MS20 model, which has a pin mill coupled to a dynamic selector with solid feed through a pair of synchronised valves. A fan is fitted upstream from the mill to create a strong air flow through the grinding chamber of 100 to 320 m The experimental programme showed that product quality is essentially governed by the performance of the selector. The specific surface depends on the air pressure ( It is further found that the speed of rotation of the grinding rotor has little effect on the specific surface of the product and that the solids flow rate has practically no effect on the product specific surface, which does however vary with the speed of rotation of the classifier. Repeated passages through the mill show that there is practically no change in product quality after the first passage through the mill. Up to a maximum value of the feed rate this phenomena are consequences of the importance of the classification process and coarse particles recycling to determine the output size of the product. The main results of the study may be resumed as follows: Product quality from an air jet mill depends mainly on the specific energy used (ratio of kinetic energy of the gas to the solids feed rate). Product quality from a fluidised bed type air jet mill is mainly controlled by the performance of the turbo selector. Product quality from an impact type mill (pin mill, hammer mill) is mainly determined by the speed of rotation of the grinding rotor. Product quality from a pin mill coupled with a selector is mainly governed by the performance of the selector. The different types of mill can be compared on the basis of: The specific surface of the product, the width of the particle size distribution expressed as the span defined as: The ease of use with respect to the production capacity of the mill, Cleaning, Investment costs. Comparison shows that pancake mills give the smallest particle with the highest specific surface ( The two types of mill having integral selectors, that is the fluidised bed air jet mill and the MS20 pin mill, also give very high specific surface products ( For equal specific energy, the pancake mill is more efficient than the oval ring mill and consequently the latter is best suited to producing low specific surface products ( In the domain of fine grinding (5 μm< In this investigation, comparison is made of the performance of eight different mills for fine grinding a model pharmaceutical powder. The results summarised in For fine or coarse grinding the oval ring mill and the pin mill are comparable. The MS20 can be useful if tight size distributions are required. Finally, the fluidised bed air jet mill does not seem to be well suited to grinding organic powders. This type of mill does not have any particular qualities with respect to particle size and distribution, has only a low capacity, is rather expensive, and not very easy to use.