This study deals with the characterization of narrowly sized fractions of clinker ground by ball mill and high-pressure grinding rolls. Chemical, physical and mineralogical characterizations were made by using XRF, laser sizing, Blaine, BET, SEM, and image analysis techniques. The emphasis was given to the preferential liberation of the constituent clinker phases. High-pressure grinding rolls gave higher degrees of liberation of mineral phases arising from the intergranular breakage along the grain boundaries compared to ball mill grinding. This is expected to influence the downstream service properties of cement.The service properties of cement are affected not only by its chemical and mineralogical composition but also by its fineness and particle size distribution. Hence, a considerable number of studies were made to investigate the effect of particle size, particle size distribution, individual mineral grain size of the constituent minerals, and surface area upon the main quality parameters of cement such as strength development, water demand, setting time and heat of hydration Cement minerals, mainly alite, belite, celite and ferrite, must be exposed to water molecules for hydration to take place. The degree to which individual grains of these minerals are exposed depends to a great extent upon the surface of the individual grains relative to the surface of particles in which they are contained. Hence, the concept of “liberation” from the mineral-processing field must be introduced into the cement field. High compression applications are finding widespread use in cement grinding because of their ability to improve specific energy consumption by up to 40%. Although HPGR technology is widely used in the cement industry, the possibility of preferential liberation of clinker minerals as recognised and beneficially applied in the mineral processing industry has not received much attention. In broad terms, if the same ore is subjected to comminution by two different methods such that particle size distribution is similar, yet subsequent downstream treatment demonstrates substantial differences, then there is reason to believe that preferential liberation has occurred. The benefits of high-pressure rolls grinding in increased gold With this fact in mind, it was decided to carry out comparative test work to ascertain if the two most used different milling techniques in cement grinding, namely, ball milling and HPGR, had any substantial differences on properties, particularly on preferential liberation, of the cement minerals, and consequently, their downstream effects on product service properties. In this article, mainly characterization of differently ground particles is presented. For the results to be comparable and to eliminate the effect of gypsum addition on the characterization, the work was carried out on closely sized fractions of differently ground clinker. The effects of changes in clinker minerals' characteristics due to different grinding modes upon the downstream service properties, after the addition of adequate amount of gypsum, will be the subject of another publication. Clinker ground in an HPGR equipment was sampled in an industrial cement plant, and after deagglomeration, − Minus 90 μm clinker products were sieved to the same narrow size fractions to prepare pairs of samples having the same sieve size, but differing in the mode of comminution by which they were produced. The choice of narrow size fractions for the study was to facilitate the image analysis particularly for the determination of liberation degrees. The fractions prepared were − To check if chemical compositions varied according to particle size and the mode of comminution applied, XRF analyses were performed. Specific surface areas of samples were determined by Blaine and by BET (based on N Mineralogical characterization of the samples was made by image analysis. It was soon evident that etching was required to differentiate the clinker minerals, particularly the silicates, under the microscope. A number of etching solutions was tried and nital (HNO In order to interpret the data obtained from the tests on a sound base, the chemical composition of different size fractions should be similar. Although the analyses of Al The results of Blaine and BET specific surface area measurements are presented in Comparison of the SEM photographs included as examples provides considerable insight into the surface details in support of the above given argument. The photographs in Image analysis was carried out on the polished and etched samples of the same clinker size fractions. The algorithms, defining the images of the samples most properly, were integrated into Clemex software and the measurements such as the amount and crystal sizes of the main clinker phases, C  Crystal sizes of alite and belite, which were expressed as the longest dimension (the measured diameter equal to the maximum value of Feret's diameter), depending on the particle size classes and the mode of grinding, are presented in Quantification of C Our greatest interest in this work was obviously the comparison of grinding mechanisms in terms of mineral liberation. Liberation is well known to be the key to success in mineral processing and in the authors' opinion must be introduced to the cement field also. The degree of liberation is expressed by the percentage of a mineral that exists as free particles to the total of that mineral. In an individual clinker particle, major or minor phases can be seen together, mostly C As for the liberation studies, firstly, liberation classes were defined. If one particle consisted of only one mineral, it was called a free particle. If two minerals existed in one particle, it was termed a binary particle. A ternary particle was the one having three minerals together. The results were obtained by counting 800–1500 particles in each size fraction and the liberation classes are given in The samples are mostly composed of C Based on the findings, the following conclusions can be drawn: HPGR products have narrower particle size distributions compared to BM products. They have larger BET and smaller Blaine specific surface areas in the same size fraction. The harder component C Average crystal sizes of alite and belite show no variation in the narrow size fractions due to the grinding modes applied. They get smaller as the size fractions get finer. Ball mill ground products exhibit smoother breakage surfaces compared to HPGR products. Mineralogical composition of the size fractions indicates variations depending on the fineness. Most importantly, HPGR grinding causes breakage along grain boundaries resulting in better liberation of constituent minerals compared to BM grinding as confirmed by quantitative determination of the degree of liberation by the image analysis of the closely sized fractions of products. This is expected to affect the service properties of cement ground under differing modes.