Surface and deformation characteristics of single crystal β-Ga2O3 under nanogrinding were investigated using nanoindentation and transmission electron microscopy. Nanocrystals, stacking faults, twins and dislocations were the main deformation patterns found in the grinding of this semiconductor crystal. An amorphous phase was found when the specific grinding energy was significantly high, which was initiated behind the occurrence of other defects. The occurrence sequence of defects is somehow different from that of other semiconductors such as silicon, germanium and gallium arsenide. The hardness of grinding-induced deformed layer was higher than that of the perfect β-Ga2O3 crystal. The thickness and hardness of the defect layer were both reduced when a finer grit size was used. The mechanism responsible for deformation was found to be related to the intrinsic stacking fault energy of β-Ga2O3 and the specific grinding energy being used.Gallium oxide in its stable β-modification (β-Ga Single crystal β-Ga In this study, our recent results on the deformation of single crystal β-Ga As-received ( After grinding, cross-sectional specimens were made to examine the ground subsurfaces using an FEI Tecnai F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operated at 200 Nanoindentation was performed on the ground surfaces to measure the hardness of the deformed layers using a Triboindenter® (TI-900, Hysitron, USA). A three-sided Berkovich indenter with an included angle of 142.3   The amorphous phase was observed on top of the nanocrystal layer in Sample C, as shown in High density stacking faults along the (200) lattice planes could be clearly seen in the defect layers of all the samples, as shown in Twins were found in the ground subsurface of Samples A and B, as shown in Dislocations were found in the ground subsurface of Sample A, which are along the (101) lattice planes, as shown in Nanoindentation was performed on the ground samples using a peak load of 2.5 The values of deformed layer thickness, indentation depth and hardness of the ground and polished samples are shown in For electronic device making, the machined semiconductor substrates or wafers must meet the stringent quality requirement, i.e. defect free surface/subsurface. Thus, the grinding-induced deformed layer must be removed in the subsequent finishing process, normally by polishing The deformation of β-Ga Apparently, the grinding condition being used affected the deformation pattern in the ground subsurface. Previous studies Nanocrystals, stacking faults, twins and dislocations were the dominant defects in the subsurface layer of the ground β-Ga This work was financially supported by