Magnesium (Mg) is the fourth most abundant cation and the second most abundant intracellular cation in vertebrates. Mg is involved in numerous biological processes and is essential for life. Mg may be required for enzyme substrate formation. Free Mg2+ also acts as an allosteric activator of numerous enzyme systems, as well as playing a role in ion channels and for membrane stabilization. Mg is therefore critical for a great number of cellular functions, including oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, DNA transcription, and protein synthesis. Mg homeostasis is dependent on the amount of Mg ingested, efficiency of Mg intestinal absorption, and renal reabsorption and excretion. The mechanism(s) for intestinal Mg absorption includes passive diffusion and active transport. Mg is absorbed along the entire intestinal tract, including the large and small bowel, but the sites of maximal Mg absorption are the ilium and distal jejunum. Because of the prevalence of Mg in cells and bone, as well as its critical need for numerous biological processes in the body, this mineral plays a profound role in bone and mineral homeostasis. Mg influences the formation and secretion of hormones that regulate skeletal homeostasis and the effect of these hormones on bone. Mg can also directly affect bone cell function as well as influence hydroxyapatite crystal formation and growth. Finally, epidemiological studies have provided a major link associating dietary Mg inadequacy to osteoporosis.ATPase or GTPase (Na Cyclases (adenylate cyclase, guanylate cyclase) Kinase (hexokinase, creatine kinase, protein kinase) Adenylate cyclase Phospholipase C Na Ca2 K G proteins 5′-Nucleotidase Creatine kinase Phosphofructokinase 5-Phosphoribosyl-pyrophosphate synthetase Lipoprotein lipase K Ca2 Nerve conduction Gastrointestinal Disorders Prolonged nasogastric suction/vomiting Acute and chronic diarrhea Intestinal and biliary fistulas Malabsorption syndromes Extensive bowel resection or bypass Acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis Protein-calorie malnutrition Primary intestinal hypomagnesemia (neonatal) Renal Loss Chronic parenteral fluid therapy Osmotic diuresis (glucose, urea, manitol) Hypercalcemia Alcohol Diuretics (furosemide, ethacrynic acid) Aminoglycosides Cisplatin Cyclosporin Amphotericin B Pentamidine Tacolimus Metabolic acidosis Renal disorders with Mg wasting Primary renal hypomagnesemia Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders Diabetes mellitus (glycosuria) Phosphate depletion Primary hyperparathyroidism (hypercalcemia) Hypoparathyroidism (hypercalciuria, hypercalcemia owing to overtreatment with vitamin D) Primary aldosteronism Hungry bone syndrome Chronic renal disease Excessive lactatation  The normal adult total body Mg content is approximately 25 grams (2000 Extracellular Mg accounts for about 1% of total body Mg. Mg concentration or content may be reported as mEq/liter, mg/dl, or mmol/liter. Values reported as mEq/liter can be converted to mg/dl by multiplying by 1.2 and to mmol/liter by dividing by 0.5 The normal serum Mg concentration is 1.5–1.9 Mg homeostasis is dependent on the amount of Mg ingested, efficiency of Mg intestinal absorption, and renal reabsorptionand excretion. Intestinal Mg absorption is proportional The recommended daily allowance for Mg is 420 A principal factor that regulates intestinal Mg transport has not been described. Vitamin D, as well as its metabolites 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH) Bioavailability of Mg may also be a factor in Mg intestinal absorption as other nutrients may affect Mg absorption. Although dietary calcium has been reported to both decrease and increase Mg absorption, human studies have shown no effect ( The kidney is the principal organ involved in Mg homeostasis ( About 2,400 Micropuncture studies performed during a time in which the concentration of Mg was increased gradually, in either the tubular lumen or in the extracellular fluid, have failed to demonstrate a tubular maximum for Mg (TmMg) in the proximal tubule ( During Mg deprivation, Mg virtually disappears from the urine ( Within the cell, Mg is compartmentalized and most of it is bound to proteins and negatively charged molecules such as ATP, ADP, RNA, and DNA; in the cytoplasm, about 80% of Mg is complexed with ATP ( Studies in mammalian tissues and isolated cells suggest the presence of specific Mg transport systems. Early Mg transport out of cells appears to require the presence of carrier-mediated transport systems, possibly regulated by the concentration of Mg Mg transport in mammalian cells is influenced by hormonal and pharmacological factors. Mg Growth factors may also influence Mg It is hypothesized that this hormonally regulated Mg uptake system controls intracellular Mg The many risk factors for magnesium depletion shown in ( Gastrointestinal disorders ( Excessive excretion of Mg into the urine may be the basis of Mg depletion ( Many pharmaceutical drugs may cause renal Mg wasting and Mg depletion. The major site of renal Mg reabsorption is at the loop of Henle, therefore diuretics such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid have been shown to result in marked Mg wasting ( Several renal Mg wasting disorders have been described that may be genetic or sporadic as discussed earlier in renal Mg metabolism (Konrad Hypomagnesemia may accompany a number of other disorders (for review see Special consideration must be given to diabetes mellitus. It is the most common disorder associated with magnesium deficiency ( Because of the prevalence of Mg in both cells and bone, as well as its critical need for numerous biological processes in the body, it is not surprising that this mineral plays a profound role in bone and mineral homeostasis. Our understanding of the role of magnesium has developed principally through observations of the effect of Mg depletion in both humans and animals. Mg influences the formation and/or secretion of hormones that regulate skeletal homeostasis and the effect of these hormones on bone. Mg can also directly affect bone cell function as well as influence hydroxyapatite crystal formation and growth. These areas are discussed later and are outlined in Calcium is the major regulator of PTH secretion. Mg, however, modulates PTH secretion in a manner similar to calcium. A number of The inhibitory effects of Mg on PTH secretion may be dependent on the extracellular calcium concentration ( The effect of Mg on PTH secretion appears to act through the Ca While acute changes in extracellular Mg concentrations will influence PTH secretion qualitatively similar to calcium, it is clear that Mg deficiency markedly perturbs mineral homeostasis ( It is conceivable that either PTH synthesis and/or PTH secretion may be affected. However, as the The previous discussion strongly supports the notion that impairment in the secretion of PTH in Mg deficiency is a major contributing factor in the hypocalcemia. However, the presence of normal or elevated serum concentrations of PTH in the face of hypocalcemia ( Calcium release from the skeleton also appears to be dependent on physicochemical processes as well as cellular activity ( The renal response to PTH has also been assessed by determining the urinary excretion of cyclic AMP and/or phosphate ( The mechanism for impaired PTH secretion and action in Mg deficiency remains unclear. It has been suggested that there may be a defect in the second messenger systems in Mg depletion. PTH is thought to exert its biologic effects through the intermediary action of cyclic AMP ( While Mg Adenylate cyclase is a widely distributed enzyme in the body, and if the hypothesis just given were true, the secretion and action of other hormones mediated by adenylate cyclase might also exhibit impaired activity in Mg deficiency. This has not been found to be true, as the actions of ACTH, TRH, GnRH, and glucagon are normal in Mg depletion ( Although cyclic AMP is an important mediator of PTH action, current studies do not suggest an important role in mediating Ca The effect of Mg depletion on cellular function in terms of the second messenger systems is most complex, potentially involving substrate availability, G protein activity, release and sensitivity to intracellular Ca Mg may also be important in vitamin D metabolism and/or action. Patients with hypoparathyroidism, malabsorption syndromes, and rickets have been reported to be resistant to therapeutic doses of vitamin D until Mg was administered simultaneously (for review, see The exact nature of altered vitamin D metabolism and/or action in Mg deficiency is unclear. Intestinal calcium transport in animal models of Mg deficiency has been found to be reduced in some ( The association of Mg deficiency with impaired vitamin D metabolism and action therefore may be because of several factors, including vitamin D deficiency ( Women with postmenopausal osteoporosis have decreased nutrition markers, suggesting that osteoporosis is associated with nutritional deficiencies ( Epidemiological studies have provided a major link associating dietary Mg inadequacy to osteoporosis. One cross-sectional study assessed the effect of dietary nutrients on appendicular (radius, ulna, and heel) bone mineral density (BMD) in a large group of Japanese Americans living in Hawaii ( Other studies have concentrated on BMD of the axial skeleton. Sixty-six premenopausal women (ages 28–39) whose Mg intake was 289±73 In a study of younger individuals, the effect of dietary Mg intake of preadolescent girls (ages 9–11) on bone mass/quality in these young women was evaluated at age 18–19 ( In summary, these epidemiological studies link dietary Mg intake to bone mass. Exceptions appear to include women in the early postmenopausal period in which the effect of acute sex steroid deficiency may mask the effect of dietary factors such as Mg. In addition, diets deplete in Mg are usually deficient in other nutrients, which affect bone mass as well. Therefore, further investigations are needed to provide a firm relationship of dietary Mg inadequacy with osteoporosis. In two of the epidemiological studies cited earlier, markers of bone turnover were determined. In one, where no correlation was found between BMD and dietary Mg intake, serum osteocalcin did not correlate with Mg (or any other nutrient) intake ( The affect of short-term administration of Mg on bone turnover in young normal subjects has been conflicting. Magnesium, 360 Significant correlation between serum Mg and bone metabolism has been observed. The majority of body Mg (50–60%) resides in the skeleton, and skeletal Mg reflects Mg status. In the two studies cited earlier in which an Mg deficit was suggested by either Mg tolerance testing or low serum Mg concentration, the Mg content of iliac crest trabecular bone was reduced significantly in osteoporotic patients ( In summary, Mg status has been assessed in very few osteoporotic patients. Low serum and red blood cell Mg concentrations, as well as a high retention of parenterally administered Mg, suggest an Mg deficit; however, these results are not consistent from one study to another. Similarly, although a low skeletal Mg content has been observed in some studies, others have found normal or even high Mg content. Larger scale studies are needed. The effect of dietary Mg supplementation on bone mass in patients with osteoporosis has not been studied extensively. Administration of 600 In summary, the effect of Mg supplements on bone mass has generally led to an increase in bone mineral density, although study design limits useful information. Larger, long-term, placebo-controlled, double-blind investigations are required. Osteoporosis may occur with greater than usual frequency in certain populations in which Mg depletion is also common. These may include diabetes mellitus ( The reduction in bone mass in diabetes mellitus and alcoholism also appears to be related to a decrease in bone formation, similar to what is observed in experimental Mg depletion (see later; section 6). A histomorphometric study of bone has shown decreased bone formation, bone turnover, osteoid, and osteoblast number ( The effect of dietary Mg depletion on bone and mineral homeostasis in animals has been studied since the 1940s. Most studies have been performed in the rat. Dietary restriction has usually been severe, ranging from 0.2 to 8 These severe degrees of Mg deficiency are unlikely to commonly occur in the human population. We have recently reported less severe degrees of Mg restriction in the rat (10%, 25%, and 50% of the recommended nutrient requirement) and also observed detrimental effect on bone ( Several potential mechanisms may account for a decrease in bone mass in Mg deficiency. Mg is mitogenic for bone cell growth, which may directly result in a decrease in bone formation ( Mg deficiency can perturb calcium homeostasis and result in a fall in both serum PTH and 1,25(OH) Because insulin promotes amino acid incorporation into bone ( Although the explanation just given may explain low bone formation, it does not explain the observation of an increase in osteoclast bone resorption. Each year about 25% of trabecular bone is resorbed and replaced in human adults, whereas only 3% of cortical bone undergoes remodeling ( Mg may also independently influence bone mineral formation. In  Mg may also have another indirect effect on crystallization by influencing both osteocalcin formation and osteocalcin binding to hydroxyapatite. Osteocalcin has been shown to inhibit the conversion of brushite to hydroxyapatite and the nucleation of mineral formation ( 