Deep in situ biomining (DISB) offers the potential for exploiting metal-rich ore bodies that are currently difficult or non-economic to access, with far less environmental impact than current deep or opencast mining practices. DISB is being developed within the EU Horizon 2020 project “BIOMOre”, which targets a calcareous sedimentary copper ore, kupferschiefer, which is a widespread subterranean rock stratum in central and north-western Europe. Laboratory tests on the two main copper-bearing fractions of kupferschiefer, sandstone and black shale, showed that, besides requiring basic minerals to be removed ahead of indirect bioleaching (to avoid the formation of ferric carbonates), both contained significant amounts of chloride minerals (chiefly halite) which could have a major negative impact on DISB. A sequential three-phased protocol was developed, involving (i) leaching with water, which removed most of the chloride, (ii) leaching with sulfuric acid, which removed most of the residual chloride and carbonate minerals, and (iii) indirect bioleaching with an acidic ferric iron lixiviant. The latter was produced in a laboratory-scale ferric iron-generating bioreactor dominated by the iron-oxidizing acidophilic prokaryotes Leptospirillum ferriphilum, Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans and Ferroplasma acidophilum. The iron oxidizing capacity of this bioreactor was not impaired by the concentrations of chloride present during the leaching phase in which it was used. Sequential leaching was applied successfully using a “composite” (sandstone plus black shale) ore column, which mimicked the flow circuit in a DISB, and included a bleed stream where soluble copper was removed from the pregnant leach solutions generated by sulfide precipitation. Water leaching was shown to cause partial disintegration and lowering of the resistance of the sandstone fraction to crushing.Biomining, the use of microorganisms to recover metals by oxidative dissolution of metal sulfide minerals in primary ores and wastes (tailings, rock dumps etc.) is now well established as a global technology ( Deep The concept of DISB as an alternative approach to extract and recover base metals has been around for a number of years, and trialed in at least one location (Arizona, USA). Likewise, the use of bioreactors to generate acidic ferric iron solutions was described over forty years ago by “BIOMOre” is a research and development project sponsored by the European Union as part of its Horizon2020 programme ( Samples taken from the sandstone and black shale strata from the A 2 L (working volume) bioreactor vessel (Electrolab, U.K.) was packed with 8 mm diameter sterile porous glass beads (Poraver, Germany), a liquid medium containing 50 mM ferrous sulfate, basal salts and trace elements ( The effect of dissolved salt on the performance of the FIGB was tested by adding increasing amounts of sodium chloride (equivalent to 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 10 and 20 g/L of Cl The first column leaching experiment set up involved using separate non-aerated columns, 32 cm high and 9.4 cm wide and maintained at 35 °C, for sandstone (2.3 kg) or black shale (2.0 kg) ore. These were leached sequentially, first with sulfuric acid and afterwards with acidic ferric iron-rich lixiviant generated by the FIGB. Acid leaching, referred to as Phase I in A third column leaching experiment was set up using both components of It was noted that sand grains accumulated in the bottom of the ore column during water washing of the composite Four jars, each containing 100 g The pH values of FIGB effluents and column leachates were measured using a pHase combination glass electrode, and redox potentials (adjusted to be relative to a standard hydrogen electrode, Concentrations of total copper were determined by reducing the copper (II) present with hydroxylamine solution, followed by measuring copper (I) using the bicinchoninic acid colorimetric assay ( Metabolically-active microorganisms were isolated on selective solid overlay media ( Biomass accumulated on the porous glass beads within the FIGB, as evidenced by increasing rates of ferrous iron oxidation at constant flow rates and hydraulic retention times (HRTs). With HRTs of 10 h or more, >99% of the 50 mM ferrous iron present in salt-free influent liquors was oxidized to ferric, but this declined to ~55% when the HRT was reduced to 5 h. Larger HRTs were required to fully oxidize solutions when the ferrous iron concentration was increased to 180 mM (data not shown). Soluble iron (~180 mM) in the lixiviants used to indirectly bioleach ores in the first column experiments was always >99% ferric, and had E Chloride concentrations of up to 3 g/L (84.5 mM) in the influent liquor had no detectable effects on rates of ferrous iron oxidation by the FIGB, but 10 g/L (282 mM Cl Only two bacterial species ( Acid leaching of Redox potentials of the lixiviants decreased markedly (to <+600 mV) during indirect bioleaching, as a consequence of ferric iron being consumed by oxidizing sulfide minerals. This occurred more rapidly in the earlier sub-phases of indirect bioleaching. Analysis of PLS generated by acid leaching and indirect bioleaching showed that they contained significant concentrations of chloride, especially those from the sandstone fraction ( Column leaching of the three-layered ore (a single layer of black shale sandwiched between two layers of sandstone gravel) reflected the layered nature of However, about an additional 20% of the chloride present in the ore was solubilized during acid leaching. Very little additional chloride was removed from the composite ore during the bioleaching phase ( Other transition metals were also leached from the composite Chloride was rapidly leached from the sandstone ore by immersion in water, particularly when the gravel-water mixes were agitated by aeration (  BIOMOre is a multidisciplinary research project addressing some of these fundamental issues ( The calcareous nature of The fact that large concentrations of sodium chloride were also readily leached from The FIGB is an integral component of a DISB system ( One of the more unexpected findings of this study was that the sandstone fraction underwent partial disintegration when immersed in water, and that gentle agitation accentuated this process. Water-soaked sandstone gravel also displayed lower resistance to crushing than unwashed ore. Calcite and dolomite (which may have acted as cements holding sand particles together) did not appear to be solubilized, though large amounts of halite were. This intriguing observation could be significant for any hydro-metallurgical processing of Results from this study have greatly influenced the planning and operation of the pilot-scale tests carried out deep within the Rudna mine. This is now adopting the same three phase (water, acid, and indirect bioleaching) approach as that used in the second column test, which successfully leached most of the copper from the ore with no impairment to the performance of the FIGB. Given the results from the first column experiment, most of this copper was considered to have been leached from the sandstone rather than from the black shale fraction. The copper contents of the sandstone and black shale fractions used in the current experiments were similar, though in most This work was supported by