The zeta-potentials of the self-assembled surface ionic surfactants (sodium dodecyl sulfate—SDS and hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide—CTAB) on graphite surfaces were determined both from streaming potential and electrophoretic mobility measurements. The adsorption of the surfactants at graphite–liquid interfaces has been studied using atomic force microscopy (AFM) soft-contact imaging which shows the formation of linear, parallel hemicylinders with headgroups oriented towards the solution. The magnitude of the zeta-potential increased with an increase in surfactant concentration, reaching a constant value at a concentration corresponding to the point of surface micelle formation as confirmed from AFM imaging. The streaming potential and electrophoretic mobility measurements showed that the zeta-potentials of SDS and CTAB surface micelles adsorbed at the graphite surface were about −75 and +70mV, respectively, well in agreement with the values reported for bulk phase micelles in the literature.The adsorption of surfactants at solid–liquid interfaces has attracted intense studies in the past decades due to the important role of surfactants in interfacial phenomena such as wetting, lubrication, adhesion, colloid stabilization, and molecular and biological recognition. An improved understanding of the structure and properties of the adsorbed surfactants is of crucial importance in many industrial applications including particle separation by froth flotation, tribology, sensors, molecular electronic devices, and nanofabrications. Direct visualization of nanometer scale self-assembled structures of adsorbed surfactants has only recently been possible with atomic force microscopy (AFM) The main objective of this paper is to experimentally study the charge of self-assembled surface micelles of surfactants adsorbed at graphite surfaces. The surface charge density, Experimental methods of measuring zeta-potential include streaming potential, sedimentation potential, electroosmosis, and electrophoresis. Of these techniques, electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) is gaining wider application in industrial and academic laboratories. ELS measurements are photon correlation spectroscopy or power spectrum measurements made when the particles to be measured are under the influence of an applied electric field. ELS offers a rapid, high-resolution technique for making diagnostic and predictive measurements with a range of samples, including small particles, proteins, polyelectrolytes, and living cells. However, for small micelles of surfactants whose sizes are in the range of only a few nanometers, the ELS measurements are not so straightforward. Tiselius first reported the moving boundary method to study the electrophoretic mobility as well as the diffusion coefficient of the micellar systems Further attempts to measure the electrophoretic mobility of micelles in bulk solutions include the development of special electrophoretic light scattering photometers. These special ELS instruments include the LEZA-600 and ELS-800 systems from Otsuka Electronics Co. Ltd. The main focus of our work presented in this paper is the measurement of the zeta-potentials of the surface micelles of anionic (SDS) and cationic (CTAB) surfactants adsorbed at hydrophobic graphite surfaces. The zeta-potentials of SDS and CTAB micelles on planar graphite surfaces used in the AFM imaging were determined from streaming potential measurements using the novel asymmetric clamping cell. Also, the zeta-potential of SDS and CTAB micelles adsorbed on micrometer-diameter graphite particles was measured using an ELS apparatus—the ZetaPALS analyser from Brookhaven Instruments. The comparison between the measured zeta-potentials with the surface micelles on the planar graphite surfaces and graphite particles provides insight into the adsorption of the surface micelles of SDS and CTAB on the graphite surfaces. CTAB (with purity higher than 95%) and potassium chloride were purchased from Aldrich–Sigma. SDS (with purity higher than 99%) was purchased from Fluka. These chemicals were used as received. The graphite particles were obtained from Lonza Inc. The diameter of these particles determined using a dynamic light scattering technique was found to be 1.0903 ± 0.303 The surface micelles on the flat graphite surface for the streaming potential measurements were produced by equilibrating the graphite surface with surfactant solutions at different concentrations for about 15 Streaming potential measurements were performed with the novel asymmetric clamping cell (Anton Paar, Graz, Austria) to obtain the zeta-potential of the surfaces in the absence and presence of surfactants. The novel design of the test cell allows zeta-potential measurements of flat samples of arbitrary size and shape. The only limitation of the cell being that the thickness of the test substrate should not exceed 25 Electrophoretic mobility of the graphite particles was measured using a Brookhaven ZetaPALS apparatus. It utilizes phase analysis light scattering (PALS) to determine the electrophoretic mobility of charged particles. The advantage of the PALS technique is that it does not require the application of large fields which may result in thermal problems since in the measurement of phase change the particle needs to move only a fraction of its own diameter to yield good results. The velocities of the charged particles are measured and the electrophoretic mobility is determined by dividing the measured velocity by the electric field strength. Before measurements, the graphite particles were equilibrated in surfactant solutions. Six consecutive measurements were taken for each sample at room temperature and averaged. The electrophoretic mobilities were converted to the zeta-potentials as discussed below. To interpret the electrokinetic data for the CTAB and SDS surface micelles, AFM soft-contact imaging was employed to obtain information on SDS and CTAB aggregate structures on the model planar graphite surfaces for selected surfactant concentrations. In situ imaging of the surfactant structures was carried out using a Nanoscope IIIa AFM apparatus (Digital Instruments, CA). The AFM images were captured using soft-contact mode and standard silicon nitride cantilevers (Digital Instruments, CA) with a spring constant of 0.12 The zeta-potential calculated from streaming potential measurements at the planar graphite surface and deionised water, pH 5.3–5.8, is −21.7 Unlike streaming potential measurements, the ELS techniques directly measure the electrophoretic mobility of particles. The mobility of graphite particles versus CTAB and SDS concentrations is shown in Since the ELS measurements do not directly provide the values of the zeta-potential, estimation of zeta-potential from the measured electrophoretic mobilities is required and is described in this section. Determination of the zeta-potential from the measured electrophoretic mobility commonly uses the Smoluchowski equation. The main argument of this approach is the limited applicability of the Smoluchowski equation for large particles with For a given value of the electrophoretic mobility, Eq. Since the measured electrophoretic mobilities reported in this paper were obtained in the solution of a mixture of 1 It is also noted that the Debye constant Finally, the results of the conversion of the measured mobility into zeta-potential using Eq. The zeta-potential values for the graphite particles as a function of SDS concentrations in the presence of 0.001 It can be seen from It is noted that the CMC concentration in the bulk solution phase is about 1 If the micelle structures of SDS and CTAB are to be formed on the graphite surfaces when the bulk concentration reaches 1 and 8 In this paper, the zeta-potentials of a planar graphite surface and the electrophoretic mobility of graphite particles covered by SDS and CTAB molecules in 1 Financial support provided by the Department of Energy (DE-FG-03-93ER14315) and the National Science Foundation (INT-0227583, INT-0096920 and INT-0111248) (V.K.P. and J.D.M.), and the Australian Research Council and the Research Management Committee of the University of Newcastle (A.V.N.) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are grateful to Professor B. Moudgil from the Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the University of Florida for providing access to the streaming potential facility.