Objective
                  To evaluate patients diagnosed with posterior four-part fracture-dislocations of the proximal humerus, that were surgically treated with osteosynthesis, regarding their clinical and functional outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  A prospective observational study of eight patients from the same hospital institution in the interior of São Paulo State (Brazil), through individual interviews using the UCLA, DASH, and Constant international scores. The active movements included in the scores plus the range of motion of the affected and non-affected limb were measured. The affected shoulder's radiographs were requested to verify bone conditions and the fixation of the osteosynthesis.
               
                  Results
                  The rating of eight patients by the international scores indicated that seven of the eight patients presented good clinical and functional evolution of the affected limb; this represents 87.5% of the evaluated individuals.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Surgical treatment with osteosynthesis performed during the acute period (<four weeks) leads to good results in most cases.The shoulder joint is prone to dislocation due to its anatomical structure and its biomechanics, which allow an extensive range of movement. According to Cooke and Hackney, Posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulder (PFDS) is an uncommon orthopedic entity, The infrequent diagnosis of PFDS and its non-specific symptoms, such as pain and limitation of movement with the limb in MR and adduction, contribute to the underdiagnosis and delayed treatment of this condition. This may increase the number of complications, including osteonecrosis and collapse of the humeral head, inverted Hill-Sachs injury, posterior instability, and the inevitable arthrosis. Moreover, dislocation and PFDS have been described since the last century, but to date, the literature features few articles with a sufficient numbers of cases. In the present study, the authors evaluated patients diagnosed with PFDS classified according to Neer as four-part fractures, that were surgically treated with osteosynthesis material, all of whom were followed-up by the same surgeon at an orthopedics and traumatology unit in the interior of São Paulo State (Brazil). Between July 2001 and June 2013, eight patients were diagnosed with posterior fracture of the proximal humerus, classified as four-part fractures by the Neer classification. Posterior fracture-dislocations of the proximal humerus in three or less parts, anterior fracture-dislocation, and posterior four-part fracture-dislocation of the proximal humerus treated conservatively or with arthroplasty were not included. Patients were diagnosed and treated by the staff of an orthopedics and traumatology unit in the interior of São Paulo, State (Brazil), and are currently in outpatient follow-up. Eight shoulders were treated in eight patients (seven males and one female), with mean age of 47 years (range: 37–59). Five patients reported motorcycle accident as cause of the injury, one reported seizure crisis, and two reported electric shock. Four patients presented injury to the dominant limb, and four on the non-dominant side ( For all eight patients, radiographs of the affected shoulder were made in anteroposterior (AP; Patients were treated through open surgery and internal fixation with osteosynthesis. In one patient, Ethibond sutures were used, and in the other, fixation with Kirschner wire (KW) and securing sutures were used. Six shoulders were secured with locking plate (LP) and screws associated with securing sutures ( For clinical and functional assessment, a prospective observational study was conducted through individual interviews. The UCLA, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH), and Constant scored were used; the active movements included in the Constant score were performed under the supervision of a physical therapist. The range of motion of active movements of the affected and contralateral limb were measured with the use of a goniometer, considering elevation, LR, and MR as comparative parameters. The modified UCLA score evaluates pain, function, range of active flexion, anterior flexion strength of the shoulder, and patient satisfaction. Pain and function are graded on a scale of up to 10 points each. Active flexion, anterior flexion strength, and patient satisfaction range from 0 to 5, totaling 35 points. A score from 34 to 35 points is considered excellent; from 28 to 33, good; from 21 to 27, fair; and 0 to 20, poor, according to Oku et al. The DASH score measures the symptoms and physical function of individuals with musculoskeletal disorders in the upper limbs. The assessment of functional status is subdivided into physical, social, and psychological categories. There are 30 items, whose scores range from 1 to 5 each; and a minimum of 27 of the 30 items must be answered. In the social category, two areas are optional: musical and sports performance or work. Each area includes four items, whose scores also range from 1 to 5. In these areas, all questions must be answered. To calculate the functional status score, the following formula should be used: To obtain the score of the optional areas, a similar formula should be used: In both scores, a total of 100 points will be obtained; the higher the value, the greater the degree of dysfunction of the limb. The last score evaluates the functional ability of the affected shoulder through the Constant-Murley clinical protocol, which scores four parameters: pain, performance in daily activities, joint mobility, and isometric muscle strength. To calculate the score, the protocol must be applied bilaterally. The maximum score is 100 points; the closer to 100, the better the functional capacity. The interviews were scheduled at the institution itself, according to the patients’ availability. Radiographs of the affected shoulder were requested to assess the bone and fixation of the osteosynthesis material. The study was approved by the institution's Ethics Committee under CAAE No. 32955113.3.0000.5440 – opinion No. 774166. All eight patients attended the reassessment consultation. An Informed Consent Form was signed by all participants. In the UCLA score, two patients presented excellent results; three, good; and three, fair. In the DASH score, four patients had scores of 0 or <1; two patients, <20; and two patients, between 24 and 50 points. In the Constant score, five patients scored above 90, which is interpreted as an excellent result. Two patients scored 73 and 77 points, interpreted as fair results; and one obtained a score of 61 points ( This study evaluated patients who suffered posterior fracture-dislocation of the proximal humerus, classified as four-part fractures by the Neer classification, who were surgically treated with open reduction and internal fixation with osteosynthesis material. This pathology is a rare group among glenohumeral injuries The patients studied presented triple E syndrome as the trauma mechanism. The causes for these types of injuries are forced MR, flexion, and adduction of the shoulder joint. Robinson The internal fixation with LP and screws offers greater stability, favoring early mobility of the affected limb. It is important to have the possibility of partial arthroplasty in the surgical therapeutic arsenal for cases where a satisfactory reduction and stabilization of the bone fragments is not possible, due to fracture comminution. In the present study, different osteosynthesis techniques were used, such as securing sutures, Among the assessed patients, seven presented a good long-term evolution, while one presented scores that characterized mild to moderate musculoskeletal dysfunction. This patient admitted to not having undergone physical therapy nor performed domestic rehabilitation of the upper limb due to giving preference to treatment of associated injuries. Vastamaki and Solonem According to Oakes and McAllister, Conservative treatment presents an incidence of avascular necrosis of between 3% and 14% in cases with three fragments and between 13% and 34% in cases with four fragments. This rate increases in the presence of dislocated fractures. Plate osteosynthesis may also lead to avascular necrosis, presenting rates above 35% in complex joint fractures. According to Robinson, To date, the only complication presented by the patients studied was the reduction in the range of some movements; however the patients declared to be satisfied with the results. This complication did not lead to disabilities, and all patients were able to adapt to their limitation. In general, the final results of the evaluation of the eight patients using the three scores indicated that seven of them (87.5%) had a good clinical-functional evolution of the affected limb. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.