Teeter bed separators are widely used in different mineral and coal industries for separation at different stages. The teeter bed separator works based on the principles of fluidization and hindered settling. However, the published literature on this separator doesn't demonstrate its use in the separation of mineral fines. In the present article, an attempt has been made to characterize the teeter bed separator (Floatex Density Separator) with respect to its performance at different conditions of operating variables, while treating manganese fines. Also regression models were developed based on statistical design of experiments to quantify the effect of key operating variables on the performance of the separator. The characterization of teeter bed inside the floatex density separator was also analyzed to identify the particle separation behavior while treating manganese fines.Teeter bed separators are commonly employed for particle size classification and gravity concentration of coal as well as mineral fines based on their sizes, shapes and densities Most of the published literature on FDS has emphasized on the prominence of the teeter water flow rate on particle separation for treating coal fines. It is also observed that the literature regarding the hydraulic classifier performance is limited to coal fines and it lacks emphasis on the effect of process variables on performance of FDS while treating mineral fines. So, in this article, an attempt was made to characterize the teeter bed inside the separator and to note its behavior during different operating regime. Further, second order quadratic equations were developed to quantify the effects of process variables of FDS on separation of manganese fines. Attempts were also made to provide possible explanations on the observed trends of the data, based on characteristics of teeter bed inside the FDS. The manganese sample (one ton), as obtained from Joda, India was thoroughly mixed and sampled for characterization and experimental studies. Chemical analysis indicated that the manganese ore fines contained 22.42% Mn, 14.46% Fe A wet particle size analysis was carried out for the sample and the results are tabulated in The FDS is a teeter bed separator which consists of an upper square tank and a lower conical section. The separation feature of the FDS can be described by dividing it into six main zones, viz: overflow collection zone (A), upper intermediate zone (B), feed zone (C), lower intermediate zone (D), thickening zone (E) and underflow collection zone (F) as depicted in The experimental campaign was undertaken in a pilot scale floatex density separator (Model No. LPF-0230), of Outokumpu make with dimensions of 230 The experiments were conducted based on the statistically designed (two variables and three levels) program and the results are shown in It can be noted from Further, the recovery of Mn in the underflow stream and the rejection of silica to the overflow stream were analyzed and are shown in Although the results obtained during the experiments are encouraging, it is difficult to analyze the results based on the parameters. In an operating plant, FDS is controlled by teeter water flow rate and set point. These two parameters are fine-tuned and optimized to achieve the required quality and recovery. However, the particle separation inside the separator solely depends on the teeter bed height and teeter bed density. So, for understanding of these controllable parameters of the separator along with the dependent variables, it is necessary to explain the separation phenomenon. The co-relation between these parameters and their influence on particle separation are explained in the subsequent section. The teeter bed separator works on hindered settling and fluidization principle, wherein a rising current of water is introduced into the column so as to form a teeter column, an expanded mineral bed. During the process, the particles fall until it reaches a point where the falling velocity equals that of rising water current. Under such conditions, the trapped particles build pressure and move upward along the path of least resistance, usually through the center of the column. The void thus created is filled by sliding of mineral mass from the side wherein a process of circulation is built up and is said to be in teeter. Hence in a teetering column of mineral, the pulp density will be greater towards the bottom where the particles are lying close together Generally the performance of the teeter bed separator depends on the bed suspension density and the bed height which are not directly controlled. These two parameters are independent variables which are functions of both set point and teeter water flow rate/rising current of water (controlled variables). It can also be noted that, the bed suspension density varies with the material as coal particles maintain higher suspension density/height at lower level of teeter water flow rate and set point, compared to the suspension density while treating minerals like iron, chromite, etc. Suspension density is highest at the bottom and decreases with increasing distance from the bottom, in the axial direction. The relation between the suspension density and bed height along with the process variables are very complex which are to be established before discussing the insight phenomenon of the separation. The relations between them were recognized from the experimental results and are shown in  The relation between the bed height and the controlled variables of the FDS are shown in Further, the quality of the underflow stream in terms of manganese (%) and silica (%) are evaluated along with the two independent process variables which are shown in To correlate the effects of dependent variables on the performance of FDS, the data presented in Where TW is the teeter water flow rate in lpm and SP is the set point. The actual and predicted values of different performance indicators obtained using model equations (Eqs. The manganese content of underflow stream of FDS can be computed by using the Eq. The model equations for the manganese recovery (%) of the underflow stream and the silica rejection to the overflow stream of FDS are given in Eqs. Floatex density separator is an effective teeter bed separator which can substitute the conventional separators by impacting the density effect rather than the size effect. The manganese content in the underflow stream of FDS was upgraded up to 42.22%Mn and silica content reduced to 21.15% with Mn recovery of 75.13% at intermediate level of teeter water flow rate (10 The authors are thankful to