The interfacial interactions in carbonaceous solid–water slurries (CSWS) influence slurry viscosity. Additives impact the slurry viscosities by modifying the surface chemistry of the carbonaceous solids, thereby affecting the interfacial interactions in CSWS. The focus of this study was to determine the effect of the additives on the interfacial interactions which results in viscosity reduction in CSWS. Since additives are extremely specific to surface chemistry of solids in the slurry, this understanding would help in the selection of appropriate additive for viscosity reduction for specific carbonaceous water slurries. The study was conducted using three carbonaceous solids with different O/C ratios and two additives-one anionic and the other non-ionic. The adsorption of the additives on the carbonaceous solids, the change in the zeta potential and hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the solids and the change in the free water content of the slurries were experimentally determined. It was observed that adsorption of the additives increased with an increase in the mineral matter content of the carbonaceous solids. There was also an increase in the zeta potential of the carbonaceous solids in water upon addition of the anionic additive. However, the calculated resultant electrostatic repulsion energy upon the addition of the anionic additive was 5–6 orders of magnitude lower than the polar interaction energy of the carbonaceous solids in water. Contact angle measurements indicated that both additives changed the hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of the solid surface. This resulted in the release of bound water into the bulk slurries, resulting in greater fluidity. The increase in free water content of the slurries with additives was confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). A correlation predicting slurry viscosity on the basis of weight fraction of free water in the slurries was developed.Viscosity reduction of carbonaceous solid–water slurries (CSWS), used as gasifier feedstock, is one of the major challenges faced by the gasification industry It increases the surface charge of the carbonaceous solids, which results in an increase in the inter-particle electrostatic repulsion in the slurries It provides steric hindrance by interposing a mechanical barrier and therefore prevents particle aggregation and helps in viscosity reduction It changes the hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity of the carbonaceous solids to prevent aggregation of the carbonaceous solids or to control absorption and adsorption of water Changes in the surface chemistry of the carbonaceous solids upon the addition of additives cause changes in interfacial interactions, which in turn cause a reduction in viscosity. Therefore, to understand the science of slurry viscosity reduction using additives, it is important to have a good understanding of the interfacial energetics and phenomena in CSWS. The reported studies have only attempted to predict the nature of the inter-particle interaction energies based on zeta potential and contact angle measurements; however, determining the magnitude of the energy under consideration is vital to understanding its role in changing inter-particle interactions and hence in viscosity reduction. Developing a fundamental understanding of the science of viscosity reduction using additives promises to aid in the selection of appropriate additives based on scientific principles rather than empirical observations. This study aims to gain a quantitative understanding of interfacial forces and their role in the reduction of viscosity. This is achieved by using interfacial interaction energy calculations to determine the change in inter-particle interactions due to the change in surface chemistry of carbonaceous solids upon the addition of additives. The reduction in slurry viscosity is then explained on the basis of the change in inter-particle interactions. This study was done using three carbonaceous solids with different surface chemistries (characterized by different oxygen to carbon ratios). Petcoke (oxygen/carbon ratio Experiments were mainly carried out with slurries of petcoke, Illinois no. 6 coal (bituminous coal) and Pust coal (lignite coal) in water. Some of the experiments involved use of Pittsburgh no. 8 coal. The Pittsburgh no. 8 whole coal (SG0) was gravity separated to prepare the SG1 fraction. The preparation of the SG1 fraction has been discussed in the work of Soundarrajan et al. An anionic additive, Norlig TSD, and non-ionic additive, Triton X-405, were used for this study. Descriptions of these additives are given in An additive concentration of 0.5% (by weight of the carbonaceous solids), generally resulting in an optimum viscosity in CSWS, was used for all the experiments Viscosities were measured using a Bohlin 88 Viscometer (a product of Malvern Instruments Ltd., U.K.), which comprises a constant speed motor with a torque detecting system. For all the experiments conducted in this work, measuring system no. 8 (i.e., the system designated as ‘wide gap,’ with an inner cylinder diameter of 25 CSWS with additives were prepared in the manner described in Section The zeta potential of the carbonaceous solid samples was measured using a Malvern Zetasizer ZS. The measurement technique used was Laser Doppler micro-electrophoresis. It involved applying an electric field to the solution causing the particles to move in suspension. The velocity of the particles was measured and based on that the electrophoretic mobility was calculated and finally from this value the zeta potential was determined. For all zeta potential measurements, finer particles of −45 Contact angles were measured using a goniometer (ramé-hart Model 295) using the sessile drop technique. Carbonaceous solid particles were made into pellets using a pressure of 2000 CSWS with and without additives were prepared as discussed in Section Viscosities of CSWS could be considerably reduced by using either of the additives. From Adsorption of additives on the carbonaceous solid surface can be calculated if the concentration of additives in the CSWS supernatant is known. A higher absorbance signal of the supernatant signifies a higher additive concentration in the supernatant and therefore a lower adsorption of the additive on the carbonaceous solid surface. The UV–Vis analyses of the supernatants of all three CSWS (50% solid loading by weight) with Triton X-405 are compared in It can be observed from It is clearly evident that the absorbance signal is higher for the SG1 sample in both cases, indicating lower additive adsorption on the SG1 solid surface. As indicated by the absorbance signals, adsorption is greater in the case of mineral matter-rich SG0 fractions (SG0: ash As can be observed from Existing works in the literature have assumed the increase in the zeta potential of the solid surface to be an important factor for promoting inter-particle repulsion to prevent aggregation of particles It is evident from This observation of the effects of electrostatic inter-particle interaction is further supported by some of the established facts about the inter-particle interaction energies of concentrated solid suspensions in water. Polar interaction energies are short-range forces that are very strong at an inter-particle distance below 5–10 The change in solid hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity due to the addition of additives was studied using contact angle measurements The primary reason for an increase in viscosity at a particular solid concentration is due to trapping of free water For petcoke water slurry, due to the hydrophobic nature of the petcoke particles, formation of aggregation networks and trapping of water leading to loss of free water are the principle causes of high viscosity Illinois no. 6 coal is slightly hydrophobic with hydrophilic characteristics The principle reason for the high viscosity of the Pust coal water slurry is due to adsorption or absorption of the free water by the hydrophilic Pust coal sample To further confirm the release of trapped free water due to the addition of additives, TGA was done to determine the free water content of all three CSWS, with and without additives. TGA was used to record the weight of water lost with an increase in temperature for the different slurries To confirm the decrease of free water with an increase in solid concentration, TGA analysis was done on petcoke water slurries with solid concentrations of 44%, 52%, 62% and 67% (by weight). The mass loss (water loss), determined using the residual weight percent corresponding to the peak of the curve, gives the amount of free water in the system. The greater the residual weight percentage, the lower the mass loss (mass loss % With a decrease in solid concentration, the total water in the system increases, and therefore the free water content also increases. The ratio of free water to total water represents the water trapping capacity of the carbonaceous solid involved and is a function of surface chemistry that should be constant for a particular carbonaceous solid for all solid loading in the highly concentrated range. To test this, the TGA data for petcoke water slurries at different concentrations were analyzed, and as can be observed from The free water to total water ratio is constant for a particular carbonaceous solid for all solid loadings but varies with the surface chemistry of the solid. The free water to total water ratios were determined for Illinois no. 6 coal and Pust coal. The ratios described above confirm the findings of our previous work, which stated that free water in the slurry increases with a decrease in the oxygen to carbon ratio of the carbonaceous solid. The free water to total water ratio, determined using TGA results and using the VFCF values as determined in our previous paper, are compared in To test if additives function by releasing trapped water in CSWS, TGA analyses were done on CSWS of the same solid loading with and without additives. The results of the analyses have been plotted in Therefore Section The free water to total water ratio is constant for a particular carbonaceous solid–water slurry. Additives release trapped bound water, resulting in an increase in the free water to total water ratio. Viscosity increases with a decrease in the free water content or increase in the bound water content of the slurry. It is evident that the viscosity of a slurry depends on the availability of free water in it. Therefore, the variation of viscosity with the weight fraction of free water in a slurry was studied and is presented in As is evident from This equation makes prediction of slurry viscosity easier, as knowledge of the surface chemistry of the solids or the particle-size distribution of the solids in the slurry would not be required. The free water content can be determined using TGA, and the total weight of the slurry measured can then be used in Eq. The key to viscosity reduction is to release bound water into the bulk phase to increase the free water content of a slurry. Since the mechanism of trapping water is different for different carbonaceous solids in water, the choice of additive also varies. Highly hydrophobic solids like petcoke, bitumen, etc., tend to form inter-particle aggregation networks, which trap free water. This network structure is therefore responsible for causing an increase in viscosity in the case of highly hydrophobic solids. The additive in this case should be able to prevent aggregation of particles by decreasing the hydrophobicity of the carbonaceous solids or by providing steric hindrance. Therefore, non-ionic additives appear to be most suitable for such carbonaceous solids. With an increase in O/C ratio, the hydrophilicity of the carbonaceous solid increases. It starts adsorbing and absorbing water. The additive in this case should be able to make the solid more hydrophobic so that adsorption or absorption of water decreases and more free water is available in the slurry. In this study, the anionic additive, Norlig TSD, proved to be a better choice in such cases. Through this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: Adsorption of additives on a carbonaceous solid surface increases with an increase in mineral matter content. The addition of an anionic additive, Norlig TSD, increased the zeta potential of carbonaceous solids. The increase in zeta potential did result in a slight increase in the electrostatic repulsive interaction energy. However the electrostatic interaction energy was still lower than the polar interaction energy by 5–6 orders of magnitude. Additives increase or decrease hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity of carbonaceous solids. The resultant polar interaction energy is still the dominant interaction energy in CSWS. A change in hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity releases bound water and therefore decreases the viscosity of a slurry. This was confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis, which determined the weight of free water in the slurries. Therefore, additives act by increasing the free water of a CSWS. The ratio of free water to total water is constant for a particular carbonaceous solid in suspension with water. It increases with a decrease in the oxygen to carbon ratio of carbonaceous solids. The free water to slurry weight ratio can be directly used to predict viscosity using the correlation developed in this work.