The effect of chloride on chalcopyrite leaching has been investigated by performing batch leaching tests with three kinds of leaching solutions and using Hiroyoshi’s model, which suggests that a zone of rapid leaching exists between the critical potential (Ec
                     , equilibrium redox potential for the reduction of CuFeS2 to Cu2S) and the oxidation potential (Eox
                     , equilibrium redox potential for the oxidation of Cu2S). The results of the leaching tests show that the leaching rate in hydrochloric acid solution is the fastest and that the relationship between the Cu leaching rate and oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) follows Hiroyoshi’s model. Thermodynamic calculations indicate that, with an increase in the chloride concentration, the concentration of cuprous ions increases as the chlorocuprate(I) complex ions are formed and the contribution of cuprous ions to the critical potential is greater than that of cupric ions, even though the concentration of cuprous ions is lower than that of cupric ions. This fact suggests that the formation of chlorocuprate(I) ions in a chloride solution may improve the chalcopyrite leaching rate by increasing the critical potential.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Hiroyoshi and co-workers studied the effect of the redox potential on the leaching rate of chalcopyrite and reported that the leaching rate increased in relatively low redox potential ranges ( Although chalcopyrite can be reduced to chalcocite at a potential lower than The critical potential in a sulphate solution is determined by the cupric ions because copper species exist only as cupric ions or copper metal in a sulphate system. In a chloride solution, cuprous ions need to be considered for determining the critical potential because there are various stable cuprous ion species such as chlorocuprate(I) ions ( Generally, the leaching rate of chalcopyrite has been found to be faster in chloride than in sulphate ( In the present study, chalcopyrite leaching tests were performed in chloride and sulphate solutions, and then the results were analyzed using the model devised by The chalcopyrite concentrate used in this study was obtained from the Omine Mine, Tono City, Japan. The concentrate contained 25.6% Cu, 38.1% Fe, and 2.0% Si, and its mineralogical composition was 74.8% chalcopyrite, 22.3% pyrrhotite, and 2.9% quartz. The concentrate particles were ground with an alumina mortar and then dry-sieved with a 200-mesh sieve. The ground particles were characterised using a Ru-200B X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected under the following conditions: radiation, Cu Kα, 30 Three types of leaching solutions were prepared with reagent-grade FeCl Leaching tests were performed in a glass reactor with a water jacket, as shown in    First, the copper leaching rate and ORP  In this study, another leaching rate was obtained from the ORP difference (ΔORP) at a designated time interval. This ORP difference rate is given by On the basis of Eqs. During chalcopyrite leaching, Cu In Eq. As shown in Hiroyoshi reported that the chalcopyrite leaching rate could be improved by increasing the critical potential ( The critical potential by Ag The critical potentials by Cu The copper species exists as cupric ions or copper metal in a sulphate medium. Therefore, the critical potential in a sulphate solution is determined by the cupric ions, as shown in Eq. Chalcopyrite can be reduced by cuprous ion species according to the following equations: The critical potentials by the cuprous ion species can be obtained according to the following equations: As can be seen in The standard critical potentials were calculated at 298 The concentration of each species was determined. First, the total copper concentration can be defined according to the following equation:  The equilibrium constants obtained by The relation between Cu This reaction can be represented by the following equation: The cupric concentration in Eq. This equation can be rearranged as Eq. The concentration of cuprous ions is expressed in terms of the total copper concentration, chloride concentration, and redox potential. The concentrations of the cuprous and cupric ion species were obtained using the calculated cuprous ion concentration. Finally, each critical potential was determined. The critical potentials of   Chloride leaching for chalcopyrite has been widely known for its fast leaching rate as well as high solubility and production of elemental sulphur, but there has been limited work done to determine its mechanism. Therefore, in this study, the behaviour of copper ions with an increasing Cl Hiroyoshi reported that the leaching rate of chalcopyrite would increase with an increase in the critical potential. Therefore, this result reveals that the chlorocuprate(I) ions formed in a chloride solution could improve the chalcopyrite leaching rate by increasing the critical potential. Therefore, the above results indicate that the effect of cuprous ion species on the improvement of the chalcopyrite leaching rate is more substantial than that of cupric ion species. Chalcopyrite leaching experiments were performed in chloride, sulphate, and mixed solutions, and the behaviours of copper ions in chloride and the effect of cuprous ion species on the critical potential were investigated thermodynamically on the basis of the model by Hiroyoshi. The copper leaching rate is the fastest in the chloride solution, and the trend of the chalcopyrite leaching in the chloride solution seems to follow Hiroyoshi’s model. Cuprous species exists as chlorocuprate(I) ions in the chloride solution, and the critical potential increases more rapidly in the chloride solution than in the sulphate solution, as the cuprous ions becomes more dominant with an increase in the chloride concentration. These results indicate that the increase in the critical potential by cuprous ion species in a chloride solution improves the chalcopyrite leaching rate. The authors express appreciation for support of this research by a grant from Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources. The authors would like to thank Dr. Hyo Shin Yu for helpful advice on writing this paper. The authors also wish to thank Miss. Myung-Hwa Kim for her kind help for the leaching experiments.