Background
                  The term “bolus death” or “cafe coronary” refers to a misplaced larynx or laryngeal inlet by foreign bodies, in most cases by unchewed pieces of food such as meat, sausage, or fruit. The pathophysiologic mechanism of death is still debatable – sudden reflex cardiac arrests and asphyxial suffocations are implicated. In particular, children, alcoholics, and persons with brain-related damages belong to this risk group. A defective dentition is also associated with the risk of bolus deaths.
               
                  Aim
                  The aim of the study was to supplement existing literature by evaluating cases of bolus deaths and determining the most likely mechanism of death in a large autopsy sample.
               
                  Material
                  Among 31,647 autopsies, 59 cases of cafe coronary syndrome were identified and evaluated: 38 male adults and 21 female adults between the ages of 26 and 89 years.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective analysis of autopsies performed in the Institutes of Forensic Medicine in Rostock (1990–2014) and Munich (1990–1999) was conducted. Autopsy findings, circumstances of death, police investigations, preexisting conditions, dentition, and toxicological investigations were recorded. Then, based on the presence or absence of selected findings and surrounding circumstances, conclusions on the mechanism of death were drawn.
               
                  Results
                  In eighty-six percent (86%), boluses of meat and sausage or meat-like chunks were observed. Of the forty-nine victims, 22 (42%) had elevated blood alcohol levels (>0.5‰) with blood alcohol concentration (BAC) levels of >0.73‰ to <3.99‰. Of the nonalcoholized decedents, 63% had neurological disorders and 11% had preexisting cardiac conditions.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Detecting potential bolus events upon autopsy and the resulting mechanism of nonnatural deaths are of great importance. Therefore, the medical history, resuscitation protocol, and detailed description of the scene of death are essential. Upon autopsy, the type and position as well as size and weight of the bolus and dental status of the victims should be documented in a standardized manner. Additional toxicological investigations are necessary.Legend has it that the Greek poet Sophocles choked to death on a grape lodged in his larynx in 400 BC. In German specialist literature, the term The exact pathomechanism has been a matter of debate in specialist literature for decades and continues to be so. A theoretical distinction is made between asphyxial suffocation due to an airway displacement and the impossibility of expectorating or regurgitating the foreign body, but also a reflective cardiac death inter alia by irritating the upper laryngeal nerve. It is likely to be a combination of both processes. The present study aims to supplement the existing literature, based on the evaluation of 59 deaths out of 31,647 autopsies due to cafe coronary. Here, the most likely mechanism of death is proposed according to the selected criteria. Relevant information about when and where the person was found and witnesses' statements about the incident were taken from police investigations. The following aspects were investigated: Have characteristic symptoms been observed (dyspnea, livid discoloration of the facial skin, convulsions, coughing, choking, spitting, or regurgitation)? Can statements on the period of agony be provided? Was there any report of sudden lifelessness or a prolonged struggle before death? Is there evidence of an imminent food intake? Among all postmortem examinations performed at the Institutes of Forensic Medicine at the Ludwig Maximilians University in Munich (1990–1999) and the University Medical Center in Rostock (1990–2013), cases of “cafe coronary” were identified. Cases with ambiguous autopsy findings were not taken into account. The evaluation also included police investigation files regarding the circumstances of death. Information about medical history, age, and gender but also the position, quality, and size of the bolus and the dental status were taken from autopsy reports. Morphological findings such as asphyxial signs (facial cyanosis, petechiae of the facial skin/conjunctivae, or Tardieu spots), pulmonary emphysema, and/or pulmonary edema were evaluated. If available, concomitant cardiac and neurological diseases, blood alcohol level, and drug test results were also taken into account. Among 23,819 forensic autopsies performed at the Institute of Forensic Medicine in Munich between 1990 and 1999, 36 cases (0.16%) of bolus asphyxiation were observed. These cases include 24 male and 12 female victims aged 30–89 years (median 61 years). Of 7828 forensic autopsies performed at the Institute of Forensic Medicine in Rostock between 1990 and 2014, 23 cases (0.29%) were diagnosed as “café coronary.” Of those, 14 were male and nine female, ranging in age from 26 to 91 years (median 60 years). The overall sample provides 59 cases (38 men, 21 women) of bolus deaths among 31,647 forensic autopsies (0.18%) ( In all 59 cases, the bolus was preserved and inspected. The nature of the predominant component was defined macroscopically ( The blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was analyzed in 50 cases (85%), 28 (56%) of which showed no blood alcohol. One deceased person had a BAC <0.5‰. Twenty-one decedents (42%) had BAC levels considered to be relevant for the act of swallowing ranging from 0.73‰ to 3.90‰. The arithmetic mean BAC level of these 21 victims was 2.3‰. Alcohol consumption was significantly less in women (male 19 cases, female two cases). The highest value was 3.42‰ for women and 3.90‰ for men. The gender distribution of the BAC levels is shown in The age distribution of persons affected by alcohol and their mean BAC values are shown in Five cases showed neither preexisting conditions nor signs of alcoholic influence. They could not be attributed to a concrete age group (36–78 years) or a specific gender (three male and two female decedents). Furthermore, the teeth conditions were not recorded for these cases. Among the remaining 54 (91%) persons, both cardiac and neurological conditions as well as combinations thereof were found. In 27 cases (45%), morphological cardiac alterations such as cardiac hypertrophy, myocardial infarction scars, and middle- to high-grade coronary atherosclerosis were detected. Neuropathological alterations could be found in clinically documented neurological diseases, for example, infantile brain damage, Huntington's disease, paresis after stroke, ethyl toxic encephalopathies, and dementias. Furthermore, brain atrophy and hydrocephalus were subsumed, such that morphological changes were noted in a total of 36 cases (61%). The age and gender distributions of cardiac and neuropathological findings are shown in There were 18 cases (30%) with clinical and medical history data concerning neurological conditions, as shown in Out of 29 nonrelevant alcoholized persons (see above), 22 (76%) had neurological abnormalities and 14 (48%) had cardiac abnormalities. In 10 cases (34%), the victims were exclusively affected neurologically, whereas two (7%) had cardiac conditions only. The previously mentioned five cases showed no preexisting conditions. The distribution of preexisting conditions is listed in The dental status was only recorded in 17 cases. In three cases (18%), an intact denture was noted. In eight cases (47%), irregular dentition or partial prosthesis was described. In six cases (35%), a full prosthesis was noted. Of the 59 deceased persons, 28 were found dead alone; 13 (46%) of these deaths were clearly related to food intake. Twenty-two persons died in the presence of others. In 9 cases, there was no information. Upon autopsy, 22 persons who died immediately due to food intake showed signs of suffocation such as petechiae, Tardieu spots, acute emphysema, or pulmonary edema. In seven cases, there were no findings. Witnesses' descriptions were categorized into “sudden collapse” and “turning blue” with following collapse and “vomiting/choking/coughing” according to the leading symptom. One case could not be assigned. The testimonies and autopsy findings are presented in Statements on the duration of agony can be estimated semi-quantitatively (“short” vs. “longer”). All cases of the “sudden collapse” category were associated with a short-term agony. The remaining heterogeneous group of cases had a long-term agony. Morphological signs of suffocation such as petechiae and/or Tardieu spots were noted in 18 of 59 cases (30%). Of these 18, eight (44%) had been resuscitated. By considering other, nonspecific findings such as pulmonary edema and acute emphysema as indicators of suffocation, the number of cases with morphological signs of suffocation increased to 33 (56%) in total. Of these 33, 14 (32%) had been resuscitated. Five cases showed exclusively pulmonary edema or emphysema. Out of 26 victims without signs of suffocation, four had been resuscitated. The position of the bolus was subclassified as “pharyngeal,” “laryngeal inlet/laryngeal,” “tracheal,” and “esophageal” based on the anatomical location of the main body. Cases of multilevel tamponades were categorized as “all.” The bolus was in the laryngeal inlet in 60% of the cases, and at multiple anatomical levels in 22%. There was no significant coincidence of preexisting conditions, the consumption of alcohol, or gender. Chunks of food in the laryngeal entrance revealed during autopsy were found to be the cause of death. The most common anatomical location is the laryngeal inlet with the bolus tightly pressed into the laryngeal aperture. In the present study, the boluses in 60% of the cases were in this position. From the authors' point of view, the macroscopic postmortem evaluation of a bolus and its localization is suitable for differentiating between a press in operation during food intake on the one hand and resuscitation, agonal aspiration, or movement of the body on the other. Litmus tests – as suggested by some authors to distinguish regurgitated stomach contents from real boluses Ten percent of the cases defined as café coronary during autopsy were previously recognized as such clinically. Given the frequency of 0.18% identified in this study – roughly two of 1000 autopsies –bolus deaths are classified as a rarity in daily forensic routine work. Our results of gender and age distribution correspond to previous studies, which have shown greater frequency among men and with increasing age. In >60% of the cases, meaty pieces of food, which required sufficient chewing and swallowing, were found. In 2005, Wick et al. described large pieces of meat in only 29% of the cases. The teeth condition (if data are collected) was relevant to the risk of dysphagia as insufficient comminution of food is more likely. Coincidences of poor dentition, age, and socioeconomic status raise serious questions on the assessment “condition sine qua non”. In contrast to younger persons, the pharyngeal period of swallowing is extended for people aged ≥60 years. From the age of 80, the oral stage of swallowing is further extended. We find it difficult to assess the relevance of pathomorphologic findings as coronary sclerosis or cerebral edema, but a contributing aspect can be assumed. The evaluation of diagnosed conditions causing deaths must be based on clinical and medical history data. Older persons had predisposing organic brain diseases more often, whereas younger persons died mainly in conjunction with alcohol consumption. The extent to which preexisting cardiac conditions such as coronary insufficiency contribute is still uncertain. At best, these conditions seem to facilitate death, particularly in cases of suffocation. The five cases ( Elderly persons with brain disorders and difficulties in controlling the oral stage of swallowing have an increased risk of dysphagia. Alcohol interferes with the vegetative activity of the nervous system. Defensive reflexes are attenuated and reaction times are extended. Suffocation, reflective cardiac arrest, or a combination of both is assumed to be the mechanism leading to death. Despite these useful, theoretical models, deaths have to be evaluated case by case as autopsy findings are not pathognomonic, despite being associated with suffocation. Resuscitation or preexisting conditions could also explain these findings. As a functional cause of death with a very short time of agony, there is no morphological evidence of reflective cardiac arrests. After vagal nerve stimulations, acute bradycardias – and even cardiac arrests – are known to occur. Third-party observations and their descriptions of the events shortly before the death are particularly significant in identifying a bolus death and its pathophysiological classification. Of the 59 victims, 22 died in the presence of others. A prolonged time of agony with livid discoloration of the face, coughing and choking, and an – even undirected – ability to act, in conjunction with morphological findings associated with suffocation, indicate a preserved circulation and can be assigned to suffocation. To systemize the individual cases, three categories according to the leading symptom were established: “sudden collapse” “turning blue” “coughing, choking, vomiting” For categories I and II, a reflectogenic cardiac arrest could be considered, for categories II and III a death due to suffocation. Therefore, category II represents a mixed category as reflective death and suffocation could not be clearly distinguished. Considering the autopsy findings, several suffocation-associated findings are noted in category III, as well as in category II yet less pronounced. This correlation suggests suffocation as the cause of death, although resuscitation might also cause similar findings. Based on the results of our investigations, the cause cannot be reliably distinguished. To what extent resuscitation attempts by laypersons may have led to false findings has not yet been examined. A combination of pathophysiological mechanisms of death is shown in overlapping categories and the mixed category II. Observed classical bolus deaths in accordance with category I were described in six cases, only one of which showed suffocation-associated autopsy findings. Fifteen cases were described as deaths according to category II and III, >85% of which showed characteristic autopsy findings. The period of agony could not be assessed accurately by the illustrated events. For all observed deaths – cases classified as category I – only a “shorter” time of agony could be estimated. All other cases are attributable to a “longer” time of agony. A further narrowing within this subgroup is not needed. In conclusion, a proper postmortem evaluation of the events is a more academic inquiry. However, the detection of potential bolus events during the postmortem examination and the resulting mechanisms of nonnatural deaths are of greater importance. Therefore, the medical history, resuscitation protocol, and detailed description of the scene of death are essential for any assumption. Upon autopsy, the type and position as well as the size and weight of the bolus and the dental status of the victim should be documented in a standardized manner. Furthermore, a case history must be carried out. Additional toxicological investigations are necessary, but postmortem imaging is recommended. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. None declared None declared We thank Kristina Kolbow for her help in retrieving some cases from Munich.