The present study describes the development and characterization of strontium(II)-modified biomimetic scaffolds based on mineralized collagen type I as potential biomaterial for the local treatment of defects in systemically impaired (e.g. osteoporotic) bone. In contrast to already described collagen/hydroxyapatite nanocomposites calcium was substituted with strontium to the extent of 25, 50, 75 and 100mol% by substituting the CaCl2-stock solution (0.1M) with SrCl2 (0.1M) during the scaffold synthesis. Simultaneous fibrillation and mineralization of collagen led to the formation of collagen-mineral nanocomposites with mineral phases shifting from nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite (Sr0) over poorly crystalline Sr-rich phases towards a mixed mineral phase (Sr100), consisting of an amorphous strontium phosphate (identified as Collin's salt, Sr6H3(PO4)5
                     ∗2 H2O, CS) and highly crystalline strontium hydroxyapatite (Sr5(PO4)3OH, SrHA). The formed mineral phases were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and RAMAN spectroscopy. All collagen/mineral nanocomposites with graded strontium content were processed to scaffolds exhibiting an interconnected porosity suitable for homogenous cell seeding in vitro. Strontium ions (Sr2+) were released in a sustained manner from the modified scaffolds, with a clear correlation between the released Sr2+ concentration and the degree of Sr-substitution. The accumulated specific Sr2+ release over the course of 28days reached 141.2μg (~27μgmg−1) from Sr50 and 266.1μg (~35μgmg−1) from Sr100, respectively. Under cell culture conditions this led to maximum Sr2+ concentrations of 0.41mM (Sr50) and 0.73mM (Sr100) measured on day 1, which declined to 0.08mM and 0.16mM, respectively, at day 28. Since Sr2+ concentrations in this range are known to have an osteo-anabolic effect, these scaffolds are promising biomaterials for the clinical treatment of defects in systemically impaired bone.Divalent strontium ions (Sr In bone tissue engineering, mimicking the extracellular matrix is a common strategy for the development of suitable scaffold matrices. Thereby, the scaffold material should constitute the physical microenvironment for cells allowing the colonization, proliferation and differentiation towards the desired tissue. A scaffold material fulfilling these characteristics is the well described nanocomposite mineralized collagen. Mineralized collagen is produced in a biomimetic process of synchronous collagen fibril reassembly and mineralization In this study, we demonstrate the development of Sr-modified mineralized collagen scaffolds, generated by substituting calcium with strontium during the scaffold synthesis to the extent of 25, 50, 75 and 100%. The Sr-modified scaffolds were analyzed by various methods (inductively coupled plasma with optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), nano-computed tomography (Nano-CT), pycnometry, mechanical testing) to study the effect of Sr-substitution on scaffold composition and properties. The release kinetics of bioactive Sr Biomimetically mineralized collagen scaffolds without strontium substitution were prepared as described by Gelinsky et al. Inductively coupled plasma with optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, iCAP 6500 Duo View, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used for chemical element analysis of the mineral phase of the Sr-substituted scaffolds. Therefore, scaffolds (n To characterize the molecular composition of the generated scaffold variants Raman spectra were recorded using a spectrometer (Raman Rxn1, Kaiser Optical Systems Inc., USA) coupled to a light microscope (DM2500P, Leica Microsystems GmbH, Germany). For excitation, a 785 The amount of inorganic and organic fraction in the freeze-dried specimen was determined by measuring the loss on ignition. Therefore about 100 For the analysis of mineralized collagen scaffolds via transmission electron microscopy (TEM), small pieces of the freeze-dried scaffolds were infiltrated with epoxy resin and heated to 60 To determine whether the gradual substitution of CaCl To characterize the scaffold densities, single projection images were taken from small cylinders (d Porosity of dry scaffolds was determined by helium-pycnometry (Ultrapyc 1200e, Quantachrome Instruments, USA). The porosity was calculated from the quotient of the scaffolds volume (according to its height and diameter) and the pycnometrically measured volume. For mechanical characterization compression properties of the scaffolds variants were measured using a mechanical testing machine (ZWICK Z010, Zwick, Germany) equipped with a 100 For Sr All results are shown as mean For the generation of Sr-modified mineralized collagen scaffolds, CaCl To determine the relation between inorganic and organic phase (collagen), loss on ignition experiments were carried out (n In order to investigate how the Sr-substitution influences the mineral crystallization, the yielded mineralized collagen of Sr0, Sr50 and Sr100 was examined via TEM with respect to morphology, distribution and nanostructure of the precipitated mineral phase ( As expected for Sr0, mineral crystals appeared as dark needle- or platelet-like objects of about 50 In Most prominently, an intense band can be observed around 961 All examined mineralized collagen nanocomposites were capable to be further processed into porous scaffolds. SEM imaging and the measurement of porosity via pycnometry were applied to examine how the porosity was influenced by gradual Sr-substitution ( While imaging by SEM gives a good impression of the scaffold surface and the pore shape, the analysis by Nano-CT enables the visualization of the overall microstructure. The influence of the gradual Sr-substitution on the mechanical properties was characterized for Sr0, Sr50 and Sr100 by measuring the compressive modulus and the compressive stress at 50% compression ( The release of Sr In this study, we developed and characterized a novel biomaterial based on Sr-modified mineralized collagen. Due to its known favorable influence on bone metabolism, strontium is the therapeutically active component of the approved drug strontium ranelate in osteoporosis therapy and clinically applied in form of oral administration. However, a systemic application is generally afflicted with an insufficient bioavailability, thus the integration of strontium into a biomaterial and the local supply directly at the site of injury would be a superior alternative. The biomimetic scaffold material mineralized collagen, which has been shown to be a very promising biomaterial for bone tissue engineering by several in vitro Sr-substituted apatites are commonly manufactured by direct synthesis in aqueous medium (wet chemical route) requiring high temperatures around 90 The isomorphous Sr-substitution leads to the formation of different types of solid solutions. Due to the distortion of the apatite crystal lattice the physical and electrical homogeneity of the solid material gets affected The modified mineral phases of the investigated groups also led to altered material properties of the generated scaffolds. While investigations via SEM showed a similar porous morphology of the scaffold surface, Nano-CT revealed a slight decrease of porosity correlating with the increased solid volume content of scaffolds with progressing Sr-substitution. The investigation of the mechanical properties revealed that Sr-substitution generally did not impair the compressive strength of the respective scaffolds, while the elasticity has been shown to be significantly decreased in scaffolds partially substituted with strontium ( The main focus of developing Sr-modified mineralized collagen scaffolds was to create stable scaffolds capable of a sustained release of Sr By gradually substituting CaCl The authors thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for financial support. This study was performed as part of the Collaborative Research Centre/Transregio 79 (SFB/TRR79; Subproject M4). We thank Ortrud Zieschang and Gunhild Martels for excellent technical assistance and Dr. Armin Springer for sample preparation for TEM analysis. Furthermore, we are grateful to Syntacoll (Saal/Donau, Germany) for providing bovine collagen.