Soil organic matter is an important agent responsible for binding soil mineral particles together and creating soil structure stability. Soil management can modify the content of soil organic matter and soil structure stability. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of soil organic matter on soil structure stability under different soil management practices in Rendzic Leptosol, in an extremely humid year. In 2006, an experiment of the different management practices in a productive vineyard was established in the locality of Nitra-Dražovce (Slovakia). The following treatments were established: 1. control (grass without fertilization), 2. T (tillage), 3. T+FM (tillage+farmyard manure), 4. G+NPK3 (grass+NPK 120–55–195kg·ha−1), and 5. G+NPK1 (grass+NPK 80–35–135kg·ha−1). Soil samples were collected every month, during the year 2010. The results showed that the aggregation process and soil structure stability were mainly dependent on the stable form of soil organic matter or the physically protected soil organic matter inside of aggregates in all soil management practices in a vineyard. In the treatment with plowed farmyard manure, the soil structure stability decreased, during 2010. In this case, humic substances stability had a statistically significant influence on soil structure stability. The lower the values of color quotient of humic substances in soil were, the lesser was the decrease in soil structure stability.Soil organic matter represents a dynamic material influenced by several factors, such as: climate, clay content and mineralogy, and soil management ( Organic carbon is an important agent responsible for binding soil mineral particles together creating an aggregate hierarchy ( The total area of the Slovak Republic is 4,903,380 In recent years we have recorded significant fluctuations in temperature and precipitation compared to the long-term average. This has an impact on the organic matter. For example, the results of The objectives of the present study were: (i) to evaluate the effect of different soil management practices on the dynamics of soil organic matter and soil structure stability; and (ii) to assess the effect of soil organic matter on soil structure stability in an extremely humid year. We hypothesized that (1) soil structure stability is affected by different soil management practices through their effect on soil organic matter and its labile forms and (2) soil structure stability in Rendzic Leptosol might be affected by the stability of humus substances, in an especially extremely humid year. An experiment of the different management practices in a productive vineyard was initiated in the year 2006 in the locality of Nitra-Dražovce (48°21′6.16″N; 18°3′37.33″E), which is located in the Nitra wine-growing area (Slovakia) ( The experimental site has a temperate climate. The mean annual rainfall is 550 The experiment was conducted on a randomized complete block design with four replicates. It included the following treatments: Co — control (sown grass in the rows and between vine rows), T — tillage (every year medium tilth to a depth of 0.25 T G G Soil samples were collected in all treatments from a depth of 0–0.3 The carbon management index (CMI) was calculated according to Eq. CPI and LI are calculated as follows: The control treatment was used as the reference and different soil management practices as the treatment. The index of crusting (I The index of crusting (I Critical soil organic matter content (S The obtained data were analyzed using Statgraphic Plus statistical software. A multifactor ANOVA model was used for individual treatment comparisons at The results showed that soil management practices in a vineyard did not produce changes in C In treatments with fertilizers (mainly in G The index of crusting (I In all soil management practices in the vineyard during the year 2010, the higher the values of the organic carbon in soil were, the greater was the soil structure stability. In addition, higher values of organic carbon in soil were observed to have with more favorable values of the crusting index ( Through parameters such as the carbon pool index (CPI) and carbon management index (CMI), some scientists ( In Rendzic Leptosol, the aggregation process and soil structure stability were found to be mainly dependent on the stable form of soil organic matter or physically protected soil organic matter inside of aggregates within all soil management practices in the vineyard. In the treatment with plowed-in farmyard manure, the soil structure stability decreased during the year 2010. In this case, humic substances stability had a statistically significant influence on the soil structure stability. The lower the values of color quotient of humic substances in soil were, the lesser was the decrease in soil structure stability. In different soil types under different soil management practices we need to understand the relationships between soil organic matter and soil structure. On the basis of our results, farmers can improve their approaches and contribute to sustainable land management at the same time. We thank Matthew Evans (Brackley Northants, England) for improving the English text and also the Editor and reviewers, for constructive comments. Project was supported by the