We carried out wet milling batch tests in a laboratory scale ball mill on a minus 600μm UG2 ore as feed. In this paper, we aim to investigate the nature of the UG2 ore using a simple method that relies only on the breakage kinetic data and knowledge of basic process modeling skills. Our results show that a two component model more accurately predicts the breakage behavior of the UG2 ore when compared to the homogeneous or true first order model. This paper takes the view that due to the effectiveness of the two component model in describing the milling behavior, it may be hypothesized that the ore might best be described as composing material of two different hardness; termed the ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ components. Our results also show that for all solid concentrations investigated, the rates of breakage of the ‘soft’ component are much higher than for the hard component. We also found that at 20% solid content the difference between the rates of breakage of the soft component (0.15 per second) and that of the hard component (0.0159 per second) is 0.1341 per second, while at 50% solids the difference is 0.111.The work reported in this paper is an ongoing research on platinum group metal (PGM) ore at the University of South Africa. In this test work, we used small ball sizes (10 We carried out a series of wet milling batch tests in a laboratory-scale ball mill with a UG2 ore feed, in which the particles were below 600 The outcome of this study might be of great benefit to scholars, mineral processors and designers of milling circuits, as it offers a new approach to how process modeling can be used to determine the nature of an ore. One of the tools that are commonly applied to evaluate whether comminution is being carried out effectively is process modeling First order models are often valid and frequently used in the analysis of the rate of breakage of single-component (homogeneous) material in a batch laboratory scale ball mill. However, batch tests do not always fit the first order model Various models can be used to predict the PSD of multi-component or heterogeneous feeds, as summarized in At present, the extraction of PGMs from ores in South Africa follows the traditional route, which involves four stages: size reduction to liberate values, concentration to remove the gangue followed by smelting that chemically separates mineral components and refining that purifies to achieve a saleable product Because current mineral processing circuits are not as effective in liberating valuable minerals (values) from gangue in the UG2 ores as they could be, researchers In this experimental work we considered three particle size classes. These are the feed (size class 1); an intermediate (size class 2) or desired size class and the fines (size class 3), which are difficult to float resulting in the loss of values. The feed size class chosen was particle sizes above 45 In the analysis of various types of grinding mills, the concept of treating grinding as a rate process (like chemical reactor design) is well accepted are the size classes; is the mass fraction of the particles in size class is the specific rate of breakage of size class is the mass fraction of broken products from size class is the grinding time. Eq. If the grinding process follows a first-order model, then a plot of ln[ Considering a composite binary mixture of a soft and a hard material  Where: is the mass fraction of material of size class the mass fraction of material of size class the specific rate of breakage of the soft component in size class the specific rate of breakage of the hard component in size class For the feed size class ( We can also perform a similar kinetic analysis as above, for the intermediate size class ( is the mass fraction of material in the intermediate size class, after a certain grinding time; is the mass fraction of material in feed size class, after a certain grinding time; is the fraction of material broken from the feed size class that reports to the intermediate size class; is the breakage rate function of feed size class material; and is the breakage rate function of intermediate size class material. Further integration of Eq. Modification of the above-single component first order breakage model for the intermediate size class material, in order to incorporate a second component, results in Eq. is the mass fraction of material in intermediate size class, at time is the mass fraction of material in feed size class, at is the fraction of soft component broken from the feed size class that reports to the intermediate size class; is the fraction of hard component broken from the feed size class that reports to the intermediate size class; is the fraction of the soft component of the ore; is the breakage rate function of the soft component in the feed size class; is the breakage rate function of the hard component in the feed size class; is the breakage rate function of the soft component in the intermediate size class; and is the breakage rate function of the hard component in the intermediate size class. We carried out a series of wet milling batch tests in a laboratory-scale ball mill with a PGM ore feed, in which the particles were below 600 A size distribution of the overall feed material used in this experimental test program comprising typical UG2 primary cyclone underflow material is presented in One can see that the feed material is not mono-sized, but rather split into 67% in size class 1, 13% in size class 2, and the balance (20%) in size class 3. This PSD is summarized in   On the basis of this dynamic behavior we hypothesized that the material appears to contain a component (call it ‘soft’) that breaks at a relatively rapid rate independent of the concentrations of the solids. The differences in breakage observed in the latter part of the plots could be accounted for by another component with different breakage characteristics (called ‘hard’), which breaks at a relatively slow rate that is dependent on the solid concentrations. Another explanation of the phenomena shown in the above-plots could be the presence of some weaker particles that break first in a feed that is otherwise homogeneous, under all conditions tested, and that the different patterns of breakage start to occur after these ‘weaker’ particles have been milled. We had to perform further experimental tests on the material, and this work will be reported in the next journal publication, in order to eliminate this possibility of the presence of ‘weak’ and ‘strong’ particles in the ore. We then fitted the heterogeneous (two component) model, as given by Eq. After obtaining the above given parameters, we evaluated an average value for the fraction of the soft component in the ore (0.5620). We then fixed this parameter and used the excel solver again to estimate the selection functions. The results truncated again to four decimal places are given in We then referred back to We then fitted the homogeneous (one component) model, as given by Eq.     The parameter values of the two-component model fitting the feed size class fraction, for all the solid contents we investigated are summarized in  In terms of mill operation, After achieving selective grinding, the hard and soft components of the ore then have to be separated before proceeding with the concentration process. If the values are concentrated in the hard component, the soft can be discarded after the separation process leaving the hard component as the feed to the next milling stage. The graphs we obtained of the middle size class material plotted against grinding time showed a similar behavior for all the solid concentrations investigated, in that the two-component model is a better fit to the experimental data compared to the single-component model. We then chose to present only a single graph here due to the similarities in their trends.  The parameter values, truncated to four decimal places, of the two-component model fitting the intermediate size class case, for all the solid contents we considered are presented in  A simple method that relies on breakage kinetic data and basic process modeling skills was successfully applied in determining the breakage behavior of the UG2 ore. The general conclusion in the case of both the feed and intermediate size classes considered here is that the two-component parallel first-order model offers a better approximation to the experimental data, possibly because of the heterogeneous nature of the material. By application of our methodology, we found that the UG2 ore contains 56.2% of the soft component. For all solid concentrations investigated, the rates of breakage of the soft component are much higher than for the hard component. In terms of mill operation, we also found that selective grinding of these components can be achieved by varying the grinding period and the slurry density in the mill. A low solid content promotes preferential size reduction of the soft component. A great deal of research can follow from the implications of the conclusions above. For example, a flow-sheet can be developed for the separation of the soft from the hard phase, after milling. The effects of change in the concentration of solids could also be used to adjust flow-sheets.