This computational chemistry analysis compares the interactions of H2O and CO2 with zigzag graphene edges, and in particular their adsorption and desorption steps. We provide detailed information regarding the geometric and electronic factors that influence both their adsorption and desorption (of H2 and CO) processes. Density functional theory results are compared with experimental information to offer heretofore unavailable insights into key aspects of the rate-limiting steps, inhibition phenomena and nanoscale differences in these two reactions. Thus, for example, the orientation and rotation of the adsorbing H2O molecules are elucidated using intrinsic reaction coordinate calculations and molecular orbital analysis, and these results complement recent pulse field gradient NMR measurements and molecular dynamics calculations. Such mechanistic findings reveal the H2O adsorption process to be a slow rotational phenomenon whereas the low-temperature H2 desorption is geometrically constrained by the presence of contiguous (di)hydrogenated carbon atoms with or without hydroxyl groups. This surface-assisted desorption mechanism is proposed to be responsible for the formation of hexagonal pits during the graphite-H2O reaction. Similar insights were obtained for the graphene-CO2 reaction. Mechanistic schemes are proposed for the desorption products observed in experiments, distinguishing zigzag from armchair sites.The reactions of graphene-based carbons, from coal to graphite, with oxygen-containing gases such as O In the face of such a wide spectrum of applications, it has not been easy to identify, appreciate and exploit their unifying features. In a typical recent example [ In this context, it is well known that the reactions of graphene-based materials with H The emblematic example of an important unresolved issue, based on the venerable L-H mechanism, is apparent from the following straightforward reaction sequence: In our earlier studies, we used a quantum chemistry approach to analyze the similarities and differences in the thermodynamics and kinetics of key elementary steps in the C–O The same computational methods and procedures were used for the main results as in Part I of this study [ The model chemistry selected was B3LYP with the 6-31G(d) basis set, as a reasonable compromise between chemical rigor and computational time. In selected cases we also included non-covalent intermolecular interactions for comparison with dispersion-corrected methods [ Supplementary Material related to this article can be found at The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Only two of the four structures studied in our previous work [ A quantum-chemistry-based comparison of the gaseous reactants is a necessary and revealing first step. It is summarized in We first report the results for the two reactions separately and then discuss the principal mechanistic implications, especially with regard to their reverse reactions, i.e., the potentially inhibiting steps. The basic conclusions regarding differences and similarities among the four reactions described here and in Part I [ The interaction of carbon (re)active sites with H  The transition states shown in   In As described in the previous section (see As shown in As documented in In summary, dissociative H Here we analyze the step(s) leading to the formation of the first CO molecule. Desorption of the second is discussed in Section The results for single-site adsorption of a CO  There is general consensus that the C–H Mechanism I Mechanism II Mechanism III A very recent study [ In our single-site process simulation we obtained evidence that the adsorption step is relatively slow. However, the subsequent surface rearrangement is as fast as the preceding reverse reaction; this leads to the formation of a hydroaromatic C(2H) complex (or methylene bridge) contiguous to the relatively stable phenolic group. In our analysis of two contiguous sites, adsorption is also dissociative but an aromatic C(H) complex is formed next to the phenolic group. Reactions For adsorption on two contiguous sites, the dissociative pathway is consistent with the UV-PES results [ As long as the reaction takes place and sites are occupied, more single rather than dual contiguous sites should be available due to thermodynamic stability. As shown in Taken together, In The second question will be discussed in detail at the end of Section Although in the previous section we have considered reaction Lussier Lussier Our results indicate that the formation of C(2H) from C(H Even though our results are inconsistent with single-step H The TEM analysis of Yang and Wong in combination with a gold-decoration technique [ As mentioned, our results are in conflict with abundant experimental evidence about global reaction endothermicity (see Another process that influences the overall endothermicity is nascent site deactivation (NSD) [ In In the context of facile hydrogen saturation of graphene edges as the reaction proceeds, it is worth examinating the reactivity of C(H) zigzag sites. A frontier orbitals analysis is presented in In Section The dual site case ( The CO desorption process revealed here resembles the one described by Fritz and Hüttinger [ As mentioned, a detailed kinetic analysis [ The step-response CO Additionally, we have evidence of reversibility suggested by Kapteijn  Desorption of the second CO molecule from a semiquinone group is common to all the oxygen transfer reactions. This step has thus received much attention and the abundant literature provides theoretical information in agreement with experimental results [ We analyze out-of-plane CO desorption from two different graphene clusters (oxidized Z1, Z1-Ob, and a smaller cluster, Z1-Oa). Results for the smaller cluster, which was analyzed previously [  Finally, and returning to the second question about side approach of H The behavior of CO Our computational quantum chemistry analysis offers new insights into the essential differences in the adsorption of H The key characteristics of the product desorption mechanism are also revealed. Easy subsequent rearrangements eventually lead to C(OH) and C(2H) intermediates, which eventually desorb H The graphene-H Similarities and differences vis-a-vis the graphene-CO A.M.O. and L.R.R. conceived and designed the analysis, contributed data or analysis tools and wrote the paper; A.M.O. collected the data and performed the analysis; X.G.C. and L.R.R. also provided review from their expertise. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study has been supported by The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary Material to this article can be found online at