This is an update of P. Stevenson, 2.50 - Foam Separations, Editor: Murray Moo-Young, Comprehensive Biotechnology (Second Edition), Academic Press, 2011, Pages 715-726.Feed concentration (mol m Foamate concentration (mol m Tailings concentration (mol m Enrichment (−) Acceleration due to gravity (m s Drainage superficial velocity (m s Liquid superficial velocity (m s Gas superficial velocity (m s Drainage expression prefactor (−) Drainage expression index (−) Bubble radius (m) Recovery (−) Surface flux (s Liquid feed volume (m Liquid foamate volume (m Liquid tailings volume (m Surface excess (mol m Liquid fraction (−) Liquid dynamic viscosity (Pa.s) Liquid density (kg m This is an update of P. Stevenson, 2.50 - Foam Separations, Editor: Murray Moo-Young, Comprehensive Biotechnology (Second Edition), Academic Press, 2011, Pages 715-726.  The enhanced segregation of phases of matter using inclined plates. The supply of enriched foamate to the top of the foam column. A process for enriching solutions of amphipathic molecules by making them adsorb to the gas–liquid interface in foam. The autogenous supply of enriched liquid in the foam caused by bubble coalescence and Ostwald ripening. A sloped receptacle, open to the atmosphere, for collecting foam at the top of a column. If molecules in a solution have a tendency to adsorb to a gas–liquid interface and reduce the surface energy of those interfaces, the concentration can be enriched by forming a foam that is stabilized by these molecules, collecting the foam, and then collapsing it to form an enriched ‘foamate’ product. Gas–liquid foams have a very high surface area per unit volume of liquid (i.e., specific surface area). It is this feature of their structure that is exploited in foam fractionation; when the foam is collapsed, the molecules that had previously adsorbed onto surfaces (i.e., manifest as a surface excess) go into the bulk foamate solution thereby enriching it. Foam fractionation has been shown to be an effective process for enriching solutions of proteins and enzymes, as well as stripping surface-active components from wastewater streams. The pioneer of modern foam fractionation technology was Lemlich Foam fractionation is closely related to the process of froth flotation, There are typically three distinct zones within a foam fractionation column:     Possibly the best-known application of foam fractionation is that of the ‘protein skimmer’ that is used to maintain water quality in aquaria. Organic material originating from fish and aquatic plants is removed from the water before it has the opportunity to decompose to nitrogenous waste. Bubbles of air are sparged into a draft tube within the aquarium, typically via an air stone, and organic compounds adsorb to the gas–liquid interfaces in the liquid pool. The foam forms on top of the pulp and continues rising up the draft tube before discharging over the lip of the column, the top of which is open to atmosphere, into a ‘cup’ which is similar to the launder vessel known in flotation. The cup is periodically emptied by the aquarist. It is, perhaps, perplexing that a cheap, simple, and well-known method of removing organic compounds from fish tanks has failed to become an established separation method in bioprocessing. However, one of the major difficulties of foam fractionation of biological molecules is that they can denature at the gas–liquid interface, and clearly this consideration is not relevant in protein skimming since the foamate is waste, rather than product. Because enzymes and proteins are amphipathic (i.e., they possess polar and nonpolar groups) they posses surface active properties and are therefore susceptible to the foam fractionation method. Proteins form into globular structures in aqueous solutions, similar to ionic surfactants forming micelles, so that the interaction of the nonpolar groups, that are sent toward the center of the globules, are segregated from the polar water molecules. However, the Gibbs free energy is further reduced if the molecules can adsorb to a gas–liquid interface so that the nonpolar groups can locate away from the water molecules. The adsorption of molecules also stabilizes the foam by the reduction of surface energy. However, there is a major potential problem that the protein molecules may unfold and denature at the gas–liquid surface. The foam fractionation process has been shown, on a laboratory scale, to be effective for the enrichment of a vast array of proteins and enzymes, including bovine serum albumin; hidistine-tagged proteins from tobacco extract; pepsin from a mixture of itself and rennin; Most of the published studies that have highlighted the potential of foam fractionation in bioprocessing share two general characteristics: The studies are system specific so that research findings are generally not transferable to the separation of other types of bioproducts. Very few of these processes have been commercially adopted. In fact, the only large-scale commercial application of foam fractionation within the bioprocessing industry that the author knows of is the production of the food preservative Nisin (described below). Having said that, it is entirely possible that foam fractionation is being used commercially elsewhere, but that such use is not in the public domain. In this article, an attempt will be made to elucidate the physics that underpin the foam fractionation process so that development of the technology as a mainstream process can continue. As a case study of the use of foam fractionation in a bioengineering process, the commercial manufacture of Nisin is considered. Nisin is an antibacterial natural food preservative that demonstrates activity toward Gram-positive bacteria. Its primary use is in the preservation of processed meats and dairy products although it is also used in cosmetic and pharmaceutical products. Within the European Union (EU) it is given the designation E234. The biggest production plants have an annual production capacity of approximately 40 tonnes.  The Nisin manufacturing process is typical of the role of foam fractionation in many biological processes in that it performs the role of a primary separator that feeds into further purification processes. Foam fractionators in biological systems are almost universally operated as enrichers that are used to concentrate the amphipathic component of a liquid, as in the Nisin process described above. Foam fractionation has wider utility acting as a stripper to remove surface active materials from waste streams. For example, foam fractionators are increasingly being installed at mechanical car washing sites to remove detergent from the run-off water. The design of such units is essentially the same as for biological units, but a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of this article. However, design and operation of foam fractionators for nonbiological applications is simplified by the fact that denaturation of molecules at interfaces is not an issue. In addition, there is potential for the use of foam columns to achieve enhanced oxygenation in biological systems, and the techniques of estimating the behavior of pneumatic foams that are used for design of foam fractionators have utility for such applications. Of paramount importance in the design of foam fractionators is the prediction of liquid and surface flux within the column, as well as the liquid concentration and surface excess at the top of the column. In this section, methods of estimating the relevant fluxes by adopting the hydrodynamic theory of rising foam, Of importance to the operation of foam fractionators is knowledge of the liquid flux and liquid fraction within the foam phase (i.e., the hydrodynamic condition of the foam); in particular, the liquid flux is required so that overall and component mass balances on the unit may be written. Within the foam fractionation literature, there are a number of empirical descriptions of the hydrodynamic condition of the froth phase. The majority of these describe an exponential decrease of liquid fraction within the foam height increases (and therefore the residence time increases) the foam has had longer to drain and is therefore dryer. This description is not founded on principles of continuity and, instead, the pneumatic foam theory of Stevenson A pneumatic foam, at steady state, is created by sparging gas bubbles, at a superficial velocity of The flux of surface area, The liquid flux up the column is Consider a pneumatic foam created by sparging gas at a superficial velocity of 5 In the examples above, it was assumed that the bubble sizes were known and monodispersively distributed. In fact, although the hydrodynamic state of pneumatic foam is very strongly dependent on bubble size, very little is known about bubble size in practical pneumatic foams. At present, there are no reliable methods of measuring bubble size distribution within the bulk of the foam. Bubble size distributions obtained by analyzing images taken through the pipe wall are unlikely to be representative of the bulk of the foam because of a statistical planar sampling bias, bubble shape distortion, and a wedging effect of big bubbles away from the wall by small bubbles. Another problem with bubble size is that it appears to be very difficult to obtain reproducible bubble size distributions, and this can have a dramatic impact upon the hydrodynamic condition of the froth. The corollary is that consistent performance of a commercial foam fractionator is rare because of variable bubble size distribution. Many experimental studies of stationary foam achieve reproducible and monodispersive bubble sizes by blowing bubbles through a single or multiple capillary tubes. However, such methods of bubble generation are unsuited to foam fractionation because they cannot support the gas rate necessary to create a pneumatic foam. Even if the bubble size distribution was known with confidence, it is not at all clear what mean is representative of the distribution for the purposes of applying A key physical process in foam fractionation is the adsorption of the target molecule to the gas–liquid interfaces. The rate and extent to which molecules adsorb determine the surface excess, and therefore the enrichment and recovery. However, because little is known about the complexities of protein adsorption, a discussion of the adsorption of nonionic surfactants will be given as an introduction before the confounding problems of protein adsorption are outlined. The adsorption of proteins to gas–liquid interfaces is discussed at length An equilibrium exists between surface concentration (known as the surface excess) and bulk concentration, and the rate at which molecules adsorb is generally driven by the difference between the equilibrium and instantaneous surface excess. Adsorption of surfactants reduces the Gibbs free energy of the system. Multifarious equilibrium relationships between bulk concentration, Eastoe and Dalton The equilibrium surface excess will be attained if the residence time of the bubbles is infinite. In order to illuminate the rate at which this equilibrium is approached we require knowledge of the adsorption kinetics. In general, the surfactants need to diffuse from the bulk solution to the subsurface (i.e., to the gas–liquid interface), whereupon they may need to undergo a rearrangement in order to adsorb to the surface. Generally speaking, the rate-limiting step for smaller molecules is the diffusion to the surface, and may be described using relatively simple mathematics. The adsorption of ionic surfactants is still more complicated since there are electric effects to consider, and ions must travel across the diffuse layer next to the interface, and, in some cases, the Stern layer. Moreover, most analyses and measurements of adsorption rate apply to quiescent systems, whereas, in foam fractionation, there is a net flow past the interface. It is highly likely that such a net flow will enhance the rate at which surfactants adsorb. Proteins and enzymes tend to adsorb to gas–liquid interfaces because the Gibbs free energy is reduced by minimizing interaction between nonpolar groups in the molecules and water, and the elimination of some interface of high free energy. It has been shown that only certain segments of a protein molecule adsorb onto the surface, and the molecules can undergo surface coagulation. Adsorption isotherms are generally difficult to determine because of uncertainties about the reversibility of the process. In general, there are three barriers to adsorption, which proteins must overcome: The molecules must diffuse from the bulk solution to the subsurface, in common with the adsorption of nonionic surfactants. There is an energy barrier associated with the surface pressure. There is an electrical energy barrier. Thus, it has been found that, generally, rate of adsorption is maximized by adjusting the pH to the isoelectric point so the surface carries no net charge. Simple models for the adsorption of proteins exist, but their general utility is limited. An important consideration in the foam fractionation of proteins is the potential for denaturation. Interfaces can be responsible for protein inactivation because of conformational changes (i.e., unfolding) on adsorption and because of rates of shear associated with surface replenishment. It was Lemlich who suggested that the use of reflux could engender multiple effective equilibrium stages. Without any source of reflux the surface excess of the foam at the top of the column can only approach its equilibrium with the bulk concentration of the liquid in the liquid pool, whereas significantly higher surface excesses are achievable if reflux is enabled. Reflux can be provided to the column in two ways: As ‘external reflux’ where some of the enriched foamate product is sprayed onto the surface of the foam in a manner similar to the addition of washwater to the free surface in froth flotation. As ‘internal reflux’ where changes in bubble size distribution in the foam due to coalescence and, to a lesser extent, Ostwald ripening liberate enriched liquid to flow down the column. Not only does reflux enable the gas–liquid interfaces to contact richer liquid, but it also increases the absolute slip velocity between gas and liquid phases, and this is probably beneficial to the adsorption rate to interfaces. A theoretical treatment of the external rate upon the final enrichment has been given by Stevenson and Jameson Lemlich suggested four modes of continuous foam fractionator configuration:     The first two configurations are of primary interest in bioprocessing. The third mode is appropriate for stripping contaminants from wastewater streams, whereas the author knows of no practical application for the last configuration. Mass balances for continuous operation of foam fractionation, with and without reflux, are given by Stevenson and Jameson. The two parameters that characterize process performance are the enrichment, Thus, by eliminating concentrations from mass balances, we write, for a batch system, that: The discussion of the Nisin production process in It is easier to maintain sterility in a system cleaned after every batch than in a continuous system. The typically low duty on the unit does not warrant design for continuous operation. Typically, both upstream and downstream processes are operated batchwise. Construction and operation of several batchwise units in parallel may be justified if the foamate is of higher added value. However, there are potential problems associated with the choice of a batch operation. Consider an analogy with batch distillation, where, as the distillation progresses the concentration of the overhead stream diminishes. Foam fractionation suffers similarly in that, all other things being equal, the concentration of the foamate diminishes with time. However, the reduction in concentration could possibly have a detrimental impact upon foam stability, which means lower liquid flux but a higher degree of internal reflux. In practice, some batch foam fractionators at the laboratory scale are run until the foam is no longer stable enough to reach the top of the column. It was mentioned in By far the most common method of bubble creation is the sparging of gas through porous plates or holes in tubes. In laboratory systems, gas can be suppled via sintered glass frits. A flexible air stone is a tube with small holes around its periphery that is commonly used to aerate aquaria, and this is useful for sparging gas to laboratory columns. However, such methods are generally not suitable for industrial bioprocessing because of concerns about sterility. Instead, laser-perforated steel plates, of a thickness of about 1 Induced air flotation machines have gained a degree of popularity within certain sections of the minerals processing industry because of their ability to produce small bubbles at relatively high energy efficiency. The most common of such machines is the Jameson Cell. A downcomer protrudes out of the bubbly liquid in which is housed a plunging jet. Because this jet is at high velocity the pressure within the downcomer is low due to the Bernoulli equation, and air is induced into the downcomer creating a plume of bubbles within the liquid, which rise to form a foam. There are major problems with operating Jameson Cells because their high demand for surfactant causes downstream residual frother issues. (It is noted, as an aside, that ‘frother strippers’ are being developed to remove residual frother in flotation circuits, and these are identical to foam fractionation units.) Notwithstanding that Jameson Cell technology has failed to live up to its promise, it has been successfully used as a pilot-scale foam reactor to effect the autothermal thermophilic aerobic digestion (ATAD) of high strength wastewater sludge produced at a chicken processing factory. The advantage that induced gas systems have over alternative pneumatic foam systems is their very high gas–liquid surface area per unit volume of foam due to their small bubbles. This feature of the foams would also be an advantage in foam fractionation because it creates high flux of gas–liquid surface. However, to the author‘s knowledge, no attempt has ever been made to use induced gas systems as foam fractionators. Dissolved air flotation is a technique in which a liquid with significant dissolved air is flashed to a lower pressure thereby encouraging the air to come out of solution and manifest as small (micro) bubbles. Hydrophobic particles are attached to these bubbles and are ultimately recovered as a froth at the top of the column. Just as with induced-gas flotation systems, there is no reason why this technology cannot be transferred from froth flotation to foam fractionation. Noble et al. The depth of the liquid pool and the foam must be considered in the design of a foam fractionator. In doing this, it is important to consider the role of both areas in the column. The role of the liquid pool is to provide primary contact between the liquid and gas so that the target molecules can adsorb to the surface of the bubbles. From a mass transfer perspective, it is desirable to have a tall liquid pool to increase the residence time of the bubbles so that equilibrium between the bulk concentration in the liquid and the surface excess can be approached. However, a tall liquid pool comes with increased capital cost. In batch systems the liquid pool is often used to store the feed that is charged to the fractionator, and therefore may be required to be tall not through mass transfer consideration but due to inventory. In the commercial production of Nisin, the liquid pool is several meters tall, but this is governed by batch inventory. The role of the foam phase is to provide further adsorption and perhaps multiple equilibrium stages by coalescence. It is the very nature of the foam having a low liquid fraction that causes enrichment. Very little is known about the height of foam required to emulate a distinct physical stage. Lemlich‘s advice was this height of a theoretical unit (HTU) was approximately several inches, which hardly constitutes a precise design code. In general, a taller foam creates a higher enrichment because of the possibility of a greater number of equivalent stages and a greater opportunity for bubbles to coalesce, thereby creating a larger internal reflux source and smaller liquid flux. The interface between the liquid pool and the foam can be controlled by varying the pressure at the bottom of the column, perhaps by using a vented underflow. A higher pressure will cause the interface to rise and vice versa. In industrial foam fractionation units, air is almost universally used as the sparging gas. If prehumidified, the evaporation from the liquid to the gas within the bubbles is minimized thereby mitigating against evaporation-enhanced coalescence. The air can be passed through a sterilization filter upstream of the sparger. Foams created with air are susceptible to Ostwald ripening. Since oxygen has substantial solubility in water, it can migrate across liquid films from small to large bubbles because of differences in partial pressure in total pressure that are described by the Young–Laplace equation. Nitrogen has very low solubility in water and therefore experiences minimal Ostwald ripening. (It is precisely due to this effect that so-called ‘nitro-keg’ beers exhibit heads with enhanced stability.) However, in all systems but those with the lowest of gas rates, Ostwald ripening in pneumatic foam is insignificant and therefore the added cost of using gases other than air can rarely be justified. Varying the gas rate can significantly change the performance of the foam fractionation process. In the absence of changes in bubble size distribution, the flux of the foamate varies approximately as the square of the gas flux according to the theory of pneumatic foam described in As described elsewhere in this article, the hydrodynamic condition of a pneumatic foam, and therefore the foam fractionation performance, is critically dependent upon bubble size distribution, and this is described by the hydrodynamic theory of pneumatic foam. In general, bigger bubbles mean a dryer foam but a lower surface flux. A significant design challenge in foam fractionation is how to obtain a liquid foamate product from the top. This involves two stages: the recovery of foam from the top of the column and collapsing the foam to form a liquid product. The schematic representation of a foam fractionation column shows a launder foam collection unit that is typical of the foam collection method used in froth flotation. The foam reaches the top of the column and discharges over a weir into a launder vessel around the periphery of the column with a bottom slanted to a discharge tube. Depending on the stability and rheology of the foam at the top of the column, the gas disengages from the foam by drainage and collapses thereby enabling a liquid product to be discharged from the launder, or the foam itself flows out of the discharge line. The major advantage is that launder collection enables relatively large amounts of foam to be collected. The foam handling capacity can be still further enhanced by designing a so-called ‘donut launder’ that enables discharge around the periphery of the column, as well as into a well in the center. A further idea gained from the design of flotation column is that of a ‘froth crowder’ which is a solid block that is positioned at the column top to help direct foam over the weir and into the launder. It should be noted that the launder method of foam handling means that there is a free surface of foam at the column top, and therefore surface coalescence of bubbles is enabled. As mentioned above, coalescence, whether in the bulk or on the foam surface, diminishes the liquid flux but engenders internal reflux. The rate of surface coalescence is currently unpredictable, but it has been shown to be dependent upon environmental humidity, In general, the collection of foam into a launder is useful for very wet foams (approximately greater than 3% liquid fraction) because these exhibit relatively low viscosity and can therefore flow easily into the launder and discharge. However, relatively dry foams exhibit a high viscosity and therefore tend not to flow easily. Instead, the foam forms a ‘crown’ on top of the column that can become quite voluminous and bypass the launder vessel. In our laboratory, we can sometimes ameliorate this problem by recycling liquid foamate and using it to spray the foam in the crown to enhance flowability; the spray is targeted to the side on the crown so as not to form a source of external reflux that travels down the column. If antifoams are being used downstream of the launder it is absolutely critical that this spray does not enter the column itself or the process will be killed. The location of spraying should be sufficiently far from the column riser itself so that antifoam cannot travel into the tube by diffusion. However, a better method for the collection of relatively dry, and therefore viscous, foams is to dispense with the launder and instead pass the foam directly from the top of the column into an inverted U-bend (that can be either solid or a flexible hose) so that the foam is discharged downward into a collection vessel. Such an arrangement is used in the foam fractionation of Nisin described in Thus, the general heuristic is to use a launder collection method if the foam at the top of the column has a liquid fraction of above about 3% and large volumes are to be handled (stripping of surface active material from wastewater falls into this category), whereas for drier foams with lower production volumes (as are typical in bioprocessing) the use of an inverted U-bend circumvents the low flowability of the foam. If a foam discharges from the column (i.e., if an inverted U-bend is used, or if the foam does not collapse in the launder), then it must be broken so that a liquid foamate product is formed. The simplest method of doing this is to discharge the foam into a vessel and allow time for the foam to collapse. As liquid drains from the foam and Ostwald ripening occurs, the foam will become progressively less stable. However, some foams, especially those stabilized by adsorbed proteins, can be tenacious and other means of promoting foam collapse are desirable. The most common method, and that used in the commercial production of Nisin is the use of a defoaming agent to promote the coalescence of bubbles. In the Nisin process a blend of several different polyethers is used to collapse the overhead foam into a liquid foamate stream that is sent to precipitation. However, there is a plethora of defoaming agents available in the market, and the selection of a defoamer depends upon the application and the product. However, if some foamate is returned to the column as an external reflux stream, or multiple physical stages are employed (see In a laboratory setting the use of a hairdryer to apply warm air to the top surface of a foam is effective, since it has been shown that foam stability can be manipulated by changing the rate of evaporation from the foam surface. However, just as with the other methods mentioned above, there remain concerns about whether hot air can contribute to denaturation. It should be noted, as mentioned above, that foam stability is strongly dependent upon environmental humidity, and therefore foam collapse is promoted by engendering a dry air stream in contact with the free surface of the foam. Several novel types of foam fractionation columns, designed to intensify the process, are described below. The first method uses physical methods to create multiple effective equilibrium stages, whereas the latter two endeavor to increase enrichment by reducing liquid flux within the column. However, since foam fractionation is a nascent technology, at least on the industrial scale, there is potential for further routes to process intensification in the future. Over the past several years there have been several designs of multistage foam fractionation column proposed. The rationale for such proposed designs is that, in conventional columns, only one effective equilibrium stage between bulk liquid and surface excess can be engendered, whereas multiple effective equilibrium stages can be obtained if multiple physical stages are constructed within a column. Such a design is that proposed by Darton et al. There are practical problems with operation of such a unit. The foam cannot be broken by the introduction of antifoam, since this would destroy the foam throughout the system. However, the use of mechanical means (in this case paddles) for foam breaking can be unreliable. The problem of mechanical foam breaking is compounded in a multiple staged column because the foam must be destroyed as many times as there are stages. In fact, the construction of a column with multiple physical stages is quite unnecessary since, as explained above, multiple equilibrium stages can be engendered by external or internal reflux. To explain this further, consider mass transfer between gas and liquid phases in a standard fractionation column. Multiple equilibrium stages can be engendered by either (1) installing discrete physical stages upon which the gas and liquid phases approach equilibrium with each other, or (2) allowing gas–liquid mass transfer to take place in a countercurrent packed bed, such that there is a finite height of the bed over which equilibrium is effectively attained (i.e., the HTU). In a foam fractionator, mass is transferred from liquid to surface rather than liquid to gas, but the analogy is still valid. In fact, in a foam fractionator, the bubbles autogenously provide the packing. Thus if one can provide a reflux stream, either internal or external, then multiple equilibrium stages can be created without the need to install complicated column internals or break the foam more than once. Thus, it is not at all clear what advantage is accrued by building foam fractionators with multiple physical stages. For efficient foam fractionation, one seeks to reduce the flux of interstitial liquid while maintaining the flux of gas–liquid surface. If bubbles coalesce, then the foam becomes dryer (and therefore the liquid flux is reduced) but this comes with a loss of surface. Thus, one seeks methods of reducing the liquid fraction in the foam without causing significant changes in the bubble size distribution. There have been developed two methods to do just this, one of which uses a sudden expansion to from a narrower tube into one of larger diameter (the so-called foam riser) and the other utilizes the Boycott effect to create enhanced drainage using inclined plates. The foam riser, shown schematically in Another potential method