One of the promising methods for rock cutting technology is the use of high-speed water jets. In order to improve the cutting capacity of water jets without increasing the hydraulic power of equipment, pulsed water jets are basically used to increase the rock cutting efficiency. However, there are no mature recommendations for selection of rational parameters, and the relationship between indicators of rock cutting efficiency and parameters of pulsed water jet is still not established. In this context, we aimed at developing a generalized equation for calculating rock cutting efficiency, in which all the major parameters in consideration of rock cutting process are included. Then, a calibration of the rational parameters of rock cutting by pulsed water jets was conducted. The results are likely helpful for increasing productivity and reducing energy consumption.In mining engineering, significant attention is now paid to the development of mining equipment and facilities, where water jet technology is one of the most promising solutions ( One of the main causes using water jet technology for rock breakage is that the stress within the rock should be higher than its strength ( Despite the advantages of pulsed water jets regarding rock cutting, this technology is still not widely used in mining engineering. This is in part attributed to the limited understanding of the rock breakage mechanism of such devices ( Although a large number of studies have been carried out on the considered topic concerning the pulsed water jets (e.g. The basic principle and the major influence factors for this technology are shown in In this study, in order to form pulsed water jets from a continuous water stream, rotating discs with slots on their periphery were used. This method for obtaining the pulsed water jets is extensively used by many researchers (e.g. Sandstone, sandy–clay slate, marble, crystalline shale, and limestone samples were used in these experiments due to their relatively isotropic properties ( The testing facility to form pulsed water jets (see Three discs with different numbers of slots were produced for the experimental studies (see The water pressure in the converter tube was controlled by a manometer 7 (  Rock cutting was performed at water pressure The experimental results show that, regardless of rock strength, increase in pulsation frequency The dependence of cutting depth on pulsation frequency can be explained as follows. As the pulsation frequency of the jet The threshold of pulsation frequency, above which the cutting depth The crystalline shale samples with The testing results are listed in The crystalline shale samples with As can be seen from The samples of sandstone with One can see from The major parameter that describes the structure of the pulsed water jet is a dimensionless Strouhal number The water jet velocity can be determined by Investigation of all factors affecting the rock cutting efficiency is helpful for obtaining their individual dependences; nevertheless, it is not an easy task. The limit lies in the fact that individual relationships and interconnected variable (parameter) with constant values of other parameters cannot be described by a common equation. In order to obtain the generalized quantitative relationships, similarity and dimension analysis methods are adopted to obtain the theoretical and experimental data, taking into account the possible qualitative and quantitative relationships between parameters, which can reduce the number of parameters as possible ( Taking into account the values from Section Next, we use three similarity theorems. In the first theorem, similarity processes (real and simulated) must have some identical combinations of parameters. All the main parameters affecting the actual process of rock cutting are listed in Eq. The second theorem, known as the π-theorem, states that any equation relating We take As determinant of the dimension matrix For the third theorem, we replaced any criterion of similarity by its reciprocal value or a criterion composed of the replaced and any other criteria. Thus, the generalized equation has the following form: The next step is to establish the exact form of Eq. As a result of processing the experimental data by means of multiple regression, the generalized equation for calculating the rock cutting efficiency by pulsed water jet has the following dimensionless form: Correlation coefficient The experimental studies show that the optimum pulsation frequency of a water jet with respect to rock cutting ranges from 1300 Hz to 1800 Hz, irrespective of rock strength. In comparison with continuous water jets, given that pulsation frequency is in the optimum range, the pulsed water jets have higher cutting capacity. The water pressure and the nozzle's orifice diameter have significant impacts on the rock cutting process. With the increase in water pressure from 10 MPa to 120 MPa, the cutting efficiency of crystalline shale increases by 7.9–16 times. Changing the nozzle's orifice diameter from 0.2 mm to 0.8 mm causes an increase in cutting depth by 1.2–2.5 times. Optimal distance from rock surface ranges from 30 mm to 40 mm, irrespective of pulsation frequency and nozzle's orifice diameter. The cutting depth decreases with an increase in traverse speed according to the dependence close to hyperbolic. For this, a generalized equation should include all the major parameters in terms of rock cutting by pulsed water jets. The generalized analysis of experimental data using the methods of similarity theory and dimensions, as well as the probability theory and mathematical statistics, allows obtaining a calculated dependence of dimensionless parameters, which can determine the cutting depth with all the influence factors included. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.