 Vitamins differ from each other in chemical structure and function. They are classified as fat or water-soluble vitamins. Vitamins A, D, E and K are fat soluble. This means that a certain amount of fat is needed in the diet to help the body absorb these vitamins. Unused supplies can be stored in the body. The B group vitamins (consisting of vitamin B1, vitamin B2, vitamin B3, vitamin B5, vitamin B6, vitamin B8, vitamin B9 and vitamin B12) and vitamin C are water soluble. They cannot be stored in the body so we need a daily supply of them from our diet. In food products, vitamins are mainly added to replace losses in processing, or to fortify the product, but are also used as antioxidants or colourants. In the pharmaceutical industry, vitamins are used in supplement preparations such as tablets or capsules. Vitamins are also used in the cosmetics industry in skin care, hair care and oral hygiene products. Vitamins have been added to skin care products to boost the skin's antioxidant or anti-inflammatory response. They also function as immune system strengtheners, clarifiers or wrinkle reducers. All these vitamins can be used as active ingredients in cosmetics according to the European Union legislation, except vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). In USA and Japan, there are no restrictions for their cosmetic use. Some of the vitamins that are used as active ingredients in cosmetics are shown in A fat-soluble vitamin occurs in two principal forms in nature: retinol and certain carotenoids. Retinol is found only in animal sources, in foods such as fish, meat, eggs and full-fat milk. In plant foods, vitamin A can be obtained from a family of substances called carotenoids that are found in brightly coloured fruit and vegetables, and leafy green vegetables. The best-known form of carotenoid is The International Unit (IU) is a unit of measurement for a substance, based on measured biological activity or effect, used for vitamins and other substances. In the case of vitamin A: 1 IU vitamin A is the biological equivalent of 0.3 Vitamin A is essential for vision, adequate growth and tissue differentiation. Deficiency symptoms include night blindness, hyperkeratinosis of the skin and xerophthalmia, an eye condition which if untreated can lead to permanent blindness. Vitamin A Vitamin A (palmitate or acetate) is also called the “normalizing vitamin”, and is widely used in the cosmetic industry. Over the last 10 years, the vitamin A group received additional publicity because of the clinical studies conducted with an analogue, retinoic acid, which has shown the ability to reverse photo ageing. Vitamin A (palmitate) is the active agent for the treatment of skin aging in beauty care. It promotes enzyme activity in the skin, improves natural skin functions, thickens the epidermis, can regenerate skin prematurely aged by UV-radiation and efficiently reduce wrinkles and improve skin elasticity ( Vitamin A is soluble in oils and fats. The vitamin is not easily destroyed by heat but is readily oxidized. Preparations must, therefore, be protected from oxidation and are prepared in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide or nitrogen. In the absence of air, vitamin A is unaltered at moderate temperatures. The creams and lotions must therefore be free of oxidases, and perfumes must be free of peroxides. The addition of antioxidants is useful to maintain stability. Pure vitamin E is effective as an antioxidant in lipid solutions of vitamin A. The generic name for a group of steroid-like substances with anti-rachitic activity, promotes bone calcification. Vitamin D is found only in animals and there are only a few foods that contain vitamin D: oily fish, fish oils, butter and eggs. Unlike other vitamins, we can actually synthesize vitamin D in our bodies as a result of exposure to sunlight, provided that vitamin C intake (ascorbic acid) is adequate. The two most prominent members of this vitamin group are ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) and cholecalciferol (vitamin D3). The mass equivalents of 1 IU for vitamin D is the biological equivalent of 0.025 Vitamin D is required for calcium and phosphorus absorption from the small intestine, their re-absorption in the kidneys and the mineralization process of bones. It thus supports Vitamin D deficiency causes delayed closure of the fontanelles in infants and impairs tooth development. In adults a shortage of vitamin D can lead to softening of the bones and spontaneous fractures. A lack of vitamin D may also prevent adequate adsorption of calcium and contribute to osteoporosis. Vitamin D also plays a role in immunoregulation and healing skin disorders. In animal production, vitamin D deficiency can cause growth depression, leg disorders and thin egg shells. Vitamin D has several beneficial effects on the skin: prevents photo damage, wrinkles and other morphologic alterations. Its topical application has been recommended for psoriasis ( The term vitamin E covers eight different compounds found in nature. Four of them are called tocopherols and four tocotrienols, and they are identified by the prefixes—α, β, γ and δ. α-Tocopherol is the most common and biologically the most active of these naturally occurring forms of vitamin. The most important sources of vitamin E in nature are vegetable oils (peanut, soya, palm, corn, safflower, sunflower, etc.) and wheat germ. Secondary sources are nuts, seeds, whole grains and leafy green vegetables. The mass equivalents of 1 IU for vitamin E is the biological equivalent of about 0.667 mg of D-α-tocopherol (2/3 mg exactly), or of 1 mg of DL-α-tocopherol acetate. The primary role of vitamin E is to protect the body tissues from damaging reactions (peroxidation) that arise from many normal metabolic processes and exogenous toxic agents. Specifically, vitamin E protects biological membranes such as those found in the nerves, muscles and cardiovascular system, helps to prolong the life of erythrocytes (red blood cells) and helps the body to make optimal use of vitamin A.  There is evidence indicating that vitamin E may play an important role in intermittent claudication, thrombotic diseases, immune function, cancer prevention, cardiovascular disease and prevention and protection of lipoproteins from oxidation. Dietary deficiency of vitamin E is rare. Deficiency symptoms are seen in patients with fat mal-absorption and in newborn infants, particularly premature infants. Results are a rare type of progressive neuromuscular disease; symptoms include a loss of coordination and balance and in severe cases loss of the ability to walk. Vitamin E is also called the “protecting vitamin” and is used in the cosmetic industry as antioxidant for either the skin or the formulation. It also softens the skin and alleviates dry skin conditions. Esterified forms such as vitamin E acetate are used because of their superior stability. Unesterified α-tocopherol has antioxidant properties The effects of the topically applied vitamin E acetate are very well documented in published studies: increased moisturization of the horny layer; improvement in skin surface relief; evident anti-inflammatory properties; increased epithelization of surface wounds; improved enzyme activity in the skin; prevention of skin damage induced by free radicals; protection of properties against sunburn. Vitamin E acetate can increase the natural protection of the skin against UV radiation; reduce the amount of the UV damaged cells and protect against damage by reactive oxygen radicals. A number of studies in the past few years have shown that vitamin E acetate is responsible for the previously mentioned complex protective functions within the skin. First of all, its suggested anti-inflammatory action was published by Two published studies ( Studies carried out in 1990, commissioned by Hoffmann-La Roche USA, showed that vitamin E acetate can improve natural skin protection against UV radiation. The SPF of a suncare product was determined  All these effects together with the antioxidative properties make vitamin E a valuable additional ingredient for all kinds of cosmetic products. Vitamin E acetate is easily incorporated into cosmetics and has good stability. Vitamin E is soluble in alcohol, fats and oils, and like vitamin A palmitate, can be solubilized in aqueous solutions with solubilisers such as polysorbate 80. Vitamin E acetate can be added to the oil phase of topical formulations without special precautions; however, strong alkaline solution will specify the ester. The unesterified α-tocopherol darkens on exposure to air, but dilution in oils will minimize this. Trace metals accelerate decomposition and chelating agents are recommended in emulsion or alcoholic-solution based preparations. They should be added at a temperature not higher than 40°C. The presence of other antioxidants, such as vitamin C and Vitamin K occurs in three forms: vitamin K1 (phylloquinone, phytonadione, phytomenadione) is found in plants; vitamin K2 (menaquinone) is synthesized by bacteria in the human and animal intestine; and vitamin K3 (menadione) is a synthetic compound that can be converted to vitamin K2 in the intestinal tract. Vitamin K is needed primarily for the blood-clotting mechanism that prevents bleeding to death from cuts and wounds or internal bleeding. Vitamin K is found naturally in plants and can be produced by bacteria in the intestine. The best dietary sources are leafy green vegetables, such as spinach, sprouts, broccoli and cauliflower. Lower levels are found in liver, lean meat, cow milk, egg yolk and whole-wheat products. The vitamin's main function is as part of the blood-clotting system that prevents excessive blood loss due to cuts, wounds or following an operation. Vitamin K is needed to make a protein called prothrombin, which is the first stage in blood clotting and wound healing. Scientists also believe that a vitamin K dependant protein may be needed for healthy bone mineralization.  Dermatologists have recently found vitamin K to be successful for treating dark circles under the eyes and bruising on the face. Dark circles may be hereditary for some people or simply a part of the aging process. When the fat pad beneath the eye begins to thin with age, it can create a sunken look to the under eye area. Studies have shown that sluggishness of blood flow underneath the eyes may also contribute to dark circles. Vitamin K has been found to diminish the appearance of these dark circles. Vitamin K has also recently been studied for its effects on reducing bruising following certain dermatologic procedures. More recently, it has also been used in patients undergoing laser treatments to lessen the appearance of spider veins on the face. The B group vitamins comprise B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B8, B9 and B12. Also called thiamine, occurs widely in food, but mostly in small amounts. The best source of thiamine is dried brewers yeast. Other good sources include meat (pork, lamb and beef), poultry, whole-grain cereals, nuts, pulse and dried legumes. Because thiamine has a high turnover rate and is not appreciably stored in the body, a continuous supply is required. The heart, kidney, liver and brain have the highest concentrations, followed by the leukocytes and red blood cells. Thiamine is essential for the breakdown of foods, especially carbohydrates, to release energy and for healthy nerve and muscle function. Deficiency causes growth retardation and disorders of the nervous and cardiac systems (well known under the name ‘beri-beri’). Historically, it occurred in people living on diets of mainly white rice (where the thiamine in the whole grain has been removed or destroyed). In animals, progressive paralysis and neck retraction has been observed. Vitamin B1 (thiamine HCl) acts as a co-enzyme in amino acid metabolism and maintains healthy skin. Also called riboflavin, is one of the most widely distributed vitamins. All plants and animal cells contain it, but there are very few rich sources. Yeast and liver have the highest concentrations, but the commonest dietary sources are milk and milk products, meat, eggs and leafy green vegetables. Cereal grains, although poor sources of riboflavin are important for those who rely on cereals as their main dietary component. Animal sources of riboflavin are better absorbed than vegetable sources. Riboflavin is vital for the release of energy from foods and for healthy skin, eyes and growth. It plays a major role in oxidation and reduction processes in cells. Deficiency is rare, and usually occurs in combination with deficiencies of other water-soluble vitamins. Since cereals are poor sources of vitamin B2, virtually all types of compound animal feed must contain vitamin B2 supplements. In farm animals, even marginal vitamin B2 deficiency leads to loss of appetite and impaired growth rate. Riboflavin deficiency also affects the nervous system, gastrointestinal tract and reproductive organs. To prevent deficiency, most feed mixes (except those intended for ruminants) are fortified with riboflavin. Vitamin B2 (riboflavin 5′-phosphate sodium) has a bright deep yellow colour, although is not used in skin care, it could be used as a colouring agent in cosmetic products. Also called niacin refers to both nicotinic acid and its derivative nicotinamide (also called niacinamide). Both occur widely in nature, with nicotinic acid being more prevalent in plants, and nicotinamide in animals. Yeast, liver, poultry, lean meats, nuts and legumes contribute most of niacin in food. Milk and leafy green vegetables contribute lesser amounts. Niacin belongs to the group of B vitamins. Niacin is vital for energy release in tissues and cells. Working with riboflavin and thiamin, it helps to maintain healthy nervous and digestive systems. It is essential for growth and is involved in the synthesis of hormones. Deficiency in animals affects the skin and digestive tract. Ruminants on green fodder usually do not require extra niacin, but niacin supplements improve milk yield in cows. Pellagra is a disease resulting from a combined deficiency of niacin and tryptophan. The symptoms of pellagra include dermatosis, dementia, diarrhoea and nervous disorders. Pellagra is rarely seen in industrialized countries and is associated with alcohol abuse. In other parts of the world where maize is the major staple diet, pellagra persists. The multiplicity of effects and formulation benefits seen with niacinamide make it a good choice for a variety of cosmetic products: niacinamide can help normalize the imbalance of nicotinamide coenzymes in skin depleted with age. It increases biosynthesis of ceramides as well as other stratum corneum lipids to improve the epidermal permeability barrier ( Pantothenic acid is present in almost every type of food. It is particularly abundant in yeast and organ meats (liver, kidney, heart, brain); however, eggs, milk, vegetables, legumes and whole-grain cereals are probably more common sources. Processed foods contain smaller amounts, unless the vitamin B5 lost during processing is replaced afterwards. Pantothenic acid is synthesized by intestinal microorganisms, but the amount produced and its role in human nutrition is unknown. Pantothenic acid is vital for the release of energy from food, for healthy growth and for the production of antibodies. Pantothenic acid requires vitamin A, vitamin B6, vitamin B12, vitamin B9 and vitamin B3 in order to function properly. Panthenol is broadly used in cosmetic products and has become an essential ingredient in skin- and hair-care products. Its main functions are improved wound healing, antiinflammation and hydrating activities. Panthenol is often called “pro-vitamin B5” in advertising literature. Panthenol is the stable biologically active form of vitamin B5 or pantothenic acid. This vitamin is essential for growth and normal maintenance of skin and hair. Pantothenic acid is an essential constituent of coenzyme A, which plays a central role in the metabolism. Ethyl panthenol, like panthenol, is metabolized into pantothenic acid in the skin. The pantothenic acid is then incorporated as an important component in the coenzyme A. The use of panthenol as a moisturizer and conditioner in hair-care products imparts several effects: gives hair long-lasting moisturization, improves the manageability, protects and repairs damage due to chemical and mechanical procedures (brushing, combing, shampooing, perming, colouring, etc), reduces the formation of split ends, improves the condition of damaged hair, thickens the hair and imparts shine and lustre.  Studies carried out in Hoffmann-La Roche have shown that although single applications of panthenol have an effect, multiple applications give better results. Panthenol is deposited on the hair and also penetrates the hair shaft accumulating in the hair. D-Panthenol in shampoos, conditioners, hair and scalp treatments and hair tonics not only improves the shine, the feel and the flexibility of the hair, it also protects the hair against mechanical damage and in general makes the hair more resistant to environmental stresses. In skin-care products, it helps to keep the skin moist and supple, stimulates cell growth and tissue repair and inhibits inflammation and reddening. It improves and increases the humidity properties of the skin (moisturizing effect); it also makes dry skin softer and more elastic, has anti-inflammatory effects and soothes irritated skin, stimulates epithelization and helps to heal minor wounds (shaving, skin grazes and blisters).  Panthenol can also be used in nail care. The elasticity of fingernails depends on the water storage capacity of the nail keratin. Panthenol can substantially increase the water storage capacity of nails and by this mechanism the flexibility and stability of nails are improved. Panthenol is added to the water phase and is stable to heat during manufacturing (up to 75°C), although prolonged heat should be avoided. It is stable in the pH range from 4.0 to 7.5 (optimum pH 6.0). The above-mentioned panthenol product forms are miscible with water, alcohol, propylene glycol and glycerin, but do not mix with fats or mineral oils. Also called pyridoxine, occurs widely in foods like wholemeal bread, bananas, yeast extract, nuts, liver and pulses. Vitamin B6 plays a role in the metabolism of protein, carbohydrates and fats, the production of neurotransmitters and the formation of nicotinic acid. It is vital for maintaining a healthy nervous system, skin, muscles and blood. One of the central roles of this vitamin is in protein metabolism where it helps regulate the balance of amino acids in the body. It is also closely involved in hormone production. Severe deficiency is rare, but surveys have revealed that marginal deficiency might be quite common. The need for this vitamin increases during pregnancy and lactation due to Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine pure crystalline powder or pyridoxine hydrochloride forms) acts as a coenzyme in amino acid metabolism and maintains healthy skin; it also controls oily skin. Also called D-biotin, is one of the more recently discovered vitamins. It belongs to the group of B vitamins and is found in most foods in small amounts. The richest sources are yeast, liver and kidney. Egg yolk, soybeans, nuts and cereals are also good sources. Biotin is found in most feedstuffs because its bioavailability is low it is added to most animal feeds to improve reproductive functions and general health. There are eight different forms of biotin, but only one, D-biotin, has full vitamin activity. It is vital for the production of energy from carbohydrates and fats, and for healthy skin and hair. It forms part of several enzyme systems and is necessary for normal growth and body function. It plays a key role in carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism. Human biotin deficiency is extremely rare. Deficiency symptoms include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, glossitis, pallor, mental depression, dry scaly dermatitis and, after long-lasting, severe biotin deficiency, hair loss (alopecia). Biotin is extremely important in animal production. Spontaneous biotin deficiency has led to heavy losses in certain livestock species. Consequently, biotin is added to feed mixes for poultry, pigs and fish in order to ensure optimal growth, healthy skin and bones and efficient reproduction. New research by DSM Nutritional Products has led to findings for topically applied D-biotin (coenzyme R). Furthermore, it has been shown that vitamin C has a boosting effect on the D-biotin activity on the skin. D-biotin can be used in the following applications: anti-aging products because it reduces wrinkles and smoothes the skin surface; anti-age-spot treatments, because it lightens age-spots and therefore evens skin tone; skin protection and regeneration products, because it enhances the recovery of skin-barrier damage. Other applications are also possible, such as lip care, hair care, nail care, men's care, decorative cosmetics, etc. Folic acid belongs to the group of B vitamins and is found primarily in leafy green vegetables, oranges, fortified cereals, wholemeal bread, liver and potatoes. Folic acid was the Folic acid is vital for healthy blood cells, the formation of new body cells and for healthy growth. It plays an important role in the metabolism of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), the carriers of genetic information in all living things. Folic acid deficiency may be the consequence of disease or treatment with certain drugs and may also occur during pregnancy. Abnormalities in the production of blood cells are the main clinical sign of deficiency. The hematological changes associated with folic acid deficiency are similar to those encountered in vitamin B12 deficiency, and patients are often deficient in both vitamins. Folic acid reduces the risk of neural tube birth defects when consumed in adequate amounts by women before and during early pregnancy. For this reason, the enrichment of cereal products with folic acid is compulsory in the USA. Folic acid is easily destroyed during prolonged storage and up to 50% can be lost during cooking. In animals, folic acid deficiency results in anaemia and impaired reproduction, and in poultry with bad feathering and reduced laying performance and hatchability. Very few cosmetic products (e.g. lip glosses) include folic acid in their formulations. It may have skin repair applications because it plays a role in the production of DNA and RNA ( With regard to other B-group vitamins, such as vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin), to our knowledge no cosmetic applications have been described in literature. Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is found in citrus fruits, blackcurrants, sweet peppers, parsley, cauliflower, potatoes, sweet potatoes, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, strawberries, guava and mango. The mass equivalents of 1 IU for vitamin C is the biological equivalent of 50 Vitamin C is important for the production of collagen, connective tissue and protein fibres that give strength to our teeth and gums, muscles, blood vessels and skin. In the immune The early symptoms of vitamin C deficiency are fatigue, lassitude, loss of appetite, drowsiness and insomnia, feeling run-down, irritability and low resistance to infections. Severe deficiency causes a weakening of these tissues (scurvy), resulting in capillary bleeding. Fish, like humans, are dependent on a vitamin C supply via the diet. The other food-producing animals are able to synthesize vitamin C themselves. However, under conditions of stress, this production may not be sufficient to support optimum health and performance. Several benefits of ascorbic acid topical application have been described. However, due to its pure stability in aqueous systems, until the last years these benefits were not exploited by the cosmetics industry on a large scale. Some derivatives of vitamin C, e.g. sodium ascorbyl phosphate, have the benefit of being stable in cosmetic formulations and exerting the favourable effects of vitamin C when applied on the skin. The most commonly used are salts of ascorbic acid: sodium or magnesium ascorbate, sodium or magnesium ascorbyl phosphate, ascorbyl glucoside and ascorbyl palmitate. One of the most useful is sodium ascorbyl phosphate (SAP); some major cosmetic activities of this compound are described briefly below. It is the sodium salt of the monophosphate ester of ascorbic acid. It is a white powder, easily soluble in water to concentrations up to 50%. In contrast to ascorbic acid, SAP is stable in aqueous solutions at a pH above 6.5. SAP can be used in skin-care products to prevent the formation of free radicals and to increase the firmness of the skin. Furthermore, SAP has skin lightening activities and inhibits the growth of harmful oral bacteria. SAP is also ideal in combination with vitamin E acetate to enhance the protection of sun-care products. Sodium ascorbyl phosphate alleviates oxidative stress to the skin. Lipid peroxidation induced by UV-A light leads to the formation of peroxide radicals along the side-chains of polyunsaturated fatty acids in lipids. A single initiating event can lead to many cycles of peroxidation, leading in turn to breakdown products that can damage DNA or protein. A study conducted by DSM Nutritional Products on 20 healthy volunteers showed that the application of a cream containing SAP prevents the formation of UV-A-light-induced Dermatologists have long observed that skin fibroblasts synthesize less collagen as they age. Vitamin C can counteract this decline in two ways. It is an essential cofactor in the hydroxylation of lysine and proline, which contribute to the stability of collagen. It also stimulates the synthesis of collagen, thus increasing skin firmness. Regular skin-treatment with 3% SAP leads to significantly firmer skin. Ascorbic acid plays an important role in the regeneration of vitamin E from vitamin E radical. This recycling effect has been specifically shown in skin. Therefore, sun-care products should ideally combine vitamin E acetate and sodium ascorbyl phosphate to protect the skin from harmful UV irradiation. To test this, a new method was developed by Ascorbic acid and its derivatives are widely used in skin-lightening products and skin-care formulations which prevent and attenuate age spots. Daily teeth brushing is important but often not enough alone to prevent caries, gingivitis and periodontitis. Bacterial infections are the main cause of dental problems. Traditional toothpaste formulations use rather strong anti-bacterial agents, which are not well accepted by consumers. Furthermore, there is a lack of effective natural substances which inactivate oral bacteria and which are stable in oral-care formulations. SAP is the ideal ingredient for oral-care products because it inhibits the growth of several oral bacteria, such as The following recommendations should be followed when formulating with SAP: it is compatible with almost all cosmetic ingredients (check stability with acrylic acid thickeners and some ionic emulsifiers); use always chelating agents (e.g. disodium EDTA); maintain the formulation at a pH above 6.8; dissolve SAP in water and add it to an emulsion as an aqueous solution below 35–40 °C. Very good stability levels can be achieved by keeping the pH at 6.8. While the content remains essentially unchanged at room temperature, a slight decrease can be observed at 43 °C. Finished products should therefore be stored at temperatures below 25 °C. Polyunsaturated fats are known as essential fats. Like vitamins they are essential for life, they cannot be made in the body and must be obtained from the diet. These good fats have actually been shown to counter the effects of “bad” fats in our blood and are important for maintaining good health of our hearts, cells and nervous systems. In contrast to saturated and mono-unsaturated fatty acids, PUFAs have at least two double bonds, a feature which crucially affects their structural, physical and chemical properties.  PUFAs are just as essential as vitamins, mineral salts and proteins. Omega-6 oils enhance the barrier function of the skin and are therefore ideal for cosmetic products designed to combat dry and scaly skin. When applied topically, unsaturated fatty acids, as contained for example in borage and evening primrose oil (both especially rich in gamma-linolenic acid (GLA)), are characterized by many positive effects. Studies conducted in recent years have revealed that although water plays an important role in keeping the skin moist and supple, the ability of the top layers of the skin (stratum corneum) to resist moisture loss depends on the presence of certain long-chain polyunsaturated lipids known as essential fatty acids (EFA). These lipids classified as Omega-3 and Omega-6 lipids cannot be synthesized by the body, although when topically applied, they can be metabolized in the skin and directly incorporated into the structural lipids of the epidermis (ceramides): the building blocks of the water barrier of the stratum corneum. Evening primrose oil and borage oil (the latter also known as starflower oil) are rich sources of Omega-6 lipids and in particular GLA. Insignificant levels of GLA are detected in mammalian skin, because the epidermis lacks the enzymes necessary to convert linoleic acid into GLA. Thus, there is a need to provide the body with products containing this material. Topical application of borage oil and evening primrose oil significantly increases the level of GLA in the stratum corneum. The structure and properties of the cell membranes and lamellar skin lipids depend greatly on the type and composition of the phospholipids or ceramides forming the double lipid layers. If only saturated fatty acids are present, stiff and rigid cell membranes or skin lipids are formed. In contrast to this, phospholipids and ceramides with a high content of unsaturated fatty acids, such as linoleic acid or GLA, form structures which are more mobile and flexible. The result is an increase in the elasticity of the skin since unsaturated fatty acids are incorporated in the cell membranes of the skin. PUFA-nourished skin looks younger and smoother. PUFA oils have to be added to the oily phase of an emulsion and can be heated for a short time up to 75 °C. When formulating with PUFAoils, one should add antioxidants (e.g. tocopherol, BHT) to prevent them from decomposing in the formulation over time. It is also recommendable to add a chelating agent (e.g. EDTA) and to avoid contact with oxygen. PUFA oils can be used in skin-care products against dry skin, as well as in baby-care cosmetics, soaps, cleansers and shampoos.