Hydrochars are materials with a promising future, as their high carbon content and porosity renders them suitable for uses including peat substitutes, soil remediation and carbon adsorbent precursors. Combining hydrothermal carbonization and pyrolysis offers the prospect to provide advanced materials with a higher porosity and carbon content. This approach would mitigate drawbacks associated to hydrochars, including phytotoxicity. This research studied the influence of pyrolysis temperature and heating time on the resulting properties of chars made from hydrothermal carbonization of biomass wastes at 200 °C for 4 h and compared them to biochars that had not received any prior hydrothermal carbonization. Interestingly, hydrochar followed by pyrolysis was able to result in phytostimulation, while, when only pyrolysis was carried out, phytotoxicity was eliminated, but no phytostimulant effect was observed. In addition, the results indicated that the higher and longer the pyrolysis temperature (from 350 to 550 °C) and duration time (from 1 to 5 h), respectively, the more microporosity was generated, while phytotoxicity was reduced. In addition, aromaticity and thermal stability significantly increased with pyrolysis treatment. Consequently, hydrochars improve their properties and offer more potential for environmental applications after a pyrolysis post-treatment.Much research has been conducted in the last years to upgrade organic waste materials via thermo-chemical processes and use these materials (chars) as soil amendments with multiple purposes, chiefly, plant yield, soil remediation and/or carbon sequestration. Most of the research to date has been undertaken in biochar, the solid product of slow pyrolysis, with much less research available in alternative areas such as torrefaction ( Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) or wet pyrolysis is a physicochemical process used to generate chars (hydrochars) from organic feedstocks. It consists in the combined application of moderate temperature (200–300 °C) and high pressure (2–10 MPa) in the absence of oxygen and using subcritical water as media ( However, phyotoxicity and low carbon stability of some hydrochars can limit their use ( It would be desirable to have cost-efficient and effective methods to remove potential pollutants from hydrochars. However, the body of literature available on this topic is modest. Washing and aging/aeration have been used to improve hydrochars’ properties ( In order to increase potential uses of hydrochars we propose to apply slow pyrolysis downstream to hydrothermal carbonization. This could possibly increase porosity and carbon content, while reducing the phytotoxicity potentially associated with hydrochars. While the idea of combining hydrothermal carbonization and pyrolysis is not new ( In view of the above-mentioned considerations, the scope of this research is to determine the influence of pyrolysis temperature and duration time on the properties of hydrochars compared to biochars obtained by direct slow pyrolysis. To do so, hydrochar obtained by HTC of waste biomass was pyrolyzed at two different temperatures (350 and 500 °C) and three times (1, 3 and 5 h), and testing was conducted to determine a variety of properties, relevant for the use of chars as soil amendment, growing media, cheap adsorbent or fuel, namely pH, electrical conductivity, electrochemical potential, elemental composition, porosity and phytotoxicity. In contrast, with the scant literature available on the topic, we included an additional comparison with biochars prepared from the same feedstock. This would allow determining which process (hydrothermal carbonization + pyrolysis) versus pyrolysis permit to provide chars with more favorable characteristics. The feedstock used in this research was a waste biomass (WB) from parks and gardens in Náquera (Valencia, Spain) provided by Ingelia. WB was treated by HTC at 200 °C for 4 h in Ingelia’s Náquera plant, generating a sample denominated HWB. HWB sample was further treated via pyrolysis at 350 °C and 550 °C during 1, 3 and 5 h leading to samples designated H-XXX/Y, being XXX the temperature of pyrolysis in For comparison purposes, WB samples that had not gone through HTC process were pyrolyzed for 5 h at 350 °C and 550 °C leading to two biochars designated as B-350/5 and B-550/5 respectively. Preparation of these samples followed the same procedure used on the pyrolysis of HWB ( Chars prepared by pyrolysis of hydrochar or waste biomass were characterized as follows: Carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur content were determined by dry combustion using a LECO CHNS 932 Analyzer. Oxygen was obtained by difference as 100%-(%C + %H + %N + %S + %Ash). Atomic ratios (H/C) and (O/C) were also determined. The Higher heating value (HHV) was estimated according to the formula proposed by Thermogravimetric analysis was performed using a Labsys Setaram TGA analyzer. Twenty mg of each sample were heated at a rate of 15 °C/min up to 850 °C using hot air at a 30 mL/min flow. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy was performed using a Bruker Vector 22 analyzer along with Bruker OPUS software suite, using 0.1 mg of sample and 0.25 g of KBr as binding agent. Organic carbon (C pH, electrical conductivity (EC) and redox potential (Eh) were determined on aqueous solutions at a concentration of 4 g/L of sample in distilled water. pH value was measured using a Crison micro pH 2000. EC was measured using a Crison 222 conductivimeter and Eh Nitrogen isotherms and BET surface area (S Phytotoxicity was evaluated using Zucconi test (  The pH of chars was alkaline and increased with increasing pyrolysis temperature due to ash enrichment and polymerization/condensation reactions. Different authors ( EC could be used as an indicative parameter of dissolved salts content in samples. Data from Biochar obtained by pyrolysis of biomass has received much attention in the last years as a green-cost effective adsorbent for removal and/or immobilization of metals from water and soils ( The content on organic carbon oxidised with potassium dichromate (Coxi) shown in  Related to H/C and O/C evolution during HTC and/or pyrolsysis, FTIR analysis of samples was performed. Results of derivative thermogravimetry (DTG) shown on We can conclude that chars obtained after post-pyrolysis of hydrochar were more chemically and thermally stable than the original hydrochar and with lower salt content than biochars. As chemical and thermal stability increase, the potential applications of chars as carbon materials precursors or for soil carbon sequestration increases. Mercury porosimetry and nitrogen isotherms analyses results are summarized in The increase in porosity as both, pyrolysis temperature and pyrolysis time, increase is likely caused by the growth of existing pores and the formation of new micropores due to the reaction of carbon with carbon dioxide or water vapor, generating volatile carbon contents, which are evolved from the material ( Germination indexes presented in Overall the results of this study indicate that pyrolysis could improve some properties of hydrochar obtained by hydrothermal carbonization of waste biomass. Micro- and meso-porosity of hydrochar increases with pyrolysis. The higher temperature and longer the pyrolysis, the more microporosity was observed indicating than hydrochars can be precursors of activated carbons and/or used for environmental remediation. Thermogravimetric, FTIR and elemental analyses indicate that chars obtained by HTC followed by pyrolysis tend to have a higher chemical stability and reduced salt contents when compared to the two biochars prepared by direct pyrolysis, with positive implications when used as fuel, soil amendment or as material in growing media. Hydrochar from biomass waste followed by pyrolysis was able to result in phytostimulation, while, when only pyrolysis was carried out, phytotoxicity was eliminated, but no phytostimulant effect was observed. Consequently, chars obtained by hydrothermal carbonization followed by pyrolysis at low temperature were interesting materials for soil remediation applications or as part of growing media. Our study is a proof of concept, which shows that phytotoxicity in hydrochars can be mitigated by a further thermal treatment step. Further studies need to be conducted in order to optimize the interplay between obtaining hydrochars with suitable conditions without a significant increase in energy consumption and, consequently, in cost. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors wish to thank Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: