The purpose of this study was to investigate mechanical properties, microstructure and sintering behavior of ultrafine grained Ti5Si3-TiC composite synthesized by mechanically activated self-propagating high-temperature synthesis method. For this purpose, the composite was sintered at 1450 °C at constant pressure of 50 MPa and reached to 97% of theoretical density by spark plasma sintering technique. The XRD pattern of the sintered sample is composed of the same peaks as the synthesized sample which means that the composite is stable at high temperature. The microstructure analyses illustrate that the composite retained its fine microstructure during the sintering process. The results also show that the amount of C atoms in the structure of titanium silicide slightly increased during the sintering process. The Young’s modulus and nanohardness of the composite reached 281 ± 15.5 GPa and 16.6 ± 0.8 GPa, respectively. In addition, Vickers indentation test results show that the composite possesses hardness and fracture toughness of 13.2 ± 0.6 GPa and 4.7 ± 0.1 MPa.m1/2, respectively. Formation of microstructure with low microcracks and homogenous distribution of TiC through the matrix are responsible for relative high mechanical properties of the composite. The crack deflection is observed as the main toughening mechanism.Silicides and silicides-based materials have been considered as a capable candidate for high-temperature structural application However, the application of Ti Making composite with a ceramic compound is an alternate approach to improve the fracture toughness of the titanium silicide In addition high thermal expansion anisotropy in the Ti The aim of this study is to investigate the mechanical properties, microstructure and sintering behavior of ultrafine grained Ti Ti, Si and C powders in a Ti:Si:C mole ratio of 5:3:1 were milled by a planetary ball mill unit with stainless steel cup and balls for 2 h under protective Ar atmosphere. The ball-to-powder weight ratio (BPR) of 10:1 and rotation speed of 250 rpm were used during the milling. The powders were compacted by the uniaxial press at a pressure of 250 MPa to the pellet and transferred to a combustion reactor. The synthesis process conducted under Pure Ar atmosphere. The synthesized samples were ground by pestle and mortal. The density of synthesized powders was measured by gas pycnometer and considered as theoretical density. The powders were put in a graphite die (height of 30 mm and diameter of 32 mm) and placed in the spark plasma sintering apparatus (20 T-10, China) under vacuum atmosphere. The graphite plungers with height of 30 mm and diameter of 30 mm as well as graphite spacers with height of 40 mm and diameter of 50 mm were used. The graphite foil was employed to avoid adhesion of powders to die and temperature was measured by the pyrometer. The constant pressure of 50 MPa was applied to die during the sintering process. The heating rate about 60 °C/min used for the process. Then the sintered sample was polished using 1000-grit SiC. In order to remove residual stress, the sample was annealed in furnace under Ar atmosphere at 700 °C for 30 min. The nanoindentation test was employed to measure Young’s modulus and nanohardness of the sample. The fused silica with known Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio was used to calibrate tip area function. A Berkovich diamond tip was used as an indenter and the standard analysis suggested by Oliver and Pharr The XRD patterns of as-received, milled powders and synthesized samples are shown in The XRD pattern of the synthesized sample shows that in situ Ti The displacement and displacement rate as a function of temperature during sintering of the composite are shown in It has been reported that the density of pressureless sintered Ti The XRD pattern of the sintered sample ( Thus the combination of MASHS and SPS decreases the sintering temperature and limits grain growth during the sintering. The grain size reduction is an effective way for improving mechanical properties of the ceramic-based composites. Therefore, combining MASHS and SPS is a suitable method to achieve a dense ceramic-based composite with fine microstructure. Detailed study on XRD patterns of synthesized and sintered samples represents that Ti As it was mentioned dissolution of C atoms in the crystal structure of the titanium silicide reduces the thermal expansion anisotropy along a- and c-axes of Ti The density of the sintered sample is measured by the Archimedes method and value of 4.26 g/cm The nanoindentation test was used to measure Young’s modulus and nanohardness of the composite. The load-displacement curves of the composite are shown in The hardness and fracture toughness of the composite were measured by Vickers indentation method. The crack emanated from the corner of the indenter was used to evaluate the fracture toughness of the composite. According to c/a ≥ 2.5 the crack considered as radial-median The value of hardness and fracture toughness of the TiC-Ti  The mechanical properties, microstructure and sintering behavior of Ti The authors thank the