In this work, bioleaching and dissolution processes of chalcopyrite from three different regions were investigated and compared mainly by leaching experiments, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electrochemical analysis. Hall effect experiments showed that one (chalcopyrite A) belonged to p-type chalcopyrite whose carrier concentrations were high, while the other two (chalcopyrite B and C) were both n-type chalcopyrite whose carrier concentrations were low. A remarkably higher copper extraction of p-type chalcopyrite could be achieved during bioleaching by L. ferriphilum compared with n-type chalcopyrite. Redox potential in bioleaching of p-type chalcopyrite can be maintained at the appropriate range (about 380–480mV vs. Ag/AgCl) for a longer period of time. Acid consumption in bioleaching of p-type chalcopyrite was significantly lower than that of n-type chalcopyrite. SEM analysis indicated that p-type chalcopyrite was more easily corroded by microorganism than n-type chalcopyrite. XPS analysis revealed that monosulfide (S2−), disulfide (S2
                     2−), polysulfide (Sn
                     2−) and sulfate (SO4
                     2−) were the main intermediate species during bioleaching of both p-type and n-type chalcopyrite. Electrochemical analysis showed that the electrochemical dissolution processes of p-type and n-type chalcopyrite were similar, while the conductivity and oxidation-reduction rate of p-type chalcopyrite was significantly higher than those of n-type chalcopyrite, thus resulting in significant higher electrochemical dissolution kinetics and copper extraction. This work is potentially useful in explaining the inconsistences in chalcopyrite hydrometallurgy.With the depletion of copper resource and growth of copper demand of the world, economic and efficient technology in processing low-grade copper ores are required to be developed. Bio-hydrometallurgy is considered as a promising technology in processing low-grade and complex copper. It has been successfully applied in the extraction of secondary sulphide minerals such as chalcocite ( Many researchers have been striving to study the mechanisms of chalcopyrite bioleaching and enhance its dissolution kinetics. They proposed that the dissolution process of chalcopyrite in bioleaching was mainly hindered by the passivation layer formed on mineral surface. However, the detailed dissolution and passivation mechanism are still under debate so far because different researchers obtained different conclusions ( Therefore, bioleaching and dissolution processes of chalcopyrite from three different regions were investigated and compared in the present work. This work would be potentially useful in explaining the inconsistences in hydrometallurgy of chalcopyrite. Chalcopyrite samples from three different regions were designated as chalcopyrite A, B and C. They were obtained from the Chambishi Copper Mine of Zambia, Hunan Province of China and Guangxi Province of China, respectively. XRD ( Hall effects test was used to analyze the semiconductor properties of chalcopyrite samples and the analytical results are presented in  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was implemented with the model of ESCALAB 250Xi, and the spectra were recorded at the constant pass energy of 20   An electrochemical analysis was carried out to further interpret the differences of dissolution processes. Tafel test ( Potentiostatic polarization experiments ( Based on the above results, a model of dissolution mechanism of different chalcopyrite samples was proposed in A remarkably higher copper extraction and low acid consumption of p-type chalcopyrite with high carrier concentrations could be achieved during bioleaching by This work was supported by the