Fluorination of Y2O3 by NH4HF2 to obtain pure YF3 is studied in this work by observing the mass changes at room temperature and by employing TGA and DTA at higher temperatures, and observing the subsequent phase changes by X-ray diffraction. Fluorination begins at room temperature with the formation of (NH4)3Y2F9 and NH4F, and continues with the later further fluorinating any leftover Y2O3 to ammonium yttrium fluorides with the evolution of NH3. Similarly, on heating a mixture of Y2O3 and NH4HF2, the reaction proceeds sequentially through the formation of (NH4)3Y2F9, NH4Y2F7 and finally YF3. Any Y2O3 still remaining reacts with YF3 to form yttrium oxyfluorides, which continue as impurity. Substantial evaporation of NH4HF2 is possible even before it could participate in the reaction. This disturbs the stoichiometry of the charge causing oxygen to remain in final YF3. The compound reported in literature as YF3·1.5NH3 appears to be NH4Y2F7.Metallothermic reduction of rare-earth oxides results in rare-earths which contain substantial amount of oxygen Fluorination of rare earth oxides can be done using fluorine gas (F It is known in the literature NH Kalinnikov et al. Besides being used for fluorinating rare earth oxides, NH Yttrium oxide (Y Samples of NH Simultaneous thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) – differential thermal analysis (DTA) curves for NH Phase identification was carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in an Inel-make unit (model MPD) with Cu-K All the samples became reasonably warm during mixing of the powders, alluding to the occurrence of an exothermic chemical reaction even at room temperature. Another interesting observation was made in a few sealed bags containing the samples. After placing the samples, these bags were completely deflated to remove the air inside and the seals were closed. Some of the bags became inflated after some time, thereby indicating that the reaction had a gaseous product. Smell of ammonia could be observed from some of the bags. Appreciable mass changes were also observed with time even at room temperature ( The samples were analysed by XRD ( However, the relative intensities of some of the peaks of (NH If material balance for the following reaction the mass loss on complete consumption of NH in samples 3NH NH If the moisture pickup data by the product NH However, neither the excess reactant NH It could thus be concluded that NH To further confirm that NH The occurrence of a reaction between Y XRD patterns of NH Similarly, only (NH Before discussing the results further, it may be appropriate to mention here that the sensitivity of the home-made DTA unit was inferior as compared to that of the professionally made simultaneous TGA–DTA unit. As mentioned earlier, the increase in temperature upto 70 According to thermodynamic data, YF  The curves obtained by simultaneous TGA–DTA of NH Melting point of NH The first DTA peaks of all the samples ( The second DTA peaks were exothermic. These began at the tips of the first peaks and overlapped with the third peaks as well in all the samples and thus were not very apparent. However, as observed from the DTG curves ( The third DTA peaks ( When the DTA of isolated (NH To help in assessing the events occurring beyond the third peaks obtained in the simultaneous TGA–DTA unit (  It is not clear whether the evaporating species is NH As the temperature was increased further, two events appeared to be occurring, one endothermic (fifth peaks) and the other exothermic (sixth peaks) ( When the DTA of isolated NH The sixth and exothermic peaks appear to be occurring due to the reaction between YF Since reaction After the runs of heating 7.5–9NH When there is no mass change in a sample, the value of DTG should be observed as zero. Horizontal lines have been drawn in the DTG curves in Wang et al. A few mixtures having different amounts of NH The heating of NH Similarly, 3NH It is clear from the earlier discussions that the formation of YF It may now be appropriate to compare NH It may be appropriate to mention here that, as fluorination of yttrium oxide using NH Russo and Haendler According to JCPDS database, the XRD patterns of NH  Fluorination of Y Reaction of NH In other words, during the reaction of NH The reaction between (NH NH The decomposition temperatures of (NH If Y No indication of the existence of ammonium yttrio-oxyfluorides (NH YF For obtaining oxygen-free YF