A depth-sensitive X-ray diffraction technique has been developed with the aim of studying microstructural modifications in inhomogeneous polycrystalline materials. In that method, diffraction profiles are measured at different X-ray energies varied by small steps. X-rays at higher energies probe deeper layers of material. Depth-resolved structural information is retrieved by comparing energy-dependent diffraction profiles. The method provides non-destructive depth profiling of the preferred orientation, grain size, microstrain fluctuations and residual strains. This technique is applied to the characterization of seashells. Similarly, energy-variable X-ray diffraction can be used for the non-destructive characterization of different laminated structures and composite materials.The study of increasingly complex materials and multilayered structures requires the development of X-ray diffraction techniques able to determine the three-dimensional distribution of structural characteristics in inhomogeneous systems. Two-dimensional mapping is under intensive development on synchrotron beam lines through X-ray microscopy In order to achieve depth profiling within a polycrystalline sample, the effective X-ray penetration depth must be changed. At fixed energy, the X-ray penetration depth depends on the entrance angle between the incident beam and the sample surface. This is used in the “scattering vector method” Alternatively, the X-ray penetration depth can be varied by small steps by accurately tuning the X-ray energy Diffraction measurements were carried out at the 5BMD beam line of the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory. We used monochromatic radiation with the energy, Energy-variable X-ray diffraction provides non-destructive profiling of structural parameters based on the relationship between the X-ray energy, In order to illustrate the capabilities of the energy-variable diffraction, we applied it to the characterization of seashells, keeping in mind that seashells possess complicated microstructures which are also depth-dependent The energy range, Energy-variable diffraction, in principle, enables phase analysis with depth resolution. In our shells only the single aragonite phase was observed in the shell interior. No calcite phase was found in the investigated shells. However, aragonite blocks can be differently packed within sub-layers, producing a variety of microstructures and resulting in the re-distribution of the diffraction intensity between diffraction peaks and in some modifications of the shapes of diffraction profiles. X-ray diffraction patterns taken from the nacre layer (see The preferred orientation with depth resolution can be deduced from the diffraction intensity ratios, Uniaxial preferred orientation can be treated with the Dollace–March approach In layered structures the March parameter, Experimental data were fitted by substituting the trial The depth-dependent function, Energy-dependent diffraction profiles can be used in order to extract the depth dependences of the grain size and microstrain fluctuations. For this purpose, the measured profiles were decomposed onto the Lorentzian and Gaussian contributions. Practically, the (0 In our case of the [0 In the specific sample,the lamellae are around 300 nm thick. The It should be stressed that our method (like every X-ray diffraction method) provides the material parameters, The averaged microstrain fluctuations, The procedure of microstrain determination was tested with a 1 μm thick Al film deposited by the electron beam technique on the quartz crystal mentioned above. Due to the small thickness of the Al layer (as compared with the X-ray penetration depth at the lowest energy used, The averaged microstrain fluctuations, Important information on the shell’s strain (stress) state can be obtained by measuring the diffraction peak positions (2 The first correction, The second correction, The third correction, An example of the dependence thus obtained, We have developed energy-variable X-ray diffraction in order to non-destructively measure the spatial distributions of microstructural characteristics in inhomogeneous polycrystalline materials. It was shown that this approach is well suited for synchrotron beam lines and helps to extract depth-resolved structural parameters from energy-dependent X-ray diffraction data. By using synchrotron radiation from third-generation synchrotron sources the depth profiling can be performed to a depth of hundreds of microns. The minimal step depends on the material investigated and, from the energy point of view, can be reduced below 100 nm. We have shown that the diffraction intensities measured allow us to extract the depth-dependent preferred orientation, while the shapes of the diffraction profiles provide information on the depth-dependent grain size and averaged microstrain fluctuations. Besides that, the diffraction peak positions are influenced by depth-dependent residual strains. Application of this technique to seashells allowed us to characterize the microstructural evolution in the nacre layer. Individual diffraction profiles were treated in the course of the line profile analysis by utilizing Voigt functions. We found that the nacre layer in the investigated specimens of the The lamellae thickness, The presence of thick well-ordered lamellae leads to the enhancement of the (0 Information on depth-resolved residual strains (stresses) can be retrieved from the energy-dependent diffraction peak positions. We indicate that this treatment requires a proper correction procedure that takes account of the experimental geometry and sample curvature. The This work was performed at the DuPont-Northwestern-Dow Collaborative Access Team (DND-CAT) Synchrotron Research Center located at Sector 5 of the Advanced Photon Source. DND-CAT is supported by the E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co., the Dow Chemical Company, the US National Science Foundation through grant DMR-9304725, and the State of Illinois through the Department of Commerce and the Board of Higher Education grant IBHE HECA NWU 96. Use of the Advanced Photon Source was supported by the US Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Office of Energy Research, under contract no. W-31-102-Eng-38. The technical support of J. Kulpin and A. Philippides (DND-CAT) is gratefully acknowledged. We thank D. Shaham (Technion) for taking the SEM micrographs of the seashell specimens, and B. Pokroy (Technion) for his help in part of synchrotron measurements. One of the authors (E.Z.) would like to thank the Fund for the Promotion of Research at Technion for partial financial support.