Background
                  Tibial pilon injuries are a complex group of fractures, whose classification and radiological assessment has been under constant reform. Till date, there is no universally accepted classification system.
               
                  Objective
                  To determine the interobserver agreement and intraobserver reproducibility of Ruedi and Allgower, AO, and Topliss et al. classification systems for tibial pilon fractures, with CT scans.
               
                  Method
                  Forty-seven CT scans of tibial pilon fractures were evaluated independently by 5 orthopaedic surgeons. Fractures were classified according to Ruedi and Allgower, AO and Topliss et al. types. Assessment was done on two occasions, eight weeks apart.
               
                  Results
                  The interobserver reliability and intraobserver reproducibility for Ruedi and Allgower, AO and Topliss et al. classifications showed only moderate agreement. The interobserver agreement was dependent on the familiarity and specificity of the classification system.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Currently used classification systems for tibial pilon fracture have moderate interobserver and intraobserver agreements, even with the help of CT scans. Therefore Tibial pilon fracture classification still remains largely undetermined.Classification systems are useful in research and clinical practices as it provides a common mode of communication and evaluation. They also form a comparison and prognosis assessment tool. Hence classification systems should be reliable and reproducible with a consistently substantial level of agreement. Pilon fracture classification has been a subject of constant review and reform by orthopaedic surgeons Classification systems routinely used in clinical practice include Ruedi and Allgower The aim of the current study was to assess the interobserver agreement and intraobserver reproducibility of Ruedi and Allgower, AO, and Topliss et al. classification systems for tibial pilon fractures, utilising CT scans. Forty-seven CT scans of tibial pilon fractures were identified using the hospital coding system, by the first author (MR). All the scans were done as part of normal treatment and were not altered for the purpose of this study. Re-fractures, paediatric fractures and fractures with metalwork were excluded during the selection process by the first author. The scans were assigned a study number and all identifiable data (other than labels indicating the right and left sides) was obscured. Five observers comprising of three orthopaedic consultants (PM, AH, and AP) and two specialist registrars (AB and AS) then reviewed these scans. The observers were blinded to the treatment of these injuries. Published material relating to these classification systems (Ruedi and Allgower The kappa coefficient for interobserver reliability and intraobserver reproducibility was calculated with the help of Statsdirect software (Statsdirect Ltd., United Kingdom). Kappa coefficient ( The kappa coefficient values ( Ruedi and Allgower classification ( Generalised kappa coefficient values for multiobserver agreement of Ruedi and Allgower, AO and Topliss et al. classification systems based on CT scan was as follows Ruedi and Allgower system: AO type: AO group: Topliss family: Topliss types: Three observers repeated the classification. Reproducibility was best for AO type followed by Ruedi and Allgower and Topliss family ( Overall the agreement was best with AO type followed by Ruedi and Allgower groups. Three out of 5 observers found AO system to be the simplest followed by Ruedi and Allgower and Topliss. Remaining 2 observers preferred Ruedi and Allgower over the other two systems due to simplicity. An ideal fracture classification system as described by Martin et al. The decision to use CT scan in this study was based on two reasons. Firstly, to delineate the fracture better. Most of the previous systems have shown moderate interobserver and intraobserver agreements in the classification of pilon fractures ( Topliss et al. showed moderate to substantial agreement with Topliss classification and moderate agreement with AO and Ruedi and Allgower classification. In our series it was moderate with all the three systems, though agreement was better with the Ruedi and Allgower and AO systems as compared to Topliss system. This difference is due to twofold reasons. Firstly, AO and Ruedi and Allgower systems were more familiar than the Topliss et al. system to all the observers in our study, which could be a source for bias. Hence interobserver agreement depends on the familiarity of the classification system, as also noticed in the Topliss et al. study Also one of the concerns with Topliss system is difficulty in delineating fracture patterns to either sagittal or coronal families, as more than a third of the pilon injuries were found to have fracture lines in diagonal planes creating confusion with this system. However interobserver agreement improved with experience. Compared to AO and Ruedi and Allgower classification, Topliss et al. classification demonstrates fracture anatomy better. Pilon fractures are among the most complex intraarticular injuries, often secondary to high energy mechanisms. One of the reasons for difficult interpretation of articular fragments or moderate agreement in the classification systems is due to the fact that the articular segments can be identified precisely only during surgery. Though CT scans identify articular fragments better than radiographs, they still remain largely underestimated, mainly due to the severe comminution. Hence existing classification systems for pilon fractures have a limited reliability and reproducibility, even with the help of CT scans. This limits their role in clinical decision making as well as research purposes Currently used classification systems (Ruedi and Allgower, AO and Topliss et al.) for pilon fractures have moderate agreement even with the help of CT scan. If a classification system has to be useful in clinical and research practices, it has to provide substantial level of agreement consistently, which has not been observed with these classification systems. Therefore classification of pilon fractures still remains largely undetermined. There are no conflicts of interests with any of the authors involved in this study.