Polyacrylamide grafted oatmeal (OAT-g-PAM) was synthesized by conventional method. The grafting of the PAM chains on the biomaterial backbone was confirmed through intrinsic viscosity study, FTIR spectroscopy, elemental analysis (C, H, N, S and O), SEM morphology and TGA study. The intrinsic viscosity of oatmeal appreciably improved on grafting of PAM chains, thus resulting grafted product with potential application as superior viscosifier. Further, flocculation efficacy of the graft copolymer was studied in coal fine suspension, kaolin suspension, iron-ore suspension and then in municipal wastewater through ‘jar test’ procedure.One key factor that will continue to influence the development of nations in 21st century is the availability of fresh water. Fresh water is essential for man, agriculture as well as industry. The standard of living of a country is directly influenced by the fresh water availability as well as cost of its procurement. Water once used by man or industry, leads to the formation of wastewater. The treatment of wastewater not only results in more usage of water but also eliminates the possibility of depletion of water resources of the receiving water body. Treatment of wastewater is getting more and more priority in economical development owing to its limited availability. Often the industrial operation in a particular location critically depends on the ability to treat wastewater, thus ensuring minimum damage to ecology. Among the various technologies available to treat wastewater, flocculation is most suitable as it involves nominal instrumentation as compared to other processes. Flocculation is a physical process of agglomeration of colloidal particles, accelerated by presence of chemical agents called flocculants. Grafted polysaccharides can form network between large number of colloidal particles, thus leading to better floc formation. Polysaccharides are widely applied in the mineral processing industry as depressants in froth flotation, as flocculants and as selective flocculants. All of these applications involve adsorption of the polysaccharides onto minerals. Grafted polysaccharides are far more effective than simple polysaccharides due to their highly branched nature, which results in extensive network formation between colloidal particles, hence heavier floc formation. Also, for the removal of suspended solids from the coal washery effluent, wastewater, river water, flocculation aided by synthetic and semi synthetic flocculants ( Although, more efficient flocculation systems are available in these suspensions ( Oatmeal ( Oats are the only cereal containing a globulin or legume-like protein, avenalin, as the major (80%) storage protein. The more typical cereal proteins, such as gluten and zein, are prolamines. The minor protein of oat is a prolamine and avenin. Oat protein is nearly equivalent in quality to soya protein. Till now, oat has not been modified and used as graft copolymers to the best of our knowledge. In this research work we aim at suitably modifying this natural resource towards its utilization as a flocculant for waste water treatment. The study described in this paper involves the synthesis of graft chains of poly acrylamide (PAM) onto the backbone of oatmeal, thus resulting in formation of poly acrylamide grafted oatmeal (OAT-g-PAM). The synthesis has been carried out by Acrylamide was supplied by CDH, New Delhi, India. Ceric ammonium nitrate was supplied by E. Merck (India), Mumbai, India. Acetone was purchased from Rankem, New Delhi, India. All the chemicals were used as received; without further purification. Grafting reaction was carried out by ceric ion induced redox initiation method ( 1 Subsequently, the gel like mass left in the reaction vessel was poured into excess of acetone. The resulting precipitate of graft copolymer was collected and was dried in hot air oven. Subsequently, it was pulverized, sieved and purified (as explained in Section The synthesis details of various grades of the graft copolymer have been shown in Any occluded polyacrylamide (PAM) formed by competing homopolymer formation reaction was removed from the graft copolymer synthesized as above, by extraction with acetone for 24 Viscosity measurements of the polymer solutions were carried out with an Ubbelohde viscometer (capillary diameter 0.46 Subsequently, the reduced viscosity (  The elemental analysis of oatmeal and that of OAT-g-PAM 5 (best grade of the grafted oatmeal synthesized) was undertaken with an elemental analyzer (Make – M/s Elementar, Germany; Model – Vario EL III). The estimation of five elements, i.e. carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen and sulphur was undertaken. The results have been summarized in The FTIR spectrums of oatmeal ( The important FTIR peaks of oatmeal and that of OAT-g-PAM 5 have been reported in Supplementary Table 1.Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Surface morphology of oatmeal ( The thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) of oatmeal and that of the OAT-g-PAM 5 was carried out with TGA instrument (Model: DTG-60; Shimzadu, Japan). The study was performed in an inert atmosphere (nitrogen) from 25 Flocculation studies were carried out in 1% coal fine suspension, by standard ‘jar test’ procedure. All flocculation experiments were carried out in jar test apparatus (Make: Simeco, Kolkata, India). The test protocol involved taking a measured quantity (800 Flocculation tests in 0.25% kaolin suspensions and 1% iron ore suspensions were carried out through a similar procedure as above, however in these cases, turbidity of supernatant collected was measured in nephelo-turbidity meter (Digital Nephelo-Turbidity Meter 132, Systronics, India). The flocculation efficacy thus studied for oatmeal, and various grades of OAT-g-PAM have been graphically compared in Flocculation efficacy of the best grade of the grafted oatmeal (OAT-g-PAM 5) in municipal wastewater, at the optimized dosage as determined by earlier flocculation experiments, was studied and compared to the efficacy in case of the raw material (oatmeal). The flocculation efficacy was evaluated by assessment of pollutant load in the collected supernatant. The experiment was done in three sets. SET 1: Wastewater without flocculant SET 2: Wastewater with 1.25 SET 3: Wastewater with 1.25 The water quality of these supernatants was analysed by standard procedures ( OAT-g-PAM has been synthesized by conventional method. The term Various grades of the graft copolymer were synthesized by varying the ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN) and acrylamide (monomer) concentration. The synthesis details have been tabulated in CAN is an electron deficient molecule. It draws electrons from alcoholic oxygen in oatmeal to form a new bond i.e. Ce The proposed mechanism of conventional grafting has been depicted in The intrinsic viscosity was evaluated for oatmeal and for all the synthesized grades of OAT-g-PAM, as shown in Intrinsic viscosity is the hydrodynamic volume of the macromolecule in the solvent (water in this case) solution. As evident from By uncoiling of the polymeric chains of oatmeal proteins and polysaccharides through steric hindrance to intra molecular bonding. By contributing their own hydrodynamic volume. Further, the increase in intrinsic viscosity due to grafting is in good agreement with Mark–Houwink–Sakurada relationship (intrinsic viscosity The correlation between percentage grafting (% The results of elemental analysis for oatmeal (OATMEAL), poly acrylamide (PAM) and that of the best grade of poly acrylamide grafted oatmeal (OAT-g-PAM 5) are given in As evident from From The important FTIR peaks of oatmeal and that of OAT-g-PAM 5 have been reported in Supplementary Table 1. It is evident from the SEM micrographs of oatmeal ( The TGA curves of oatmeal ( In case of OAT-g-PAM 5 ( The flocculation study in 1% coal fine suspension, 0.25 kaolin suspension and 1% iron-ore suspension in jar test apparatus, for dosage varying between 0 All the grades of grafted oatmeal have shown better flocculation efficacy than the starting material (oatmeal). This is due to their higher hydrodynamic volume (i.e. intrinsic viscosity) as evidenced in Evidently, among the various grades of OAT-g-PAM, the optimized grade (OAT-g-PAM 5) showed maximum flocculation efficacy due to its highest hydrodynamic volume (intrinsic viscosity). The much higher flocculation efficacy of the grafted product than the original polymers conforms to Singh's easy approachability model ( For all the polymers studied, there is an optimal dosage at which the flocculation efficacy is maximum, beyond which the flocculation decreases. This behaviour of the flocculation curve finely conforms with the The optimal dosage of OAT-g-PAM 5 as flocculant, in 1% coal fine suspension, 0.25% kaolin suspension, and 1% iron-ore suspension is at 1.25 OAT-g-PAM 5 was found to be able to considerably reduce the pollutant load of wastewater, compared to oatmeal, as evidenced by analysis of supernatants drawn from the ‘jar test’ procedure at optimized flocculant dosage (1.25 Polyacrylamide grafted oatmeal (OAT-g-PAM) has been synthesized by Srijita Bharti acknowledges the support of Sumit Mishra and Gautam Sen acknowledge the support of BIT-Mesra; in form of All authors acknowledge the support of