The aim of the current study was to assess the biochemical methane potential (BMP) of different functional groups harvested from different semi-natural grassland types that are valuable for nature conservation purposes. Ensiling of particular biomass did not significantly influence its methane yield, however, the ranking of functional groups by their methane yield varied during the experiment. During the first days of the experiment, methane was released most rapidly by legumes and other forbs with higher N and P contents. At the end of the BMP experiment the quantity of methane produced was higher in grasses and sedges/rushes with lower K, Mg and lignin content. Hence, measurement of feedstock chemical composition is an essential input to develop suitable technology for anaerobic digestion of late harvested biomass from semi-natural grasslands.Recently much attention has been paid to the bioenergy potential of unused herbaceous biomass from extensively managed semi-natural grasslands ( While we assume that the energy input requirement for pre-treatment for different bioenergy conversion methods of biomass from semi-natural grasslands is equal, the energy output during methane production will be less than 60% of that we can get from combustion ( The main aim of this study was to assess the biochemical methane potential of different functional groups harvested from three types of semi-natural grassland that have value for nature conservation in the Scandinavian and Baltic regions. The objectives of the current study were to identify: (i) how silage sample particle size affects methane yield, (ii) whether the methane yield of hay is comparable to the methane yield of silage, (iii) whether BMP or methane dynamics is dependant on functional group, (iv) which chemical elements in studied feedstock have an impact on methane yield. The study was carried out on the central mainland of Estonia. Two Northern boreal alluvial meadows (NATURA 2000 habitat code 6450), two Fennoscandian lowland species-rich dry to mesic grasslands ( Fieldwork was undertaken between July 5 and July 8, 2011. The aboveground biomass of different functional groups: grasses ( Most of the collected biomass from each functional group of each grassland type studied was used to imitate silage processing on a small scale. For this purpose the biomass was chopped using a commercial universal food chopper (Robert Bosch Hausgeräte GmbH, Germany) for about 30 s to achieve a particle size ranging from 12 to 30 From both hay and ensiled biomass samples some material was used for chemical analyses in the Laboratory of Plant Biochemistry of the Estonian University of Life Science. The contents of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and the concentrations of calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) were measured. Analyses of the organic compounds, N and K were carried out according to standardized methods ( Biochemical methane potential (BMP) of herbaceous biomass was measured in a batch experiment with three replicates of mixed biomass from each functional group and grassland type in the Laboratory of Bio- and Environmental Chemistry in the Estonian University of Life Sciences. All measurements were carried out simultaneously. Before the BMP experiment the samples of openly stored biomass (“hay”) and half of the ensilage biomass (“silage”) were dried and milled to achieve particles of about 1 Before the experiment the inoculum, that had been obtained from the mesophilic anaerobic reactor of Paljassaare Wastewater Treatment Plant in Tallinn, was sieved (1 Statistical analyses were performed using the software package SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). For detecting the impact of particle size, the wet and pre-dried silage samples data were compared. In order to keep the dataset in balance and to minimize the influence of additional factors only data of pre-dried silage were used in all comparisons with hay feedstock. The general analyses of the influence of grassland type, functional group or treatment on methane yield were carried out with the MANOVA test and the differences of the chemical parameters studied by functional groups were detected with ANOVA. Grassland type factor was not significant in our model and hence we pooled data of all grassland types to study the impact of functional group in detail. To test the differences in methane yield between different feedstocks and study days and to compare functional groups by their chemical characteristics the Ryan-Einot-Gabriel-Welsch Multiple Range Test (REGWQ) was used. Significance of different chemical compounds on the second day or 45th day methane yield, was detected with GLM Multiple Linear Regression test (MLR) Type III SS hypothesis. The best model was selected after elimination of non-significant factors on methane yield. The confidence level of all analyses was set at 95%. The average methane yield of raw and pre-treated silage samples was not significantly different (MANOVA However, the similarity in yields of methane from both dry and raw silage was rather unexpected. These results suggest that neither feedstock water content nor particle size had an impact on the anaerobic digestion of the substrate. Water content is reported to be one of the most important parameters that affects the process of anaerobic digestion of municipal solid waste in batch-scale experiments ( Reduction of particle size improved gas production in batch-scale experiments in some BMP experiments ( While during the initial stages of the experiment the average methane yield was higher in silage, after the 10th day hay methane yield exceeded that of silage. Overall the average methane yield tended to be higher in hay samples (0.30 However, other studies have revealed that ensiling increased methane yield of different grasses ( In our previous study we detected differences in methane yield by semi-natural grassland types and reported that the biomass from boreal alluvial meadows had significantly lower feedstock-specific methane yield than the biomass from other grassland types ( At the end of the experiment the methane yield of hay was significantly higher in sedges/rushes (0.33 The higher methane yields from grasses and sedges/rushes than from legumes and other forbs support the results of From our study results we conclude that the methane yield in a particular grassland type is more affected by the ratio of different functional groups in the field than the differences inside a particular functional group between grassland types. However, further investigation should focus in more detail on the chemical composition of various species inside a functional group and grassland types. Measurements taken on the second day showed that the cumulative methane yield of both silage and hay feedstock was significantly higher in legumes and other forbs compared to that in grasses and sedges/rushes ( From day seven the cumulative methane yield from the other forbs silage no longer differed significantly from that of grasses and sedges/rushes and the same pattern was observed from day ten for hay samples. By the third week of the experiment the methane yield of the other forbs group was the lowest. In general, over the same time period, the other group of dicotyledonous plants, the legumes, had no greater methane yield when compared with monocotyledonous plant groups. The higher N and P content of the legumes and other forbs may provide a possible explanation for their higher methane yield during the early period of the BMP experiment. Through their influence on the mineralization process both of these elements can promote microbial biomass growth ( During the experiment the cumulative methane yield stabilized over time. In hay, the two successive cumulative methane yields did not differ significantly from each other after day ten in legumes, after day 25 in sedges/rushes and after day 38 in grasses and other forbs ( The pooled data of both hay and silage biomass revealed significant differences by functional group in all measured chemical parameters (MANOVA The average methane yield of the 45th day was in a significantly negative correlation with K, Mg and lignin contents ( The results revealed that neither reducing the particle size of silage samples or ensiling influenced methane yield. Feedstock-specific methane yield depended on functional group and was highest in grasses and sedges/rushes and lowest in the other forbs. Additional daily methane production reduced to negligible levels more rapidly in legumes and other forbs than in grasses and sedges/rushes. During the initial phase of the experiment methane was produced faster in legumes and other forbs richer in N and P, but poorer in hemicellulose. By the end the BMP was higher in grasses and sedges/rushes with lower K, Mg and lignin content. The authors would like to thank Pilleriin Puskar and Alltech Estonia for the biological silage additive (Sil-All (Alltech Inc., Nicholasville, KY, USA)), Prof. Olavi Kärt for introducing the method of mini-silage pre-treatment, Mai Olesk for lab analyses conduction, Sander Laherand for assisting in the fieldwork, and Eike Eller and Kaire Lanno for useful comments. We would also like to thank Roger Evans for the manuscript English correction and anonymous reviewers for useful comments. Financial support was provided by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 