Magnetite is presently used by many coal washeries in India as a dense medium in dense-medium cyclones for coarse coal cleaning. Considering the high cost of magnetite, efforts were made at R&D, Tata Steel, India to develop alternatives to magnetite. Studies revealed that the magnetic fraction of blast furnace flue dust (MFFD) had requisite properties for use as heavy media. Systematic studies in the laboratory, at pilot-scale and then the plant showed that MFFD can function as a dense medium. A process flow route was developed for the generation of MFFD, which has now been patented by the company.
                  The ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit generally used in coal washeries for grinding magnetite can be used to generate the MFFD with slight modifications. However, close control of the size distribution of the MFFD is required. Also nucleonic gauges, if any in the plant need to be re-calibrated.Heavy-medium separation, alternatively known as dense-medium separation, is essentially the most widely applied gravity concentration process both in minerals treatment and in coal preparation. It is a process applied to the separation of minerals in a liquid or a fairly stable suspension of predetermined density chosen such that the density is higher than the lighter constituents and lower than the heavier constituents. Dense medium for commercial separations have been made from a variety of materials such as clay, quartz, slate, galena, magnetite and ferrosilicon Magnetite is the medium solids commonly employed for coal preparation. Most magnetite are produced as a by-product of iron ore processing. Demand for magnetite is expected to increase continuously. The increasing cost of magnetite has led to a growing interest in recovering magnetite from alternate sources such as power station fly ash. Studies with fly ash-derived magnetite have shown that it could be an acceptable substitute for magnetite with some changes in the magnetite recovery circuit Tata Steel (Jharkhand, India), which has four indigenous coal washeries, produces 75% of the coking coal required for its 4.0 megatonnes/year steel plant. In all the washeries, coal—after being crushed to different top sizes (−25/15/13 mm, depending on the washability characteristics)—is screened at 0.5 mm. The +0.5 mm group, which is 80% of the ROM, is treated in dense medium cyclones and the −0.5 mm group in the froth flotation circuit. The dense medium cyclones use commercially available magnetite (obtained as a byproduct during mining and ground to the desired size by the supplier) as the dense medium solids for separation. Efforts were made at R&D Tata Steel to develop alternatives to magnetite from blast furnace flue dust, which has typically been discarded as a waste material. In any integrated steel plant, blast furnace flue dust is recovered during the cleaning of the blast furnace gas by dust collectors. At Tata Steel, the recycling of these wastes even to the sinter plant is prohibitive, mainly because of the high alkali contents (0.8–0.9%). Generation of the blast furnace flue dust at Tata steel is approximately 40,000 tonnes/year. It was found that, because of their intrinsic usable contents, recycling of these materials would require de-alkalification to an acceptable level. Lab-scale studies to de-alkalify the flue dust showed that the blast furnace flue dust, when subjected to wet low-intensity magnetic separation between 500 and 1000 G, could give a highly magnetic fraction with 25% yield The static stability tests were carried out using the conventional measuring cylinder method Stability tests The magnetite slurry is a non-Newtonian slurry with complex rheological behaviour A slurry of 1.45 relative density was prepared (which is the relative density employed in Tata Steel's coal washeries) with all the samples, that is, coarser MFFD, finer MFFD, and the conventional magnetite, and were kept in suspension by using an impeller in a slurry tank with 1000 ml capacity. The slurry was then allowed to drain from the tank and the time it took for the slurry to drain completely was measured. It was found that while the time of flow of slurry for conventional magnetite and the coarser MFFD were 55 and 57 s, for finer MFFD, it was 65 s, thus indicating the higher viscosity of finer MFFD. X-ray mapping was done for each of the three samples and the stoichiometric percentages of elements were determined The media recovery circuit usually consists of sieve bends, drain-and-rinse screens, and a series of magnetic separators. Most of the medium drains through the sieve bends and the drain screens, and are returned to the medium sump for reuse. It was thought that the finer MFFD, which contains a higher proportion of slimy/clayey material, would lead to slower drainage of media slurry through the sieve bend, leading to bypass of media and a drop in primary medium density. It was believed that fluctuation in primary medium density might cause a drop in clean-coal yield and ash at higher feed rates. The studies carried out showed that MFFD should be used at coarser sizes (approximately 80% of −0.045 mm) to obtain the stability and viscosity equivalent to that of conventional magnetite. Subsequently, large-scale dense-medium cyclone tests were carried out. The results obtained with MFFD as dense medium were compared with those obtained with conventional magnetite. The studies were carried out in three stages 75 mm dense-medium cyclone, lab-scale tests; 500 mm dense-medium cyclone, pilot-scale trials; 610 mm dense-medium cyclone, plant trials. About 100 kg of MFFD was generated using a dry magnetic separation technique. The sample was coarser in size, so it was ground in a ball mill to 80% <0.045 mm. To facilitate comparison, the size distribution of magnetite and MFFD were kept similar. The size distribution is shown in The coal used for the test work was in the size range −2 to +0.5 mm and was supplied by Washery-II, West Bokaro, Tata Steel. The size and the size-wise ash content analysis of the coal are detailed shown in Tests were conducted in a 75-mm dense-medium cyclone (DMC), which was fitted to a laboratory test rig having a slurry tank of 100 l capacity. The slurry was kept in circulation in closed circuit, and a sample cutter was provided to draw overflow and underflow slurries simultaneously when needed. Before each test, the desired spigot diameter was installed. A 25-mm-diameter vortex finder was used for all tests. The calculated quantity of water and medium solids (magnetite or MFFD) were added into the tank to make a slurry of desired relative density. The stirrer was switched on and the pump started. A known amount of coal was added into the tank. The medium/coal ratio by weight was kept constant at 5. The feed pressure was set to 10 psi. The system was allowed to run for at least 5 min, so that it reached the steady-state conditions and then the overflow and underflow samples were taken. The coal and the medium solids were separated in a slurry state using a 150 Tyler mesh sieve. The coal samples thus obtained as overflow and underflow product were filtered, and the solids were dried, weighed, and analyzed for ash content. A total of 10 tests was conducted at different levels of variables using MFFD and magnetite as medium solids. The results obtained from the tests on the 75-mm cyclone are presented in Results obtained from tests with MFFD as the medium solids showed that the yield and the ash content of the overflow product was always lower than that obtained with magnetite, under identical test conditions. The yield–ash curve for each medium is shown in Coefficient of separation (CS) is a function of the combustible recovery and ash rejection, and takes the variation of feed grade into account. It is calculated using the formula: The parameter can thus be used to compare results with variation in feed grade. While magnetite was found to have a higher combustible recovery (CR), MFFD was found to give a better ash rejection (AR). The CS at all conditions was higher with MFFD than with magnetite except in Test 1. The CR, the AR, and ultimately, the CS were higher at higher relative densities of the medium. Understandably, the smallest spigots and highest relative density of the medium gave the highest combustible recoveries and lowest ash rejection. The differences in combustible recoveries and ash rejection decrease with increasing spigot diameter and lower relative density of the medium. The fact that magnetite gave coal with higher ash content showed that the relative density of separation obtained with magnetite was higher than that with MFFD, leading to a greater cutpoint shift or offset, that is, the difference between the relative density of separation and the relative density of medium. Equations were then developed relating the spigot diameter and the relative density of medium to CR, AR, and CS. For MFFD, the equations were As can be seen from the coefficients of the equation, the feed density had the maximum impact on CR, AR, and hence, CS. It was decided that pilot-scale trials would be carried out in one of the washeries to confirm the lab-scale findings. The trials were carried out in a 500-mm DMC cyclone circuit. Since MFFD was coarser (the MFFD was gradually added while the conventional magnetite present in the circuit was gradually flushed out. After ensuring the complete replacement of magnetite with MFFD, samples of dense medium and coal were collected from different locations. The coal samples were collected from the feed, underflow, and overflow of dense medium cyclone. Cyclone performance is often measured using performance indicators such as separation efficiency, offset, and the CS • •Three sets of samples were collected for the Ep tests: (i) only when conventional magnetite was used; (ii) after 7 days of the start of the trial, when the MFFD had replaced 84% of the magnetite in the circuit; and (iii) when the magnetite had been 100% replaced with MFFD. •In the case of MFFD, the clean-coal ash ranged from 13.7% to 18.2%, with the yield varying from 39.1% to 61.6% from a feed of 26.1–28.3% •Another important factor which largely dictates the consumption of dense media are the losses to clean-coal and rejects. The typical losses for both MFFD and magnetite are shown in Results showed that MFFD could substitute for magnetite as heavy medium provided it is ground to the desired size. A flow-sheet was developed based on which a 5 tonne/h throughput plant was set up to generate MFFD. The flow-sheet was similar to the closed circuit ball mill hydrocylone system described in The typical coal washing circuit used for plant trials is shown in Problem 1 •The material formed cakes affecting the stability of the dense medium suspension. Analysis and solution •The MFFD contained very fine slimy (−5 μm) material which formed lumps on absorption of moisture. The finer size particles acted as nucleation sites for formation of cakes. Upon analysis, it was found that the percentage of slime (−5 μm) was about 4% of the feed. Attempts were made to de-slime the MFFD via a hydrocyclone. The size of the cyclone required for removing the slimy material and for getting the required cut size was calculated using the formula of The problem had not occurred in the previous trial due to the very coarse MFFD used. Problem 2 •The nucleonic gauges in the circuit started giving erroneous results. Analysis and solution •Analysis showed that the elements in the MFFD, such as sodium, potassium, calcium, barium, interfered with the reading of the nucleonic gauges giving erroneous readings. Nucleonic gauges needed recalibration with reference to MFFD, and hence, it was decided that the MFFD would be tried out in the washeries without nucleonic gauges. Subsequently, a plant trial for 1 month was planned with the material ( Considering the effect of fluctuation in the process variables on the clean coal yield, a robust statistical method was used for comparing the performance of the DMCs during the base and the trial period. Ash in the feed, clean coal and rejects of the DMCs were collected against each data point. Noisy data sets were removed using the outlier analysis. Data sets were then compared on the basis of comparison of regression line method to find out the difference in CS during the base and the trial period. The method involved three major steps: establishing simple linear relationship between CS and feed ash using data sets collected during the base and the trial period, fitting of the regression lines using a pooled/mean gradient, and then comparing the regression lines from the mean separation value. The simple linear relationship of CS and feed ash for DMCs for the base and the trial period are shown in Ideally, the difference in CS between the two periods should be similar all along the regression lines, this being possible only when the gradients for both the regression lines are the same. In the present case, the gradients for both regression lines are different due to the paucity of sufficient data points in each case. Therefore, fitting the regression lines is essential for attempting a better comparison Having the various statistical criteria as discussed, separation between the regression lines was calculated from the difference of intercepts A significant The statistical data analysis report is furnished in  As can be seen from The average magnetite loss was 2.47 kg/tonne of feed to DMCs during the base period, whereas the loss of MFFD was 2.35 kg/tonne for the trial period. The difference between the overflow and the underflow medium densities (usually between 0.4 and 0.7 kg/l in industrial operations and which gives an indication of the stability of the heavy media) was 0.6–0.65 kg/l for the cyclones, within acceptable limits during the trial period. The relative density of the media was 1.45 during the trial and the base periods. The solids content in the clarified water being recycled was 0.226 g/l during the trial period, compared to 0.22 g/l during the base period, showing that there was no slime accumulated in the circuit. The Ep value (0.04) was similar for both streams of the primary cyclone during all the sampling campaigns. The studies clearly showed that MFFD has the potential to replace magnetite as dense medium. A process route for commercial production of MFFD was developed, which is now patented. MFFD after generation needs to be de-slimed and ground to 80% <0.045 mm. Nucleonic gauges, if there are any in the circuit, need to be re-calibrated. The authors express their thanks to Dr. Amit Chatterjee, Chief, Technology Officer, Tata Steel; Dr. O.N. Mohanty, Chief, R&D and SS; and Mr. Ch.V.G.K. Murty, Head, Titanium Task Force, Tata Steel, for their keen interest and encouragement during the studies. The authors are also thankful to the Geological Department of West Bokaro and to the Geological Department of Bhelatand for providing necessary the data to carry out the study.