The beneficial effects of the synergy between two reagents were realized long time ago. The purpose of using a mixture of collectors is to increase both the recovery and selectivity. In this work, sodium iso-amylxanthate (SIAX) and its isomeride (Y89), having different molecularstructures, were used. The separation performance of these collectors were investigated at ratio varies of SIAX and Y89. The results showed that a better recovery of auriferous pyrite was observed with collector mixture comparing to use collector alone. There exist an optimal mass ratio between SIAX and Y89, and it is 1:2. The adsorption measurements of collector mixture and single collector were investigated at pH=9, indicated that adsorption density of collector on auriferous pyrite surface was improved when collector mixture was used. Infrared spectral analysis suggested stretching vibration peaks from chemical adsorption were increased with using collector mixture. At an optimal mass ratio 1:2 of SIAX:Y89, an Au concentrate assaying 12.79g/t was produced with an Au recovery of 84.24% from a feed containing only 3.44g/t Au after one roughing stage. The advantage of this collector mixture can improve the recovery of auriferous pyrite at the same collector consumption, and this collector mixture has great potential for industrial application.Gold is more commonly recovered together with sulfide minerals, and it is intimately associated with sulfides as fine unliberated grains (solid solutions or inclusions), or with barren and hydrophobic sulfides. The most commonly known gold bearing sulfides are the pyrite and arsenopyrite ( All sulphydryl collectors commonly are used in sulfide flotation, such as xanthates, dithiophosphates (DTPs) and dithiocarbamates (DTCs). These collectors are heteropolar and have aralkyl chain which is hydrophobic, as well as an ionized group containing sulfur, which reacts with water and is hydrophilic. The length and structure of this alkyl chain appears to have an effect on the behavior of the collector ( From the foregoing review of mechanisms, clearly any single collector will For example, testwork reported by In this study, the flotation of fine auriferous pyrite particles (<38 Pure auriferous pyrite, sericite, quartz and dolomite were sourced from Xinjiang, China. X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the auriferous pyrite, sericite, quartz and dolomite were 97%, 95%, 98% and 96% pure, respectively. According to the results of chemical The sources of flotation reagents were as follows: analytical grade sodium iso-amylxanthate (SIAX) and Y89 were from Zhuzhou flotation reagents factory, Hunan, China. The molecular of collectors are shown in Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 The adsorption measurements were completed on a TU-1810 ultraviolet visible spectrophotometer (Purkinje General, Beijing, China). The curves represent the averages of five measurements, and the error bars are based on the standard deviation. Two grams of auriferous pyrite powder and 40 Prior to the test, pure minerals were ground to −2 Firstly, the floatation separation tests using SIAX or Y89 at a dosage of 30 As shown in From The flotation behavior of auriferous pyrite, sericite, quartz and dolomite individually using a collector mixture of SIAX and Y89 at different mass ratio was investigated. A series of flotation results demonstrate that the collector mixture of SIAX and Y89 at a mass ratio of 1:2 achieves the best flotation separation performance, as shown in As shown in From A series of adsorption studies were completed to probe the adsorption behavior of the single collector and mixed collector.  Adsorption studied were conducted on auriferous pyrite when the collector mixture of SIAX and Y89 was at a mass ratio of 1:2. As shown in  As shown in When the collector mixture of SIAX and Y89 was at a mass ratio of 1:2, the infrared spectral patterns of auriferous pyrite before and after interaction with mixed collector was studied. As shown in The materials containing auriferous pyrite in the flotation were obtained from Xinjiang, China. Chemical composition analysis was carried out X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) technique by suing a Philips spectrometer. XRF results of the experiment sample are shown in  Based on the results of microflotation experiments, adsorption measurements and FI-IR analyses, the raw ore flotation tests were investigated under the condition of different collector. In raw ore flotation, 500  In this study, the flotation of fine auriferous pyrite was studied with a collector mixture of Sodium iso-amylxanthate (SIAX) and its isomeride (Y89). It can be noted that, when the two strong collectors were mixed for recovering auriferous pyrite, the higher recovery can be obtained than alone collector. There exist an optimal mass ratio between two collectors. Adsorption measurements show that the adsorption density of collector on auriferous pyrite slightly decreases increasing pH from 4 to 9 and greatly decreases with from 9 to 12. Comparing to use collector alone, the mixed collector has greater adsorption density on the surface of auriferous pyrite under condition of the same collector concentration in the whole pH range. The infrared spectral analysis suggests that mixed collector can much strongly absorb on the surface of auriferous pyrite, and the stretching vibration peaks have greater intensity. This is the reason that collector mixture can improve the recovery of auriferous pyrite. The collector mixture SIAX This research work was financially supported by the