Objective
                  Retrospective case–control study of authors experience in the modified Bristow-Latarjet procedure for treatment of recurrent traumatic anterior glenohumeral dislocation with glenoid bone injury.
               
                  Methods
                  Sample with 102 recurrent glenohumeral dislocation cases submitted to modified Bristow-Latarjet procedure. Indications included situations of recurrent traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability with more than two dislocation episodes and with glenoid bone attritional or fragmentary injuries, without possibility of reconstruction. Mean follow-up time was 5.33±2.74 years (minimum 1; range 1–13).
               
                  Results
                  The mean Walch-Duplay Score at the last evaluation was 91.23±11.46 (range 15–100). The functional score of patients with glenoid bone loss greater than 20% did not show a significant difference in comparison with patients with glenoid bone loss lower than 20% (90 vs. 92, respectively). The functional score also did not show a significant difference between sports practice categories and between recreational and competitive practice, being excellent (greater than 90) in every category. There were no dislocation recurrences and the only complications were a case of persistent instability and a screw revision. Mild glenohumeral osteoarthrosis imaging signs were identified in 7.84% of the patients; however, their functional scores were not significantly different in comparison to other patients.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The modified Bristow-Latarjet procedure is a very effective procedure with few complications in the medium-term, showing very satisfactory functional outcomes in the treatment of recurrent traumatic anterior glenohumeral dislocation associated with glenoid bone injury.The glenohumeral joint is the main joint complex of the shoulder; it is the joint with the highest mobility in the human body, and therefore has a high susceptibility of dislocation and instability. Glenohumeral dislocations are classified according to the position of the humeral head in relation to the glenoid cavity; the anteroinferior direction accounts for 95% of the dislocations. Recurrent glenohumeral dislocations occur when one or more of the active or passive stabilizers of the glenohumeral joint are affected, either by changes in coordination and muscle power of the rotator cuff or deltoid; by lesions of the labrum, ligaments, or joint capsule; or by single or repeated trauma, involving direct or indirect forces. In this article, the authors present their experience with a modified Bristow-Latarjet procedure for the treatment of recurrent anterior glenohumeral instabilities and their results. This is a retrospective series of 102 cases of recurrent glenohumeral dislocations in 102 patients who underwent the modified Bristow-Latarjet surgery performed by the same orthopedic team using the same surgical technique. Indications for this procedure are cases of recurrent traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability with more than two episodes of glenohumeral dislocation and presence of glenoid erosive or fragmentary bone injury, without possibility of reconstruction due to high comminution, reduced size, or resorption of the bone fragment. All patients previously underwent conservative treatment with immobilization followed by rehabilitation, which was unsuccessful, and the instability persisted. Patients with glenohumeral instabilities with engaging Hill-Sachs lesions, ligament hyperlaxity, instabilities in directions other than the anterior, other pathologies, or previous surgeries of the shoulder in question were excluded. The mean follow-up time was 5.33 The osteotomy of the coracoid apophysis and its transfer along with the insertion of the conjoint tendon to the glenoid neck was first described by Latarjet The patient is positioned in a beach chair position. Through a deltopectoral approach ( The sample consisted of 102 patients, with a mean age of 26 After surgery, no cases of glenohumeral dislocation recurrences were observed. The mean Walch-Duplay score at the last assessment (which corresponded to the follow-up time) was 91.23 Procedures for coracoid apophysis transfer, such as the surgeries described by Latarjet and Bristow, are often indicated in cases of recurrent anterior glenohumeral instability associated with glenoid bone lesion. Isolated capsulolabral repair in glenohumeral instability has proven results in cases with minimal glenoid bone loss. However, no randomized prospective studies with a high level of evidence on this subject are available in the literature. Any glenoid bone lesion is an important risk factor for recurrence of glenohumeral dislocations, and isolated capsulolabral repair has higher recurrence rates than bone transfer surgeries in these patients; the larger the glenoid bone defect, the higher the risk. Boileau et al. Several studies have demonstrated an unacceptable glenohumeral dislocation recurrence rate after arthroscopic isolated capsulolabral repair as a treatment of traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability in patients under 20 years of age who practiced competitive or contact sports, or sports with gestures above the level of the head, who presented capsular hyperlaxity and marked bony glenoid or humeral head defects. Those authors concluded that isolated capsulolabral repair is contraindicated in this group of at-risk patients and recommend that, in these cases, the instability should be treated through a bone transfer procedure. The present authors advocate the principle of anatomical reconstruction: the orthopedist, in the presence of a fragmentary glenoid lesion (bony Bankart) with bone fragment that can be incorporated into the capsulolabral repair, should seek an anatomical arthroscopic glenoid reconstruction. In light of the recurrence rates observed in isolated arthroscopic capsulolabral repair in instabilities associated with glenoid bone lesions, and considering the efficacy, functional results, and the absence of recurrences in this study with 102 patients who underwent the modified Bristow-Latarjet operation, the authors recommend its application to situations of recurrent traumatic anterior glenohumeral instability with erosive glenoid bone lesions of any degree. Given the very satisfactory functional results (and even superior to several series with isolated capsulolabral repairs in instabilities without bone defects); the absence of recurrences; and the reduced rate of complications and development of glenohumeral osteoarthrosis, regardless of the degree of sports practice, the authors believe that this surgical procedure to be an excellent option for the treatment of these patients. Thus, patients in the second and third decades of life, involved in risky sports and with erosive glenoid bone lesions or without adequate bone fragments for glenoid reconstruction, are the ideal candidates for bone transfer surgery; an isolated capsulolabral repair would not be sufficient for the resolution of instability. Nonetheless, the increase in the follow-up time of the present study may lead to the identification of more cases that are typically observed in the long term with signs of glenohumeral osteoarthritis and other complications. The authors consider that the very satisfactory results and the reduced rate of complications observed in the present study may be related to the long experience of this surgical team and the modifications introduced in the original surgical technique, particularly in terms of bone block fixation, subscapularis approach, and the glenohumeral stability obtained. The U-opening of the subscapularis, preserving its lower third, allows an excellent visualization of the glenoid and minimizes the risk of injury to the axillary nerve. Moreover, the lower aggressiveness of this incision in the subscapularis when compared with its deinsertion in the original technique may also be responsible for the very satisfactory functional results and mobility of the operated shoulders. The main limitations of the present study were its retrospective nature, which did not allow a rigorous preoperative functional evaluation, a short follow-up period, and a non-normal data distribution, which required the use of non-parametric tests. In turn, the fact that the surgeries were all performed by the same team of orthopedists using the same surgical technique reduced some biases arising from these factors. The present study demonstrated that, in the medium-term, the modified Bristow-Latarjet surgery is a very effective and safe procedure with reduced complications, presenting very satisfactory functional results in the treatment of recurrent anterior glenohumeral instability associated with glenoid bone lesions. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.