Porous Al 6061–2Mg–1Sn–3nylon preforms were nitrided and subsequently infiltrated with Al–Si and Al–Si–Mg alloys at different temperatures. Different infiltration modes were identified and confirmed by numerical simulation. When infiltration happens under conditions close to the eutectic points, it proceeds in the conventional slug flow mode with a well-defined infiltration front. However, as the infiltration conditions depart from the eutectic points, the infiltration mode changes gradually to extreme non-slug flow, where the infiltrant preferentially fills small pores irrespective of their distance from the infiltrant entrance, leading to homogeneous infiltrated structures without any infiltration front. The occurrence of different infiltration modes can be attributed to the competition between thermodynamic and kinetic factors. Extreme non-slug flow occurs under thermodynamically favourable conditions where the preform is well wetted by an infiltrant with sufficient fluidity. In contrast, slug flow occurs under kinetically favourable conditions when the low infiltration temperature at the eutectic points makes mass transport difficult.Infiltration has been intensively studied for many decades, both theoretically and experimentally, because of the significant application of such a phenomenon to a number of technological fields, e.g. soil science and oil recovery. It is also widely used in materials science because it provides a route for fabrication of both polymeric and metal matrix composites with homogeneous net shape structures and high reinforcement volume fractions Slug flow of the infiltrant has been widely assumed in such composite fabrication processes However, the slug flow assumption has been challenged by some research results which have shown evidence that infiltration is not always fully saturated Recently, we identified an infiltration process which represented an extreme mode of non-slug flow The feed stock was prepared by mixing pre-alloyed Al 6061 powder with 2% Mg, 1% Sn and 3% nylon (all compositions are given in wt.%). The aluminium powder was argon atomized, with a particle size range of 15–75 The infiltration process is shown schematically in In each experiment, 4–5 preforms were infiltrated for different lengths of time to reveal collectively the whole infiltration process. All samples were taken out of the furnace and cooled quickly to room temperature after infiltration. The remanent infiltrant was then removed from the top of the preform, and the weight gain of the infiltrated sample was calculated simply by comparing the weights before and after infiltration. The preforms were then sectioned along the infiltration direction to examine the entire infiltration profile. They were subsequently sectioned into five pieces of equal length. The density of each piece was measured using the Archimedes method. The preforms were then polished and observed using an Olympus AX 70 optical microscope. The infiltration profiles from Experiments 3 (Al–12Si, 590 The infiltration mode is superimposed on the Al–Si phase diagram (  In order to compare the infiltration rate among the different groups, the effects of infiltration time on weight gain are summarized in In order to simulate the experimental results, an analogy model was established, whose configuration is shown in Partially saturated flow in the porous medium can be described by the Richards equation The COMSOL Multiphysics simulation software Pores of different sizes distribute randomly inside the preform and thus the probability of finding a small or large pore at any place within the preform is approximately the same. Slug flow and extreme non-slug flow infiltration represent two different ways of pore filling. In the slug flow mode, the infiltrant preferentially fills the pores that are closest to the infiltrant entrance, irrespective of their size. The process is governed by highly non-linear infiltration kinetics, which is well understood Such preferential filling of small pores is consistent with the change in the Gibbs free energy during infiltration. The overall interfacial energy of the system decreases as the solid/gas interface between the preform and the atmosphere is replaced by the solid/liquid interface between the preform and the infiltrant. When a pore of radius Eq. The dependence of the infiltration mode on the proximity of the infiltration condition to the eutectic point reflects the competition between thermodynamic and kinetic factors. The driving force for infiltration is provided by the capillary pressure while the resistance to infiltration largely derives from the viscosity of the infiltrant. Both factors are influenced by the temperature. The wetting between liquid Al alloys and AlN deteriorates quickly with decreasing temperature In materials science, the competition between thermodynamically and kinetically favourable phases is fundamental to many phase transformations. For example, when a liquid alloy with high metallic glass formability is quenched, crystallization (thermodynamically favourable) competes with amorphization (kinetically favourable) Because the infiltrant always fills the smallest pores preferentially during extreme non-slug flow, irrespective of the distance from the infiltrant entrance, the preform is always infiltrated uniformly. The saturation of the preform thus varies with the volume of the infiltrant used. Consequently, the porosity of an infiltrated preform may be controlled over a wide range in a nearly continuous fashion by controlling the amount of the infiltrant that is used. In addition, because the pore-filling pattern under non-slug flow is largely dictated by the pore size, the process also offers a unique means of controlling the pore size and size distribution. Therefore the newly identified extreme non-slug flow infiltration mode, which produces uniform saturation in the preform, may provide a simple and reliable route to fabricate composite materials with uniform microstructures and controlled porosity. Porous Al 6061–2Mg–1Sn–3nylon rectangular bars were nitrided at 560 This work was funded by 3D Systems, Inc. In addition, financial support by the Australian Research Council (ARC) is acknowledged.