Objective
                  The fluoroscopically-guided procedure of antegrade posterior lag screw in posterior column fixation through anterior approach is technique-dependent and requires an experienced surgeon. The purpose of this study was to establish the safe zone for the antegrade posterior lag screw by using computational analysis.
               
                  Method
                  The virtual three-dimensional model of 178 hemi-pelvises was created from the CT data (DICOM format) by using Mimics® program, and were used to measure the safe zone of antegrade lag screw fixation on the inner table of the iliac wing, and the largest diameter of cylindrical implant inside safe zone. The central point (point A) of the cylinder was assessed and was compared with the intersection point (point B) between the linea terminalis and the anterior border of the sacroiliac articulation.
               
                  Results
                  The safe zone was triangular with an average area of 670.4mm2 (range, 374.8–1084.5mm2). The largest diameter of the cylinder was a mean 7.4mm (range, 5.0–10.0mm). When height was under 156.3cm, the diameter of the cylindrical implant was smaller than 7.0mm (p<0.001, regression coefficient=0.09). The linear distance between points A and B was 32.5mm (range, 19.2–49.3mm). Point A was far enough away from the well-positioned anterior column plate to prevent collision between the two.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The safe zone was shaped like a triangle, and was large enough for multiple screws. Considering the straight-line distance between points A and B, the central screw can be fixed without overlapping with the well-positioned anterior column plate at the point between holes 2 and 3.Over the last 20 years, open reduction and internal fixation have become the standard method for treating acetabular fractures with displacement of more than 2 Surgical morbidity and associated complications may be reduced by using less invasive alternatives, such as percutaneous techniques and other new approaches Although safe and accurate insertion of the antegrade posterior lag screw can be verified by intraoperative computed tomography (CT) scans, with or without a computerized navigation system, most surgeons still use fluoroscopic placement of screws. This fluoroscopically-guided procedure requires additional imagination by the surgeon, based on a thorough understanding of pelvic anatomy. So, antegrade posterior lag screw fixation is technique-dependent and requires an experienced surgeon. Therefore, using computational analysis, we measured the area of the safe zone of the antegrade posterior lag screw for cases without extraosseous placement above the ischial spine, and we identified the optimal entry point and relevant anatomical landmarks that can be easily identified in the surgical field. This study received institutional review board approval. We collected the CT scan images of 112 adult cadavers (57 males, 55 females) who underwent continuous 1.0-mm slice CT (Pronto, Hitachi, Japan) in the supine position. We excluded 23 cadavers due to poor quality CT images. Finally, 178 hemi-pelvis models from 89 pelvises (45 males and 44 females) were included in the study. The average age of the male cadavers was 50.3 years (range, 21–60 years), and the average height was 165.5 A virtual three-dimensional (3D) model of the pelvis was created from the CT data (DICOM format), by using image-processing software (Mimics After locating the safe zone and the central point of the cylindrical implant, we measured the linear distance between the central point (point A) and the intersection point (point B) between the linea terminalis and the anterior border of the sacro-iliac articulation ( All data are presented as mean and range or mean and standard deviation. Two-sample The safe zone of the antegrade posterior lag screw was approximately triangular in shape and its apex was pointed towards the iliac tubercle, postero-superior iliac spine, and pubic tubercle ( The area of the safe zone averaged 729.2 The maximum diameter of the cylindrical implant averaged 7.4 When compared with the well-positioned plate for anterior column fixation, the central point (point A) was sufficiently distant from the lateral border of the plate to avoid collision. Point A grossly corresponded to the spot between the second and third hole of the plate ( Although percutaneous screw fixation for acetabular fractures has recently focused on the benefits of minimally invasive surgery On the base of the results of a cadaveric study by Mu et al. Similar with our results, Mu et al. Despite considerable research on the direction of the retrograde posterior column screw After exposure of the inner table of the iliac wing through the ilioinguinal approach, structures such as the anterosuperior iliac spine, the intersection point (point B) between the linea terminalis and the anterior border of the sacro-iliac articulation can be easily identified. By comparing the location of the central point in relation to these structures, the central point can be used as a practical landmark during surgery. Through this computational analysis, the linear distance between point A (central point) and point B (intersection point) averaged 32.5 However, our study has several limitations. Because all measurements were from normal pelvises, our results may only be useful in minimally displaced fractures without comminution or free fragments in the joint. Second, if navigation is not available putting K-wires and drill bits, the complex anatomy of the pelvis made it very difficult to determine the screw direction and extra-osseous placement in real time, despite use of the optimal entry point. Thus, our results may only be applicable to the situation that fluoroscopic images are so successful in. Third, disagreement about the indications and usefulness of antegrade posterior column screw remain. Nevertheless, our investigation made an important contribution to the literature in several respects:(1) The safe zone for the antegrade posterior lag screws was quantified by computational analysis and was verified to be large enough for multiple screwing. (2) The central point was the optimal entry point, and it could be confirmed in a certain location and compared with practical landmarks that were easily identified in the surgical field. (3) The central point was located vertically between the second and third hole of the well-positioned anterior column plate. In the future, considering that most surgeons work with 2D fluoroscopy, additional studies to verify the anatomical landmarks on fluoroscopic views by analyzing three-dimensional (3D) models virtually implanted with an antegrade lag screw are to be conducted. In addition, if the biomechanical stiffness of the antegrade lag screw is demonstrated as optimal fixation constructs, and convenient computerized navigation for this technique is developed, our information will help reduce the surgical morbidity related to the surgical approach in both column, transverse, and T-shaped fracture of the acetabulum. The safe zone of the antegrade posterior lag screw through the anterior approach was shaped like a triangle and was large enough for multiple screw fixation. Considering the linear distance averaged 31.4 None.