A study of the effects of temperature and heating rate upon the ageing response of a Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy was undertaken. The degree of strengthening declined with increasing ageing temperature as the precipitate morphologies became coarser, while the extent and thickness of grain boundary α increased with temperature. Ageing at temperatures between 440°C and 500°C result in the greatest age hardening response in times of around 4h due precipitation of the α phase. At 440°C the hardness increases from the initial solution treated value of 275 H
                     
                        V
                      to more than 450 H
                     
                        V
                     . The rate of heating to reach the isothermal ageing temperature has a substantial impact on the ageing response. Greater scatter was observed in hardness results for the samples aged using a faster heating rate at 500°C. For ageing at 560°C a faster rate of heating to the ageing temperature led to rapid declines in the hardness after the peak, equivalent to around 20% of the peak value. Slower heating rates (5°Cmin−1) appear to increase the number of nucleation sites for precipitation of the α phase, forming finer, more even distributions of precipitates. Faster heating rates (∼100°Cmin−1) produce coarser, less evenly distributed precipitates which coarsen more rapidly.There is considerable interest in development of new titanium alloys for aerospace applications due to their high strength to weight ratio and excellent corrosion resistance Ti-6554 (Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al) is a new metastable β Ti alloy, developed to suit heavy section structural aerospace applications. The composition of the alloy has been optimized in order to give an excellent balance between high strength and good ductility. The alloy exhibits ultimate tensile strengths (UTS) of around 1250 As Ti-6554 is a newly developed alloy, information within the literature critical to its further development and application is very limited. However, more extensive detail is available on other similar metastable β Ti alloys, such as the Ti-5553 alloy (Ti–5Al–5Mo–5V–3Cr), which contains the same primary alloying additions in differing proportions. In this respect, it clear that heat treatment parameters, including the solution and ageing temperatures, and heating/cooling rates, can have a remarkable influence on properties and microstructure The Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy was cast by multiple vacuum arc-melting. Ingots of 620 Solution and ageing heat treatments were conducted in a MIHM-VOGT P6/B box furnace in air. The samples were solution treated at 830 Hardness testing was conducted on a Vickers hardness tester using a 30 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted using a D8 Advance X-Ray Diffractometer operated at 40 The chemical composition of the hot rolled Ti-6554 alloy, determined by the wet analysis method, is given in The age hardening response of the solution treated Ti-6554 alloy to isothermal ageing at various temperatures between 380 A series of SEM micrographs showing the precipitate morphologies associated with the peak or plateau hardness for the various ageing temperatures are shown in XRD analysis was undertaken in order to determine the phase composition of the alloy before and after ageing. The XRD spectra are presented in TEM images from a sample aged to the peak or plateau hardness at 440 The age hardening response of the solution treated Ti-6554 alloy is contrasted in A series of optical images which show the development of the microstructures over time at 560 SEM micrographs of the precipitate morphologies associated with the peak hardness for isothermal ageing at 500 SEM micrographs of the precipitate morphology obtained using the faster heating rate (∼100 The Ti-6554 alloy, solution treated at a temperature of 830 Over time, ageing at all temperatures between 380 The hardness values can be used to give an estimate of the strength of the alloy using the relationship, The extent and thickness of grain boundary α increased with increasing ageing temperatures, becoming discontinuous at the highest temperature (620 Grain boundary α may be coupled with corresponding precipitate-free depleted β layers adjacent to the grain boundaries The rate of heating to reach the isothermal ageing temperature had a marked impact on the age hardening response of the Ti-6554 alloy ( The slower heating rate appears to increase the number of intragranular nucleation sites for precipitation of the α phase in the Ti-6554 alloy, enabling formation of finer and more even distributions of precipitates within the β matrix. A potential origin for differences in the numbers of nucleation sites is the formation of the metastable ω phase, which is known to be a potent nucleant for α precipitation Further considerations as to the influence of the heating rates upon the microstructure and properties of the Ti-6554 alloy concern effects related to the decomposition of the β phase and solute partitioning through diffusion. For near β alloys containing Al, an α stabilising element, localised rejection of the Al can be detected in the vicinity of ω precipitates In this study the effects of ageing on a β phase solution treated Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al alloy at temperatures between 380 The authors would like to thank BaoTi Group Ltd., Baoji, China for provision of the alloy.