Goldcorp Red Lake Mine processes a mildly refractory high grade gold ore with 77.8 g/t Au and 1.9% arsenopyrite, 1.7% pyrite and 0.2% pyrrhotite at a grind of 77% −37 microns. A cyanidation study was conducted to determine the necessary retention time of the leach circuit and the optimal gold extraction and cyanide consumption. Results have shown that the gold leaching kinetics could be significantly improved by the addition 100–200 g/t lead nitrate directly in the grinding circuit, followed by a 6 h cyanidation. A 1 month trial indicated a throughput of 810 tpd can be sustained without detrimental effect on gold extraction. However, the mill is currently limited by the underground operation to a throughput ranging from 650 to 700 tpd for a 55 h retention time. In the event of future throughput increase over 810 tpd value, lead nitrate could become an essential part of the leaching efficiency. The experimental work indicated a gold extraction at 87.1–87.4% (tailings ∼9.8 g/t Au) which is similar to plant performance. The associated cyanide consumption was 0.7 kg/t. Gold dissolution can efficiently be conducted at an average cyanide concentration of 400 ppm. Previous control of cyanide concentration in the plant was 700 ppm in the first leach tank to 350 ppm NaCN at the end. Testwork realised in the mill allowed a 32% cyanide reduction predicted by the on-site cyanidation study. The new cyanide concentration is ranging between 500 ppm in the first leach tank and 300 ppm NaCN at the end of the leaching circuit. The cyanide consumption of the plant was reduced from 1.0 to 0.68 kg/t with reduction of effluent treatment costs. Grinding finer (91% −37 microns) slightly increased the gold extraction (tailings lower by 0.4 g/t) but lowers the leaching kinetics, increases cyanide consumption (35%) and the arsenic dissolution.The Goldcorp Red Lake Mine, originally known as the Dickenson Mine, has been in production since 1948 ( Numerous studies have shown that lead nitrate addition reduces the detrimental effect of metallic sulphides, increases gold leaching kinetics (thereby increasing plant throughput), and decreases cyanide consumption ( In December 2001, a laboratory study was initiated to evaluate several leaching parameters (grinding size, dissolved oxygen, pH, free cyanide and lead nitrate) that could optimize the performance of the cyanidation circuit at Goldcorp, Red Lake Mine. The cyanidation study aimed to identify ways of improving the overall extraction of gold, improving leaching kinetics and reagent consumption, and to evaluate the effects of finer grinding and oxygen sparging. The approach was divided into two schemes: dissolution of gold with lead nitrate addition and dissolution of gold with a high oxygen content. Such an approach resulted in reducing the number of tests in each scheme because the overall cost of the contract was kept the same. The interpretation of the results, their impact on the operation and the recommendations are formulated in relation to the plant practice. The client submitted a finely ground sample and did not ask CANMET to evaluate the effects of coarser grinding in this series of tests. A sample of gold ore, weighing 34.3 kg, was received from the Goldcorp Red Lake Mine. The ore was labelled as “pre-leach thicker underflow material” and was identical to the plant cyanidation feed. Coarse gold had already been recovered by gravity at the plant. The excess water was filtered off and the sample was air dried for 96 h. After air drying, the sample was tumbled for 18 h under nitrogen using a drum tumbler and divided into 1000 g lots with a Rotary separator. The lots were bagged, labelled and stored in an air-tight container under nitrogen to prevent oxidation. Additional grinding was performed on lots, under nitrogen, to 91.5% and 94.4% −37 microns, using a 23-cm diameter ball mill. A wet particle-size analysis of the sample indicated that 77.3% of the sample is −37 microns. The gold content of the head, obtained by fire assay, is 77.81 g/t (duplicate). The calculated gold content of the original sample (obtained from all the reported tests) is 82.01 g/t with a variance of 0.35. The gold content distribution indicates that most of the gold (92.1%) is in the −37 microns fraction. The mass balance of gold in the various fractions indicates a grade of 76.40 g/t which is close to the value of the head assay. The ore was characterized using standard mineralogical practices and phase proportions were determined using image analysis. A polished section was prepared and studied with an image analyzer to determine the mineral quantities in each sample. The ore consists largely of gangue (94.3%) quartz, ankerite, dolomite and small proportions of phlogopite, clinochlore, grunerite, anorthite, talc and hornblende ( The lime, sodium cyanide, lead nitrate and oxygen used were all certified reagent grade chemicals. Distilled water was used. The gold-leaching cell is glass, with a capacity of 2 l. The cell’s cover has four openings which allows for the insertion of pH and dissolved oxygen (DO) electrodes, an agitator and a tube for adding oxygen. A Chemcadet pH monitor provided pH readings. Mixing was conducted by an agitator with 2.5 cm Teflon paddles powered by a variable-speed electric motor that was kept at a constant rate of 400 rpm. The tests were performed on a pulp of 45% solids (1000 g of ore with 1222 ml of solution). Most of the cyanidation tests were carried out on ore at 85.4% −37 microns. The ore was introduced into the leaching cell and pulped for a few minutes. The cyanidation tests were either 24 or 55 h in duration. The calculation of the cyanide consumption was based on the fact that the leach solution is not recycled. The details of the experimental procedure, analysis and calculations are available in a previous publication (  The effect of lead nitrate addition on gold dissolution kinetics is illustrated in The effects of lead nitrate addition at the beginning of cyanidation is illustrated in There was no significant variation in the amount of cyanide consumed when lead nitrate concentration increased. The concentration of thiocyanate and copper in solution did not show noticeable variation either. Arsenic dissolution was very low (0.64–1.64 ppm) in the 0–200 g/t range of lead nitrate additions because arsenopyrite has a very low solubility in cyanide solutions. The duration of the pre-leach time had no significant effect on the efficiency of the leach. The leach residues had 10.02, 10.05 and 10.06 g/t Au for respectively 0.5, 4.0 and 12.0 h pre-leach. Also, the 0.5 h pre-leach slightly improved the initial gold leaching rate by ∼10%. Such a short pre-leach time could be achieved by adding lead nitrate to the grinding circuit, without losing tankage for cyanidation. The effect of the free cyanide concentration on gold leaching parameters was evaluated between 200 and 500 ppm NaCN. The results are illustrated in The pH did not affect the gold leaching kinetics. The dissolution kinetics were very similar at pH 10.2 and 11.2. The gold content of the two leach residues were also almost identical with only a difference of 0.09 g/t. The slight increase of the final gold content of the leach residue and the 14% (0.83 kg/t vs. 0.73 kg/t NaCN) increase in the cyanide consumed by reducing the pH from 11.2 to 10.2 indicates that it is more beneficial to operate the leach at a pH above 11. The effect of particle-size on gold leaching kinetics was assessed from 77% to 94% −37 microns. At 91% −37 microns, a 0.4 g/t increase in overall gold extraction was obtained. Overall gold extraction continued to increase by 0.9 g/t Au when grinding finer to 94% −37 microns. The steady state was reached in 24 h for the systems at 77% and 91% −37 microns but took 55 h for the system at 94% −37 microns. The finer grinding liberated more sulphide minerals and caused the cyanide consumption to increase by about 35%. The cyanide consumption increased from 0.87 kg/t to 1.20 kg/t NaCN. Finer grinding also increases the amount of arsenic dissolved which can cause environmental problems. Finer grinding does not seem beneficial in this case. The effect of the three different concentrations of dissolved oxygen (8, 10 and 16 ppm) in a 24 h leach is illustrated in The high oxygen content of the pulp, 16 ppm, did not increase as much the gold leaching rate as the lead nitrate did according to The use of a high dissolved oxygen concentration coupled with lead nitrate addition did not show any obvious advantages. It is not possible to rationalize these results and the authors would rather think that the combination of these two factors would have to be favourable for the leaching rate. The cyanide consumption for both systems shows only a 10% difference (0.55 vs. 0.50 kg/t). The use of a lower free cyanide concentration also showed a reduction of the effluent treatment cost at the plant scale. Monitoring of the arsenic in the pregnant solution indicated that the addition of lead nitrate did not appear to affect the dissolution of arsenic. Very fine grinding (91–94% −37 microns) and a 55 h cyanidation resulted in the highest concentration of dissolved arsenic (6.82–11.68 ppm). It appears that the absence of lead nitrate coupled with a high cyanide concentration (600 ppm NaCN) generates one of the highest arsenic dissolution values (4.72 ppm). No lead nitrate is added in the circuit and oxygen enrichment is controlled at ∼10–15 ppm in the first tank. Experimental results indicate that it would be beneficial to add lead nitrate to the pre-leach circuit as this practice significantly enhances the gold leaching kinetics. Although a direct addition of lead nitrate during cyanidation is less efficient for gold extraction and the leaching rate, the addition of 200 g/t lead nitrate in a 30 min pre-leach reduced the gold content of the tailings to 9.84 g/t in about 18 h. The cyanide consumption for a 24-h leach is 0.55 kg/t using 300 ppm NaCN ( Experimental work conducted in the mill allowed a 32% cyanide reduction which was later confirmed by the cyanidation study. Previous control of cyanide concentration in the plant was 700 ppm in the first leach tank to 350 ppm NaCN at the end. In September 2001, the cyanide consumption was reduced from 1.3 to 1.0 kg/t ( At a usual P The use of a high dissolved oxygen content, coupled with lead nitrate addition, did not show any obvious advantages ( The gold content of the plant tailings was reported to be between 8.5 and 9.0 g/t Au. This value is lower than the best recovery obtained in this study because of the higher arsenic content of the sample studied. Plant data showed that a higher arsenic content causes a higher gold content of the leach residue ( Fine grinding of the sample (94% −37 microns) showed that the unleachable gold represents 9.0 g/t. The effect of grinding indicates that the plant practice is correct in this aspect. No benefits would be seen by finer grinding because of the higher associated costs, slower gold leaching rate, higher cyanide consumption (1.2 kg/t NaCN), and higher dissolution of arsenic. Faster leaching kinetics were observed by using a higher DO and/or lead nitrate addition. A one month trial indicated that a throughput of 810 tpd can be sustained without detrimental effect on gold extraction ( This high grade gold ore sample contains 77.81 g/t Au with 92% of the gold in the −37 microns fraction. The unleachable gold is 11.6% and located in arsenopyrite and pyrite sulphide hosts. The fine grind 77% −37 microns is responsible for the important cyanide consumption because the cyanide consumers are at low concentration with only 1.7% pyrite and 0.2% pyrrhotite. The retention time can be significantly reduced by the addition of lead nitrate to the pre-leach or by a higher dissolved oxygen concentration in the pulp. A moderate dissolved oxygen concentration (10 ppm) coupled with 100 g/t lead nitrate addition in the pre-leach is more effective than using solely high oxygen enrichment of the pulp. Modifications of cyanide addition in the plant resulted in a 32% reduction in cyanide consumption with reduction of the effluent treatment costs. The trial on the higher throughput capacity indicated a feed rate of 810 t/d is achievable without reducing the performance. Finer grinding increased the gold extraction to some extent (tailings lower by 0.4 g/t) but it also increased arsenic dissolution and cyanide consumption. The authors wish to thank Klaus Tietz from Goldcorp Red Lake Mine for his participation. Thanks also to Jean Cloutier for the fire assay and other analysis, Gilles Laflamme and Dr. Rolando Lastra for the mineralogical analysis, John Graham and Phil Mulvihill for the other analyses and Dr. T.T. Chen and Amelia Atkin for the editorial review.