Prediction of ground vibration is of great importance in mitigation of blast-induced adverse effects. In this research, an innovative multivariate analysis procedure for prediction of blast-induced ground vibration is presented. Several blasts performed in a sandstone quarry were brought together and an extensive blast database is created. Blast design parameters, and the parameters related to ground vibration were considered to perform multivariate analysis. The hierarchical cluster analysis was used to separate the blasts data into different groups of similarity. Group memberships were analyzed and confirmed by the discriminant analysis. A linear discriminant equation was created to classify prospective blasts. Regression analysis was applied to develop prediction equations for the estimation of blast induced ground vibration. Validation analysis of the proposed equations was performed using test blasts. Prediction capability of the proposed models was found to be strong.Blasting is an important element of the mining system that includes drilling, blasting, loading, haulage, crushing and disposal. Blasting operation has to be designed to provide optimum rock fragmentation at minimum cost while considering environmental concerns. One of the important adverse effects of the use of explosives is ground vibration. The main parameters that are effective on occurrence of vibration may be divided into two groups. The first group consists of blast design parameters. The blast design parameters are controllable parameters and determined by the explosive engineers. The burden, spacing between holes, bench height, drillhole diameter, stemming height and subdrilling are all design parameters. The second group consists of rock mass parameters that are referred to as uncontrollable parameters. Various research studies have been performed to create a predictive equation for blast vibration. Because of the complexity of blast design parameters and rock mass parameters, it is difficult to develop a general equation. The blast researchers perform site-specific studies to predict and control blast vibration In this study, a new methodology is proposed to predict peak particle velocity. This methodology comprises application of the different multivariate analysis procedures step by step. The target of the methodology is to explore the structure of the blast data and to find similarities and differences among the recorded blasts. Classification of the blast data into homogeneous groups according to similarity enables the development of better equations for ground vibration prediction. As the first step, a blast database was created to use for multivariate analysis. The blast data were collected from a quarry in Istanbul. Istanbul is a fastest growing city in Turkey. Because of the increasing population density, many quarries that were once rural are now in suburban areas. Thus, nowadays the minimization of environmental effects is considered as an important part of mining activities. The cluster analysis was used to separate the blast data into different similarity groups. Group memberships were analyzed and confirmed by the discriminant analysis. Then, the regression analysis was used to develop a prediction equation for peak particle velocity for each group. Finally, a validation of the suggested models was performed. The field investigations were performed at the Akdaglar Quarry of Cendere basin located in the northern Istanbul. The quarry produces aggregate for concrete and asphalt plants. Current production capacity of the quarry is about 5000 The diameter of the drill holes is 89 All main blast design parameters are measured and recorded to develop a vibration prediction model. They are the burden ( Most of the blast design calculations start with burden determination. The determination of the proper burden based on hole diameter is one of the most important decisions made in blast design Thus, 8 parameters were used to establish a ground vibration prediction model. At the first stage, 6 blast design parameters ( At the last stage, 2 parameters were used to create peak particle velocity (PPV) prediction equations for each group: weight of explosive charge detonated per delay ( Several researchers have used multivariate analysis techniques (cluster analysis and discriminant analysis) in earth science and blasting operation. Zhou and Maerz Castro et al. Hudaverdi et al. used the hierarchical cluster analysis to separate the blasts data into different groups of similarity The cluster analysis which is also called segmentation analysis or taxonomy analysis is used to create relatively homogeneous groups of variables or cases. The hierarchical clustering technique is the most common clustering technique that is applied in earth science. This technique creates relatively homogeneous groups of cases or objects (the blasts in the conducted research) based on selected variables or characteristics. Each object is identified as a separate cluster and then the clusters are combined until only one is left As the first step of the hierarchical cluster analysis, a data matrix (proximity matrix) is formed. If there are ‘ In matrix In the data matrix, usually a standardization process is applied to weigh each measurable variable equally and to remove the effects of different units of measurement across the different variables. Each variable in the data matrix, The above operation is also called The basic criterion for any hierarchical clustering is the distance. The similarity between objects is determined based on the distance between each other The dendrogram resulting from the performed hierarchical cluster analysis As seen in the Dendrogram, the blasts are divided into two main clusters (groups) between rescaled distances of 18 and 25. The first group that appears on the left side of the dendrogram graphic is given in The mean variable vectors of the groups may be examined to understand which parameters are effective on the occurrence of two different groups. The discriminant analysis technique was applied to make sure that the blasts are grouped (clustered) correctly. Also, the discriminant analysis enables one to investigate the differences between Groups 1 and 2 more precisely. The discriminant function used to classify the blasts can be presented based on the unstandardized discriminant function coefficients as The discriminant score is the value resulting from applying the discriminant function formula Eq. A summary of the discriminant analysis is shown in  Wilks' lambda is another measure of a variable's potential. It tests whether there are differences between the means of the groups of the subjects on a combination of dependent variables Finally, two groups of blast were developed. Group 1 contains the blasts that have high Numerous researchers performed empirical studies to predict the damage level of blast-induced vibrations. The researchers created empirical formulations to predict particle velocity. Particle velocity is the most used and most reliable ground motion descriptor in blasting seismology. Empirical equations take into account weight of explosive detonated and distance between station and blasting point. As a first step, a scaled distance is derived by combining maximum charge per delay and the distance The equation used for the scaled distance is given below: As a second step, a prediction equation for peak particle velocity (PPV) is created by regression analysis. The formula given below, which was suggested by United States Bureau of Mines (USBM), is widely used in most researches to calculate peak particle velocity Regression analysis was applied to develop a prediction equation for the blasts of the Groups 1 and 2. The dependent variable of the multiple regression analysis is the measured peak particle velocity values (PPV) and the independent variable is scaled distance (SD). Eq.  Eq. At this stage, it is to be noted that it is possible to develop PPV prediction equations using various blast design parameters. Some limited researches have been carried out in development of prediction equations using multivariate regression analysis technique As a result of multivariate analysis, two prediction equations for PPV were developed. This provides an opportunity to use a different prediction model in accordance with operational blast design parameters. The results of the PPV prediction equations were compared with actual recorded PPV values. Eq.  Additionally, the blasts that were not included among the 88 blast data given in Groups 1 and 2 were used to analyze the prediction capability of Eqs. As seen in The classification process provided an opportunity to create a different prediction model in accordance with the blast design parameters. A prediction model developed for each similarity group (which is a sub set of whole data base) will definitely have a higher accuracy (because of less variability) than a prediction model developed for the whole database. Therefore, multivariate analysis procedure given in the paper allows one to develop better vibration prediction models. All existing models for prediction of blast induced ground vibration have a site-specific character. The developed vibration prediction equations should be updated depending upon the time and progressing of the mine. Cluster analysis and discriminant analysis are very flexible and adaptive techniques. When the need arises, the site engineers can change the blast database and/or add new blasts to the database. Also, it is possible to add new parameters to the model. The multivariate analysis model presented in this paper can be adapted to a particular situation or a particular mine easily. Application of the multivariate analysis in stages is a new approach introduced in this paper to develop ground vibration prediction model. The large number of blasts performed in a quarry was put together to create a blast database. Most of the important blast design parameters and the parameters related to ground vibration were incorporated in the developed model. As the first step, the hierarchical cluster analysis was applied to the whole database to separate blast data into similarity groups based on blast design parameters. Two groups resulted from the cluster analysis. In addition, the main parameters responsible for creating the differences between groups were identified. As the second step, the discriminant analysis was applied to confirm the different groups resulted from the cluster analysis. Also, demarcations between groups were established by developing the discriminant functions. As the final step, the regression analysis was applied to each group to come up with a vibration prediction model. Prediction capability of the proposed vibration prediction models was found to be strong. Blast induced ground vibration is a highly complex earth science problem. It depends on many geological/geotechnical and blast design parameters. Therefore, prediction of blast-induced vibration incorporating all the relevant parameters is an extremely challenging task. There are several suggested models appearing in the literature to predict ground vibration. Research continues on the topic to develop better models. The main contribution of this paper is the successful application of multivariate analysis techniques in developing better ground vibration prediction model.