We describe a two-sector, general-equilibrium model of productive sorting under output risk and incomplete information. Risk-neutral (entrepreneurial) individuals can either produce alone, or – acting as employers/insurers – team up with risk-averse (non-entrepreneurial) individuals. Although the latter option has the potential to generate more surplus, when effort is unobservable and risk is high, the moral hazard problem in mixed matches may be too severe for mixing to be attractive to both risk-aversion types, leading to a segregated equilibrium in which risk-averse individuals select low-risk, low-yield activities. An increase in the profitability of the riskier sector can then trigger a switch from a mixed to a segregated equilibrium and cause aggregate output to fall. Evidence from a panel of non-OECD countries – showing that the presence of uninsured, small-scale mining firms has a negative impact on the relationship between natural resource exports and agrarian productivity – suggests that this ‘high-yield sector curse’ might be present in natural resource-rich, low-income countries.Does the presence of high-yield, risky sectors in an economy decrease productivity in the rest of the economy? The theoretical argument underpinning this conjecture goes as follows. Absent formal insurance markets, a lack of risk bearing capacity in any given sector can induce a choice of low-risk, low-yield modes of production in that sector. Productivity differentials across sectors will thus reflect the intersectoral allocation of entrepreneurial risk-taking, which, in turn, depends on intersectoral risk differentials. Large risk differentials can lead to a concentration of entrepreneurial risk-taking in the riskier sectors and, consequently, to a drain of entrepreneurial risk-taking from the rest of the economy. To formalize this argument, we describe a model of productive sorting under contracting with incomplete information, where risk-neutral, entrepreneurial type individuals and risk-averse individuals can either work alone (autarky) or work with other individuals in production teams in which both partners must exert non-contractible effort, and where individuals and teams sort themselves across alternative production activities. Risk-averse individuals can only be induced to work in the riskier, higher-return activities when teamed up with risk-neutral individuals who can insure them. However, high risk exacerbates the moral hazard problem for mixed-type teams. As a result, starting from a non-segregated equilibrium with mixed teams choosing to operate in a moderately risky activity, an increase in the profitability of a higher-risk activity can drive risk-neutral individuals to switch to autarky, moving to the higher-risk activity rather than acting as employers/insurers in the moderately risky activity; when this happens, risk-averse individuals, left with no insurance, switch to a low-yield, riskless activity, and the aggregate level of output falls — a mechanism that could be described as a ‘high-yield sector curse’. This result is consistent with analyses from the theoretical literature on matching. The scenario depicted by our model is representative of the productive structure of many LDCs, where almost two-thirds of the workforce are employed in very small enterprises (enterprises with less than five workers; The most commonly invoked explanation of “entrepreneurial failure” in less developed countries (e.g. The ‘high-yield sector curse’ we highlight could be a contributing factor for the low productivity levels that are observed in the traditional sectors of many low-income countries – which in turn can explain much of the observed differences in aggregate labor productivity across countries ( The last section of the paper presents some empirical evidence suggesting that the mechanism we describe could also be at work in low-income, natural resource-rich countries, providing a new and complementary explanation for the ‘natural resource curse’ that afflicts many of those economies. We report results of cross-country panel regressions on the relationship between resource abundance and agrarian productivity in poorer countries, revealing patterns that are consistent with this interpretation. Even after controlling for conflict, non-fuel resource abundance is found to have a negative impact on agrarian productivity, and only so in those countries with a greater concentration of artisanal and small-scale mining firms (which have limited insurance or risk diversification opportunities). In contrast, fuel resource abundance does not appear to have a significant impact on agrarian productivity. This finding is consistent with our model's predictions — given that all oil and natural gas production is carried out by large, well-insured firms. There is an economy populated by finite numbers of individuals of two types, indexed by The economy produces goods from labor supplied by the individuals. Production can be carried out either by single individuals or by teams of two individuals. There are three alternative production activities, indexed by Production teams in activity 0 obtain 2 As already stated, activities are ranked with respect to their riskiness and with respect to the risk-free surplus they can generate, with riskier activities offering a higher risk-free surplus to both types: These assumptions imply that the high-risk technology is an efficient choice under perfect risk sharing, although, in risk-adjusted terms, it might be dominated by one of the other two technologies from the point of view of the risk-averse type. We shall assume that the only available contractual arrangements are between individuals within a production team, i.e. individuals cannot enter into parallel insurance contracts; as we shall discuss in We can disregard single-type teams, as these offer no advantage relative to autarky, as well as mixed teams in the safe activity, which also cannot improve on autarky in the safe activity. Without loss of generality, a contract for a mixed team in activity If effort is fully observable and verifiable, payments can be conditioned on it. Full effort in a mixed match ( Constraint If individual effort levels are not observable, or if they are observable but not verifiable, the contract must also satisfy the following incentive compatibility constraint: We can disregard arrangements under which either An equilibrium for this economy is given by a configuration of production teams and autarkic producers, each selecting an activity, such that no two autarkic individuals wish to form a team, no individuals in a team wish to switch to autarky, and no two individuals in a team wish to rematch with others in a new team. For the sake of exposition, we start by characterizing equilibria for a scenario where activities 1 and 2 – the risky activities – are identical, and, without loss of generality, we assume that a team or individual not operating in the riskless activity (activity 0) always selects activity 1. We show that whether individuals with different risk attitudes decide to mix or segregate depends on the level of production risk: when risk is low, individuals form mixed-type teams in sector 1; when it is high, segregation occurs — risk-neutral individuals selecting activity 1 and risk-averse individuals selecting the risk-free activity. To characterize equilibria, we note that, since risk-averse individuals obtain a surplus Finally, given that the LHS of Eq. When effort is fully observable, it can be readily shown that a non-segregated outcome will also be the only possible equilibrium:  Proofs are given in Full insurance, when possible, makes payoff concavity irrelevant and thus restores transferability. In contrast, if effort is unobservable or unverifiable, the risk-neutral type cannot insure the risk-averse type efficiently (in a first-best sense) and hence may be unable, in a mixed-type contract, to secure a surplus above that which it can obtain by segregating. Then, two kinds of equilibria are possible: a non-segregated equilibrium such as the one described above; and a segregated equilibrium, where all risk-neutral individuals select autarky in the risky, high-surplus technology (which, by Eq. In order to state this result formally, we first need to derive conditions for the existence of an optimal, incentive-compatible contract between a risk-averse and risk-neutral individual. Given Eq. Such a contract will only be feasible if production is not too risky:  As output risk increases, moral hazard makes insurance provision within mixed-type teams increasingly difficult. Above a certain level of risk ( Consider next scenarios where activity 2 is a higher-risk, higher-yield activity, and interpret this activity as representing an alternative production sector. We show that a positive shock in this second, alternative sector can induce a switch from a mixed-type equilibrium in the first sector to a type segregated equilibrium, with risk-neutral individuals migrating to the second sector and risk-averse individuals switching to the low-yield activity in the first sector. The fact that activity 2 yields a higher return than activity 1 means that autarkic risk-neutral individuals will always select activity 2, i.e. Examining problem  Let us then consider a situation where  An increase in profitability in the high-risk sector attracts risk-neutral individuals, who are unable to profitably insure risk-averse individuals in the high-risk sector but can now obtain a higher surplus than they could obtain by staying in the low-risk sector through mixed-type teams. From the above, we also obtain a clear-cut prediction about the effect of such a switch on aggregate productivity:  If an increase in the profitability of the riskier sector triggers segregation, it also brings about a fall in aggregate output — an occurrence that can be described as a ‘high-yield sector curse’. This happens because, by Eq. Only economies where production in sector 1 is not too risky ( The segregation outcome we have described can be interpreted as an ‘entrepreneurial drag’: high-yield, high-risk activities, can divert risk takers from lower-risk activities in which they could take on the role of entrepreneurs/insurers vis-à-vis more risk-averse individuals. The key mechanism at work here is that a given extent of informational asymmetry within a contract has a greater or smaller adverse effect on surplus generation through insurance depending on the degree of production risk. Hence, intersectoral risk differentials can give rise to a segregated, ‘dual’ structure even where there are no intrinsic information differentials across sectors. The availability of parallel insurance contracts outside the production unit can change the picture. Parallel insurance contracts suffer from the same informational problem as insurance arrangements in mixed matches; so, when risk is too high, the moral hazard problem will make insurance unprofitable even for an outside insurer. In some cases, however, when risk is not too high, parallel insurance can restore productive efficiency. If an outside insurer is just as able to observe effort or output as a individual directly involved in production is, then, in the scenario depicted by Our results were obtained under the assumption that production in teams has the same productivity and risk characteristic as autarkic production, but our argument readily generalizes to scenarios where this is not the case. If, in any particular activity, production teams dominate autarkic units either in terms of risk or in terms of output, then single-type teams (featuring no-insurance, symmetric contractual arrangements) would be selected as the best outside option by each type instead of autarky. If, on the other hand, teams have a disadvantage over single producers, the net insurance surplus achievable in mixed teams would be further limited even in the absence of moral hazard. Either way – subject to relatively straightforward qualifications – all of our arguments and results would still apply. Also, the discontinuous jump from one type of equilibrium to another would not occur if, in either sector, returns were decreasing in aggregate (e.g. because of the existence of sector-specific factors in limited supply). In a scenario with decreasing returns, an exogenous increase in the profitability of the high-risk sector would lower the proportion of mixed teams in sector 1, with results qualitatively analogous to those obtained in a constant-returns scenario. Contrary to popular belief, small enterprises dominate the extractive sectors of LDCs: about half of the world mineral extraction is carried out by artisanal and small-scale mining firms. The term ‘artisanal and small-scale mining’ (ASM) refers to mining by individuals, groups, families or cooperatives, carried out with minimal or no mechanization, often in the informal (or illegal) sector of the market. According to the Global Report on Artisanal Small-Scale Mining ( According to International Labor Organization, small-scale mining falls into two broad categories: (i) mining and quarrying of industrial minerals, surface coal and construction materials on a small scale; and (ii) mining of relatively high-value minerals, notably gold and precious stones. This distinction is important since the profile of firms in the first category is very different from that of firms in the second. The first category involves low-income firms producing mostly for local markets, and generally employing poor, low-skill individuals attempting to escape poverty. In contrast, firms in the second category produce mostly for exports and employ relatively high-income, risk-taking individuals with varying levels of education and no sector-specific training. The above anecdotal evidence supports an interpretation of the export-oriented ASM sector as a high-yield, high-risk sector. The organization of production in the ASM sector also comes close to our model's characterization: in every mining pit there is generally a small team of miners (usually 5 to 10 people), remunerated not with fixed wages but with a share of the total revenue, and thus bearing part of the risk. Our model could thus provide a new and complementary explanation for the so-called ‘natural resource curse’ — the consistent finding in cross-country regressions that a country's share of natural resources in GDP is a strong negative predictor of economic performance: We explore this conjecture by performing cross-country panel regressions on the relationship between resource abundance and agrarian productivity in poorer countries. We base our empirical exercise on the World Bank WDI 2007 dataset, focusing on the period 1970–2006. The WDI dataset includes time series country data on fuel exports and other mineral (non-fuel) exports; the latter figure includes products extracted by the ASM sector: crude minerals (excluding coal, petroleum and precious stones, ISIC3, sec 27), metalliferous ores (sec 28) and non ferrous metal (sec 68). The WDI dataset also includes time series data on a number of other economic indicators, including agricultural labor productivity, arable land and irrigation, agricultural mechanization, GDP, inflation. We perform panel OLS regressions using the following specification: We focus on the agrarian sector for several reasons: (i) the only available measure of non-agricultural productivity in the WDI includes the extractive sector; (ii) the manufacturing sector of ASM countries is quite small; (iii) migration of workers to the ASM sector typically originates from the agrarian sector. The distinction between fuel and non-fuel minerals is important because the extraction of almost all other fossil fuels (oil, natural gas, non-surface coal) generally requires capital-intensive technologies, and is only carried out by large (often foreign-owned) firms. The focus on natural resource exports can be justified on the grounds that, for most poorer countries, natural resource exports (in particular non-fuel) correlate highly with production. Moreover, as already noted, the use of export data has the advantage of isolating the higher-yield, higher-risk segment of the ASM sector. Given that the concentration of ASM firms is highest in ASM countries, that high-yield, high-risk ASM firms produce for export, and that their output consists mostly of non-fuel products, total mineral non-fuel exports in ASM countries should be more strongly correlated to output by high-yield, high-risk ASM firms than other natural resource export measures are. Accordingly, our model would predict a negative correlation between non-fuel mineral exports and non-mining productivity – and more so in ASM countries – but a much weaker correlation (or no correlation) between productivity and fuel exports. To be sure, evidence of this sort is at the best suggestive; but it does accord broadly with the basic prediction of our model. The countries included in the sample are non-OECD countries (the complete list of countries in our dataset is given in In this specification there is a potential problem of endogeneity, as individuals might move to the mining sector in response to negative shocks in the agrarian sector – implying that a negative coefficient on the resource exports my occur because of reverse causality from agrarian productivity to mining exports. To avoid this, we use one-year lags for all export variables. Results are reported in When we only control for land quality (column 1), the coefficient for non-fuel exports is negative and statistically significant for ASM countries, while it is positive and significant for non-ASM countries — which lends support to our interpretation. Also, in line with our model's predictions, fuel exports do not depress agrarian productivity; on the contrary, they have a positive and significant impact. In our second specification (column 2) we introduce a broader range of controls pertaining to agrarian production, all of which have the expected sign. Findings are substantially unchanged, the only exception being that now the coefficient on fuel exports by ASM countries becomes insignificant. In our third specification (column 3), we include the logarithm of GDP amongst the controls. This is essentially for two reasons: (i) it may capture a shock in the agrarian sector and therefore control for the effect due to the reverse causality; and (ii) it acts as a control for changes in exports arising from changes in domestic demand rather than output changes. The negative coefficient on non-fuel exports for ASM countries is in this case even larger in magnitude and more significant than before. Coefficients on all other natural resource export variables are essentially unchanged. In our fourth (column 4) specification, we introduce a dummy variable for conflict, which is found to be insignificant and has no impact on coefficients for the natural resources export variables. Our fifth and final specification (column 5) also includes inflation. The associated coefficient is negative and significant, but there are no substantial changes in the coefficients for natural resource exports. In scenarios where Let us begin with the case Continuity of Combining Eqs. Given assumption and such that Next, we show that For Finally, we can note that for As we did earlier for the one-sector case, we can identify a value  As in the proof of As shown in the preceding proof, we have ∂ This happens if and only if 2 Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo Dem. Rep., Congo Rep., Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt Arab Rep., El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran Islamic Rep., Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao PDR, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Macedonia FYR, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands Antilles, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela RB, Vietnam, Yemen Rep., Zambia, Zimbabwe. Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Kenya, India, Indonesia, Laos, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Myanmar, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Niger, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Surinam, Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe.