Cables and wires have a widespread use due to their application in electric power and data transmission. Since they consist of a conductive core (Cu or Al) and an insulating layer (polymer), they can be brought back to life after disposal through recycling in the form of secondary raw materials such as copper, aluminium and/or polymer. The aim of this paper is to research the possibilities of electrostatic separation use for separating aluminium left in residue fraction after the process of recycling Al waste electric cables, as well as to determine the influence of operating parameters and the optimal separation conditions. Waste fraction characterisation has determined that aluminium is mainly found in small–size particles (<2 mm) with the mass fraction higher than 60%. During the research planning the central composite design was used and three operating variables of an electrostatic separator were tested: roll speed, voltage and separation splitter position. Results have shown that it is possible to obtain a concentrate with the Al mass fraction of 97.86% at 91.20% recovery. It has been shown that the splitter position has the most significant influence on the grade of concentrate and recovery. It has also been shown that the roll speed individually and the interaction of the roll speed and splitter position have a significant influence on the grade of concentrate.Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is one of the fastest growing waste streams, globally and locally, regardless of the development level of the country, i.e. the same phenomenon is evident in developed, developing and transition economies ( Cables and wires are used for electric power and data transmission and have a widespread use in transportation, civil engineering, communication and commodities industry, vehicles and most of all electric and electronic equipment ( Cables consist of a conductive core (a conductor, Cu or Al) and an insulation layer (non–conductor, usually polymer materials, silicone rubber, polyethylene (PE), flexible PVC, etc.) ( Xu et al. in their recently published article have given a very good overview of research conducted in the field of cables recycling up to present ( Park et al. used the plate-type induction-electrostatic separator in order to separate covering plastics from particulate copper in cable waste ( Unlike the research conducted so far, which aimed at recycling cables, this paper focusses on analysing residue fraction after the recycling of cables with the intention of increasing the recovery of aluminium, which would otherwise end up as waste. We applied electrostatic separation, used for separating conductors from non–conductors. Additional goals of the research include determining the influence of individual operating parameters on the grade of concentrate and Al recovery, and defining optimal separation conditions. A sample of residue fraction left behind after the Al cable recycling was taken at the electric cables recycling plant “Metis“ in Ogulin, Republic of Croatia. Waste cables are first separated manually based on their dimensions (diameter and length) and composition (Cu cables, Al cables and Al/Fe cables from high–voltage transmission lines). They are then cut using shearing machines to the maximal length of 1 m and the outer insulation (outer sheath) is peeled, and moved to the recycling line, where it undergoes primary and secondary comminution and afterwards air separation. In the air separator “heavy“ (conductors – metal) and “light“ components (insulators – polymers) are separated as the final products of the recycling. The “heavy“ component is usually Cu or Al granulate with the grain size of maximum 6 mm, and the “light“ fraction consists primarily of insulators (and also Cu or Al, due to the faults in the separation process) and is sent to disposal. The sample of 20 kg of “light” fraction from Al cables recycling process was taken for the laboratory testing. So, the sample characterisation (in relation to the cable composition) was partially conducted in the recycling plant during the sampling: the sample consists of a self–supporting overhead cable bundle which is used for electric power distribution in low–voltage city, suburban and rural networks, for public lighting and household connections, and installed on columns, consoles and house fronts. The sample cable consists of cross-linked polyethylene XLPE (more recently marked as PE–X) of black colour as an insulator and Al as the (phase) conductor. Grain size distribution and mass fraction of components ( The obtained grain sizes (classes) are weighed and the mass fraction of components (Al and PE–X) in larger classes is determined by manual selection based on visual characteristics, while a simple heavy medium (sink–float) separation was used for smaller classes in the medium density of 1.8 g/cm Physical separation methods use the difference in one of the physical characteristics in order to cause the difference in movement (separation) of components composing the feed material under the influence of a certain force field. Since Al is a very good conductor, and PE is known as a very good insulator, it was decided that the electrostatic separation used for separation of conductive and non-conductive materials will be applied ( The separation principle is as follows ( Operating parameters of a separator, the influence of which was the subject of this research, included voltage, roll speed and the separation splitter (11) position (inclination). After operating parameters had been adjusted, tests were conducted and the concentrate (conductors) and the tailings (non–conductor and middling together) were obtained as final products. These products were weighed, and then the grains of Al and PE–X were separated manually ( So, the efficiency of electrostatic separation is monitored and compared to two basic technological parameters: grade of concentrate and recovery. The grade of concentrate The testing conditions and the results are presented in The table shows that the recovery varies in the interval smaller than 10% (from 91.20% in test 16–100.00 in tests 4, 12, 15 and 17). Therefore, the focus was mostly on the grade of concentrate, which varied from 62.91.% (test 8) to 97.86% (test 16). Since the mass fraction of Al was 62.75% already in the feed, in most tests (14 out of 17 in total) only a slight increase (within 10%) of the usable component (Al) occurred in the concentrate in comparison to the initial value. This testifies about the greatest importance of the selection of values of operating parameters of a separator. The highest grade of concentrate of 97.86% was obtained in the test number 16 with the maximum separation splitter inclination. The influence of specific operating variables on the grade of concentrate is evident in At the middle voltage of 25 kV ( At the maximum splitter inclination angle in test 17 (  The models for the grade ( The validation of the model was performed by an additional test with the following values of operating parameters (independent variables or factors): Rs = –0.5 (60 m/min), V = +0.5 (26.5 kV), and Sp = +0.8 (110°). The results of this additional test were grade of concentrate of 78.19% with Al recovery of 100.00%, while the results obtained by the models were grade of 79.70% and recovery of 97.46%. The same separator model was used within some earlier tests ( Jeon et al. used triboelectrostatic separation for separation of PVC and rubber from insulation plastics from communication cable scrap ( The testing of separation of Cu from waste cables using the plate-type induction-electrostatic separator for separation of covering plastics from particulate copper in cable waste has been conducted in Japan ( To conclude, the testing conducted within our research has shown that the electrostatic separation can separate more than 90% of Al from the residue of electric cables recycling process with the grade of concentrate of almost 98%. On the one hand, this contributes to a better overall recovery of Al at recycling, and on the other hand Al is removed from the residue fraction and this additional separation step results in almost residue-free PE–X. The electrostatic separation uses difference in electrical conductivity and is usually used to separate metals from other non-conductive materials. The results obtained in this research can serve as a guideline (in terms of values of operating parameters during separation) when testing separation of other metals from nonconductive material, primarily those with similar electrical conductivity (Ag, Cu, Au). High-tension separators operate on feeds containing particles between 60 and 500 µm in diameter ( The electrostatic separation requires dry raw material and its industrial application is possible in the plants with dry material processing. In addition, for efficient separation, the layer of material which comes to separation should not be thicker than the diameter of a single particle. It follows that this method is not suitable for large processing capacities in industrial applications. For this reason, in the case of high capacity, it cannot be recommended as the main process, but for the cleaning of concentrate (increase of metal content in the final product) or for the processing of middling (increase of metal recovery), but after the main process. Eventually, it can be used as the main process in the case of smaller quantities, depending on the capacity of the used separator. Determining grain size distribution of residue after Al cables recycling has shown that the grains in the range from 1 to 3.15 mm account for even 84.42%, whereby class 1 to 2 mm was more prominent (45.73%) than class 2 to 3.15 mm (38.69%). Determining the composition of individual classes has shown that classes smaller than 2 mm contain the highest mass fraction of Al (from 62.75% to 76.52%). The Al separation was conducted only for grain size from 1 to 2 mm, due to large mass fraction of 45.7% and high Al share of 62.8%. Separation test results have shown that electrostatic separation can result in concentrate with the Al content of 97.86% at the recovery of 91.20% in optimal conditions (medium roll speeds and voltage, and larger splitter inclination). As far as the operating parameters are concerned, it has been shown that the splitter position has a great influence both on the grade of concentrate and recovery. Roll speed itself and interaction of the splitter position and roll speed also have a significant influence on the grade of concentrate. The influence of other operating variables and their interaction is not significant. Future research could include the use of electrostatic separation for class 2–3.15 mm due to its large mass fraction in the total fraction (38.69%), regardless of the smaller Al content (7.24%) – in case of good results the Al recovery would be somewhat increased and the residue–free PE–X fraction would be obtained. Other classes cannot be recommended for testing due to their small mass fraction in the waste fraction and partially due to their small Al content. Having in mind a relatively significant difference in the density of Al and PE–X, the testing using gravity concentration for the comparison with the electrostatic separation could also be conducted. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the