Biosorption of heavy metals and dyes is a promising technology that involves the removal of toxic metals from industrial wastes. The present study aims to screen the bacterial strains isolated from soils and polluted pond for their potential biosorption of both cationic dye and cadmium. Bacillus catenulatus JB-022 strain removed 58% and 66% of cationic basic blue 3 (BB3) and cadmium (Cd(II)) at the respective concentrations of 2000 mg/L and 150 mg/L. The biosorption equilibrium data were well fitted by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm, and the kinetic studies indicated that the biosorption followed the pseudo-second-order model. The biosorption kinetics showed that the equilibrium was reached within 10 min and 5 min for BB3 and Cd(II), respectively. According to the Langmuir model, the maximum uptakes of BB3 and Cd(II) by the JB-022 biomass were estimated to be 139.74 and 64.28 mg/g, respectively. To confirm the surface morphology and functional groups, field emission scanning electron microscope, energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer, X-ray diffraction, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy analyses were carried out, and the results revealed that the biomass of JB-022 has carboxyl and phosphonate groups as potential surface functional groups capable of binding to cationic pollutants. In conclusion, B. catenulatus JB-022 is proposed as an excellent biosorbent with potentially important applications in removal of cationic pollutants from wastewaters.Dyes are widely used in the textile industry for the coloration of products and believed to be toxic and carcinogenic Biosorption is a promising technology to remove and/or recover ionic pollutants such as heavy metals, anionic/cationic dyes, and precious metals Cell wall composition is one of the most important factors affecting bacterial biosorbing properties. The anionic functional groups, which are present in the thick peptidoglycan and teichoic acids, known as the polyalcohols of gram-positive bacteria, and in an additional outer membrane composed of phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides of gram-negative bacteria, are the major elements responsible for the anionic character and the metal-binding ability of the cell wall Ionic dye biosorption including BB3 by different biomasses has been studied by several researchers By considering the aforementioned conditions, appropriate bacterial strains were screened for BB3 and Cd(II) biosorption. As the most potent sorbent, The biosorbents used in this study were the Basic Blue 3 (BB3, C In order to evaluate the stability of BB3 and Cd(II) under different pH conditions, BB3 and Cd(II) solutions with an initial concentration of 500 mg/L and 300 mg/L, respectively, were prepared. Thirty milliliters of each solution was placed in each bottle without biomass, and the desired pH during the experiment was attained using either 0.1 M NaOH or 0.1 M HNO According to biosorption experiments were carried out in a 50 mL polypropylene conical tube as described in the literature Kinetic experiments were conducted by agitating 60 mL of the BB3-bearing solution with 0.6 g of the biomass at 160 rpm and 25°C in a shaker. The samples were collected at predetermined time intervals to evaluate the equilibrium time. Isotherm experiments were carried out by placing various BB3 concentrations, ranging from 100 to 2500 mg/L, in contact with 0.3 g of the biomass. The amount of BB3 sorbed on the biomass, All Cd(II) experimental procedures were the same as those used in the BB3 experiments. The pH edge experiments were conducted with 300 mg/L of the initial Cd(II) concentration and 1.67 g/L of the biomass. Kinetic experiments were conducted by agitating 60 mL of the Cd(II)-bearing solution with 0.2 g of the biomass at 160 rpm and 25°C in a shaker. Isotherm experiments were carried out by placing various Cd(II) concentrations, ranging from 30 to 300 mg/L, in contact with 0.05 g of the biomass. The surface functional groups of the JB-022 strain were analyzed using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (Spectrum GX, Perkin Elmer). For the FTIR study, samples of unloaded and Cd(II)-loaded biomass of the JB-022 strain were dried first and then ground before performing FTIR analysis. The dried powder was prepared as KBr pellets. The specific peaks within the range of 4000–400 cm Based on 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA gene analyses and the biochemical identification of the organisms by the analytical and according to the literature The absorption spectra of BB3 (500 mg/L) solutions were measured under different pH conditions. The absorption peak, corresponding to the color of BB3 at The absorption spectra of Cd(II) (300 mg/L) solutions were measured at different pHs. The absorption spectra within the pH range 2–8 showed very similar patterns. However, the absorption spectrum at pH 9 was dramatically reduced and some solid mass was found at the bottom of the Cd(II) solution after centrifugation. Therefore, the biosorption experiments with Cd(II)were only conducted within the pH range from 3 to 8. The sorption performance of the biosorbents JB-000, JB-001, JB-002, JB-003, JB-004, JB-008, JB-009, JB-011, JB-016, JB-022 and JB-028 were compared. As can be seen in The solution pH is one of the most important factors affecting the biosorption process. In the first series of experiments, the influence of equilibrium pH on the biosorption of BB3 and Cd(II) was examined ( The examination of the effect of solution pH on BB3 uptake by various strains showed the maximum dye uptake at pH 7 and 9. Therefore, a pH value of 9 was selected for the other BB3 biosorption experiments ( BB3 and Cd are present in the forms of positively charged ions, and thus exhibit electrostatic attraction towards the negatively charged cell surface. In particular, the carboxyl groups present in The adsorption isotherm plays an important role in the predictive modeling procedures for the analysis of an adsorption system. The Langmuir isotherm is one of the models most commonly used to describe the sorption of a solute onto solid sorbents. Further, the Langmuir model serves to estimate the maximum uptake values, where these could not be determined experimentally The various constants relating to the Langmuir isotherm models for BB3 and Cd(II) ions using various microorganisms were calculated and are presented in Since sorption is a time-dependent process, the kinetic rate must be known for the design and evaluation of sorbents. In wastewater treatment, sorption kinetics is significant, as it provides the mechanism of the sorption reactions and valuable insights into the reaction pathways The experimental biosorption kinetic data were described using non-linear pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models. The rate constants ( The FE-SEM micrographs of the Cd(II)-free ( The crystal phases of the JB-022 biomass, before and after Cd(II) biosorption, were determined by XRD ( In order to investigate the functional groups of the JB-022 biomass, the FTIR spectra of the raw biomass were analyzed. According to a previous study The FTIR spectra of native JB-022 and Cd(II)-loaded biomass in the range of 400–4000 cm Before and after Cd(II) absorption, the appreciable change in the spectra at the peak of 1737 cm FE-SEM, EDX, XRD and FTIR results revealed the potential carboxyl and phosphonate groups as potential surface functional groups on the JB-022 biomass to bind to cationic pollutants. Among several bacterial strains isolated, This work was supported by the