Mechanistic modelling is an important tool allowing engineers to understand how enhanced biological phosphorus removal (EBPR) works both at a microbiological level as well as at a process operations level. In addition, mechanistic models also serve as tools for predicting, if not always the exact performance of an EBPR system under given conditions, at least the relative effects on performance of various factors such as wastewater composition, solids retention time (SRT), anaerobic zone retention time as well as many others. The ongoing efforts to improve mechanistic models of EBPR processes of The paper of Defining the structure for kinetic expressions represents a greater challenge in many respects than defining the stoichiometric structure because the factors involved in regulating the kinetics of PAOs and GAOs have not been well studied. In the case of anaerobic VFA sequestration, Lopez-Vazquez et al. have followed the example of many others in defining the kinetic expression as first-order with respect to biomass concentration and subjected to saturation kinetics with respect to VFA concentration. This structure has proved to allow for good predictions of batch experimental data and would seem to represent a satisfactory level of model simplification. Other switching functions are included in the kinetic expression to account for polyphosphate and glycogen limitation but these functions are simplified to a value of ‘1’ for typical operating conditions. Developing kinetic expressions for aerobic PHA utilization, however, is more complicated because there are three competing processes (growth, polyphosphate storage and glycogen storage) each of which is a function of PHA availability. The amount of PHA utilized for growth or glycogen storage will, as a result, have an impact on the amount of PHA available for utilization for polyphosphate storage, thus affecting the phosphorus removal performance of the system. This was accounted for by  Despite these advantages, the approach proposed by A second difficulty that the Murnleitner aerobic model structure introduces is that it introduces confusion with respect to yield coefficients. For example, glycogen formation from biomass in the As an alternative to the