Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has become one of the fastest growing solid waste. The development of WEEE treatment facility will promote the infrastructure to realize sustainable waste management. At present, the treatment of cathode ray tube televisions (TVs) forms the dominant part of the WEEE treatment system in China. In this paper, a life cycle assessment is conducted to estimate the energy use and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions arising from CRT TV treatment. Three treatment scenarios for CRT TV are analysed: (i) the current situation in China (Current China Scenario), (ii) one with encouragement from China’s WEEE Directive (WEEE Directive Scenario), and (iii) the development of more advanced techniques (Advanced Technique Scenario). The results show that the changes in energy use caused by the three scenarios are −526.51, −475, and −556.07MJ, respectively. Meanwhile, the relevant GHG emissions are −19.59, −20.43, and −25.82kg CO2-eq, respectively. The scenario involving encouragement from China’s WEEE Directive offers no benefit compared to the current situation in terms of energy use and GHG emissions. Moreover, the Advanced Technique Scenario is more efficient than the Current China Scenario. In consideration of the main contribution, the results reveal that CRT glass recycling contributes the highest energy use and GHG emissions to CRT TV treatment, besides, displaced plastic and displaced glass account for the main proportions with regard to any accrued environmental gain. A sensitivity analysis is also carried out to quantify the influence of collection efficiency and the lead (Pb) recovery rate on environmental performance. In so doing, some recommendations are proposed to realize the sustainable development of the WEEE treatment system in China.Advances in Information and Communication Technology (ICT), increasing consumption of electronic product, and growing spending power have resulted in fast growth in the amount of WEEE (i.e., e-waste) on a global scale ( In China, the amount of discarded items among the five most common kinds of household appliances (television, washing machine, air conditioner, refrigerator, and computer) will increase from 130 million units in 2010–221 million units by 2020 ( China’s The life cycle assessment (LCA) can be used to analyse the implications arising from the implementation of WEEE legislation ( This study identified typical treatment options for waste CRT TVs and determined whether, or not, the suggested recycling techniques could potentially result in environmental benefits. By using a rigorous LCA methodology, the environmental implications of the proposed China’s WEEE Directive are quantified in comparison with current practices in China. Meanwhile, some advanced techniques, such as, website-based collection and bio-hydrometallurgical processing are also considered. Relevant results from this study could support decision-making for government sectors and enterprise managers, so that they could adjust their current policies on environmental management, and improve WEEE treatment techniques. The aim of this study was to explore the environmental implications of waste TV treatment, and identify the opportunities of different recycling techniques to improve WEEE management in China. To these ends, an environmental LCA was performed, with respect to life-cycle energy use and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The life-cycle energy consumption was measured by primary energy demand (MJ). The total GHG emissions were evaluated in terms of CO The functional unit was a single TV set, specifically a 29-inch colour CRT screen. According to a sampling analysis in licensed disassembling plant, the average composition of the TV was as follows: panel glass, 19.51 Influenced by the long-term development of the waste collection industry, WEEE in China is currently collected in traditional ways. Collectors ride electric tricycles along streets to collect WEEE, which is then gathered and transported from disperse sites to transfer stations. After being trans-shipped many times, the WEEE is transported to special recycling plants. In recent years, with the unceasing fusion between Internet technology and traditional industries, a WEEE online collection platform based on various websites has gradually appeared in China. In addition, it has become an important area of development and is supported by the government. In 2015, Green Eco-manufacture, the typical WEEE disassembling and recycling plant in China, officially launched its website-based collection project. This project aims to collect WEEE based on website and mobile APPs: it collects WEEE through online trading and uniform offline logistics as a template governing its operations. In addition, a batch of Internet companies dedicated to the collection of WEEE has gradually appeared, such as Aihuishou and Taolv. Moreover, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) issued their Licensed treatment plants in China mainly use workers on assembly lines to manually disassemble CRT TVs. The components of CRT TVs that can be disassembled by hand mainly include CRT tubes, plastic shells, printed circuit boards (PCBs), electrical wires, loudspeakers, As an important disassembled part, CRT tubes need to be further separated to funnel glass and panel glass components. The panel glass comprises the front part of the display. The funnel glass is the conical part of the CRT at the rear of the set. So far, the hot-wire method and the diamond cutting method are the dominant methods used to dismantle funnel glass and panel glass. Thereinto, the former is most commonly utilized (85% of licensed plants) ( PCBAs are printed wiring boards (PWBs) populated with electronic components. Before PCBAs are further treated, the components thereon have to be removed. In this way, PWBs can be used to recover valuable metals. Some of the components can be recycled to extract precious metals, while parts including capacitors and resistors need to be safely disposed as they contain hazardous substances. The recycling of waste CRT presents a challenge due to the increasing amounts and high lead content ( The MEP and the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) released the PWBs are considered as the most valuable components of WEEE ( Bio-hydrometallurgical process is an appropriate route for extracting metals from low-grade ores. In recent years, it has also been applied in metal recovery from waste PWBs ( Among the various technical approaches for recycling PWBs, the mechanical-pyrometallurgical process is preferred by the relevant administrative departments in China. The This study covered the whole life cycle of waste CRT TV, ranging from collection, through transport (from collection site to disassembling plant), disassembly and recycling, up to, and including, final disposal. As shown in In China, waste CRT TVs are primarily collected in a traditional manner involving streetside pick-ups. After being trans-shipped several times, they are transported to disassembling plants. The disassembled plastic shells are shredded at first, then washed and finally granulated to serve as secondary materials. CRT panels and funnels are separated with hot-wire method: after being shredded, panel glass is used to produce foam glass, while the treated funnel glass is used as a material to produce fluorescent lamp tubes. In addition, fluorescent powder is delivered to treatment plants as a hazardous waste for disposal to landfill. Except for the capacitors and resistors on PCBAs which should be safely disposed, other electronic components are recycled. For those PWBs with their electronic components removed, the copper is recycled using a mechanical-pyrometallurgical process. While non-metallic materials are burned to recover heat. As for the other electronic components obtained from the disassembling of a CRT, such as electrical wires, loudspeakers, and shadow masks, they are treated through the recycling process. Guided by policies, including China’s WEEE Directive, waste CRT TV is collected by website-based system and transported to recycling plants with the help of a specific logistics system. In terms of the recycling of disassembled parts, Scenarios 2 and 1 differ in that the CRT funnel glass is transported to lead-smelting plants to extract the lead using a pyrometallurgical process, while the non-metallic materials in PWBs are recycled to produce composite materials rather than be treated by incineration. With the emergence of new technology, the WEEE treatment industry is expected to develop in a technical direction outwith the ambit of current policy support. In Scenario 3, it is demonstrated that lead is recycled from CRT funnel glass through a hydrometallurgical process. After being shredded, the PWBs are treated by bio-hydrometallurgical process. Copper is recycled through bioleaching, filtration, extraction, counter-current extraction, and electrolysis. Meanwhile, glass fibre and epoxy resin can be obtained by further recycling the non-metallic materials. In the above three scenarios, all the treatment processes used for CRT TV are assumed to take place in Shanghai, China. Only the transport between collection site and disassembling site was involved. Environmental impacts related to the transport of hazardous component to the disposal facilities are not considered, because it is expected to be slight. For the same reason, the transport within recycling facilities is not included in this study. In the collection stage, different parameters are set for traditional collection and website-based collection. For the traditional collection adopted in Scenario 1, based on our investigation, collectors ride electric tricycles for 40 To avoid the allocation in multi-functional systems, avoided burdens method is adopted to estimate the environmental performance of the treatment of CRT TVs. Therefore, system expansion is made for secondary materials that take into account avoided energy consumption and GHG emissions in each scenario. In the expanded system, alternative processes of producing an equivalent amount of product, energy, or materials from virgin resources were included. The environmental impacts that would have been caused by the equivalent amount of products and materials were subtracted from the treatment system to account for avoided energy consumption, and likewise for GHG emissions. In this study, life cycle inventory was compiled from plant-specific data, and supplemented with published literature, the PE database, and field investigations ( The environmental profile of waste CRT TV treatment in terms of energy use and GHG emissions are quantified by primary energy demand and CO As to Scenario 1, by material recycling and energy recovery, approximately 812.39 To better describe the dominant contributors in CRT TV treatment, this study also quantified the contribution of the main processes to the environmental performance. These results are shown in more detail in CRT glass recycling contributes the main environmental loss to CRT TV treatment. CRT glass recycling process in Scenarios 1, 2, and 3 accounts for 53.99%, 54.18%, and 51.69% of the positive energy use, respectively. Similarly, the corresponding contributions of the CRT glass recycling process to the positive GHG emissions are 58.02%, 59.96%, and 59.5%, respectively. In terms of environmental gain from CRT TV treatment, some differences exist between the energy saving and GHG reduction. According to the primary energy demand, displaced plastic is the significant contributor to energy saving, followed by displaced glass, displaced steel and displaced copper. However, displaced glass accounts for the biggest proportional contribution to GHG reduction. The overall energy use and GHG emissions for the three scenarios are presented in By comparing the environmental performance of different scenarios, the results show that the WEEE Directive Scenario ( For the China’s WEEE Directive encouragement system, the LCA results show that the environmental performance did not confer any advantage compared with the current treatment system. In other words, the preferential processes of CRT TV treatment did not bring about a dramatic improvement in the energy consumption and GHG emissions. The main reason for this is that funnel glass recycling by pyrometallurgical process in the WEEE Directive Scenario relies on energy-intensive industrial processes. The environmental benefits of lead recovery from funnel glass (displaced lead) are lower than those accruing from glass material recycling for use in fluorescent lamp tube manufacture (displaced glass). On the other hand, the website-based collection used in the WEEE Directive Scenario needs a systematic internet platform. The power consumption of computers and servers for a website-based collection system is fixed. Currently, this kind of collection manner is not widely accepted in China. Therefore, the low energy efficiency of the collection system results in an increased power consumption and greater GHG emissions. According to the aforementioned scenario analysis, it is shown that the diversity of overall energy use and GHG emissions of the CRT TV treatment systems are dependent on two key processes: collection with transport, funnel glass recycling. Both of them are discussed with a sensitivity analysis in more detail below. The influence of daily collection amount via the website-based system is quantified, considering a range from 50 to 300 units. For funnel glass recycling by pyrometallurgy, improving the recovery rate of lead results in an increase in energy saving and GHG reduction. The analysis is conducted to quantify the influence of recovery rate of lead, considering a range from 50% to 100%. Based on the research results, when the recovery rate of lead reaches 90.6%, and 85.8%, respectively, the energy saving and GHG reduction for recycling funnel glass by pyrometallurgy exceed that achieved by hydrometallurgy ( This study identified energy use and GHG emissions of waste CRT TV treatment in China, from a life cycle perspective. It is not possible to generalize this study to all types and sizes of TV. However, effort has been made to provide a method to be applied to other WEEE implementations. The life cycle model of this study was partly based on commercial database that could be improved with more plant-specific data. For instance, system expansion is made for secondary materials that take into account avoided energy consumption and GHG emissions in each scenario. The choice of dataset used to represent the alternative processes of producing avoided materials and energies is crucial for the results ( In this study, all the collection and recycling processes of three scenarios are assumed to take place in Shanghai, China. Actually, some formal recycling plants are trying to build their own collection channels, and then collect WEEE by a trans-regional online platform. To do so, they need to quantify their optimal collection service radius ( In this study, a LCA was used to determine whether, or not, China’s WEEE Directive encouragement system, instead of the current treatment system, would improve the overall environmental benefits of waste CRT TV treatment. Besides, another aim was to support, some emerging techniques, such as PWB recycling by bio-hydrometallurgical process as successfully trialled for recovering copper and non-metallic materials. The results show that the ranked order of environmental benefits from highest to lowest is: Advanced Technique Scenario, Current China Scenario, then WEEE Directive Scenario. To be specific, the WEEE Directive Scenario requires more energy than the Current China Scenario, and the GHG emissions of the two systems are similar. Furthermore, the Advanced Technique Scenario is more efficient in both energy usage and GHG emissions than the Current China Scenario. In consideration of the main contribution thereto, the results reveal that CRT glass recycling contributes the highest energy use and GHG emissions to CRT TV treatment. Moreover, displaced plastic and displaced glass account for the bulk of the environmental gain. After analysing WEEE Directive Scenario, it can be found that website-based collection and funnel glass recycling are two important stages in this life cycle analysis. The energy use and GHG emissions from the WEEE Directive encouragement system have certain weaknesses compared to the current situation of CRT TV treatment due to the collection efficiency and the recovery rate of lead from funnel glass therein. Therefore, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to quantify the influence of these two factors on overall environmental performance. An increase in collection amount results in lower environmental loss on energy use and GHG emissions. When more than 141 CRT TVs are collected per day using website-based collection, the environmental benefits of the method begin to exceed those of the traditional collection method. Similarly, when the recovery rate of lead reaches 90.6%, funnel glass recycling by pyrometallurgy is superior to that found when using hydrometallurgy both in terms of energy saving and GHG reduction. Based on the LCA results, the following recommendations are important for licensed recyclers and policy-makers to ensure sustainability of CRT TV treatment system. Firstly, for the emerging website-based collection system, its implementation requires the application of old-for-new and credit exchange policies. In this case, website-based collection system will bring conveniences and benefits for consumers. Accordingly, such policies could encourage consumers to dispose their old e-products by website-based collection system when they need to buy a new one. In addition, tools including mobile APPs are expected to be developed to guide the public to participate in the collection scheme so as to improve the amount of waste collected and the energy usage efficiency. By doing so, the environmental benefits of the website-based collection may surpass those of the traditional collection system. Secondly, as the closed-loop recycling of CRT funnel glass is limited, recyclers need to devote themselves to continuously improving the recovery rate of lead in the pyrometallurgical process. Besides, the environmental benefits of recycling funnel glass for primary and secondary lead production need to be compared and analysed so as to optimize the selection of a suitable process. Next, government sectors are suggested to encourage advanced recycling techniques represented by hydrometallurgical process for funnel glass and bio-hydrometallurgical process for PWBs so as to improve the environmental benefits of the treatment system. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the