Conductivity is one of the key physico-chemical properties of electrolyte in silver electrorefining since it affects the energy consumption of the process. As electrorefining process development trends towards high current density operation, having electrolytes with high conductivities will greatly reduce the energy consumption of the process. This study outlines investigations into silver electrorefining electrolyte conductivity as a function of silver, free acid, copper and lead concentration at different temperatures via a full factorial design comprising of 246 individual measurements. Regression analysis of the model was used to determine the goodness of fit R2, goodness of prediction Q2, model validity and reproducibility. Conductivity was shown to be enhanced by increases in free acid, copper, silver and lead, with free acid having the highest impact on conductivity. Temperature also increased conductivity in two ways: both as a single factor and as a combined effect with free acid, silver and copper concentration. Overall, this work produced a model of high accuracy that allows conductivity of a range of industrial silver electrorefining conditions to be calculated.Electrorefining to produce high purity silver is industrially undertaken via one of two methods: either the Balbach-Thum or the Moebius process. These processes have traditionally involved the use of silver anodes and stainless steel cathodes immersed in AgNO A majority (~ Early investigations of electrolyte conductivity theory ( By further substituting the value of specific resistance with conductivity of electrolyte, the resistance of electrolyte can be defined by Eq. In an electrorefining process, the electrical current flows through the electrolyte from anodes to cathodes and the presence of electrolyte resistance gives rise to an overpotential effect known as IR or ohmic drop within the system. With the typical parallel connections between anodes and cathodes that are used in industrial silver electrorefining cells ( As the cell potential during electrorefining is equal to zero, the applied overpotential is theoretically the extra energy needed to overcome the ohmic drop of the system. While there has so far been no intensive research into the silver electrorefining process, previous research based on copper electrorefining has demonstrated that the overpotential needed to overcome electrolyte resistance (0.11–0.13 Previous research by Gordon and Davenport calculated the electro-conductivity of a silver electrolyte as a function of silver, copper and free acid concentration at different temperatures ( In contrast, an examination of the literature related to similar investigations of copper electrolyte physico-chemical properties, show that increase in free sulphuric acid and temperature have the most significant increasing impact on conductivity, while the concentration of copper, nickel and arsenic were calculated to lead to a decrease in the conductivity ( As electrolyte conductivity can have a significant impact on the electrorefining process, this study has investigated the effect of changing temperature and electrolyte concentration has on electrolyte conductivity. The research has placed particular emphasis on the optimisation of the electrolyte conductivity such that it can be increased without any adverse impact on the overall efficiency of the electrorefining process. The range of parameters utilized in this investigation (temperature, silver electrolyte and free acid concentration) were selected in order to emulate industrial process conditions: the silver concentration was within the range of 40 Conductivity measurements were carried out using a Knick Portamess® 913 Cond conductivity meter (Knick Elektronische Messgeräte GmbH & Co. KG) that was calibrated prior to measurement using Reagecon solution with a conductivity of 12.88 Data analysis and experiment design were carried out using the modelling and design tool MODDE 8.0 (MKS Data Analytics Solutions) that allows for design of experiments (DOE) and multivariate data analysis. The full experiments were designed using a full factorial method that incorporated three centre points with defining factors, responses and levels of the factors, which resulted in the need for 246 individual data points. The multivariate method used for the data processing was a Partial Least Square (PLS) regression as it can provide a better interrelationship analysis within the parameters (X axis) for the same result (Y axis) than the alternative Multiple Linear Regression (MLR). Initial regression analysis was based on the assumption that each ion concentration has an independent effect on the conductivity, whilst the subsequent, second regression step was undertaken with a full factorial analysis to provide the best fit for the equation. Overall, the final model was checked to ensure that it met the required values of R By taking the best fit model from this study, further analysis into the effect of conductivity on energy consumption was also calculated to determine the optimum conductive electrolyte. All the measurement results are summarized in the 3D scatter diagrams displayed in It has been earlier suggested that the free acid concentration does not significantly contribute into the value of conductivity ( Free acid concentration in solution was found to have the strongest influence on electrolyte conductivity, both as an independent effect and as part of a combined effect with temperature as shown in the The second model was investigated by using a full factorial interrelation (Model 2) between all parameters. After the initial iterations some parameters that induced high error were removed and the final parameters utilized are shown in Summary of fit values, generated using MODDE, between both models were compared to determine the most representative model to calculate conductivity. The summary of fit values and the minimum requirements can be seen on These values show that both models can be considered as good models. Nevertheless, Model 1 has a better accuracy of prediction when compared Model 2 and by having a Q Both the conductivity Models 1 and 2 were compared with the previous work of Gordon and Davenport as shown by As can be seen in Another comparison was made using the same method under the range of parameters used in this study ( In the silver electrorefining process, silver is not completely deposited on the cathode and as a result, dendritic silver crystal by-products can accumulate at the bottom of the electrolytic tank. Thus, it is highly likely that this dendritic silver will be re-dissolved back into the electrolyte solution as it is not cathodically protected and this phenomenon is one of the notable differences between the silver and copper electrorefining processes. Therefore, in contrast to what has been previously observed for copper electrorefining, a higher acid concentration in the silver electrolyte is not the best option to increase overall electrolyte conductivity. In addition, an increase in copper concentration as the second higher conductivity contributor will also have detrimental effect on the silver electrorefining process as copper could also be co-deposited into cathode, which would affect the purity of the final product. The consequence of the above phenomena means that silver concentration is considered to be the main component of electrolyte that provides both the required conductivity and ion supply in the electrolyte during the electrorefining process, therefore a high concentration of silver is necessary to lower the electrolyte polarization potential. Modelling η Nevertheless, since the potential equation as function of silver concentration is expressed rather by non-linear, the addition of silver does not always lead to a significant reduction in the potential. With the wide range of silver concentration from 30 to 150 From this work it can be concluded that an increase in all ion concentrations (free acid, silver, copper and lead) and temperature have a positive effect on silver electrolyte conductivity. Of these, free acid concentration was found to have the most significant impact on electrolyte conductivity. A significant linear conductivity increase was also observed with copper, silver and temperature, however this was found to be less significant when compared to the free acid concentration. Two models were calculated as part of this work: the first model calculation was based on the independent ion's effect and the interrelation effect of the ions with temperature (Model 1). The second model was determined using a full factorial equation that takes into account all the interrelation effects between all the parameters, then removes any parameters that result in significant errors within the equation (Model 2). In general, both of the models outlined in this work were found to have high accuracy and sufficient validity. Of the two models proposed, Model 1 was considered to be the superior one as it possess a higher Q As mentioned previously, electrolyte resistance can be the major contributor factor to the total over potential, therefore a further calculation of the electrolyte polarization potential with Model 1 was also performed. It was found that the electrolyte polarization potential varies with a natural logarithmic curve as a function of silver concentration. This finding suggests that the addition of silver (up to an electrolyte concentration of approximately 80 Furthermore, this investigation calculated that under industrial silver electrorefining conditions as defined by both Pawlek (parameter range of 300 to 400 This research has been performed within the SIMP (System Integrated Metal Production) project of FIMECC (Finnish Metals and Engineering Competence Cluster Ltd) and funding support from