Combining the intermetallic compound with the ductile metal at the eutectic composition is one promising method to improve the ductility of the intermetallic compound. This paper reports the microstructure and the micro-hardness of the Ni–Ni3Si eutectic in situ composites prepared by electron beam floating zone melting technique. Ni–Ni3Si eutectic in situ composites display regular lamellar eutectic structure at the solidification rate R=0.3–4.0mm/min. The lamellar spacing is decreased with the increase of the solidification rate. The phase composition of the Ni–Ni3Si eutectic in situ composites is also determined by X-ray diffraction. Ni–Ni3Si eutectic in situ composites present lower micro-hardness than pure Ni3Si, although a small quantity of metastable Ni31Si12 phase is formed during the directional solidification process.Intermetallics possess higher melting temperatures than the superalloys, and with metallic bonding, at least the possibility of better toughness than ceramics. Therefore, intermetallics have been paid more attentions. Ni The incorporation of a ductile phase into the intermetallic materials is an attractive method to improve the ductility of the intermetallic materials. This can be achieved by directional solidification process of eutectic alloys, and eutectic The master alloys are obtained by cutting the middle of the Ni–11.5 The longitudinal microstructure of the Ni–Si alloy prepared by vacuum induction melting technique is shown in In the process of the crystal growth, both the nucleation rate and the diffusion rate of solute in the liquid are the two important parameters. At low solidification rates, atomic diffusion is efficient enough and eutectic growth happened at near equilibrium conditions. This can result in well-aligned and a large lamellar spacing as shown in As far as Ni–Ni    Microstructures of the Ni–Ni Ni–Ni In comparison with the pure Ni Dr. Zhongwu Hu and Dr. Jing Zheng from Northwest Institute for Non-ferrous Metal Research are given special thanks for the preparation of the samples. The authors would like to thank the