During pyrochemical reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel, complex melts based on LiCl-KCl eutectic are formed, but their properties are still not well studied. We measured the electrical conductivity of (LiCl-KCl)eut. − CeCl3, (LiCl-KCl)eut. − NdCl3 and (LiCl-KCl)eut. − UCl3 quasi-binary melts was up to 40mol.% CeCl3, 40mol.% NdCl3 and 10.45mol.% UCl3 in a wide temperature span. In addition the electrical conductivity of several compositions, such as (LiCl-KCl)eut. − CeCl3
                     +NdCl3 and (LiCl-KCl)eut. − CeCl3
                     +NdCl3
                     +UCl3 was measured. The measurements were carried out in quartz cells of the capillary type. When the total concentration of trivalent ions is less than 12mol.%, we found that the conductivity of mixtures of arbitrary composition is almost a linear function of CeCl3, NdCl3, and UCl3 the overall concentration.At the present time the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) is one of the major problems of nuclear energy. Currently used hydrometallurgy has irremovable shortcomings. This is prolonged exposure of SNF before reprocessing, a very large amount of waste in the form of water contaminated by radionuclides, and the risk of proliferation of radioactive materials. Pyrochemical technology is largely free of these drawbacks. The SNF cooling time is less by a few times, the water is not used at all, the spreading risk of radionuclides is minimal In a number of stages of pyrochemical technology the working medium is a molten LiCl-KCl eutectic mixture. Uranium, plutonium, fission products were dissolved in the melt for subsequent electrochemical separation The aim of this work is to obtain experimental data on the electrical conductivity of the melts formed during SNF reprocessing. These data should become the experimental basis for the development of model to evaluate the electrical conductivity of arbitrary complex melts used for SNF reprocessing. SNF pyrochemical reprocessing is supposed to maintain in a solution of relatively low uranium, plutonium and fission products concentration. This is due to the fact that increasing of the SNF components concentrations leads to excessive melt radioactivity, to approaching its freezing temperature to the liquidus line, and to an undesirable closing of U and Pu discharge potentials with lanthanides ones. Therefore, we have restricted ourselves to the study of relatively dilute CeCl Previously, we have already been studied in detail the electrical conductivity of the (LiCl-KCl) An anhydrous LiCl (≥ High grade CeCl In a second step the obtained mixture is dissolved in dilute HCl, the precipitate was filtered off and the solution evaporated to CeCl The heating to about 250 High grade NdCl The last step of both syntheses was distillation under reduced pressure (about 1 The most undesirable impurities are oxychlorides CeOCl and NdOCl. Their content was controlled by solubility test. Approximately 0.5 The (LiCl-KCl) directly in LiCl-KCl melt. To avoid layering, LiCl, KCl and PbCl For measurements of electrical conductivity we used capillary quartz cell with platinum electrodes. It consisted of two quartz tubes connected by a capillary of approximately 1 Most of the experiments were carried out at the input frequency of 10 A resistance of molten salts depends on the frequency of supplied current. It is known that there is a frequency range in which the frequency dependence of the resistance is small or absent at all. This range is tentatively of 10–50 We measured the frequency dependence of a number of melt in the range of 0.6–100 An electrical conductivity error consists of uncertainty in a conductivity value of the KCl solution used for calibration (0.04%) The electrical conductivity of (LiCl-KCl) For fitting the experimental data on electrical conductivity of molten salts a polynomial of first or second order, or exponential are typically used. Among listed functions the best approximation gives the second order polynomial as it was shown in The coefficients of the equation The conductivity isotherms at temperatures 773 and 873 Because quite dilute solutions are under study, the solvent makes the largest contribution to the conductivity, and thus the total electrical conductivity depends little on the nature of the added cation. This can be seen in As seen from The structure of (LiCl-KCl) These data indicate that when UCl The results of our measurements are in complete agreement with these ideas about the melts structure. As addition of heavy cations into melt, occurs formation of complexes containing an average of about 7 firmly connected Cl According to Based on the presented experimental data, we plan to develop a model to calculate the conductivity of melts, based on (LiCl-KCl) We measured the electrical conductivity of molten (LiCl-KCl) This work was partially supported by grant of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: