The minimization of water in batch plants through process integration has been well established in the literature. While many existing methods have relied on a fixed batch schedule, a few have employed variable production schedules. Nevertheless, methods employing variable schedules in fixed mass load problems have assumed that water-using operations (washing) are sequence independent. This paper presents a mathematical formulation for the simultaneous optimization of batch production and minimization of wastewater in fixed mass load problems. Wastewater minimization is achieved by exploring the sequence of tasks in a unit. The effectiveness of the formulation was demonstrated using three case studies. The results show that even without process integration, water usage can be minimized through the appropriate selection of task sequences in a unit. Reductions in water usage of 33% and 48.8% were observed in case study I and case study II respectively.{ { { { { { { { { { { { { { { { Outlet concentration of contaminant Level of utility Mass of water into unit Mass of water leaving unit Mass of freshwater into unit Mass of effluent water from unit Mass load of contaminant Amount of material processed by a task at time point Amount of state Amount of state Amount of utility Time at which a state is produced from unit Time at which a state is used in unit Time at which water is produced at time point Amount of material stored in unit Binary variable associated with the usage of intermediate state produced by unit Binary variable associated with the availability of storage for state Binary variable associated with changeover from Binary variable associated with storage of state Binary variable indicating that Binary variable associated with usage of state Binary variable indicating that the amount of utility made available from Constant coefficient of processing time of a task Variable coefficient of processing time of a task Maximum inlet concentration of contaminant Maximum outlet concentration of contaminant Cost associated with changeover from Cost of effluent water treatment Cost of freshwater Cost price of product Cost price of raw material Maximum inlet water mass of unit Constant amount of utility required by a task Variable amount of utility required by a task Time horizon of interest Small number Contaminant loading corresponding to processing Upper bound on the amount of utility Maximum capacity of unit Maximum capacity of unit Minimum capacity of unit Portion of state Portion of state Portion of state Portion of state Portion of state Portion of state Duration of changeover when Fixed duration of washing for unit Increasingly, strict environmental regulations and economic prudence have incentivized the improvement of plant operations. An important feature of batch plants is that an equipment unit can perform more than one task. As a result, changeover is usually required to prepare the unit after completing a task, for the next task. Changeover can either be sequence dependent or sequence independent. Sequence dependent changeover takes into consideration, the task just completed as well as the task about to be conducted in a unit, while sequence independent changeover disregards the sequence of tasks. Water for equipment cleaning during changeover is of particular interest. Too many changeovers signify increased freshwater demand and wastewater generation. The following section provides a brief overview of the state of the art in the literature addressing wastewater minimization in batch plants and batch production scheduling, where sequence dependent changeover was taken into account. Equipment washing belongs to a special class of water-using operations called fixed load operations. Here, water is modelled as a mass transfer agent into which contaminants of a given mass are transferred. Process integration techniques have been widely adopted as a reliable tool to minimize water in fixed load operations. These techniques capitalize on the potential to reuse water with certain levels of contamination. Both freshwater consumption and wastewater generation are reduced when water reuse opportunities are maximized. The extent of water reuse in batch plants is limited by the suitability of contaminated water for each water-using operation, and the timing of operations. Techniques for wastewater minimization in batch processes sought to overcome these limitations and can be divided broadly into insight-based and mathematical techniques. The insight based techniques of Mathematical optimization for wastewater minimization is sought after for its suitability in addressing more complex batch problems involving multiple contaminants, elaborate objectives such as cost optimization and additional constraints such as limited piping, forbidden connections, etc. The earliest formulations such as A common feature of the aforementioned formulations is that an optimum production schedule is assumed, i.e., the timings of water-using batch processes are fixed parameters. A fixed schedule oversimplifies the wastewater minimization problem in batch plants. According to The development of variable schedule formulations for wastewater minimization has been supported by the substantial advancements made in scheduling methodologies in terms of robustness, reasonable computational times and the variety of problems that can be solved. Over the past few decades, a plethora of methods for batch plant scheduling has been developed. These methods differ in their handling of time (discrete, continuous), the objectives addressed, the types of batch plants considered (multipurpose, multiproduct) and so on. Studies of these characteristics and differences can be found in The discrete time formulations of Network-based models are more general than their precedence based counterparts and can handle a larger variety of problems featuring complex characteristics such as: recipes involving splitting, mixing, recycles and the presence of shared resources other than equipment, such as utilities and manpower, etc. The drawbacks of these models however, are larger integrality gaps and increased computational time due to the iterations required in deciding the number of time slots or event points. In the global time point, STN based formulation of Thus far, the discussed formulations did not account for sequence dependent changeover costs in their objectives. The prerequisite to account for this is the ability to correctly establish the immediate successors of all tasks in each unit. This is not a trivial problem when one considers that although tasks occur consecutively in the same unit, they do not necessarily take place at consecutive time points/slots. That is, the difference between the time points/time slots of two consecutive tasks on a unit may be greater than 1. The asynchronized slot based formulation of From the literature review, sequence dependent changeover costs were considered in scheduling formulations provided that the unique successors of tasks occurring in a unit could be identified adequately. Regarding wastewater minimization, it has already been established that a true minimum for water usage in batch plants can only be obtained if production scheduling and water use optimization are performed simultaneously. In the published literature, water requirement is sequence independent. Missing from literature is a formulation that determines the water requirement in a unit based on a task and its unique successor in the unit (sequence dependent). The illustration in In the motivating example, a unit need not be washed if Task C succeeds itself. Secondly, only a degree of washing is required when Task B succeeds Task C on a unit. Observed from From the above discussion, it is clear that the order in which tasks take place in a unit affects freshwater use, wastewater generation and overall profit. The objective of this paper is to develop a mathematical model for the simultaneous optimization of batch production scheduling and water use in a multipurpose batch plant in which the water requirement is determined by the sequence of tasks in units. The problem considered in this paper can be stated formally as follows. Given the following scheduling data: production recipe including processing times of operations required to convert raw materials to product, available units and their capacities, utility requirements and the maximum availability, availability and capacity of storage for each material, time horizon of interest, costs of raw materials and products. and wastewater minimization data: mass load of contaminant, maximum inlet and outlet concentration of contaminants, sequence dependent changeover time, cost of freshwater and effluent treatment. Determine the production schedule that achieves the maximum profit through reduced freshwater use while taking into consideration the sequence of tasks. The mathematical formulation consists of two modules, i.e. batch production scheduling and wastewater minimization modules. The constraints of the formulation are based on the superstructure in The scheduling formulation of Allocation constraint Capacity constraint Material balance for storage Duration constraint Sequence constraint  Sequence constraint: Different tasks in the same unit   Usage of previously stored states Constraints for FIS policy Storage constraints when an idle unit stores material it produced previously Time horizon constraints The changeover binary variable,  The last task in a unit does not necessarily occur at the last time point, i.e., Constraint These constraints are necessary for the solution of problems with special conditions, namely, case study III. The case study features the use of external utilities when tasks are processed, states with no intermediate storage and the possibility to store intermediate material in idle processing units. Utility constraints The availability of utilities determines the extent to which tasks occur. Constraint Constraint (27) states that the level of utility at each time point consists of the level of utility available at the previous time point, increased by utility made available due to tasks that used the utility ending and reduced by utility consumed due to tasks that require the utility beginning. Constraint Constraint  The original scheduling framework of Constraint The storage constraints for an intermediate state are modified to accommodate the possibility of additional material storage in idle units. Constraint Constraint For states with NIS, Constraint For states with FIS, Constraint Constraints Constraint Constraint The following constraints account for the storage of material in idle processing units. Constraint Constraints Constraints Constraint Constraints After a processing task has occurred in a unit, the unit may be washed to prepare it for another processing task. The water inlet to a unit is freshwater, depicted by Constraint Constraint (52) calculates the mass load in a unit after a state has been processed. It is a product of the contaminant loading and the amount of material processed. Constraint  Constraint The task scheduling constraints ensure the proper sequencing of equipment washing and production tasks. According to Constraint The objective can take different forms. Eq. Constraint Three case studies are examined. The first two case studies consider a multiproduct facility and a multipurpose facility respectively, where a single contaminant is assumed present. In order to demonstrate the influence of the task sequence on the amount of water required for washing, three scenarios of case studies I and II are observed. Scenario 1: Freshwater is used for washing without considering the sequence of tasks. After a task is performed, the unit is washed so that it is suitable for any future tasks. As such, the washing duration of a unit after a task has taken place is the maximum of the changeover times required for every possible succeeding task. Furthermore, the entire mass load of contaminant after a task has been performed must be picked up by water. Scenario 2: Freshwater is used for washing while considering the sequence of tasks. After a task is performed, the unit is washed so that it is suitable particularly for the succeeding task. The washing duration of a unit after a task has taken place is determined by the specific succeeding task. The entire mass load of contaminant is picked up by water. Scenario 3: Freshwater is used for washing while considering the sequence of tasks. After a task is performed, the unit is washed so that it is suitable particularly for the succeeding task. The washing duration of a unit after a task has taken place is determined by the specific succeeding task. A fraction of the mass load of contaminant is picked up by water obtained by applying Constraint The third case study does not consider water use explicitly but characterizes the extent of washing in the form of changeover costs. This case study serves as a comparison between the proposed formulation and an existing one. The models for the three case studies resulted in an MILP. The models were solved using GAMS 22.0 software on a machine with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-2670QM, 2.2 This case study from The model for case study I consists of Constraints The results of the three scenarios are illustrated with their respective production schedules in The introduction of sequence dependent changeover in The revenue achieved in This case study from The model for case study II consists of Constraints The resulting production schedule of The resulting production schedule of The resulting production schedule of This case study, originally from   The model for case study III consists of Constraints The value of the objective function, maximization of profit is $3093.04. The resulting production schedule illustrated in From the STN in The computational statistics for this case study are presented in A new mathematical formulation has been developed for the simultaneous optimization of batch production and wastewater minimization. The formulation takes advantage of the sequence of tasks in determining both the occurrence and extent of water-using operations in a unit. The formulation relies on a flexible schedule featuring continuous time, unit specific event points and was based on fixed mass load applications. Results from the application of the model to three case studies showed that profit maximization together with wastewater minimization was achieved with further improvements in profit and water use when the sequence of tasks was taken into consideration. The formulation can be extended to include process integration techniques for further water reduction such as reuse, recycle, storage and regeneration. The authors would like to thank the