Varus posteromedial rotatory instability (VPMRI) is a well-recognized type of elbow instability with an injury pattern distinct from posterolateral rotatory instability. Unrecognized, VPMRI can lead to rapidly progressive ulnohumeral joint arthritis. Investigations on elbow dislocation or subluxation with associated intra-articular fracture are uncommon. Although autograft and allograft reconstruction of trochlear defects have been mentioned as options for management of chronic instability, A 40-year-old police officer presented to clinic with left elbow pain and swelling. Two days prior, he was dog sledding when his sled hit a stump and he was thrown from it. The patient could not fully describe the mechanism of the injury. Initial x-rays revealed a comminuted coronoid fracture and a double density on the medial trochlea that was approximately 5 mm by 2-3 mm and corresponding articular depression on the medial side of the trochlea ( A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a type I coronoid fracture and an impacted, comminuted medial trochlear osteochondral fracture ( For surgery, the patient was placed supine. A fluoroscopic examination under anesthesia was performed. A lateral view was obtained in which the patient's elbow caught with the coronoid fracture in the trochlear defect during both flexion and extension. This occurred without varus or valgus stress. Diastasis at the radio-capitellar articulation was noted with varus stress on the anteroposterior view of the elbow in full extension. The ulnohumeral articulation appeared normal in full extension. A standard posterior approach to the elbow was performed with creation of medial and lateral full thickness flaps. With incision of the fascia near the lateral epicondyle, it was apparent that the deep lateral collateral ligament was avulsed from its humeral attachment. The ulnar nerve was identified, released, and then transposed subcutaneously. A transverse olecranon osteotomy was then performed to visualize the coronoid fracture and address the trochlear lesion. This provided the advantage of complete unhindered exposure of the trochlear lesion for reconstruction and provided improved exposure for the coronoid fracture fixation ( The trochlear lesion was not reconstructible. The cartilage did not have sufficient subchondral bone, the fragments were too small, and the defect was uncontained on its medial border. The coronoid fracture was noted. There was intact cartilage on the fractured coronoid piece, but cartilage loss noted just dorsal to the fracture ( The standard technique detailed in the Arthrosurface HemiCap technique guide (Arthrosurface) was utilized to reconstruct the trochlea. When this was completed, the component was flush with the patients remaining articular cartilage ( Next, the coronoid was manually reduced and fixed under direct visualization with 2 variable pitch AcuTwist threaded pins (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The olecranon osteotomy was then repaired using 0.062 k-wires and a standard tension band technique. The lateral collateral ligament was repaired with two #2 Orthocord The elbow was then examined clinically and with fluoroscopy and found to have full fluid range of motion (ROM) and good stability. There was no lateral gapping when a varus stress was applied. A standard closure was performed followed by application of a soft bulky dressing and splint. Postoperatively, ROM was started when the wound appeared healthy at 2-3 days after surgery. The patient was cautioned to avoid abduction of the shoulder to prevent varus stress on the coronoid and reconstructed LCL. Aggressive flexion or aggressive contraction of the triceps was avoided to protect the olecranon osteotomy. At his 1-year follow-up, the patient was noted to have no significant pain. His elbow ROM was 10° (from full extension) to 135° of flexion. Forearm supination was 70° while pronation was 80°. His elbow had normal stability. The patient had returned to his job as a police officer without restrictions. X-rays revealed a healed coronoid fracture. The Arthrosurface implant (Arthrosurface) was in place without evidence of loosening. The olecranon osteotomy was healed. There was no evidence of ulnohumeral or radiocapitellar arthritis ( Current recommendations for treatment of VPMRI includes repair of the LCL and fixation of the coronoid fracture. Preoperative CT scans are recommended to assess the degree of comminution of the coronoid. Doornberg and Ring Very little has been written about the associated trochlear injuries that may concomitantly occur with VPMRI injury patterns. The ulnohumeral articulation is a known static stabilizer of the elbow. In general, acute repair is preferred. Options for fixation include k-wires, headless compression screws, and posterior to anterior directed lag screws. In situations with chronic bone deficiency or when osteochondral fragments are irreparably comminuted, small defects can be filled with autograft or osteochondral allograft. Metal on native articular cartilage has been used successfully in multiple joints. Though limited, studies of early results after distal humeral resurfacing are promising. Parsons et al provided a report examining the results of the Wright Medical Sorbie-Questor hemiarthroplasty. The implant was utilized in acute fractures as well as in patients with posttraumatic arthritis. At final evaluation, elbow ROM was 22°-126°. American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeon scores improved in both groups. None of these implants loosened or required revision. The Arthrosurface implants (Arthrosurface) have been designed, approved, and implanted successfully in the shoulder, hip, knees, and toes. Ultimately, the management goals in patients with acute VPMRI include creating a stable, congruent articulation, thereby minimizing risk for the development of elbow arthritis. Stability is obtained with fixation or neutralization of the coronoid fracture and repair or the LCL. Trochlear osteochondral defects may be seen in VPMRI due to impaction of the coronoid on the trochlea. This report suggests these injuries may be successfully treated with metal resurfacing implants when there is significant irreparable cartilage and bone loss. Metal resurfacing systems offer restoration of joint contour, provide immediate stability, and allow the reproduction of normal joint mechanics without requiring biological healing. Elbow specific implants are currently unavailable; and while they would provide clinical benefit, it is the opinion of the authors that the current FDA classification is hindering their development. R.F.P. is a consultant for Acumed. The second author, his immediate family and any research foundation with which they are affiliated received no financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.