Tibial plateau fractures present a difficult range of fractures to treat. Arthroscopy allows for a less invasive option when compared with arthrotomy. Furthermore, visualization of the articular surface arthroscopically can allow for a precise reduction and assessment of any concomitant injuries to the articular cartilage and meniscus. By use of arthroscopy, unicondylar lateral plateaus were traditionally approached through a laterally based metaphyseal window. However, in carefully selected patients and fracture patterns, a medially based, arthroscopic-assisted approach can create long bony tunnels for subchondral support and allow for greater ease in fracture reduction. We present our technique using a medial approach for arthroscopic-assisted fixation of lateral tibial plateau fractures.Tibial plateau fractures place the articular vitality of the knee at risk, with fixation aimed at restoring articular congruency and allowing for mobilization, all while limiting soft-tissue insults surgically. Arthroscopic-assisted techniques have shown comparable results to open methods of internal fixation. A medially based metaphyseal window to approach unicondylar lateral tibial plateau fractures has been described in the past with good results. Surgical technique is dictated by the fracture pattern, and this technique can only be used in select cases. The first step in planning for appropriate technique is a thorough understanding of the lateral tibial plateau fracture with the appropriate imaging. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the knee, as well as images of the joints above and below, are recommended. To fully understand the fracture pattern, a computed tomography (CT) scan is critical. When one is assessing the CT scan, it is important that the medial column of bone be intact for use of this technique. The medial column of bone is necessary to hold rafter screws to support the construct. The cortical envelope must be intact or easily restored and is required for this arthroscopic method ( The operating room setup requires proper positioning of the patient, fluoroscopy, and appropriate instrumentation. Arthroscopic and fluoroscopic monitors are placed on the ipsilateral side of the involved extremity. The fluoroscopy machine is placed on the contralateral side of the involved extremity. The leg holder is placed more proximal than usual to allow ample room for the fluoroscopy machine. The contralateral limb is abducted off the side of the table and the knee flexed over padding, ensuring that it is out of the way of imaging ( The extremity should first be examined for stability. The usual arthroscopic portals are used, and diagnostic arthroscopy is conducted. Concomitant pathology, such as articular cartilage injury or a meniscal tear, is addressed as needed. The fracture is identified and debrided free of fibrous tissue and hematoma. The fracture is then mobilized with a standard freer elevator to allow for easy mobilization of the fragment during reduction. Depending on the location of the fracture, elevating the anterior horn of the meniscus often offers excellent visualization of the fracture reduction and allows for easy mobilization. This is accomplished by releasing the coronary ligament at the anterior meniscal-capsular junction. If a large anterior meniscal-capsular tear is created, we typically repair this either with inside-out suture arthroscopically using Arthrex Dart system cannulas with No. 2-0 FiberWire meniscal repair needles (Arthrex, Naples, FL) or through a small arthrotomy with 1 or 2 Arthrex 2.9-mm FASTak anchors. Smaller tears that are created to visualize the fracture fragment are typically not repaired. An anterior cruciate ligament guide pin is placed percutaneously from the anteromedial tibia approximately 10 cm distal to the joint line. The area of maximal depression is targeted based on preoperative CT and radiographic evaluation. By use of anteroposterior and lateral images, the guide pin is positioned 1 to 2 cm distal to the depressed articular surface ( Fracture reduction is accomplished with a bone tamp that fits easily into the previously reamed tunnel. A small amount of bone graft placed in the tunnel may be necessary before reduction. This is performed to ensure that the chondral surface is not perforated with the bone tamp. The bone tamp is then used to elevate the fracture fragment to the appropriate height ( The patient is placed in a hinged knee brace and stays in the hospital overnight, with compartment checks and extremity elevations. Deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis should be used for 6 weeks postoperatively. The patient is started on gentle active and passive range of motion and remains non–weight bearing for 6 weeks. After 6 weeks, the patient is started on toe-touch weight bearing and advanced to full weight bearing by 12 weeks. Gentle quadriceps and hamstring strengthening should be initiated at 6 weeks. An arthroscopic-assisted medial approach to unicondylar tibial plateau fractures has similar advantages to the laterally based approach: minimal soft-tissue trauma with excellent arthroscopic visualization of the articular cartilage, both before and after reduction. Furthermore, these techniques allow for direct visualization of concomitant knee pathology, such as central pivot or meniscal injuries. The advantage of using a medial metaphyseal window is the creation of a longer bone tunnel, allowing more bone grafting support under the elevated fragment. This is hypothesized to provide a more sturdy platform to maintain the reduction obtained as compared with the shorter tunnel used with a lateral approach. The reduction is believed to be easier using the medial approach because starting on the medial side allows easier access to the entire lateral plateau, especially anteriorly. This technique has been shown to have good midterm results in the literature. Levy et al. Patient selection is important when using this technique. Preoperative planning with CT interpretation of the “cortical envelope” is essential. When this envelope is intact or is easily restored with a clamp, elevating the fracture through a medial window is achievable. Limitations of this technique are found in more complicated fracture patterns, when this envelope is disrupted. The advantage of this approach may be lost because elevating and reducing these fractures will lead to medial or lateral displacement because of lack of containment of fracture fragments. Levy et al. 