We present a case of a complex proximal humerus fracture combined with an articular glenoid fracture, in an elderly patient. This is a rare combination of injuries, and its proper treatment is scarcely described in the current literature. Our selected treatment consisted of reverse shoulder arthroplasty combined with glenoid fracture fixation, which has been reported only once in the current literature. At 18 months follow-up we report a result consisting of great pain control, appropriate mobility and functional score, and absence of signs of glenohumeral instability or implant loosening, which is in line with has been previously described. We conclude that this surgical approach is a great alternative to others such as reverse shoulder arthroplasty combined with glenoid grafting, or shoulder hemiarthroplasty.Complex proximal humerus fracture (PHF) combined with an articular glenoid fracture is a rare injury. Treatment strategy is scarcely defined in the current literature. Despite PHF's being common in the elderly population [ Treatment of articular glenoid fractures depends on glenohumeral instability, fragment size and displacement [ A 67 years old female with a personal history of type-two diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, obesity and osteoporosis, was diagnosed with a four-part PHF after a low-energy fall with direct trauma to the right shoulder. Radiographs showed fragment displacement and tuberosity comminution ( Surgery was performed 12 days after injury, under general anaesthesia, in beach-chair position, with intra-operative fluoroscopy. Deltopectoral approach was used. Rotator cuff insertions were tagged with sutures. Suprapectoral tenodesis of the long head of the biceps was performed. The glenoid fracture was reduced and provisionally fixed using two kirschner wires. The central guide wire for baseplate placement was positioned, and the previously placed kirschner wires were adjusted for not interfering with glenoid reaming, central peg or baseplate screws trajectory ( Rehabilitation included passive shoulder motion at postoperative week two, active assisted motion at six weeks. At 18 months follow-up patient presented a pain-free shoulder, with 140° active abduction, 150° anterior elevation, 60° external rotation with the shoulder in 90° of abduction and internal rotation to hip level. Constant Score at 18 months was 63 points, compared to 79 on the unaffected shoulder. There were no clinical or radiographic signs of joint instability, glenoid fragment displacement, scapular notching or baseplate loosening ( Most PHF's are amenable to conservative treatment [ Thus, RSA, originally developed to treat rotator cuff arthropathy, rheumatoid arthritis, or revision of both internal fixation or anatomical arthroplasty [ Criteria for surgical treatment of glenoid fractures remains to be clarified. In articular fractures, treatment depends on glenohumeral instability, displacement, and fragment size [ In a previous case series of two complex PHF with bone Bankart lesion, both were treated with hemiarthroplasty and glenoid rim fixation with bone anchors [ A long-term study demonstrated the importance of autograft in RSA for addressing glenoid defects caused by joint wear or dysplasia [ A single case of RSA with glenoid osteosynthesis was reported – a 64-years old female with a four-part PHF combined with glenoid rim fracture making up 30% of the joint surface [ Our solution for this case was effective in recovering joint motion, avoiding implant-related complications, and maintaining joint stability. Standing out as an alternative is the use of autograft to increase baseplate fixation, described mainly for chronic glenoid defects in RSA or revision RSA. In situations where preserving native bone is possible, the authors believe osteosynthesis is preferable, which is supported by the present paper. Choosing RSA over HA or PHF fixation is consensual in the literature in the case of elderly patients with complex fractures, osteoporosis and criteria for humeral head ischemia. None.