Nickel laterite is of increasing importance as an economically viable source of Ni. However, practical strategies for low cost atmospheric leaching of laterites have been hampered in part by poor recovery and the formation of potentially environmentally harmful residues, for instance jarosite. It is important therefore to define the mineralogical forms of nickel present, using readily accessible laboratory-based approaches, in the ores and residues, and the form of secondary precipitates in the residues, as a means for future optimisation of leach parameters. To this end a detailed mineralogical study of an Indonesian laterite and residues resulting from atmospheric acid leaching has been undertaken. The leach process involved the sequential reactions of first, limonite (3h) and then saprolite (11h) in sulphuric acid leach liquor. The acid, dry limonite and saprolite ores were added in the weight ratio of 1.4:1:1. At 100°C, over 80% of the total Ni was extracted into solution during the whole leach process.
                  The limonite ore was found to contain Ni (1.2wt.%) predominantly within Fe oxy/hydroxides, serpentine and phyllomanganate whilst in the residue Ni (0.4wt.%) is present in highly crystalline leach resistant minerals, such as spinels. The majority of the Ni (1.6wt.%) in the saprolite ore was present in serpentine with a small fraction also present in phyllomanganate. This association is further confirmed by the similar saprolite leach extraction curves of Ni and Mg. Goethite and jarosite are both found to be concentrated in the saprolite residue, as is consistent with the decrease in Fe extraction during the saprolite leach. For the final 11h residue of the saprolite leach, the Ni (0.3wt.%) is mainly present in undissolved lizardite and leach resistant pyroxene and spinel minerals.It is estimated that approximately 70% of global nickel resources are contained within lateritic ores, yet laterites accounted for only about 50% of global annual nickel production in 2009 ( As lateritic profiles and the factors affecting their genesis have previously been extensively reviewed ( Weathering, resulting from contact between ultramafic rock and acid surface water, gives rise to geochemical break-down and the release of mobile elements. Fe and Al are less soluble than Mg and Si and hence are enriched in the zone forming the uppermost oxide limonite layer. Oxide laterites mainly comprise goethite, hematite and Mn oxides. Ni is associated with goethite typically by substitution for Fe ( Some Ni percolates downward from the overlying limonite layer and is incorporated into the underlying serpentine (Mg–Fe silicate) layer. Silicate laterites are formed after a long period of aggressive weathering and are generally found in this underlying saprolite zone ( Lateritic leach waste management is also of concern with jarosite being a common secondary precipitate. The unstable nature of jarosite, compared to goethite, requires long term management for conversion to a more stable iron oxide form thus avoiding acid drainage upon weathering ( Indonesian nickel laterite ores have been the subject of a number of previous mineralogical studies. The chemical composition and infrared spectrum of Ni- and Fe-substituted serpentine sourced from a predominantly saprolitic laterite profile located at Sorowako, Indonesia have been examined ( Even though there has been considerable effort previously devoted to the atmospheric and pressure leaching of laterites, little emphasis has been placed on understanding in detail the Ni mineralogy as a function of leaching ( Samples were obtained from Raja Ampat, West Papua, Indonesia. The limonite and saprolite ores were selected from the upper Fe-rich ore and the deeper Mg-rich ore, respectively. Particle size analysis (Mastersizer 2000) indicated that approximately 80 The size fractions of the limonite and saprolite ores used for leaching were < Atmospheric pressure leaching of the sized Indonesian limonite and saprolite ores was carried out based on the patent Solution speciation calculations are employed to understand the speciation and saturation indices for an aqueous solution at given thermodynamic conditions. Chemical equilibrium is determined by solving a set of linear equations consisting of the equilibrium constants and mass balance constraints. The PHREEQC computer program was used for the solution speciation calculations reported herein ( The sized ore and solid leach samples were dry ground to a fine powder (< Morphological and mineralogical studies of the ore samples were performed using a Philips XL30 SEM equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) system. Quantitative mineralogical analyses of the ores and leach samples were conducted using Rietveld analysis of laboratory XRD data. XRD data collection was performed on a Bruker D4 Endeavor diffractometer with Co Kα radiation (1.7902 Thermal analysis (differential thermal analysis and thermal gravimetry, DTA–TG) was conducted using a temperature increase of 5 SEM/EDX analyses confirmed the limonite ore to be heterogeneous and fine grained, as was indicated by particle size analysis and as has been observed for other limonite ores ( EDX analysis suggests that the Ni in the particles shown in Rietveld analysis of the XRD data indicates that the limonite ore is composed of 78 Thermal analysis of the limonite ore gave rise to three endothermic events at 40  The DTA–TG trace from the saprolite ore is similar to that from the limonite ore. Three endothermic events at 40 Rietveld XRD analysis indicates that the saprolite ore is composed of 27 The pH increased from −   The kinetics of leaching for the saprolite ore is slower than that for the limonite ore with respect to metal dissolution. Only 50% of the total Cr (that is from both the limonite and saprolite ores) is extracted during the saprolite leach stage. The similar extraction curves of Mn and Co during the saprolite leach imply that they are likely to be co-located. This is reasonable as Mn and Co have been reported to be generally associated within Mn oxides ( The saprolite Fe extraction profile contrasts those of the other metals. The decreasing extraction of Fe during the saprolite leach (from 66% at 1 The formation of fine grained particles, XRD analysis of the saprolite leach residues compliments the Fe extraction measurements and solution speciation calculations. The diffraction peak heights of lizardite decrease in relative intensity due to dissolution ( The Rietveld method has been utilised to obtain quantitative phase information for the saprolite residues ( Improved definition of the forms of Ni present in both laterite ore and leach residues is essential for better understanding of their leach mechanisms and thus the design of cost-effective nickel concentration and leaching strategies. Mineralogical characterisation of a selected Indonesian laterite (limonite and saprolite) and the resultant atmospheric leach products is described. By combining SEM investigations, thermal analysis, particle size distribution and quantitative XRD studies, it is possible to elucidate the evolution of limonite and saprolite during leaching using standard readily assessable laboratory techniques. The concentrations of Ni in the Indonesian limonite ore and the final 3 For the saprolite ore and the final 11 This research has been supported by the