A coconut shell based granular activated carbon (AC) was aged in solutions containing different amount of potassium ethyl xanthate (PEX) for 24h and then separated from the solutions, rinsed with distilled several times and used for Zn(II) ion removal. It was shown that the loading capacity of PEX impregnated AC at an initial Zn(II) concentration of 112mg/L slightly increased by increasing PEX preloading, so that it increases from 1.56 to 1.88mg/g by increasing the PEX concentration in the aging solution from zero to 200mg/L.
                  Aging of AC in 0.1N sodium hydroxide solutions containing different amounts of PEX was also performed for 24h and it was shown that the loading capacity of the resultant AC samples for Zn(II) ions at an initial Zn(II) concentration of 112mg/L slightly increased by increasing PEX loading, so that it increases from 7.18 to 8.06mg/g by increasing PEX concentration in aging solution from zero to 600mg/L.
                  Aging of nitric acid oxidized AC in 0.1N sodium hydroxide solutions containing different amounts of PEX also performed for 24h. It was shown that the loading capacity of these modified AC samples for Zn(II) ions at an initial Zn(II) concentration of 112mg/L increased by increasing PEX loading, so that it increases from 15.11 to 16.43mg/g by increasing PEX concentration in aging solution from zero to 1000mg/L.
                  It was revealed that the impregnation of AC samples with PEX results in the decreasing of adsorption kinetics of Zn(II) ions, since the hydrophobic nature of PEX molecules retards solution diffusion onto PEX impregnated AC samples.
                  In order to get the highest Zn(II) loading capacity, the optimum condition for surface modification was determined to be oxidizing of AC with 4M nitric acid solution and then aging in 0.1M sodium hydroxide solution containing 661mg/L PEX for 24h. These surface modified activated carbons were named ACABPEX. The effect of Zn(II) initial concentration in the range of 59 to 165mg/L on its adsorption kinetics and loading capacity onto ACABPEX was investigated. The equilibrium and kinetic data were best represented by the Koble–Corrigan isotherm model and the pseudo second order kinetic model, respectively. It was understood that three mechanisms play main roles in the adsorption of Zn(II) onto ACABPEX.AC is an efficient and widely used adsorbent for removal of various specious from aqueous solutions, but its loading capacity for heavy metal cations is low in comparison with organic compounds. For instance, In order to increase the affinity of AC towards heavy metal cations, various factors can be tailored. These factors include not only the physical properties of AC such as specific surface area and pore size distribution, but also its surface chemistry ( Surfactants are hetero-polar organic molecules with a hydrophobic tail and a non-polar hydrophilic head, and have been applied to modify the surface properties of a solid (   Ethyl dithiocarbonate or ethyl xanthate is an anionic surfactant which widely used in the froth flotation of metal sulfide ores as a collecting agent and the hydrocarbon chain has two carbons ( Analytical reagent grade nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, zinc sulfate heptahydrate (ZnSO The basicity and acidity of AC samples were determined according to the Boehm titration method ( High-resolution compositional maps of AC samples were obtained through imaging with backscattered electrons (BSE) by using a Philips XL30 scanning electron microscope. Information about morphology and surface topography of AC samples was obtained through imaging with secondary electrons (SE). WDX studies were carried out with a WDX 3PC, MICROSPEC Corp., USA. Textural characteristics including isotherm plot of adsorption and desorption of nitrogen gas, specific surface area and pore size distribution of the AC samples before and after surface modifications were determined from nitrogen gas adsorption at 77 The pH 2 The PEX concentration of the pretreatment solutions before adding AC0 and also at the end of experiments was determined by a UV–Visible spectrophotometer at the indicating wavelength of 301 2 The concentration of PEX in the pretreatment solutions was determined by UV–Visible spectrophotometer and no PEX was observed after agitating for 24 Initially 30 Each 2 The concentration of PEX in the pretreatment solutions was determined by UV–Visible spectrophotometer and no PEX was observed after agitating for 24 Each 2 The batch kinetic experiments were performed by a similar method as previously explained for the batch equilibrium experiments. Only, the sampling was performed at regular time intervals by removing 10 AC generally has a strongly developed internal surface and it is usually characterized by a complex tridimensional porous structure consisting of pores with different sizes and shapes. Pores of AC fall into three groups of the micropores with diameters less than 2 As can be seen in  A summary of pore analysis report for AC0, ACAB and ACABPEX is presented in   Surface morphology of an AC0 particle can be seen in  PEX is a surface-active agent, which consists of an anionic polar head and an uncharged non-polar hydrocarbon chain containing two carbons. The polar head of PEX molecules has a great affinity for Zn(II) ions and zinc ethyl xanthate (ZnX Therefore, when the PEX molecules are adsorbed from their hydrocarbon chain head on non-polar carbon surface pathches as a result of hydrophobic interactions, the charged polar head of PEX molecules orients onto the solution and creates new adsorption sites, which results in the increasing of adsorption capacity of AC for Zn(II) ions. It has been reported that the aging of AC0 in a 0.1  Previously it was shown that the oxidizing of AC0 with nitric acid and then its modification with sodium hydroxide significantly improves the Zn(II) loading capacity. For example, at initial Zn(II) concentration of 112  It was shown that the highest Zn(II) loading capacity at optimum PEX concentration in the pretreatment solution was obtained for the nitric acid oxidized AC0 with 24   It can be seen that the removal percentage decreases with increasing Zn(II) initial concentration. In other words, a higher amount of Zn(II) ions remains in the solution with increasing the initial Zn(II) concentration. For example, the removal percentage decreases from 85.31 to 43.55% by increasing the initial concentration from 69 to 165    The surface morphology and topography of an ACABPEX particle can be seen in    Local precipitation of Zn(II) ions as zinc hydroxide on the external surface of ACABPEX Adsorption of Zn(II) ions by acidic surface functional groups of ACABPEX through cation exchange mechanism Adsorption of Zn(II) ions by polar head of adsorbed PEX molecules Modeling of equilibrium data is of great importance in finding an equation that can be used to compare different adsorbents under different operational conditions and to design and optimize an adsorption system. To examine the relationship between adsorbed amount and aqueous concentration of adsorbate at equilibrium, various sorption isotherm models are widely employed for fitting the data. In this study, two-parameter isotherm models including Froundlich, Langmuir and Temkin and three-parameter isotherm models including Redlich–Peterson (RP) and Koble–Corrigan (KC) were assessed through linear and nonlinear regression methods for finding the most appropriate isotherm model for adsorption of Zn(II) onto ACABPEX. In both linear and non-linear regression methods, the average relative error (ARE) was applied to test the best-fitting isotherm model to the experimental data. The ARE values can be calculated by the following equation:    Adsorption kinetic study provides valuable information on the reaction pathway and in the mechanism of adsorption reactions. Hence, it is of prime importance in designing of an adsorption system. The kinetic data for the adsorption of Zn(II) onto ACABPEX was analyzed by using different kinetic models including Elovich, Fractional power (FP), pseudo first order (PFO) and pseudo second order (PSO) kinetics models through linear and non-linear regression methods. In linear regression method, the parameters of different kinetic models can be determined from slope and intercept of linear plots.    The pretreatment of AC samples with ethyl xanthate increases its loading capacity for Zn(II) ions. This is due to the creation of new adsorption sites as a result of the adsorption of PEX molecules through hydrophobic interactions with the surface of AC. Nonetheless, the pretreatment of AC samples with ethyl xanthate decreases the adsorption kinetics of Zn(II) ions, since the surface hydrophobicity of AC samples increases after adsorption some of the PEX molecules from polar head or lying them on the AC surface which results in the decreasing of mass transfer rate between the bulk solution and the adsorbent phase. The largest Zn(II) loading capacity was obtained for the 4 The equilibrium and kinetic studies for the adsorption of Zn(II) ions onto ACABPEX showed that both of the loading capacity and adsorption kinetics increases by increasing the Zn(II) initial concentrations. Modeling of the equilibrium and kinetic data showed that the nonlinear regression method is a better way to obtain the model parameters than the linear regression method. The equilibrium data for the adsorption of Zn(II) on to the ACABPEX best represented by the KC isotherm model. Also, Langmuir and RP isotherm models are able to model the equilibrium data by a good precision. The PSO equation was best fitted to the kinetic data for the adsorption of Zn(II) ions onto ACABPEX at different initial concentrations.  Activated carbon A size fraction of − AC0 after 24 M nitric acid oxidized AC0 with 24 4 Potassium ethyl xanthate Sodium diethyl dithiocarbamate Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid Zinc ethyl xanthate Scanning electron microscopy Wavelength dispersive X-ray Backscattered electrons Secondary electrons pH of Point of zero charge Average relative error Brunauer–Emmett–Teller Barrett–Joyner–Hanlenda Redlich–Peterson Koble–Corrigan Fractional power Pseudo first order Pseudo second order