Background
                  The volar locking plate (VLP) system provides stable fixation and is widely used for distal radius fractures. Studies have shown that irritation of the implant prominence is a risk factor for flexor tendon rupture, especially of the flexor pollicis longus (FPL). Contact between VLPs and flexor tendons should be avoided. We aimed to investigate the ulnar facet locking screw locations of various VLPs placed without FPL tendon contact in cadaver wrists.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We hypothesized that ulnar facet locking screws would be in the vicinity of the subchondral bone when the plate is placed in the most distal position without FPL tendon contact.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The study assessed two variable-angles and four fixed locking plates. We placed each plate in six different cadavers, resulting in 36 different plate-cadaver combinations. Plates were placed in the most distal position without FPL tendon contact. We drilled the most ulnar hole (hole A) and the second ulnar hole (hole B) of the distal row. All drilling procedures were performed using a specific jig for each fixed locking plate. For variable-angle locking plates, we drilled with a fixed jig for each plate. We obtained lateral radiographs when the drill penetrated the dorsal cortex and measured the distance between the drill and the articular surface.
               
                  Results
                  With regard to hole A, the mean distances between the drill and the center of the articular surface were 2.6–5.2mm for the four fixed locking plates and 4.9–5.6mm for the two variable-angle locking plates. With regard to hole B, the mean distances between the drill and the center of the articular surface were 3.8–5.9mm for the four fixed locking plates and 5.5–5.9mm for the two variable-angle locking plates.
               
                  Discussion
                  When clinicians place a VLP without FPL tendon contact, the distance between the ulnar facet screws and the center of the articular surface is over 3mm in most cases. Surgeons should select variable-angle drilling for strong articular support when using variable-angle locking plates.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III, diagnostic Level.The volar locking plate (VLP) has been widely used in patients with unstable distal radius fractures and many clinical studies have warned about implant-related tendon rupture, especially of the flexor pollicis longus (FPL) Previous studies have shown that irritation of the implant prominence is a risk factor for tendon rupture In the last decade, studies have reported modified plate designs, and the screws may provide good subchondral support We conducted an anatomical study to investigate the distal limit for safe positioning of commercially available VLPs. We hypothesized that ulnar facet locking screws would be in the vicinity of the subchondral bone when the plate is placed in the most distal position without FPL tendon contact. The study considered six widely used VLPs with current designs (two variable-angle locking plates and four fixed locking plates). The variable-angle locking plates were VariAx (Stryker; Kalamazoo, MI, USA; launched in 2010) and Variable-angle LCP two-column volar distal radius Plate 2.4 (VA-TCP; Depuy Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA; launched in 2009), while the fixed locking plates were HYBRIX (Mizuho, Tokyo, Japan; launched in 2015), MODE (JAPAN MEDICAL DINAMIC MARKETING INC, MDM, Tokyo, Japan; launched in 2012), Acu-Loc2P (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR, USA; launched in 2011), and DVR (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA; launched in 2000) ( For cadaver preparation, we removed the skin and soft subcutaneous tissue on the forearm to expose the flexor muscle group. We maintained the FPL muscle origin in its anatomical position during the dissection. To confirm the relationship between the FPL and plate prominence, all flexor muscles were cut, except for the FPL. This process was mandatory because if other flexors were retained, it would not be possible to confirm contact between the FPL tendon and the plate. The pronator quadratus (PQ) was removed, as it is detached from the radial border during VLP surgery. Other soft tissues, such as ligaments, joint capsules, and fat tissue, were preserved. Although we used nine specimens, each plate was placed in six different cadavers to avoid loosening of the plates, resulting in 36 different plate-cadaver combinations. To minimize bias associated with the order of fixation, the plate and cadaver were randomly selected. We used the smallest size of each plate to exclude selection bias. Such sizing is common in clinical practice and is appropriate for most Japanese specimens. We placed the plate in the most distal position without FPL tendon contact and with the best fit in the radial-ulnar position ( For the measurement, we performed drilling under fluoroscopic guidance. A lateral view was obtained by confirming projection of the pisiform over the distal portion of the scaphoid Analyses involved the most ulnar hole and the second ulnar hole of the distal row because these screw holes were used to fix the volar lunate facet, which is most important for supporting longitudinal load On the lateral radiographs, we marked the center of the articular surface, the dorsal halfway point between the center and dorsal edge, and the volar halfway point between the center and volar edge. Thereafter, we drew a line perpendicular to the drill at each point. We then measured the distances between the drill and the center, dorsal halfway point, and volar halfway point as the dc, dd, and dv values, respectively ( The mean dc values (value The dc value for the HYBRIX was significantly smaller than that for the VariAx ( The mean dc values for the VariAx, VA-TCP, HYBRIX, MODE, Acu-Loc2P, and DVR were 5.9 The dv values for the Acu-Loc2P were significantly smaller than those for the VariAx ( Most of the plates showed dc, dd, and dv values of more than 3 The value for the HYBRIX was smaller than all the values for the VariAx, the dd value for the DVR, and the dv value for the VA-TCP in hole A. Therefore, surgeons may obtain stronger subchondral support with the HYBRIX than with these three plates when attempting to avoid FPL tendon contact. Throughout the measurement, the values for the HYBRIX, MODE, and Acu-Loc2P were smaller than the values for the other three plates; however, the differences were not significant. The smaller values for the HYBRIX, MODE, and Acu-Loc2P might be associated with the introduction of these plates after the year 2011 and the fact that they were more recently developed than the other three models. Recent commercially available VLPs are designed to fit the morphology of the distal radius. Many of these plates have a medial extension to fix the lunate facet or a lateral extension to support the lateral rim and radial process The present study had several limitations. First, the study included small sample sizes of plates and cadavers. Additionally, we used each specimen several times; therefore, the order of plate placement could affect the fixing force associated with plate loosening. However, adjustment of the placement order might have minimized this problem. Second, we used formalin-fixed specimens, which might involve alteration of the muscles and soft tissues’ condition. Additionally, it was not possible to evaluate dynamic problems, such as rubbing of the tendon over the plate with wrist and thumb motion. Matityahu et al. studied contact pressure between fresh frozen cadavers and VLP using pressure sensors Fourth, all specimens were normal without wrist fractures. Restoration of the volar tilt would affect the results, and this cannot be assessed in a non-fracture model. Fifth, although we placed the plate with the best fit in the radial-ulnar position, the plate may not have been placed absolutely straight on the radius because of the individual differences in the distal radius. This problem might have affected the measurements. Sixth, we analyzed radiographs of the drill instead of those of the screw. The diameter of the screw is greater than that of the drill. Thus, each measurement might be slightly smaller than the measurement of the screw. Finally, we used only six plate designs. Presently, different plates are available depending on the condition of the fracture site. The strength of this study was that we were able to verify the distance between the drill and articular surface in lateral radiographs of VLPs placed without FPL contact, which is usually difficult in clinical settings. In conclusion, the distance between the ulnar facet screws and the articular surface is over 3 The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Conception and the design of the study: Yoshikuni Mimata, Kenya Murakami, and Minoru Doita. Acquisition of the data and drafting of the manuscript: Kotaro Sato. Analysis the data: Gaku Takahashi. The authors wish to thank associate professor Jun Yan from the Department of Anatomy of Iwate Medial University for his technical assistance and Professors Jiro Hitomi and Professors Akira Fujimura for their continuous support of this study.