Ceramic carbon composites (CCCs) utilize carbon as the conducting phase and can be used as resistors for high voltage electrical applications. To obtain superior mechanical properties it is desired to minimize the amount of carbon yet achieve desired electrical conductivity. Thus, electrically conducting nanosized carbon like carbon black (CB) was used with the matrix materials. Uniform dispersion of CB in ceramic matrix leading to a percolating network at lowest possible volume fraction is a challenge. The present work reports colloidal processing approach to overcome these challenges. Fabrication of CCCs was done by slip casting. Two types of slurries, CB slurry and alumina–clay slurry, were made independently and mixed together at a later stage to make CCCs. Electrical, thermal and mechanical properties of the CCCs have been studied.Switching resistors serve the purpose of reducing current chopping and reduce the high magnitude in rush currents when power apparatus like capacitor banks, shunt reactors and no-load transformers are switched on. With the capability of sustaining a vast range of energies ceramic carbon resistors (CCRs) are being used in this application from the inception of high voltage circuit breakers. With regard to handling high energy per unit volume, CCRs are superior to any other materials. Ceramic carbon resistors are used in 420 CCCs were made by slip casting a blend of two types of slurries – CB and alumina–clay slurries. CB (Vulcan X-72, Cabot, Nitrogen adsorption method, specific surface area 270 Alumina–clay slurry with 26 Fabrication of CCCs was done for a range of carbon content. CB slurries (2–8 Viscosity measurement was carried out using a concentric cylinder geometry (Double gap cup DG 26.7/Q) at shear rate of 10 The lowest as dispersed size of carbon black in suspension achieved with use of PVP as a dispersing agent and measured by laser diffraction was 199 The alumina–clay–carbon black composites sintered at 1400 With increase in carbon content beyond 5 The increase in porosity with increase in carbon black amount was caused by inhibition of densification of the composites by presence of carbon black. Carbon black particles are not expected to sinter to each other and rather they resulted in poorer packing and contact between alumina–clay particles restricting densification. Clay played the dual role of inorganic binder binding alumina particles as well as forming in situ mullite crystals ( Though the porosity had a detrimental influence on the compressive strength it must have resulted in improvement in thermal shock resistance of the composite samples The thermal conductivity of the samples, as per expectation, decreased with decrease in density for increasing carbon black content ( Assuming that high compressive strength and thermal conductivity are desired for the application of ceramic carbon composites which serve as resistors in power applications the sample with 2 Specific resistance of the CCCs with varying carbon content is shown in The electrical measurements indicated that the carbon black particles formed a percolating network at around 4 The ceramic carbon composites used in power applications as switching resistors typically have specific resistance below 100 Ceramic carbon composites (CCCs) were fabricated with uniformly dispersed carbon black (2–8 The authors are grateful to SAIF, IIT Bombay for FEG-SEM facility and