The ability to predict the amount of fines produced during the transport and handling of lump iron ore is of particular importance to the iron ore supplier. This study combines simple contact and fracture mechanics approaches to derive a breakage equation for lump iron ore fractured in an ISO tumble drum. The tumble drum simulates the forces experienced by iron ores during relatively low impact handling and transport events. The results of tumble drum tests on three Australian iron ores of widely varying mechanical properties showed that the lump to fines ratio's predicted by the simple breakage equation were proportional to those measured experimentally.Lump ore commands a price premium over fines because coarse and uniformly sized feed is required to achieve efficient reduction in a blast furnace. Fine ores (−6 mm) must be processed by hot agglomeration techniques to obtain a lumpy material suitable for charging to the blast furnace. A breakage function that predicts the extent of fines production from an easily measured material property is important to the iron ore supplier/miner for: the purpose of mine planning; to ensure lump ore transported by ship arrives at the customer's port within an agreed lump to fines specification; and to assist in the optimisation of the handling and transport process. Traditionally the tendency of iron ore to generate fines has been referred to as `strength' and has been characterised by the tumble drum test. The International Standards Organisation (ISO) tumble test rotates 15 kg of iron ore in a 1-m diameter drum, with two opposed 50-mm high lifters, for 200 revolutions. The percentage of material plus 6.4 mm remaining at the end of the test is termed the tumble index (strength parameter) and the percent minus 0.5 mm termed the abrasion index. The positive features of the test include the large sample mass tested, its ease of use, and low degree of sophistication. The mechanical properties of iron ore are typically highly variable and so a large number of lumps are required to give an acceptable average. A major limitation of the empirical tumble drum test index is its relevance to a specific type of breakage, i.e., fracture by small drops and abrasion. Furthermore, different standard test methods have been observed to rank samples differently ( A more fundamental strength property would be advantageous as it could be applied to other breakage events of relevance such as high impact drops, blasting and crushing. Fracture toughness has been found to be an important material property to rock breakage because such materials fail via the extension of flaws. This study investigated whether fracture toughness is a relevant fundamental material property to surface localised breakage caused by low impact handling and transport forces. The tumble drum was used to simulate such forces rather than as a test method to evaluate strength. Fracture toughness was related to the extent of fines production after tumbling via a simple contact and fracture mechanics based breakage equation. The approach differs from the work of Bearman et al. in its attempt to provide a mechanistic basis for the relationship between toughness and contact fracture. Non-standard tumble drum experiments were performed using an ISO tumble drum on three West Australian iron ores, namely — Yandi, Koolan and Mt. Whaleback. The ores showed considerable micro-structural variation associated with different geological genesis. Yandi ore is a friable pisolitic goethite ore, Koolan is a coarse and poorly bonded hematite, and Mt. Whaleback is banded iron formation (BIF), consisting primarily of hematite. The physical properties of the materials relevant to this study are summarised in Lumps in the size range 50–60 mm were tumbled in an ISO tumble drum for 100 revolutions prior to tumble testing in order to stabilise the material. For the three iron ores considered this procedure disproportionately altered their average strength and scatter. Forty stabilised 50–60 mm lumps were tumbled in a standard ISO tumble drum for 200 revolutions in the case of Koolan and Mt. Whaleback ores, and 20 revolutions in the case of Yandi. A decreased number of revolutions/tumble cycle was used for Yandi as it displayed a significantly higher breakage rate than the other ores. At the completion of the `tumble cycle,' the material was removed from the drum for screening. Material remaining+50 mm was returned to the drum for another tumble cycle. The process was repeated until approximately less than 20% of the material remained or the breakage rate tended to zero. A detailed fracture product distribution for each tumble cycle was obtained by screening the material minus 50 mm removed at the end of each tumble cycle using the following sieve sizes (mm); 40, 25, 21, 16, 10, 8, 6.35, 4, 1. Previous studies ( The Other assumptions made in deriving a breakage function were that: the lump geometry can be represented as a cube, fracture occurred when the cube impacted on a corner with its centroid vertically aligned with the point of contact, fines were liberated by the extension of cone cracks to the lump surface. As contact deformation during tumbling was assumed to be wholly elastic it was possible to make an important conclusion about the cause for the reduction in breakage rate with increasing revolutions. It was assumed in this study that the stress distribution in the lumps was similar to that in the elastic half space so that the Auerbach solution was applicable.  The radius of Mt. Whaleback lumps was probably closest to The calculated For cone cracks, which initially propagate at a slight angle to the surface of the specimen (∼22° for uniaxial contact with no sliding forces), to join with the surface they must have formed a half penny geometry ( Values of The probability of a cube impacting on a corner and causing debris was considered to be 8/14. Approximately one half of the 40 lumps were estimated to be lifted per revolution. Thus, for the first tumble cycle, where every impact on a corner was assumed to cause fines, the mass produced was given by: The theoretical results determined using Based on the data presented there were two notable features: the systematic overestimation by the model of the amount of fines generation and the relatively large deviation of the Mt. Whaleback result from the line of best fit. The most likely explanations for this were (1) the assumption of a constant and over-simplistic loading configuration, (2) the effect of lump geometry on the mean length of cone cracks, (3) the number of lumps assumed to be raised by the lifters per revolution, and (4) the assumption of a constant 8/14 chance of impact resulting in fracture. The ratio of the contact stress, determined by the Hertzian approach, to the yield strength for each was significantly lower for Mt. Whaleback. Thus, Mt. Whaleback was least likely to undergo elastic/plastic deformation relative to the other ores and this may explain why the result for this ore shows the greatest deviation from the line of best fit. With results for three ores only further experimental work with a greater range of ore types is required to confirm the validity of the simple contact fracture model presented. Although based on limited data this work suggests that a relatively simple fracture mechanics based approach can be used to predict fines production caused by small handling forces. 1. A breakage equation relevant to surface fracture of lumps caused by small impacts was derived based on a physical model of breakage. The equation was derived using a simple contact and fracture mechanics approach and requires knowledge of the fracture toughness and density of the iron ore lumps. 2. The breakage equation gave reasonable predictions of the mass of fines produced during tumbling tests on three types of iron ore lumps in a standard ISO tumble drum. This test was considered to simulate transport and handling events such as flow in hoppers and small drops like those at conveyer transfer points. 3. The accuracy of the model could be improved by taking into account the effect of (a) torsional and sliding forces at impact, (b) fracture due to elastic/plastic contact, (c) lump geometry on the stress distribution and crack geometry/dimensions in the lump. The authors wish to thank A.C. Fischer-Cripps for his generous contributions to discussions on this work. The financial support to studentship and the provision of time by BHP Research to write this paper are gratefully acknowledged.