Selective separation of pyrite from quartz and calcite was achieved through microbiologically induced flotation and flocculation in presence of Bacillus polymyxa. Adsorption behavior of bacterial cells onto pyrite, calcite and quartz was established. Surface chemical changes on various minerals brought about by bacterial interaction were established through zeta-potential measurements as a function of pH. It has been shown that pyrite can be separated from quartz and calcite through either selective flocculation or flotation after interaction with cells of B. polymyxa or bioproteins separated from the bacterial metabolite. The results of this study are significant from the viewpoint of desulphurisation of flotation tailings with respect to environmental control.Acidic, metal-laden water drainage from abandoned mines and waste materials which are left out after metal recovery in most of the metallurgical industries causes significant environmental impact to surface waterways around the globe ( Sulfide minerals are floated using alkaline Xanthates ( Highly alkaline materials are blended with the tailings in order to neutralize acid generation and to stabilize metal through precipitation ( A solution containing bacteria and low-cost nutrients are applied to the top of the tailings pile to form a biological barrier ( Utility of microorganisms in beneficiation and bioremediation was understood and developed only in the last decade. Considering the above scenario, a system of pyrite along with quartz and calcite was studied in order to separate pyrite from rest of the tailings. Natarajan and co-workers ( In the present study, surface chemical changes brought about on minerals and cells of Hand picked highly pure mineral samples of pyrite, quartz and calcite were obtained from Alminrock, Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India. Chemical, X-ray and mineralogical analyses were carried out to ascertain the purity of the minerals. The purity of minerals was ascertained as pyrite 99.9%, quartz 99.5% and calcite 99.98%. The above samples were ground in a porcelain ball mill, sieved and fractioned to obtain different size fractions ((−105+74) μm and −37 μm). The −37 μm fraction was further ground and a sample of ∼5 μm size fraction was obtained by sedimentation. Particle size analysis determined from a Malvern Zetasizer gave an average particle size of ∼5 μm for pyrite and quartz, and ∼3 μm for calcite. These size fractions were used for the electrokinetic and adsorption studies. The surface areas of the samples used for adsorption were determined by BET nitrogen––specific surface area method. The surface area of the minerals from the above method is 2.659 m Strains of Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength, while nitric acid and potassium hydroxide were used as pH modifiers. All reagents used in the present studies were of analytical grade. Deionised double distilled water with a specific conductivity of <1.5 μmhos was used in all the tests. The bacteria were cultured by inoculating 10 ml of pure strain of the bacterial cells to the Bromfield medium. This was incubated at 30 °C on a Remi rotary shaker maintained at 240 rpm. A Petroff–Hausser counter under a Leitz phase contrast microscope (Laborlux K Wild MPS 12) was used to determine the bacterial cell count. The change in pH was monitored at regular time intervals (30 min) using a Systronics digital pH meter. The fully grown bacterial culture (48 h) was centrifuged (Sorvall RC–5B) at 10,000 rpm for 15 min at 5 °C. The supernatant was decanted and filtered through sterile Millipore (0.2 μm) filter paper to remove all insoluble materials and any bacterial cells still left out. The cell pellet was washed with deionised double distilled water and again centrifuged. This process was repeated twice to obtain pure cell pellet. One liter of batch culture of For adsorption tests, 1 g each of the individual mineral powder was taken and pulped in 100 ml of 10 Zeta-potentials of pyrite, quartz and calcite suspensions before and after interaction with the bacterial cells were measured as a function of pH using a Malvern Zetasizer 3000 instrument. One gram of the mineral sample was interacted with 5 For the flocculation tests 1 g of the mineral sample was added to 100 ml cell suspension in a measuring cylinder. The bacterial cells were obtained for the purpose after centrifugation followed by washing the cells in deionised double distilled water. Cell count was adjusted before adding to the mineral mixture. The bacterial cell count was maintained at 5 For these experiments, 2.5 g of the mineral mixture ( Initially 1 g of desired mineral was pulped in 100 ml of deionised double distilled water in a conical flask containing 5 The adsorption behavior of bacterial cells onto pyrite, quartz and calcite as a function of time, different pH values and equilibrium concentration was investigated and the results obtained are portrayed in Kinetics of bacterial cell adsorption was obtained by determining the adsorption density of cells onto the mineral with respect to time. Due to solubility of calcite in acidic pH, the adsorption behavior of bacterial cells was studied only beyond pH 7, where as for other minerals such as pyrite and quartz, the entire pH range was covered. Adsorption behavior as a function of time was studied in the pH range of 6–7 for pyrite, quartz and calcite in 10 The adsorption of cells onto minerals as a function of pH is given in Adsorption isotherms for bacterial cells onto pyrite, quartz and calcite were then established. From From From A prior knowledge of the surface charges on both the cell and the mineral is important to establish the possibility of separation of pyrite from quartz and calcite. Zeta-potentials were measured to assess the changes in the surface chemical characteristics of both cells and minerals before and after mutual interaction. The cell density used for these experiments was 1 Surface chemical changes on mineral surfaces after interaction with bacterial cells are illustrated in Surface chemical changes on quartz surface before and after interactions with bacterial cells are depicted in Zeta-potentials of calcite as a function of pH before and after interaction with bacterial cells are shown in Zeta-potential of pyrite as a function of pH before and after interaction with bacterial cells is shown in The settling behavior of pyrite, quartz and calcite mineral fines was established under different experimental conditions such as in presence of bacterial cells, extracellular bacterial protein, and both as a function of time and pH.  From the results in From From In order to estimate the optimum amount of protein required for selective separation, settling studies were also carried out in the presence of different extracellular bacterial protein concentrations at different pH values. From From the results of individual flocculation tests it is clear that quartz can be separated from pyrite after interaction with cells of From A mixture (1:1, wt.%) of pyrite and quartz was taken and treated with the bacterial cells for 15 min. The treated mixture was then floated in a Halimond tube. As observed from the flocculation studies, the maximum efficiency in selective separation of pyrite from quartz was obtained at pH 6. Hence, all the flotation studies were also carried out at this pH. From The following major conclusions could be drawn based on this study: Cells of Electrophoretic mobility of bacterial cells after interaction with the minerals was not significantly altered. However, the IEP of cells shifted to slightly higher pH after interaction with pyrite and calcite. Significant surface chemical changes were observed on quartz and calcite after bacterial interaction. Flocculation behavior of various minerals after bacterial interaction was found to be quite different from each other. Pyrite settled rapidly compared to calcite whereas in case of quartz the settling rate was reduced. Similar behavior was observed with extracellular bacterial proteins as well. Through selective flocculation pyrite could be efficiently separated from binary mixtures containing quartz and calcite after interaction with bacterial cells as well as extracellular bacterial protein. Pyrite could be efficiently separated from quartz after interaction with bacterial cells or extracellular bacterial protein, through flotation. It was observed that there was further increase in the efficiency of selective separation on addition of small amount of amine collector to enhance higher recovery of quartz. In conventional processes, collector-assisted flotation is used for removal of pyrite from tailings. Such a process could be uneconomical considering the enormous amounts of mine tailing heaps. The results reported in this paper could lead to the development of a very economical process utilising native microorganisms available in abandoned mine tailings.