Part of NaOL (sodium oleate) was replaced with different monohydric alcohols (butanol, hexanol, and octanol) in the flotation of magnesite and dolomite for lower flotation costs and higher flotation efficiency. Zeta potential analyses, contact angle measurements and molecular simulations were used to investigate mechanisms of the adsorption of alcohols. Single mineral flotation tests showed that combined reagents could produce better flotation results than single NaOL. Contact angles and zeta potentials of the two minerals indicated that alcohols were adsorbed on mineral surfaces physically and improved the hydrophobicity when combined with NaOL. Molecular dynamics simulation was used to explore mechanisms of alcohols at the molecular level. Different adsorption models indicated that alcohols could increase NaOL density and the thickness of the hydrophobic layer on both mineral surfaces. As a result, the flotation of magnesite and dolomite was enhanced. Based on molecular dynamics calculation, the adsorption mode of octanol on mineral surfaces, when combined with NaOL for flotation, was shown to be adsorbed through hydrogen bonds.Magnesite and dolomite, which are widely used in many fields as primary materials, such as refractory materials and sticky materials, are preponderant and important magnesium mineral resources Collectors, which serve as one of the most important factors in flotation, have been a topic of interest In recent years, combined collectors that combined cationic collectors with nonionic surfactants such as alcohol have gained increased attention because of their strong synergistic effects on mineral surfaces In this work, different monohydric alcohols, including butanol, hexanol, and octanol, were used to replace part of sodium oleate (NaOL) for the flotation of magnesite and dolomite. Then, the behavior of NaOL and monohydric alcohols and adsorption models were investigated. Based on the flotation test, zeta-potential measurements, contact angle measurements, and molecular simulation, the mechanisms of NaOL in both single solution and combined reagent solution with monohydric alcohols were investigated separately. The study provides physical insight into the microscopic adsorption mechanism of mixed collectors on magnesite and dolomite surfaces. Samples of magnesite and dolomite were obtained from Haicheng of Liaoning Province, China. They were hand-sorted and then ground to − Single mineral flotation experiments were carried out in a 30 Zeta-potential measurements of magnesite and dolomite were carried out using aNano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd. Britain). The 20 Samples of magnesite and dolomite with or without interacting with flotation reagents were pressed to smooth sheets in a tablet machine. For testing the contact angle of those sheets of samples, measurements were taken using a JC200A Contact Angle Goniometer (Shanghai Powereach Digital technology equipment co. LTD). Images of gas-solid-liquid three-phase contact were captured by high-speed amplifier camera. Then, contact angles were obtained by angle measurement A molecular dynamics simulation was performed using the Materials Studio 7.0 software package. Mineral surfaces and adsorption systems were established with the Materials Visualizer module and Armorphous Cell module. Condensed-phase optimized molecular potential for atomistic simulation studies (COMPASS) force fields in the Forcite module were used to calculate bonded and non-bonded atom potentials Based on the structure database in Materials Studio, crystal structures of magnesite and dolomite were modeled. Both of the surface cells were built on the principle cleavage plan of (101) faces, which are shown in Reagent models could be divided into two kinds: NaOL solution and combined reagent solution, which consisted of NaOL and different alcohols. Butanol, hexanol and octanol were chosen as the subjects. To explore the adsorption status that approached reality, all reagent models were constructed with 2000 water molecules and 20 reagent molecules. According to the proportion of molecular number, water boxes of combined reagent solution were modeled with a molar ratio of NaOL to alcohol of 3:1, the optimum ratio verified by the laboratory forth flotation test. Adsorption systems consist of three layers. The bottom layers were mineral surfaces built from (101) surface of magnesite and dolomite, which were 6 Three-dimensional structures of molecular models were created and preliminarily optimized using geometry optimization with a smart algorithm approach and a convergence level of 0.001 After initial configuration, molecular dynamic calculations were performed on each simulation system for minimization of the total energy, which was composed of potential energy and kinetic energy. The system minimized by geometry optimization was first pre-equilibrated at the NVT ensemble (constant particle number, system volume, and temperature) Interface formation near mineral surfaces was characterized through molecular dynamics simulation. It reached an equilibrium state when reagent distribution did not change with time The relative concentration, which was defined as the ratio of atoms or reagent number density in the slab to the total density in the system, was used to explore the adsorption ability of NaOL and alcohols in a single solution or mixed solution The main objective of this study was to investigate the influence of different monohydric alcohols on the flotation of magnesite and dolomite by sodium oleate. The flotability of two minerals with respect to NaOL dosage is shown in Flotation tests were then carried out at different pH values with a fixed NaOL concentration of 80 By controlling the pH values of the slurry at optimal conditions (magnesite 11.0, dolomite 10.0), the effects of different molar ratios of different monohydric alcohols to total reagents on flotation were investigated. For more distinct differences and a better understanding of the effects, the dosages of collectors adopted were the one before the peak in single solution flotation. In other words, dosages of collectors in magnesite flotation were maintained at 50 In short, NaOL could be replaced by monohydric alcohols of a specific amount for better flotation of magnesite and dolomite. It could also be concluded that the flotation recovery increased as the carbon chain of the alcohol increased. Among the three monohydric alcohols, octanol worked the best. To perform a persuasive and representative analysis of additional effects, octanol was selected to analyze zeta potential and contact angle. The zeta potentials of magnesite and dolomite as a function of pH with the absence and presence of reagents in a pH range of 1.6–12 were measured, and the results are shown in Contact angles of magnesite and dolomite in the absence and presence of NaOL, octanol and a combination of the two are shown in For further exploration of mechanisms of NaOL and combined collectors, the adsorption behavior of NaOL molecules on magnesite surfaces and dolomite surfaces at the solution state were investigated. As seen in As for combined reagent solutions, butanol, hexanol and octanol worked differently in changing the adsorption state of NaOL. With a shorter carbon structure, butanol strengthened the hydrophobic layer on mineral surfaces by increasing the carbon chain density of NaOL. With the increase in carbon number, some hexanol and octanol molecules could be adsorbed on the mineral surface or oleate molecules Based on adsorption models in the equilibrium state, the interaction energy of mineral surfaces with reagent solutions was calculated to quantify the enhancement of oleate adsorption on mineral surfaces. Combined reagents had more negative interaction energies with both magnesite and dolomite than those of the NaOL solution. Therefore, it can be deduced from As a function of the distance from mineral surface, analysis of relative concentrations of reagents can provide a quantitative basis for the adsorption ability. As shown in Neither magnesite nor dolomite could be collected by single octanol. As seen in Monohydric alcohol was used to replace certain proportions of NaOL for the flotation of magnesite and dolomite in this study. The results of laboratory forth flotation showed that combined reagents played a better role than single NaOL. The effects of monohydric alcohols on magnesite and dolomite flotation by NaOL increased as the carbon number of alcohol molecules increased. The analysis of zeta potentials showed that NaOL was adsorbed on mineral surfaces chemically, and octanol was adsorbed on surfaces physically. The contact angle measurements confirmed that the hydrophobicity of both minerals treated with a combined collector was much better than those treated by single NaOL. The interaction energy and relative concentration of reagent on mineral surfaces were used for further verification and illustration of flotation test results. Models with combined reagents of NaOL and octanol had a more negative energy than those treated by single NaOL or NaOL combined with butanol and hexanol. Therefore, combined reagents of NaOL and octanol could collect more magnesite and dolomite. Different monohydric alcohol with different carbon numbers had different effects on the flotation of the two minerals by NaOL. Butanol made a denser NaOL layer, while hexanol and octanol made more directional NaOL arrangements and thicker hydrophobic layers. Octanol was adsorbed on minerals by hydrogen bonds and decreased electrostatic repulsion between the functional groups of NaOL. In conclusion, monohydric alcohols could help to reduce the amount of NaOL and produce better recoveries in the flotation of magnesite and dolomite. This work was supported by the open fund of the