 The objective of this book is to gather a number of up-to-date contributions issued from MeGe GDR on the theme of multi-scale and multi-physics modeling of geomaterials with particular reference to micromechanical aspects. Without pretending to be exhaustive on such a widely debated theme, the book aims at presenting a glimpse of the current state of the scientific knowledge together with the available tools and methods of analysis. The contributions will have viewpoints that alternate between phenomenological/micromechanically enriched and purely micromechanical approaches. Throughout the chapters, the authors highlight advances in geomaterial modeling, while also pointing out the practical implications to the engineer. The plan of the book is organized as follows. The first chapters will be dedicated to the multi-scale modeling of cohesion-less geomaterials, including multi-physical processes. Then, the effects of particle breakage and large deformations on the response of the material at the specimen scale are examined. Finally, concrete materials are discussed together with clays as cohesive geomaterials, before closing by looking at some engineering problems involving larger scales.    In nanometric pores, the molecules of fluid are confined. This effect, denoted as molecular packing, includes fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interactions and has significant consequences at the macroscale, such as instantaneous swelling, which are not predicted by classical poromechanics. If adsorption in nanopores induces instantaneous deformations at a higher scale, the matrix swelling may close the transport porosity, reducing the global permeability of the porous system or annihilating the functionality of synthesized materials. This is important for applications in petroleum and oil recovery, gas storage, separation and catalysis and drug delivery. This chapter aims at characterizing the influence of an adsorbed phase on the instantaneous deformation of micro-to-macro porous media. In Using two-dimensional (2D) DEM simulations of compression and extension tests, we highlight the discriminant role played by mesoloops of particles, constituting different phases, in the mechanical behavior of granular materials. The Then, by simplifying the complex shapes and the variety of orientations of the mesoloops, the main characteristics are identified to achieve a complete constitutive model from an uspcaling approach including these mesoloops. Finally, the H-directional model  In In In   In