Objectives
                  This study aimed to evaluate the prognostic factors of reoperation after plate fixation for midshaft clavicle fracture and compare outcomes of dynamic compression plates (DCP) and pre-contoured locking plates.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective comparative study.
               
                  Setting
                  Level I trauma center.
               
                  Patients/participants
                  We recruited 274 consecutive patients who underwent plate fixation for midshaft clavicle fracture from 2007 to 2017 and completed at least 1 year of follow-up.
               
                  Intervention
                  235 patients underwent surgery with DCP, while 39 patients were treated with locking plate.
               
                  Main outcome measurements
                  We reviewed the possible variables of secondary surgeries, and documented complications from the medical records. Patients with a DCP or locking plate were further divided for outcome comparisons.
               
                  Results
                  150 (54.7%) patients underwent reoperation after the initial surgery, and plate removal represented the major etiology. On multivariate analysis, superficial wound infection and prominent implant were identified as significant risk factors for reoperation, while aging, locking plate usage, and higher body mass index (BMI) were protective factors (all P < 0.05). The locking plate featured a significantly decreased implant removal rate (7.7% vs. 60.9%, P < 0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Patients with risk factors for superficial wound infection or a prominent implant tended to require a secondary operation after surgery for midshaft clavicle fracture, while aging, pre-contoured locking plate usage, and higher BMI decreased the risk. Compared with DCP, patients with locking plates tended to have better prognosis and significantly lower implant removal rates.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Prognostic III.Midshaft clavicle fracture is a common injury in adults, involved in 70–80% of clavicle fractures Open reduction and internal fixation using a dynamic compression plate (DCP) is a common option for middle-third clavicle fractures. However, DCP use has a high reoperation rate due to instrumentation removal, which creates issues for patients and surgeons. Pre-contoured locking plates, which are now available and popular among global medical institutions, have advantages including lower profile and plate prominence. The plate's S-shaped design helps it better match the anatomy of the clavicle. Reoperations due to implant-related irritation are frequently required, and patients are highly concerned about it. Limited reports have focused on the prognostic factors of secondary operations and comparing outcomes between DCP and pre-contoured locking plate. In past studies, complications associated with operative fixation after acute midshaft clavicle fracture occurred at rates of 14.5–50% This retrospective chart review included data from our institution's hospital trauma database. We recruited 388 consecutive patients who underwent surgical fixation between January 2007 and December 2017 with the diagnosis of clavicle fracture. Patients who underwent plate fixation for midshaft clavicle fractures were further enrolled and evaluated. Our facility's institutional review board approved this study, which complied with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Surgical indications included fractures with more than 2 cm of shortening, open fractures, skin tenting, associated neurological or vascular deficit, and polytrauma patients. We excluded patients who had pathologic fractures, insufficient radiographs during follow-up, and loss of follow-up within 1 year. We ultimately included 274 subjects who had midshaft clavicle fractures and underwent plate fixation with more than 1 year of follow-up. Data recorded on the abstraction form included age, sex, body mass index, mechanism of injury, clinical symptoms, radiographs, operative reports, plate selection, and complications. The primary outcome was the etiology of reoperation, while the secondary outcomes included clinical complications in the medical charts. The patients were followed up at the outpatient clinic after primary surgery 2 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and after reoperation 1 month postoperatively. We used the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test to compare dichotomous variables and the Student's t-test to examine continuous variables. The statistical analysis was conducted using a multivariate logistic regression model to evaluate the prognostic factors for reoperation. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. The patients underwent the procedure at a single hospital. Prophylactic antibiotics were routinely used prior to the plate fixation Of the 388 patients with surgical fixation for clavicle fracture between January 2007 and December 2017, we excluded 83 patients who were diagnosed with distal or medial clavicle fracture and 31 patients for whom adequate medical records were unavailable or who were lost to follow-up. Of the 31 excluded patients, 7 had incomplete plain radiographs to evaluate outcome and 24 were lost to follow-up after surgery. We ultimately recruited 274 patients (190 male; mean age, 41.7 ± 14.5) who underwent ORIF with at least 1 year of follow-up. A total of 241 clavicle fractures (88%) occurred due to traffic accidents in our cohort. Falls accounted for 11%, while two open fractures were caused by cuts during fights ( Baseline patient demographics are shown in Table II. In the cohort, mean body mass index was 23.6 ± 3.6. There were 193 cases with Robinson classification 2B1 (70.4%), followed by 60 cases of 2B2 (21.9%). There were two (0.7%) and 19 (6.9%) cases of type 2A1 and 2A2 classification, respectively. Of the included fractures, mean vertical displacement width was 1.1 ± 0.6 mm, while mean shortening was 9.2 ± 8.3 mm. A total of 17 patients (6.2%) were diagnosed with nonunion after 9 months postoperatively. In this study, 150 patients (54.7%) underwent reoperation after the initial surgery. Plate removal for prominent implant represented the major etiology ( After multivariate logistic regression analysis (Table III), the patients with the risk factors of lower body mass index ( Plate fixation with DCP was performed in 86% of the fractures versus pre-contoured locking plate in 14% (Table IV). There was no significant intergroup difference in nonunion or failure rates. Lower overall complication rates were seen in the pre-contoured locking plate group (23.1% vs. 37.4%; Details of the complications after plate fixation are shown in Table V. 35.4% of all subjects had complications after surgery. The implant failure or loosening was one of the major part with the incidence of 35 (12.8%). Most cases of them (n = 25) occurred early failure within 2 months after the initial surgery. 11.7% of the population complained of prominent instrumentation. Nonunion, superficial wound infection, and limited range of motion were observed from 6.2 to 8.8%. Most midshaft clavicle fracture cases in the past were managed with conservative treatment without surgery. Many studies have revealed that plate fixation significantly The incidence of implant-related discomfort or irritation is 12.5–60% In our cohort, implant removal accounted for a 90% incidence of reoperation, similar to findings of previous studies Pre-contoured locking plate with the properties of a lower profile and anatomical design are thought to feature lower complication and implant removal rates. A retrospective review published lower reoperation rates for pre-contoured locking plates (23.5%) compared with standard plates (18.5%) We found no significant intergroup difference in nonunion, complication, implant failure, or loosening rates between the DCP and pre-contoured locking plates, a finding that corresponded to the previous review Complications after plate fixation reportedly include nonunion, implant failure, implant removal, implant prominence or irritation, superficial wound infection, deep wound infection, refracture after implant removal, numbness, and pneumothorax in past series Fracture displacement, comminution, shortening, increasing age, sex, and smoking were mentioned in a past systemic review as the factors associated with nonunion Most studies criticized prominent implant or irritation as the most common complication after plate fixation There were some limitations to the present series. First, it was limited by bias and confounders of a retrospective study design. Second, the surgeries were performed by multiple surgeons, which might have resulted in different outcomes. Third, postoperative function and pain score evaluations were not documented. And fourth, patients lost to follow-up could have turned to other medical institutions, which might have underestimated the implant removal and complication rates. However, there was only a 10.2% follow-up loss rate in this study, which was acceptable. This study was a cohort review of the outcomes and complications after plate fixation for mid-shaft clavicle fracture. In our database, patients with risk factors of superficial wound infection or a prominent implant tended to undergo a secondary operation after primary plate fixation for mid-shaft clavicle fracture, while advanced age, pre-contoured locking plate usage, and higher body mass index were protective factors. A prominent implant was the main reason for secondary surgery rather than infection, implant failure, or nonunion. Compared with DCP, the pre-contoured locking plate had better implant failure or loosening and complication rates and significantly lower implant removal rates. Our study identified the risk factors, comorbidities, and details of reoperation, which was beneficial for explaining the likely prognosis preoperatively to patients. It also had advantages for surgeons to evaluate surgical methods, decline secondary operations, and pay more attention to possible comorbidities. Further prospective larger population studies with functional outcomes evaluations are needed to validate our findings. There is no conflict of interest of the study. This research is completed by all authors. We are grateful to the nursing and all staff devoting to the patient care in the study. This research received no benefits from any agency in the commercial, public or non-profit organization related to the subject of the study. This retrospective study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (the "IRB") of Chang Gung Medical Foundation with the IRB No: 201701279B0.