Introduction
                  The aim of our study was to report the epidemiological characteristics of fractures of the proximal ulna.
               
                  Methods
                  From our prospective trauma database of 6872 fractures, we identified all acute fractures of the proximal ulna from a 1-year period between July 2007 and June 2008. Age, gender, mode of injury, fracture classifications, associated injuries and treatment were the factors documented and analysed.
               
                  Results
                  There were 78 fractures of the proximal ulna with a mean age of 57 years (15–97). Males (n
                     =35) sustained their fracture at a significantly younger age than females (p
                     =0.041), with no gender predominance seen (p
                     =0.365). The overall fracture distribution was a unimodal older male and unimodal older female type-F curve. The most common mode of injury was a simple fall from standing height (n
                     =52, 67%), with younger patients more likely to sustain their injuries following a high-energy mechanism such as sports or a motor vehicle collision (p
                     <0.001). Seventeen (22%) patients sustained associated injuries to the ipsilateral limb, with an associated proximal radial fracture most frequent (n
                     =13, 17%). Open fractures were seen in five (6.4%) patients. A total of 64 patients had a fracture of the olecranon, with the Mayo 2A most frequently seen (n
                     =47, 60%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Fractures of the proximal ulna are fragility fractures that predominantly occur in elderly patients. Given the number of elderly patients sustaining these injuries, research is needed to determine the role of non-operative treatment for these fractures, particularly in patients with multiple co-morbidities and low functional demands.Proximal ulna fractures include fractures of the olecranon, olecranon fracture dislocations and fractures of the coronoid process. Injury commonly occurs from direct or indirect trauma to the elbow following a fall from standing height. Fractures of the olecranon account for approximately 20% of all proximal forearm fractures Despite numerous reports on the management of these injuries, no single paper has clearly documented the epidemiology of proximal ulna fractures. The aim of this study was to report the epidemiological characteristics of fractures of the proximal ulna. From July 2007 to June 2008 we prospectively collected data on all inpatient and outpatient fractures that presented acutely to our trauma unit. A total of 6872 fractures presented over the 1-year period. A retrospective search of this database was performed to identify a subgroup of patients who had suffered a fracture of the proximal ulna. This was considered to be an audit and did not require formal ethical approval according to local guidelines. Patients were excluded if they presented and were treated at our centre but resided out with the defined catchment area. Patients under the age of 13 years were also excluded as they are treated at the regional children's hospital. Our trauma centre has a captive population of approximately 514,479, with 270,367 females (52.6%) and 244,112 males (47.4%). No other centre in our catchment area provides a musculoskeletal trauma service. All data were recorded prospectively and included age, gender, mode of injury, fracture classification, associated injuries and treatment. Associated injuries were defined as a fracture or significant soft tissue injury affecting the ipsilateral limb. Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the elbow from the time of injury were used to classify all fractures using the AO fracture classification system Chi-squared tests were used to compare categorical data, and the Fisher's exact test was used when the number of cases in a category was <5. Age was found to have a non-skewed distribution so the Student's There were 78 patients who presented with a fracture of the proximal ulna over the 1-year period, of which 43 (55%) were female and the mean age was 57 years (range 15–97, SD 23.3). The overall prevalence of proximal ulna fractures was 1.1% and accounted for 21% of all proximal forearm fractures. The incidence of proximal ulna fractures was 15 per 100,000 population. The mean age of fracture in males was 51 years (range 16–90), significantly younger when compared with 62 years (range 15–97) in females ( A fall from a standing height or less accounted for the largest number of fractures ( According to the AO classification, B-type fractures were most frequently observed ( Sixty-four (82%) patients presented with a fracture of the olecranon, of which 35 (55%) were female and the mean age was 57 years (range 15–97, SD 23.5). Olecranon fractures accounted for 18% of all proximal forearm fractures and the overall incidence was 12 per 100,000 population. The mean age of fracture in males (50 years) was significantly younger when compared to females (63 years; The most frequent injury according to the AO fracture classification was the 21-B1.1 type ( Eleven (14%) patients sustained a fracture of the coronoid with three (27%) isolated fractures (all type 1). Two fractures were associated with a fracture of the olecranon, one which was also associated with a fracture of the ipsilateral distal radius. Three fractures were associated with a dislocation of the elbow, with two of these fractures associated with a fracture of the proximal radius, a ‘terrible triad’ injury pattern. The remaining three fractures were associated with a fracture of the proximal radius alone. Overall, the mean age was 47 years (range 18–78) and seven were male. Six were a Regan and Morrey type 1, with four fractures being a type 2 and one a type 3. In the present study, our aim was to report the epidemiological characteristics of fractures of the proximal ulna. We have shown that these injuries are predominantly fragility fractures as they follow low-energy falls and demonstrate a type-F fracture distribution curve with an increase in incidence after the seventh decade for both males and females. We demonstrated olecranon fractures to be the most common injury of the proximal ulna and frequently occur following a fall from standing height. Karlsson et al. quoted an incidence of 11.5 per 100,000 person-years for olecranon fractures, which is comparable to our findings. We also found that almost a quarter of patients with a fracture of the proximal ulna sustained a concomitant injury to the ipsilateral limb, with a fracture of the proximal radius most commonly observed. This rate of associated injuries is notably higher than the rate quoted for fractures of the proximal radius. The strength of this analysis is that it represents a prospective series of consecutive patients who sustained a fracture of the proximal ulna. A further strength is our captive population as we are the only centre providing a musculoskeletal trauma service for the local catchment population and this allows us to define accurately the prevalence and incidence of these injuries. The intra- and inter-observer errors associated with the interpretation and classification of radiographs are acknowledged, although difficult to avoid, and no other study before has clearly documented the classification and management of these fractures in this way. Although we have presented a large series of patients, larger numbers would be beneficial, as would details of the outcome in those patients managed non-operatively. As with any epidemiological study, it could be argued that our findings cannot be generalised to every population. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that proximal ulna fractures are predominantly fragility fractures affecting elderly patients. Given the number of elderly patients sustaining these injuries, work is needed to determine the role of investigating bone quality following these fractures, particularly in post-menopausal women. Further research is required to determine the role of non-operative treatment for displaced fractures in these increasingly fragile patients with limited functional demands that are currently managed with operative fixation. No external funding source played a role in this study. No benefits of any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the production of this article. We would like to acknowledge the Scottish Orthopaedic Research Trust into Trauma (SORT-IT) for their assistance in performing this study.