Traumatic hip fracture dislocation is a rare injury associated with high-energy trauma. Most of these injuries should be surgically treated. Hip dislocation is an orthopaedic emergency and reduction must be performed within 6–8 hours of trauma.
                  We performed a retrospective analysis of 69 patients with “hip joint associated injuries”, treated between January 2002 and December 2016.
                  33 patients were assessed at a mean follow-up of 36.9 months (range 18–132) after surgery.
                  We propose a new classification system in which, different patterns of fracture (head and/or neck and/or acetabular) are described according to different types of hip dislocation. This anatomical-descriptive classification system is based on the concept of hip as a complex anatomical district and contains all possible traumatic injuries associated with hip dislocation. It includes isolated hip dislocation, hip dislocation with femoral head or neck fracture or hip dislocation with acetabular fracture and femoral head fracture.
                  There are 4 groups:
                  
                     
                        
                           –
                           I anterior dislocation,
                        
                        
                           –
                           II central dislocation,
                        
                        
                           –
                           III posterior dislocation
                        
                        
                           –
                           IV bilateral dislocation
                        
                     
                  
                  Each one of the previous groups is composed by different subgroups.
                  Post-traumatic osteoarthritis is the most common complication of these hip injuries, followed by avascular necrosis of femoral head and heterotopic ossification.
                  The bad prognosis depends on the type of trauma rather than surgical treatment.I anterior dislocation, II central dislocation, III posterior dislocation IV bilateral dislocation Hip joint injuries include isolated hip dislocation, hip dislocation with femoral head or neck fracture, femoral head dislocation with acetabular fracture associated or not with femoral head fracture. Hip dislocation is associated with acetabular fracture or femoral head fracture in 50% of cases Astley and Cooper first described femoral head fracture – dislocation in 1791 Due to the anatomic feature and its distinctive stability, hip joint injury is usually associated with high-energy trauma Hip dislocation can be related with sciatic nerve injury and, less frequently, with obturator nerve or crural nerve injury 1. It is considered an orthopaedic emergency and hip reduction can be performed as soon as possible, within 6–8 hours of trauma The aims of this retrospective study were to analyse our cases of fracture-dislocation of hip and to propose a new classification system of hip fracture-dislocation in which different patterns of fracture (head and/or neck and/or acetabular) are described according to different types of hip dislocation. There are different classification systems of hip fracture-dislocation.  Grade 1: Femoral head fracture beyond round ligament insertion area; Grade 2: Femoral head fracture across round ligament insertion area; Grade 3: Grade 1 or 2 associated with femoral neck fracture; Grade 4: Grade 1 or 2 associated with acetabular fracture. This classification system doesn’t describe osteochondral lesion of the weight-bearing area of femoral head tipically of anterior hip dislocation. The    The new classification system proposed in this article goes beyond the concept of hip isolated injury, considers hip as a complex anatomical district and includes all possible traumatic injuries associated with hip dislocation involving femoral head and/or neck, femoral head and acetabulum. It is an anatomical-descriptive classification, based on X-ray and CT images: there are 4 groups, depending on the type of hip dislocation as shown in the table below ( The first group is associated with anterior dislocation. We distinguish 4 subgroups: A- isolated ( In the second group, we consider central hip dislocation associated with impact fracture of femoral head and acetabular fracture ( The third group, associated with posterior hip dislocation, is definitely the most complex group with 6 subgroups. Subgroup A describes isolated dislocation ( In the fourth group we consider all bilateral fractures dislocations, symmetrical (A anterior, B posterior) and asymmetrical (C anterior and posterior) This classification system contains all type of hip dislocation and different pattern of fractures associated, including rare injuries such as bilateral hip fractures-dislocations or central dislocation, that is not properly a hip dislocation because femoral head moves with acetabular fragment, but this injury may result in impact fracture of femoral head. We performed a retrospective analysis of 69 patients with hip joint associated injuries treated between January 2002 and December 2016. All fractures were evaluated, classified and surgically treated by the same surgeon (RF). There were 50 men and 19 women; the mean age at the time of injury was 39.6 (range 15–88). Causes of injury included road accident, with motor-vehicle collision in 46 cases, motorcycle crashed in 13 cases, fall from height in 4 cases, sport injury in 1 case, pedestrian struck in 2 cases, falling down in 2 cases, work injury in 1 case. The hip joint associated injuries were classified, as follows, into 4 groups using Pascarella classification system. There were 2 cases of type I A; 4 cases of I B, 4 cases of IC, 1 case of ID; 8 cases of II A; 3 cases of III A, 8 cases of III B, 11 cases of III C, 3 Cases of III D, 21 cases of III E, 1 case of III F, 1 case of 4 B, 2 cases of 4. We excluded patients who reported hip dislocation with acetabulum fracture (without involving of femoral neck or femoral head). In Emergency room, initial patient management follows Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS). After clinical ad radiographic evaluation in anteroposterior view, the hip dislocation was reduced immediately until 6–8 hours after the injury in 65 cases (94,2%). In 3 cases an open hip reduction associated with surgical treatment of other traumatic injuries were performed several days after, because patients came from other Hospitals. In 1 case hip dislocation was reduced but remain unstable, probably for a large posterior wall fragment, so an immediate open procedure was performed. In 1 case (88 y old) hip dislocation was irreducible and a hip replacement was performed few days after injury. In 2 cases we observed paralysis of the sciatic nerve. All patients underwent a post hip -reduction CT scan. CT scan is useful to evaluate femoral head fracture pattern (size and plane), congruity of the hip joint and determine presence of intra-articular loose fragments. Different types of surgical approach were used according to pattern of injury. Surgical approach in case of femoral head fracture are: “Smith- Petersen approach” in supine decubitus, “Kocher-Langenbeck approach” in prone decubitus, Posterior approach with a trochanteric flip osteotomy (TFO) and surgical hip dislocation in lateral decubitus We usually used “hip posterolateral approach” for hip replacement, some cases of complex acetabular fracture were treated using also “ileo-inguinal approach” and in one case we used “lateral approach” to fix a third proximal femur fracture with LCP and screws. Goals of definitive treatment are to achieve an anatomic reduction of femoral head fracture, ORIF of associated acetabular or/ and neck fracture, remove any interposed bone fragments and mantain joint stability. Size, location and displacement of head fracture were considered in this decision-making process. The table below resumed number, gender, age, trauma, pattern’s fracture classification, treatment and surgical approach used and follow up in months of our study group (  Hip reduction: 2 weeks of walking with partial load, early hip mobilization; Removal of articular fragments: 4 weeks of walking without load, early hip mobilization; Reduction and fixation of femoral head fracture: 8 weeks of walking without load, early hip mobilization; Reduction and fixation of acetabular fracture: 12 weeks of walking without load, early hip mobilization. Clinical and radiological results were assessed by Thompson and Epstein’s score Femoral head necrosis (AVN) were classified using ARCO classification system and heterotopic ossification according to Brooker classification We excluded from study group patients with less than 18 months follow-up, patients treated with hip replacement at time of injury, 6 cases of early failure (AVN or osteoarthritis within 12 months) and one case of traumatic sciatic nerve injury completely lost at follow up. The final results showed are of 33 patients; the mean follow up period was 36,9 months (range 18–132). Table below resumes clinical and radiological results according to Thompson- Epstein score, complications occurred and secondary surgical treatment (+ patients (*) with early complication/failure) ( Clinically we registered 9 cases “excellent”, 14 cases “good”, 7 cases “fair” and 8 cases “poor” and radiographically 9 cases “excellent”, 13 cases “good”, 6 cases “fair” and 10 cases “poor”. Osteoarthritis occurred in 12 patients (2 cases within 12 months of injury) and 7 cases were treated with hip replacement. We had one case of immediately deep infection, one case of heterotopic ossification and 4 cases of AVN; 3 cases occurred within 4 months of injury and were treated with hip replacement and 1 case, occurred in 18 months from injury, was lost at follow up. Hip joint injuries are associated with high-energy trauma, often occurred in younger subjects and must be treated early. Hip dislocation is considered an orthopaedic emergency and should be reduced as soon as possible, within 6–8 hours of trauma Pipkin classification, published in 1957 and considered the most widely used classification system of femoral head fracture associated with posterior hip dislocation The most frequent complications, as the sciatic nerve palsy, femoral head necrosis (AVN) and heterotopic ossification (HO) Osteochondral injury of femoral head is a rare lesion that negatively affects the prognosis In Literature there is not a treatment-algorithm uniquely shared for treatment of femoral head fracture due to rarity of this injury and lack of scientific studies with a sufficient number of cases to provide statistically significant data; surgical treatment include fragments excision, ORIF or total hip arthroplasty. Reconstruction of acetabulum with plates and screws is priority to restore anatomic congruency and to ensure joint stability. The treatment options in case of femoral neck fracture, according to the age’s patient, are ORIF or hip replacement In our experience, choice of treatment depends on patient age, kind of hip dislocation, timing of hip reduction, location and size of femoral head fracture and possible association with acetabular and neck fracture. In case of large and single femoral head fragment, in absence of cartilage damage, we perform reduction and synthesis with Herbert screws (2.7 mm of diameter); in case of multiple and small articular fragments we did surgical removal. A conservative treatment is possible if femoral head fracture is perfectly reduced to CT after hip reduction. For patients older than 65 years, especially in case of Pascarella IIIC with radiological signs of osteoarthritis, hip replacement was performed. Choice of surgical approach depends on type of operative option: posterior approach with a trochanteric flip osteotomy and surgical hip dislocation in lateral decubitus represents an evolution of Kocher-Langenbeck approach. It is an alternative to Smith Petersen approach, allowing surgeon to do reduction and fixation of femoral head fracture or fragments removal. In recent years we usually used posterior approach with trochanteric flip osteotomy Post-traumatic osteoarthritis is the most common complication of hip joint associated injury, followed by avascular necrosis of femoral head (AVN) and heterotopic ossification (HO) We observed 4 cases of AVN: 2 cases (3E and 3B) within 4 months of injury, using K–L approach to remove femoral head fragments, 1 case (3C) in 18 months from injury, using TFO approach to fix femoral head fragment and 1 case (2 A) within 4 months of injury, using Smith- Petersen approach to fix femoral head fragment. We registered 12 cases of osteoarthritis: 2 cases (3E) using K-L approach to fragment removal and acetabular ORIF, 1 case (3E) using K-L approach to fragment removal and conservative treatment of acetabular fracture, 2 cases (3C) using K-L approach to fragment removal, 1 case (3D) treated with third proximal femoral plate using lateral approach, 1 case (3B) using Smith-Petersen approach to fix femoral head fracture, 4 cases of 2 A and 1 cases of 1B using ileo-inguinal approach to fix acetabular fracture with conservative treatment of femoral head injury. We had 1 case of heterotopic ossification, I type, in 3E fracture-dislocation treated using TFO approach to remove femoral head fracture, with conservative treatment of acetabular fracture. Hip dislocation is considered an orthopaedic emergency and reduction must be performed as soon as possible, within 6–8 hours of trauma Treatment of hip fracture-dislocation are often surgical, as showed before. Femoral head fracture has a bad prognosis and, as Pipkin report, it depends of trauma rather than therapeutic management The main complications occurred are osteonecrosis (AVN), osteoarthritis and heterotopic ossifications In our series of patients we registered: 4 cases of AVN of which 3 cases IIIC (3E, 3B, 2 A) occurred in the first 4 months after trauma and 1 case IIIB (3C) in 18 months; 12 cases of osteoarthritis (4 cases of 2 A, 3 cases of 3E, 2 cases of 3C, 1 case of 3B, 1 case of 3D and 1 case of 1B) of which 2 cases (1B, 2 A) occurred within 12 months of trauma and 1 case (3E) of heterotopic ossification type I. We have found that patients with a longer follow up showed progressive osteoarthritis with loss of joint space, acetabular sclerosis, femoral head deformity, despite they initially had good results. Our study group are limited by several factors: it is a retrospective study, composed by a small number of patients and with middle-term follow-up; in addition, many patients and dates were lost to follow-up. We think that the new classification system of traumatic hip fracture-dislocation proposed in this article (the “Pascarella classification system”) is more complete than the others described in Literature, because it considers hip as a complex anatomical district and contains all type of hip dislocation and all possible traumatic injuries associated and emphasizes the role of hip dislocation for patient’s prognosis. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest related to the publication of this manuscript. This Work submitted to Injury is comply with the principles laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki. The manuscript has been approved by the appropriate ethical committees related to the institution in which it was performed and that subject gave informed consent to the work.