This study addressed the development of a continuous countercurrent extraction-scrubbing-stripping technique using a mixture of primary and tertiary amines as an effective extractant for both thorium (Th) and uranium (U) to simultaneously separate them from the leach solutions of xenotime concentrate from the Yen Phu mine (Vietnam). Systematic studies determined the optimum parameters of the separation, including the optimum concentrations of the mixture of the primary amine (N1923) and tertiary amine (tri-n-octyl amine), the optimum acidity (pH) of the feed liquor (Yen Phu xenotime leachate), the optimum contact time between phases for extraction, scrubbing and stripping processes, and the most suitable stripping reagent mixture. Using the optimum parameters, the optimum stage number and phase volumetric ratio for extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes were calculated using the calculus method based on the law of matter conservation. The flow rates of both phases for extraction, scrubbing, and stripping were determined from the results of these studies and calculations. To optimize the separation of uranium and thorium from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate, counter-current simulations of extraction, scrubbing and stripping were done in a series of mixer-settler units. The results indicated that the selective separation of Th and U with almost no loss of rare earths (REs) and a minimal contamination of iron were obtained. The continuous countercurrent extraction-scrubbing-stripping technique shows potential applications in the commercial separation of Th and U from RE leachate after tests using a sequence of mixer-settler units on a pilot scale.Based on our previous studies ( Several technologies exist to separate Th and U from REs, such as precipitation and solvent extraction or ion-exchange. Generally, the precipitation method is too complicated and generates much waste; therefore, it is disadvantageous to apply on a large scale ( As reviewed ( A full flow sheet of the solvent extraction technique ( The next process is scrubbing. Generally, REs and iron (Fe) are co-extracted during the extraction process; therefore, most of the REs and Fe must be removed from the LO phase before stripping. Here, a dilute sulfuric acid scrubbing liquor is used generally in the scrubbing stage ( The final process in the solvent extraction technique is stripping. In conventional stripping, the metal loaded in the organic phase is transferred to the aqueous phase using a specific stripping solution. The most commonly used stripping reagents of Th and U are (i) sodium, ammonium carbonate, or hydroxide (carbonate or hydroxide stripping process), (ii) sodium or ammonium nitrate salt and nitric acid (nitrate stripping process), and (iii) sodium or ammonium chloride salt and hydrochloric acid (chloride stripping process)) ( The stripping using carbonates or hydroxides provides a simple process flow pattern since the organic phase may be stripped in a single-stage operation and Th and U precipitates are obtained as a direct result of the stripping stage; simultaneously, the amine sulfate salts are converted into free amines, which can be directly recycled to the extraction system ( The chloride stripping process is employed as the effective stripping and low-cost reagent for Th and U; it is the preferred process owing to low base requirements to precipitate Th and U from a pregnant stripping liquor. Additionally, the chloride stripping process overcomes the disadvantages of the nitrate and base stripping processes ( As highlighted in the above discussion and complying to develop an extraction-scrubbing-stripping technique applied to separate Th and U from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate, the parameters required for this process must be optimized to accurately describe the process and potentially apply the technique on a commercial scale. In addition, the recovery of Th and U increases the commercial value of the Yen Phu xenotime concentrate. The Vietnam Atomic Energy Institute (VINATOM) and MOST have an interest in REs (especially REs: Tb, Dy and Nd) and, Th and U for the application of them in socio-economic branches. The feed liquor (Yen Phu xenotime leachate) was prepared through the sulfuric acid process of the concentrate on a 50 kg batch pilot scale using a rotary furnace test plant (Rotary kiln simulator, Japan). The process was conducted at the optimum temperature of 593 ± 15 K and the acid-to-concentrate-mass ratio of 1.3 for 4 h ( ThO A UO The primary and tertiary amines used in this study were N1923 (China) and TOA (Merck), respectively. n-decanol (Merck) was used as a modifier and added to the solvent with a 5% ( The organic-phase N1923 or TOA or a mixture of both was prepared at a given concentration by dissolving N1923 or TOA or a mixture of both in IP-2028; the amine group in the solvent was pre-converted to the hydrosulfate form by shaking three times with a sulfuric acid solution before extraction. In addition, all reagents (MgO, H The experiments to study on Th or U extraction isotherms at the different concentrations of Th(SO A satisfactory mass balance was obtained for each extraction experiment; five replications were performed for each experiment on the Th or U extraction at different concentrations (C The experiments to study on the thermodynamics of Th and U extractions at a given temperature were conducted by dipping the 250-mL glass beaker in a water bath of the thermostat. 95 mL of Th(SO A satisfactory mass balance was obtained for each extraction experiment; five replications were conducted for each experiment of Th or U extraction at different temperatures ranging from 298 to 330 K. The D at each given temperature was employed to calculate the thermodynamics of Th or U extraction. The experimental procedure to study on the stripping of Th and U from the primary amine N1923 and tertiary amine TOA was as follows: The 0.1-mol·L When the optimum stripping liquor concentration was determined, the effect of stripping time on the efficiency of Th and U was studied for different intervals ranging from one to ten minutes. The aqueous phases in the stripping equilibrium for the different intervals were analyzed using ICP-MS to define the required time to attain stripping equilibrium. Five replications for each experiment of Th or U stripping were performed. The experimental procedure to study on the extraction of Th and U from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate using the mixture of N1923 and TOA was as follows: The concentration effect of N1923 and TOA on the extraction of Th, U, REs, and Fe from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate (the feed liquor) was investigated using each extractant separately. The relevant factors in the extraction were the molarity of the amines, contact time, and pH of the feed liquor. The extraction experiments were conducted at an aqueous-to-organic volumetric ratio of 10 and a temperature of 298 ± 0.2 K. 10.0 mL of the organic phase and 100 mL of the feed liquor were contacted in a mechanical shaker for ten minutes to ensure the extraction equilibrium. Different concentrations of N1923 and TOA were used for each extraction experiment. The aqueous phase in the extraction equilibrium was analyzed using ICP-MS to obtain the extraction efficiencies of Th, U, REs, and Fe as follows (Eq. When the optimum solvent composition was determined, the effect of contact time and pH in the feed liquor on the extraction efficiencies of Th, U, REs, and Fe using the optimum N1923 and TOA mixture was studied. The extraction experiments were conducted at an aqueous-to-organic volumetric ratio of 10 and a temperature of 298 ± 0.2 K. The aqueous phase in the extraction equilibrium was analyzed using ICP-MS to obtain the extraction efficiencies of Th, U, REs, and Fe (Eq. When the optimum contact time of the extraction was determined, the equilibrium pH effect in the feed liquor on the extraction efficiencies of Th, U, REs, and Fe using the optimum N1923 and TOA mixture for the optimum contact time was studied. The aqueous phase in the extraction equilibrium was analyzed using ICP-MS to obtain the extraction efficiencies of Th, U, REs, and Fe (Eq. Five replications were performed for each experiment on the extraction of Th, U, REs, and Fe from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate using a mixture of N1923 and TOA. Continuous countercurrent simulative extraction experiments using a separation funnel system were implemented to determine the parameters of the loaded and scrubbed organic phases and values of D of Th, U, REs, and Fe for extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes. The principle of the continuous countercurrent extraction process was described in detail by ( The continuous countercurrent experiments were conducted in a series of mixer-settler units. The experimental setup comprised three processes: extraction of six stages, scrubbing of four stages, and stripping of six stages ( f R′ is the volumetric ratio of the feed liquor to organic phase; V t (in min) is the contact time of the phases. The flow rates of the scrubbing and stripping liquors were calculated using Eq. f R is the volumetric ratio of the organic phase to scrubbing or stripping liquor; The concentrations of Th, U, REs, and Fe in the aqueous and organic phases for every process were analyzed using ICP-MS for a period of 2 h. At the end of the stripping operation, the amine extractants are in the form of chloride salts. Regenerate them into free amine with a base, e.g., solutions of NH For the complete regeneration of the extractants, while maintaining the carbonate requirements at a low level, a multistage operation is used. In our experiments on the regeneration of the N1923 and TOA extractants, the results indicated that the process was operated continuously, counter-currently in an arrangement of mixer-settler units of four steps, using a sodium carbonate solution of 1.0 mol·L The regenerated extractants can be recycled in the extraction process. The main parameters that must be determined in the liquid-liquid extraction technique are the stage numbers and phase volumetric ratios in the extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes. Owing to low accuracy in the graphical representation of the extraction isotherm plot, the determination of the theoretical extraction stages and the phase volumetric ratios by constructing the McCabe-Thiele diagram often results in certain errors. These parameters can be defined using the calculus method to make the theoretical stage and phase volumetric ratio calculations more accurate. The theory of the calculus method to define the theoretical stages and the phase volumetric ratios is based on the law of matter conservation. Which states that during any physical or chemical contact, the total mass of the products and the total mass of the reactants remains constant. A flow diagram of the extraction stages is shown in The organic-to-aqueous volumetric ratio R is determined by the equation of matter conservation (Eqs. X Y V As Dividing both sides by V Similarly, the equation of matter conservation employed for the second extraction stage is. and the equation of matter conservation employed for the third extraction stage is. Assuming that distribution coefficients in all of the extraction stages remain unchanged, Substituting Substituting Similarly, substituting Finally, the equation of matter conservation employed for the n Dividing both sides by X The expression Substituting Eq. Performing the common logarithm of both sides results in The extractions of Th and U from control sulfate liquors using primary and tertiary amines, respectively, were studied. 0.1 mol·L Th and U extraction isotherms were schemed from the experimental data, and McCabe-Thiele diagrams were used to obtain the theoretical stages and the phase volumetric ratio for effective extraction and to be used in continuous countercurrent extraction experiments. The extraction isotherms were drawn with reference to the successive contact technique to deplete the liquor and load the organic phase. Th and U extraction experiments in sulfate medium using 0.1-mol·L When ΔH is negative that the reaction is exothermic; hence, an increase in temperature decrease the amount of Th (and U) in the solvent. Furthermore, the Gibbs free energy (ΔG) and the entropy (ΔS) are determined using the following equations: To determine the thermodynamic data listed in Preliminary stripping experiments of Th and U using chloride reagents from 0.1-mol·L The stripping efficiencies of HCl and a NaCl-HCl mixture were investigated using an aqueous-to-organic volumetric ratio of 1 at 298 ± 0.2 K. The stripping time was ten minutes and the phase disengagement time was lower than five minutes. The HCl concentration effect was studied by 0.5 to 3.5 mol·L However, the pregnant stripping liquor obtained had high acidity; this caused difficulties for the further precipitation of Th and U using an oxalic acid or a base. Therefore, mixtures of NaCl and HCl acid were used to study the Th and U stripping. The results of the study on the effect of the molarity ratios of NaCl to HCl on Th and U stripping are shown in The studies on the effect of stripping time on the Th and U stripping efficiencies aimed to determine data required to design a relevant continuously countercurrent mixer-settler unit of the stripping process ( This study investigated the selective extraction of Th and U from an RE liquor in sulfuric acid media using a mixture of N1923 and TOA. The solvent composition was studied and the variation in the concentration effect of N1923 and TOA on the extraction of Th, U, and REs was first investigated using each extractant separately. The feed liquor was a Yen Phu xenotime leachate containing Th, U, and REs compositions ( The effect of N1923 concentrations on the extraction of Th, U, REs, and Fe from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate were evaluated by varying the concentration from 0.05 to 0.2 mol·L Additionally, the TOA concentration effect on the extraction of Th, U, REs, and Fe from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate was investigated in the range from 0.01 to 0.03 mol·L Thus, the best solvent composition to extract Th and U from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate is a mixture of 0.1-mol·L The studies on the effect of reaction time on the efficiencies of Th and U extraction aimed to determine the equilibrium time at which maximum Th and U recovery occurred with the least amount extracted from REs and flow rates of the organic phase and feed liquor that are fed into a continuous countercurrent mixer-settler extractor of the extraction process. A mixture of 0.1-mol·L By prolonging the contact time from one to four minutes, the extraction of REs was enhanced from 0% to higher than 2% and then decreased to lower than 1%. In the first minutes of the extraction process, the N1923 and TOA extractants did not attain the saturation of Th and U; hence, REs were extracted by the extractants. Additionally, because the extractability (distribution coefficients) of Th and U using the amines were greater than those of REs, the extraction competition between Th and U with REs forced the REs to keep in the aqueous phase while Th and U transferred to the organic phase. As a result, the extraction of REs decreased when contact time increased. An important parameter in the extraction of metals is the feed liquor's pH. To study the effect of the liquor's pH on the extraction efficiency of Th, U, REs, and Fe, several experiments with a pH range of the feed liquor from 0.5 to 2.5 were conducted at 298 ± 0.2 K and an aqueous-to-organic volumetric ratio of 10 using a mixture of 0.1-mol·L Thus, the feed-liquor pH of 1.5 was the preferable value that achieved the optimum extraction for Th and U; the REs and Fe remained in the effluent liquor. Initially, several experiments must be conducted to load the organic phase in the saturation capacities of Th, U, REs, and Fe. A mixture of 0.1-mol·L The concentrations of thorium and uranium in feed liquor X As indicated from our continuous countercurrent extraction testing on the separation funnel system, at saturation concentration in the organic phase of Th from 2 to 3 g·L As Similar to Eq. X Y V Similar to Eq. As indicated in Similar to Eq. X Y V Similar to Eq. As indicated from our continuous countercurrent scrubbing testing on the separation funnel system, amounts of Th and U in the scrubbed organic phase Y As calculated from Eq. The purpose of these experiments was the optimizing the separation of Th and U from the Yen Phu xenotime leachate. They were conducted using a mixture of 0.1-mol·L The volumes of the mixer-settler units for the extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes were 500 mL mixers and 2000 mL settlers, and 60 mL mixers and 240 mL settlers, respectively. The flow rate of the organic phase in the extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes was calculated as 6.5 ± 0.5 mL·min The efficiencies of the continuous countercurrent extraction, scrubbing, and stripping processes and the profiles of Th, U, Fe, and RE amounts in both phases are depicted in  The optimum parameters were tested at a pilot scale using a array of mixer-settler units, with 4-L mixers and 16-L settlers for the extraction process and 0.5-L mixers and 2.0-L settlers for the scrubbing and stripping processes to get insight of the industrial application of the process. The satisfactory results demonstrated the potential of the continuous countercurrent extraction-scrubbing-stripping technique to be applied in commercially separating Th and U from RE leachate. A continuous countercurrent extraction-scrubbing-stripping technique to separating Th and U from Yen Phu xenotime leachate is proposed in this paper; a mixture of the primary amine N1923 and the tertiary amine TOA was employed as an effective extractant for both Th and U. The steps of the process can be concluded as follows: In the extraction process, the optimum pH of the feed liquor was 1.5 and the optimum t, n, and R were 4 min, 6 stages, and In the scrubbing process, the scrubbing liquor was dilute sulfuric acid of pH = 1.5 and the optimum t, n, and R were 5.5 min, 4 (or 6) stages, and 1.5 (or 2.0), respectively; 99.9% of REs and 99% of Fe were scrubbed from the loaded organic phase, and loss of REs was at a minimum. In the stripping process, the stripping liquor was a mixture of 1-mol·L The separation of Th and U from Yen Phu xenotime leachate is an important strategy to entirely remove radioactive nuclides from the further RE products and subsequently recover Th and U.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Dr. Nguyen Trong Hung expresses his sincere gratitude and thanks to the authorities of Dr. Nguyen Trong Hung and Dr. Masayuki Watanabe express their sincere gratitude and thanks to the authorities of Dr. Jin-Young Lee and Dr. Rajesh Kumar Jyothi express their sincere gratitude and thanks to the authorities of