The effect of copper sulphate and sodium isopropyl xanthate on the flotation of a mixed mineral system has been studied at pH 9. The mixed mineral system was composed of colloidal silica and ultrafine sphalerite particles. Batch flotation, zeta potential and rheology have been applied to identify mechanisms by which the silica may misreport to a sphalerite concentrate. The results indicate that, in the absence of both copper sulphate and xanthate, silica was recovered essentially by the entrainment mechanism. However, the addition of copper sulphate and isopropyl xanthate increased particle interactions between silica and sphalerite, promoting aggregation. Consequently, silica may misreport to the concentrate via a combination of both entrainment and aggregation mechanisms. Under the conditions applied in the present study, silica is not likely to be recovered via true flotation, i.e. by attachment of silica particles to bubbles.Flotation is a complex process in which valuable minerals are separated from gangue minerals ( Via entrainment; Via Via aggregation with the valuable mineral. Entrainment is defined as a non-selective process by which fine particles may be transported into the froth phase in the interstitial liquid ( This is a very important issue to operations at several mines across the world (e.g. at Century Mine operated by Zinifex Ltd. and McArthur River Mining operated by Xstrata plc.). Century Mine is taken as an example to briefly highlight the issues investigated in the present work. Century is an open cut Zn–Pb–Ag mine, producing approximately 500,000 tones of zinc in concentrate. In the Century zinc circuit, for example, the rougher and first cleaner concentrates are reground to 80% passing 6.5  The primary focus of the current work is to investigate the influence of particle interactions on sphalerite flotation selectivity against silica at very fine size fractions. This is a very important study since the addition of reagents typically used in sulphide flotation may promote silica and sphalerite aggregation. The mechanisms by which silica may misreport to zinc concentrates are also investigated. Natural sphalerite (65.3% Zn, 32.4% S, 0.34% Fe, 0.08% Cu, 0.07% Pb, 0.17% Al Both copper sulphate (CuSO Zeta potential ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs were obtained using a high-resolution Cambridge CamScan CS44 Field Emission FE44 instrument. Samples were mounted onto double-sided sticky tape and carbon coated to a thickness of approximately 20 A high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM Philips XL30) was used to investigate sphalerite and silica aggregates after the completion of the flotation tests. This technique is named Cryogenic SEM analysis. Both concentrates and tailings were quickly vitrified under nitrogen atmosphere to avoid internal rearrangement of the aggregates. Then, the vitrified water in the sample was removed by sublimation at −90 The surface chemical composition of sphalerite and silica samples was determined by XPS (X-ray Photoelectron Spectrophotometer). This analysis was conducted with a Perkin–Elmer physical electronics division (PHI) 5100 spectrometer using Mg Kα X-ray source operated at 300 Rheology was applied as a tool to investigate particle interactions in both single and mixed systems. Rheological measurements were conducted using a Haake CV20 Couette type rheometer fitted with a Mooney–Ewart (ME45) concentric cylinder sensor. Slurries were prepared in 10 Batch flotation tests were carried out in a 300 The surface chemical composition determined by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) is presented in The Zeta potential of the silica samples after surface cleaning is shown in According to the literature (  In order to ensure that the silica particles were clean, and therefore hydrophilic, flotation tests were carried out on samples before and after surface cleaning. At 40% water recovery, silica recovery decreased from about 80% to 40% after cleaning. Silica recovery remained at around 40% up to 30 days after the cleaning procedure. It confirms that the cleaning procedure is effective in removing impurities from the surface and that the samples can be stored for up to 30 days, under vacuum, without re-adsorbing impurities from the atmosphere which may interfere with their flotation response. It is important to note that the clean silica particles are hydrophilic; therefore the collection efficiency should be low. The recovery observed for the  It has been shown that, in the absence of activator and collector, the recovery of In order to investigate the influence of reagents addition on the recovery of silica, single mineral flotation was carried out as a function of copper sulphate addition ( These results suggest that copper ions (in a form of hydrolyzed species) are needed at a specific concentration to promote collector adsorption. Xanthate is ineffective in hydrophobising silica particles when copper ions are not present. The reason being is that both silica and xanthate ions are negatively charged. The adsorption of copper ions introduces positive sites on the surface allowing collector adsorption to take place. It is important to mention that the interaction between xanthate and oxides are not essentially electrostatic. Chemisorption is also possible. However, since oxide minerals are strongly hydrophilic it is necessary to use long chain xanthates to acquire appreciable hydrophobicity.  Silica recovery as a function of sphalerite recovery in mixed mineral experiments is presented in  A hypothesis tested in the present work is that the attachment of silica onto sphalerite surface is enhanced by the addition of reagents. Rheological measurements and Cryo-SEM analysis were carried out to more fully explain silica-sphalerite interaction.    In this study the mechanisms by which ultrafine silica may report to sphalerite concentrates were investigated. The influence of reagents, commonly used to hydrophobise sphalerite, was also studied. To accomplish this, a combination of flotation tests, rheology and zeta potential measurements were applied. At pH 9 and in the absence of reagents, clean silica particles report to the sphalerite concentrate essentially via the entrainment mechanism. Reagent additions were found to increase sphalerite and silica particle interaction due to the reduction of electrostatic repulsion. Xanthate adsorbs onto the silica surface only when copper ions are added to the system. It was also shown that at copper sulphate additions below 1800 The authors would like to thank AMIRA International for funding the research presented in this paper.