We present a three-dimensional micromechanical computational framework for the direct mesoscale simulation of compressive failure mechanisms in ceramic materials at high strain rates based on the Optimal Transportation Meshfree (OTM) method and the microstructure-informed Eigen-fracture approach. A statistically equivalent polycrystal structure of ceramics is reconstructed to match the probability distribution functions of the grain size, orientation and grain boundary misorientation measured in experiments. The crystal elasticity model with damage is employed to predict the anisotropic dynamic response of the polycrystalline structure. Interaction between the crack front and the microstructure during the dynamic failure process is indicated in the model by considering the equivalent energy release rate as a function of the local micro-features. The computational model is validated by directly comparing the predicted compressive strength of 6H-SiC at various strain rates against Split-Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) experiments. Influence of the microstructure on the dynamic compressive failure mechanisms of 6H-SiC, including the effects of porosity and void spatial distribution as well as the strain-rate dependence, is quantified thoroughly by using the proposed computational scheme. The analysis demonstrates that the ultimate macroscopic compressive strength of ceramic materials is determined by the competition and combination of intergranular and transgranular fractures in the microstructure.Ceramics materials, such as silicon carbide and aluminum nitride, are brittle polycrystalline materials popular in applications of defense and shielding, due to their low density, high-temperature stability, high hardness and high compressive strength. Such applications usually require a deep understanding of the material’s limitation and their dynamic behavior during the failure process. It is generally recognized that the fracture responses in brittle polycrystalline materials are essentially related to their intrinsic microstructure and the defect distribution. Here, the microstructural features include grain size and shape, grain orientation and misorientation distributions, grain boundaries, micro-voids, second phase particle, etc. Each of these micro-features has its unique contribution to affect the propagation of cracks under dynamic extreme loading conditions. Therefore, the fundamental understandings of the dynamic failure mechanisms in brittle polycrystalline materials (e.g. ceramics) at high strain rates, such as rate-dependency and porosity-strength effect, must be sought at the microscopic scale. In addition, a detailed description of the interaction between the crack front and defects in the microstructure may enable us to better predict the macroscopic strength of ceramics under various dynamic loading conditions. Experimental studies of strain rate dependent compressive strength in ceramics, such as SiC Additionally, the intergranular fractures are often modeled using a cohesive surface approach within finite element formulation Instead of using stress-related criteria, the fracture can be modeled through energy minimization Another variational approach to fracture is deducted using the Eigen-fracture scheme based on element erosion or material point failure To this end, we present a micromechanical computational framework in this work based on the Eigen-fracture scheme to model the complexity of microstructure effects on the materials dynamic failure mechanism. A direct numerical simulation of the polycrystalline structure is proposed to explicitly account for the porosity and void distributions, grain sizes, grain orientation and misorientation distributions. In addition, the critical energy release rate of the material is defined as a function of the local microstructural features (e.g., the misorientation angle) and varies at the grain boundaries and the interior of grains. The interaction between the crack front and topological defects in the microstructure is predicted by comparing the equivalent energy release rate induced by the deformation to the local critical value. Considering the spatial distribution of the fracture property of materials in the polycrystalline structure furnishes an effective means of modeling the intergranular and transgranular fracture patterns simultaneously The paper is organized as follows. Next, we describe the computational model, including the material model and numerical solution scheme. In Section A computational framework is presented in this section to simulate the dynamic crack propagation in brittle polycrystalline structures at high strain rates based on the Optimal Transportation Meshfree (OTM) method Assuming there is no other type of energy dissipation mechanisms except fracture, a crystal elasticity model can be employed at the material points to describe the dynamic anisotropic constitutive relationship of the brittle polycrystalline material In particular, the quadratic equation of state is employed, i.e., The dynamic behavior of the material can be predicted by solving the mass and linear momentum conservation equations of the system with the specific material models under given initial and boundary conditions. Consider a body initially occupying a reference configuration In order to obtain a fully discrete action for computations, we begin by approximating the usual Lebesgue measure  Finally, the internal nodal forces are given by Finally, we extend the original Eigenerosion algorithm in our framework for tracking the inter- and transgranular fractures in brittle polycrystalline materials. Consider an elastic body occupying a domain  In the last decade, with the rapid advancement in the technology on microstructural characterization, such as Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) Analysis, a variety of quantitative information of the materials microstructure, including grain size distribution, grain orientation and misorientation distributions, may be integrated into the computational models. This work aims to reconstruct a statistical equivalent polycrystalline structure such that the micro-features included in the simulation have a more practical impact on their contributions to the final strength.  A triangulation of the Voronoi tessellation can give us the discretized model of a polycrystalline structure. A conforming mesh is generated to assure an explicit discretization of the surfaces of each grain. In the OTM method, we take the barycenter of each tetrahedron element as the material point and the nodes of the elements as the OTM nodes. The connectivity information of the original mesh becomes the initial neighborhood of the material points. The information of grain orientation and grain boundary misorientation is embedded in the discretization shown in   In order to achieve a high fidelity prediction of the microstructure evolution in simulations, it is critical to generate a statistically equivalent numerical model to the real polycrystalline structure tested in the experiments by matching their orientation and misorientation distributions. The orientation of the grains in the Voronoi tessellation is determined directly using the probability distribution function (PDF) of the grain orientations characterized in the Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) analysis. However, it is not necessary the misorientation distribution of the initial model will agree with the experimental measurement. Thus, the Monte-Carlo annealing algorithm is utilized in this framework to reorganize the spatial distribution of the grain orientations. The Monte-Carlo annealing algorithm is a probabilistic technique for system optimization, which relies on repeated random sampling towards the convergence. In this particular application, the error of the Monte-Carlo annealing algorithm is defined as a function of the orientation distribution function (ODF) and mis-orientation distribution function (MODF)  In this work, we study the dynamic failure process of ceramic material (6H-SiC) under compression. The experiment selected is the uniaxial unconfined dynamic compression test performed using the split-Hopkinson pressure bar(SHPB) The reconstructed specimen and the boundary conditions are illustrated in     The influence of porosity on the uniaxial strength has been observed and measured in many engineering brittle materials. The failure strength, in tension and compression, drops with the presence of voids or porosity    The specimen, with  In general, the ceramic material seeks for the most effective pathways to dissipate the deposited energy. As a significant amount of energy deposit into the polycrystalline structure in a short time, a transgranular fracture is capable of converting more strain energy in the bulk material into surface energy than an intergranular fracture within a limited time frame, due to the limitation of the crack propagation speed constrained by the Rayleigh surface wave speed. For example, crack front propagation speed converges to  We have developed a three-dimensional micromechanical computational framework for the direct mesoscale simulation of dynamic failure mechanisms in ceramics at high strain rates based on the Optimal Transportation Meshfree (OTM) method and the microstructure-informed Eigen-fracture approach. The microstructural features, including the grain structure, grain boundaries, and voids, are modeled explicitly in the framework. In specific, a statistically equivalent polycrystal structure of ceramic materials to the experimental measurements (e.g., EBSD) is reconstructed by using the centroid Voronoi tessellation and Monte Carlo annealing algorithm to match the probability distribution functions of the grain size, grain orientation and grain boundary misorientation (or texture). The crystal elasticity model with damage is employed to predict the anisotropic dynamic response of the polycrystalline structure. Interaction between the crack front and the microstructure during the dynamic failure process is indicated in the model by considering the equivalent energy release rate as a function of the local micro-features, such as the grain boundary misorientation angle and the void volume fraction. The computational model is validated by directly comparing the predicted compressive strength of 6H-SiC at various strain rates against experimental measurements in the split-Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) tests. The mesh-independence of the algorithm is shown in the convergence study by refining the mesh of the polycrystalline structure in SHPB tests. Finally, a quantitative analysis of the influence of the microstructure on the dynamic compressive failure mechanisms of 6H-SiC, including porosity effect and strain-rate dependence, is performed thoroughly by using the proposed computational scheme. The analysis demonstrates that the ultimate compressive strength of ceramic materials is determined by the competition and combination of intergranular and transgranular fractures in case of high energy density deposition in a short time. The model predicts that the intergranular fracture is dominant at low strain rates, but an increasing tendency for transgranular fracture has been observed as strain rate increases. In our simulations, the brittle polycrystalline material fails structurally once the vital longitudinal transgranular cracks connect all the locally distributed micro-cracks into a network and the material reaches its stress limit. The rate-dependence of the macroscopic fracture property of ceramic arises simply as a particular choice of the crack propagation path in the microstructure. In conventional modeling approaches, loading rate-dependent macroscopic fracture properties, such as the rate-dependent damage model, cohesive law or fracture toughness, are the critical postulate to predict the dynamic compressive strength of ceramics. By contrast, the proposed computational framework assumes no rate-dependent material properties in the microstructure for strain rates lower than In conclusion, the proposed computational framework furnishes an effective means of modeling dynamic compressive failure processes in ceramics and predicting several primary physical phenomena related to brittle fracture. However, plasticity in ceramics has not been concerned in our model due to the complexity of dislocation dynamics in polycrystalline structures, especially at the grain boundaries. Future work will focus on introducing the crystal plasticity model to describe the dynamic response of material points at the interior of grains and on the grain boundaries to study the influence of the competition between plasticity and fracture on the ultimate strength of the material. Also, further investigation is needed to find the dependence of the critical energy release rate on the grain boundary misorientation angle by using first principle calculations. The support of the