The present paper deals with physico-mechanical pre-treatments for dismantling of spent liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and further recovery of valuable fractions like plastic, glass and indium. After a wide experimental campaign, two processes were designed, tested and optimized. In the wet process, 20%, 15% and 40% by weight of the feeding panels are recovered as plastic, glass and indium concentrate, respectively. Instead, in the dry process, only two fractions were separated: around 11% and 85% by weight are recovered as plastic and glass/indium mixture. Indium, that concentrated in the −212μm fraction, was completely dissolved by sulphuric acid leaching (0.75molL−1 H2SO4 solution, 80°C, 10%vol H2O2, pulp density 10%wt/vol, leaching time 3h). 100% of indium can be extracted from the pregnant solution with 5%wt/vol Amberlite™ resin, at room temperature and pH 3 in 24h. Indium was thus re-extracted from the resin by means of a 2molL−1 H2SO4 solution, at room temperature and S/L of 40%wt/vol.Nowadays liquid crystal displays (LCDs) are widely used in TVs, laptops, desktops and any other device coupled with a screen. LCD panels belong to waste electronic and electric equipment (WEEE) that contain a wide range of compounds, some of which are toxic or hazardous whereas others like base and precious metals are valuable and can be recovered. Recovery of scarce resources like the critical raw materials (CRMs) was pointed out in many European policies: some are focused on waste treatment (Directive 2008/98/EC; Directive 2012/19/EU), whereas others address promotion of cleaner and more environmentally-friendly productions (Ecodesign Directive 2009/125/EC and Ecolabel Regulation 66/2010) ( In 2012, 9051 Thermal treatments, especially pyrolysis, were applied as pre-treatment of LCD panels in order to remove organics prior to leaching of indium. Pyrolysis of polarizing films at 570  Solvent extraction is a typical technique used in hydrometallurgy. Indium(III) can be effectively extracted by Cyanex 923 dissolved in toluene from HCl, H Recovery of indium and polarizing film from waste LCDs was also investigated by Indium can be extracted from LCD glass by sub-critical water. NaOH, KOH, Na Recycling of glass from dismantled LCD panels can also be carried out directly, for instance as raw material for production of glass-ceramic tiles. After crushing, grinding and sieving at 16 mesh, the glass powder was heated up at 800–950 Life cycle assessment (LCA) was also carried out to evaluate the sustainability of the recycling processes of LCDs (  The aim of the present paper is the optimization of the physico-mechanical pre-treatment stages to enhance the recovery of valuable materials from dismantled spent LCDs panels, and recovery of high-grade indium by means of leaching and ion-exchange process. Grain size separation tests were carried out on several fractions underwent different treatments. Samples were sieved in an electric vibrating screen (Set.El, Erimaki) equipped with some sieves of the standard series: 10 Several mills were used to reduce the grain size of the LCD panels and the different fractions coming from their dismantling. In particular, the following mills were used alone or in combination: cutting mill (SM 300, Retsch), blade mill (GRINDOMIX GM 200, Retsch), planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, Fritsch), ring mill (Willy Bleuler), rod mill (Sepor). All the mills were equipped with sieving meshes of 10 or 6 Some of the fractions obtained from different mills were subjected to attrition tests in order to concentrate indium by removal of external layers that could trap it. A lab-scale attrition grinder (Wemco, 1.5 Two flotation machines were used in flotation tests. The first one was an aspirated-air cell (Denver). The second flotation cell (KHD Humboldt Wedag) was similar to the first one, but the only difference was in the geometry of the stator-rotor system, since there was a lower distance between consecutive holes with respect to the first cell. The magnetic separations were carried out by a dry high intensity roll magnetic separator model Boxmag Rapid. The intensity of the electrical current varied from 0.01 Quartering method was always used to prepare the samples before any treatment and analytic determination, in order to homogenize and make each sample withdrawn for analyses representative of the whole material. Both manual and automatic rotating quartering system (model Retsch) were used. 10 X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy method (SPECTRO XEPOS) was used to determine metal concentration in solid material samples, while concentrations of indium in aqueous phase were determined by ICP method (ICP-OES, SPECTRO FM S16). The original concentration of indium in all the samples was measured by ICP-OES spectrometer after digestion in aqua regia. Quantitative analysis was performed in a microwave acid digestion bomb. Chemical oxigen demand (COD) and surfactants were measured by using UV–Vis spectrophotometer type XION 500 and its corresponding measurement kits (Dr. Lange cuvette tests LCK 114 and 314 for COD and LCK 331, 332, 333 for cationic, anionic and non-ionic surfactants) at various wavelengths. The thermal behavior (weight loss, exo- and endothermic reaction temperatures and gas analysis) of the plastic fractions was investigated by means of a TG-DTA coupled with a FT-IR spectrometer (NICOLET IR100 FT-IR, Thermo Scientific). The DTA and TG curves of the separated polymers in air flow rate of 2 One 22-in. LCD panel was manually dismantled by means of mechanical tools in order to classify all the different product fractions. In turn, 32 LCD panels from 14 to 32 Some preliminary leaching tests were carried out in different solutions aimed at obtaining the highest yield of metal extraction. Three samples of indium concentrate underwent leaching tests: these samples were obtained from grinding of 1 The cation-exchange resin used in this work was Amberlite™ IRC748, that was added to the pregnant solution in different amount. The functional groups of Amberlite™ IRC748 are of the iminodiacetic type and it is a chelating resin with high affinity for heavy metal cations over alkali or alkaline earth metals. Tests were carried out in 250 10 Fractions obtained after manual dismantling of a single 22-in. LCD panel are shown in The transparent conductive coating is made up of a thin layer of metals, that can be gold, silver or tin. Generally, indium and tin oxide and their alloys are used because of their lower price; moreover, they form a very hard layer and own an eligible transparency ( All the plastic components were analysed by FT-IR technique in order to gather the same polymers together, in the perspective of a possible recycling of such fraction. The IR spectra are shown in  After the pre-treatment tests, a flow-sheet of the dismantling procedure was worked out, in order to determine the best operations and their sequence. The procedure is shown in Three different mills were tested as a first mechanical treatment of the dismantled LCD panels, in order to study the grain size distribution and understand if indium, glass and plastics can be concentrated and recovered in some of the resulting fractions. The material obtained underwent grain size separation by means of electrical vibrating screens. Three tests were carried out by using the cutting mill for 10 The duration of the tests with the blade mill was 10 Four tests were performed with the rod mill without any sieving mesh: in particular, test A lasted 10 Considering 10 Indium was concentrated in the finest fraction passing through the 212 As it is clear from The density of some plastics contained in the dismantled LCD panels were experimentally determined in order to set up the flotation tests. The maximum density of polymers contained in LCDs was found to be 1.4 From the results obtained in the flotation tests, it can be inferred that the recovery of plastic is complete by wet grinding with rod mill for 30 Results of the preliminary leaching tests are shown in The second series of tests was carried out to optimize the consumption of sulphuric acid. Results of leaching tests are quite clear: 0.75 The extraction yield of indium by ion-exchange are reported in Results showed that 5%wt/vol of resin is enough to recover 100% of indium; the optimal pH is 3, so that not so much NaOH is required to neutralize sulphuric acid still present in the pregnant solution. The average stripping yield of indium obtained in the three tests was 99.9%. The initial pH of the stripping solution measured at the beginning of the test was 0.2 and remained constant throughout the test. It is important to highlight that the resin is completely regenerated after the stripping process, so that it can be reused for a further adsorption stage. Quantitative indium stripping was also obtained by using NaCl/HCl ( At the end of the extended experimental campaign, two different recycling processes were worked out ( The wet process worked out after tests is shown in Water is used for three main purposes: recovery of high grade plastic is enhanced, liquid crystals are removed by the aqueous stream and the downstream separations work better. Moreover, foaming is also avoided during the leaching stage. From the literature analysis, it can be inferred that only few processes remove liquid crystals before leaching ( From the mass balance it can be inferred that around 75% of the material contained in the dismantled LCD panels can be separated and recovered as clean valuable fractions: around 20% as wet plastic, 40% as concentrated indium powder and 15% as glass.  Thanks to the efficiency of the mechanical pre-treatments, only 9.53%wt of indium is lost in the plastic fraction and 3.3%wt in the glass scraps: hence, 87%wt is recovered and this represents a valuable result compared to those found in the literature, also in terms of indium concentration in the recovered fraction that undergoes leaching ( The dry process is shown in The analysis of the recovered materials is listed in Comparing the two processes, it is clear that recovery of indium is greater in the wet process than in the dry one (87% vs 74%wt), as well as recovery of plastic (20% vs 10%wt). Moreover, the concentration of indium in the wet process concentrate is higher, i.e. 575 In this paper several LCD panels were dismantled and characterized, with the aim to recover the maximum amount of valuable fractions, i.e. plastics, glass and indium that is a scarce but important post-transition metal in the electronic industry. LCDs were manually dismantled, and two physico-mechanical processes were developed and optimized: in the wet process, around 40% of the original panel weight was recovered as indium concentrate, whereas 20% and 15% of the weight were plastic and glass fractions, respectively. In the dry process, recovery of two fractions was optimized: in particular, around 11% and 85% by weight of the feed were recovered as plastics and indium/glass mixture, respectively. In both processes the grade of the valuable recovered fractions was very high: indium can be recovered by hydrometallurgical techniques, whereas plastics and glass can be easily recycled. In both processes, indium concentrated in the finest fraction, i.e. −212 The indium-containing fractions underwent leaching extraction by sulphuric acid: 100% of indium was extracted with 1