Wet-mix shotcrete mainly includes two processes: pumping and spraying. In this study, to explore the effects of the pumping and spraying processes on the rheological properties and air content of concrete, a full-scale experimental system of wet-mix shotcrete was developed with the given work parameters of these processes. The rheological parameters, slump, and air content of the fresh concrete were measured before pumping, after pumping, and after spraying, respectively. In general, the air content decreased after pumping, whereas the flow resistance declined after pumping and then increased after spraying. These changes were linked to the shear and shock caused by the pumping or spraying process. Under the interference of the pumping and spraying processes, prediction models of the changes in concrete properties were developed. Finally, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to analyze the degree of influence of the pumping and spraying processes on concrete properties. This work could be beneficial for further improvement of the understanding of the overall wet-mix shotcrete material and processes.Shotcrete is a fast construction technique to place concrete in engineering projects such as repair of concrete structures, rock support, and slope stabilization. Therefore, the wet-mix shotcrete technology is attractive owing to its low dust concentration when compared with the dry-mix or semi-wet shotcrete Wet-mix shotcrete comprises two processes: the pumping and spraying processes. It is assumed that the properties of fresh concrete (pumpability and shootability) may change under the actions of pump thrust and spray impact. Pumpability is the ability of concrete to be delivered through a hose or pipe system under pressure, and is related to flow resistance. Shootability is the ability of concrete to be shot, and is related to rebound and build-up thickness, among other factors. Feys et al. More recently, numerous scientific studies have contributed to understand the flow process of self-consolidating concrete inside a pipe, evaluate the lubrication layer thickness In brief, for the wet-mix shotcrete process, the main questions are how do the pumping and spraying processes affect the properties of fresh concrete and how do we determine their degree of influence. The corresponding knowledge is scarce. To answer these two questions, in this study, full-scale wet-mix shotcrete tests were conducted under fixed working conditions. A new type of rheometer was used to measure the rheological parameters of wet-mix shotcrete with varying workability, from high to low slump. The change trends of the rheological properties, slump, and air content of fresh concrete after pumping and spraying were analyzed. A PO.42.5 ordinary Portland cement was used with a fineness of 3100 cm Natural river sand was used as fine aggregate. As coarse aggregate, crushed gravel with a maximum size of 10 mm was employed. The fineness moduli of sand and gravel were 2.66 and 5.70, respectively. The specific gravities of sand and gravel were 2.61 and 2.67, respectively. The water absorbed by the fine and coarse aggregate was considered to correct the mixing water. The gradation curves for the aggregates are shown in The fly ash employed in this study had a specific surface area of 300–500 m Silica fume was used with a specific surface area of 16,000–30,000 m Polypropylene fibers with a specific gravity of 0.93 were employed in this study. The fiber lengths were 6, 12, and 29 mm, respectively. Its melting point was 180 °C. The tensile strength and elastic modulus were more than 500 and 3850 MPa, respectively. A polycarboxylate-based water reducer and a triterpenoid saponin-based air-entraining agent were employed for the wet-mix shotcrete. The admixtures were represented as %, indicating the percentage of the admixtures relative to the binder content (in mass). To study in detail the influence of the pumping and spraying processes on the performance of fresh shotcrete, the number of experimental samples was increased as much as possible by changing the mix proportion of shotcrete. Two methods were used for changing the mix proportions: to increase the dosage of each component in the concrete mixtures gradually or to change the types of admixtures. As listed in The experimental system of wet-mix shotcrete consists of a double-plunger pump, a mixer, pipes, and a sprayed wall, as shown in Three different concrete samples were taken at three stages: before pumping, after pumping (or before spraying), and after spraying, as shown in The air content was measured by an LA-0316 type concrete air content measuring instrument. The slump value was tested with a slump cone. Two tests were conducted as per the method in the Chinese Standard GB/T50080-2016. The rheological parameters of the fresh concrete were determined by using the eBT2 type rheometer purchased from Schleibinger Gerate Teubert u. Greim GmbH. The eBT2 rheometer includes a shaft decoder and two bending moment sensitive probes. A smart phone was used to control the tester over a Bluetooth interface. Laboratory studies have shown that the rheological behavior of fresh concrete is sufficiently described by the Bingham model Problems such as segregation and structural breakdown could be avoided during measurement because one rotation in the measurement pot was enough for the eBT2 type rheometer. It was not necessary to measure twice at the same place in fresh concrete, and thus, this rheometer structure avoided the negative impacts caused by the low flowability of fresh concrete. Moreover, it provided the possibility to measure the compacting concrete after spraying. Before pumping, fresh concrete was directly cast into molds with size of 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm, and this was also done after the pump; for the sprayed concrete samples, the concrete was first sprayed into iron box molds with dimensions of 450 mm × 350 mm × 120 mm. After 1-day curing in a standard curing chamber with temperature of 20 ± 2 °C and 95% of relative humidity, the specimens were demolded. The large concrete slabs were subsequently cut into standard cube specimens with dimensions of 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm after 7-day curing. Finally, all concrete specimens were cured to 28 days under standard conditions. The uniaxial compressive strengths were measured using a WDW3100 computer-controlled electric universal test machine. According to the test results, for the concretes before pumping, the compressive strength varied between 16.7 (FI*29) and 37.24 MPa (SF*15%); for the concrete after pumping, the compressive strength varied between 18.5 (WC60) and 40.38 MPa (SF*15%); and for the concrete after spraying, the compressive strength varied between 20.3 (FI*29) and 42.56 MPa (SF*15%). The rank of the average compressive strength was as follows: after spraying > after pumping > before pumping. This result was similar to those found in the literature The changes in concrete properties after pumping and spraying are plotted in  During the spraying process, the concrete was blown quickly onto the wall surface, forming the compacting concrete. The bonding between the ingredients in concrete became tight under the high-pressure force, and then the concrete flowability declined. Thus, the slump of concrete decreased after spraying. As can be seen in According to the analysis, the working process of a concrete pump could be divided into two parts: suction and thrust. The concrete pump consisted of two plunger actions; one sucked the materials into a cylinder while the other pushed the materials out from the other cylinder. As shown in With the changes in air content shown in On the contrary, the fresh concrete with initially high air content, such as concrete mixed with AE, WR, or FA, still had relatively high air content after pumping. During spraying, under the actions of different forces, such as the shear of high-pressure air, compacting pressure, collision between particles, and collision between particles and wall, numerous bubbles that were not broken during pumping were further broken and escaped when the concrete mixtures move towards the sprayed surface, resulting in the decrease in air content in the shotcrete substrate. In this phenomenon, although the spraying process reduced the air content, the air content value of these concretes with AE, WR, or FA after spraying was still higher than that in concretes with low initial air content. For example, WC55 concrete had 4.3% air content before pumping, whereas AE0.04% concrete had 6.1% air content after spraying in Except for the concretes mixed with AE, the flow resistance of fresh concrete nearly declined after pumping and then increased after spraying, as shown in As shown in Under the forceful action of high-pressure air during spraying, the viscosity naturally increased because of the compacting concrete. During the measurement of rheological parameters, we observed the following distinction: a thin gap was generated owing to the rotation of probes in the concrete before pumping, as depicted in According to this analysis, we assumed that the torque viscosity was related to the flowability. During pumping, the flowability of concrete became larger, and thus, the torque viscosity decreased for most concrete samples. During spraying, the spray process reduced the flowability, and then the viscosity increased. The degree of increase in concrete flowability determined the degree of increase in viscosity. After pumping, the increase in flowability was small; thus, the viscosity changed slightly with a downward trend. After spraying, the reduction in flowability was larger; hence, the viscosity changed significantly with an upward trend. However, Burns To explore in detail the correlation of each concrete property between B-P, A-P, and A-S, the three-dimensional distributions of the various property parameters are depicted in All the variances of the fitting equations are listed in In general, most variances R To qualitatively explore the influence of wet-mix shotcrete on the performance of fresh concrete, ANOVA was employed using the SPSS software to conduct the analysis of F value, as listed in According to the average value in Furthermore, to explore the effect of a single process, pumping or spraying, on the concrete properties, the difference in the average normalized value of each property between “B-P” and “A-P” was calculated, which represent the effect of the pumping process; the difference between “A-P” and “A-S” was also calculated, which represent the effect of the spraying process. The results are plotted in In this study, a test system of wet-mix shotcrete was established to explore the influence of the wet-mix shotcrete process (pumping and spraying) on the rheological properties and air content of the fresh wet-mix concrete. The working parameters of the pumping and spraying processes were given based on the routine practical experience. The trend of the effect of the pumping and spraying processes on slump was nearly consistent for all shotcretes. The slump increased after pumping and decreased dramatically after spraying. The air content decreased at different degrees after pumping. However, the effect of the spraying process on air content was related to the initial air content of the fresh concrete. The flow resistance declined after pumping and then increased after spraying. The torque viscosity declined slightly after pumping and then increased significantly after spraying. The changes in most concrete properties were related to the operation of the double-plunger pump system and the lubrication effect of cement paste. Three-dimensional distributions of the changes in each property were presented under the effect of the pumping and spraying processes. Prediction models of concrete performances, including flow resistance, torque viscosity, slump, and air content, were built under the effect of the pumping and spraying processes. The fitting effect for predicting the change in air content was the best among all the properties; from the point of view of the different processes, the prediction of properties after pumping was relatively better than that after spraying. The holistic wet-mix shotcrete process had the most significant effect on the torque viscosity. The influence of the holistic wet-mix shotcrete process on the concrete with an air entraining agent was maximum. The effect of the pumping process on air content was the maximum among all the properties. The maximum effect generated by the spraying process was on torque viscosity. This study was funded by projects, such as the National Key Research and Development Plan of the 13th Five-Year Period [grant number 2017YFC0805203]; The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors declare that the data in this paper is available.