Reinforcement of cemented paste backfill (CPB) with polypropylene fibres was investigated as a way of improving the stability of backfilled underground mine stopes. A series of unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests were carried out on both non-reinforced and fibre-reinforced cemented tailings. Sandy silt tailings from a nickel mine in Western Australia were used in the study. Ordinary Portland cement at concentrations of 3–5% by weight of tailings and 0–0.5% Adfil-Ignis polypropylene fibres by weight of total solids were used for specimen preparation. The stress–strain curves from the UCS tests showed the inclusion of fibres increased the UCS and significantly reduced the post peak strength loss. Accordingly, the fibre-reinforced specimens were found to be much more ductile than unreinforced specimens, which is highly desirable in many backfill applications. Sliced images acquired from X-ray computed tomography (CT-scan) demonstrated that the observed ductile behaviour of reinforced specimens could be explained by the restraint to crack growth provided by the mobilised fibre tensile strength. At large strains, fibre-reinforced specimens had virtually zero dislodged fragments and retained their integrity as shown in both experimental photos and CT sliced images. This was different from unreinforced specimens, which developed large, wide cracks that resulted in fracturing of the tested specimens. The potential for improving the self-supporting capacity of the fill mass using fibre reinforcing but less cement is discussed and potential advantages, such as reduced ore dilution when excavating adjacent stopes are discussed.Mill tailings are the main waste stream from mineral processing. Rather than storing this waste material on surface, where it presents environmental and safety risks, there is increasing interest in using mill tailings for backfilling of underground voids, thus providing additional structural support to future excavations and minimising the loss of ore due to dilution. Unfortunately, mill tailings often contain fine particles that can impede drainage rates, leading to the initial preference in the mining industry for use of coarser hydraulic backfill. Paste backfill was first developed in the early 1980s at Bad Grund Mine, Germany ( During the mining process, the fill mass is usually used as either temporary or permanent pillars to support the mined regions or as self-supporting structures to prevent the exposure of unstable excavated stopes ( Fibre-reinforced concrete (FRC) is increasingly popular in civil engineering, being used to increase the tensile and flexural strength of structures in the last few decades. In ordinary concrete, the internal micro-cracks contribute to the failure of structures and associated poor ductility. Inclusion of fibres helps rectify the weakness of materials by mobilizing tensile strength along the failure planes ( In addition, studies on fibre-reinforced sand and fibre-reinforced cemented soil have also been reported. In mining engineering, The tailings adopted in this study were from a nickel mine located 42 km south of Kambalda, Western Australia. The particle size distribution of the tailings is shown in Monofilament polypropylene fibres termed Adfil-Ignis ( The binder used was ordinary Portland cement. The most common cement dosage ranges between 1% and 10% in Australian sites ( The water from the mine site was utilised in the laboratory to prepare testing specimens (details of the process water quality are provided in All materials for the specimen preparation were weighed by electronic scale with an accuracy of 0.01 g. Tailings, cement and water with different proportions were mixed in laboratory blenders for about 10 min. Fibres were added after the beginning of mixing to avoid the floating of fibres ( The testing conditions used in this study were based on the accumulated experience of unconfined compression tests for concrete and cemented soils ( The original invention of X-ray computed tomography occurred in the field of medical science. The tests in this study adopted an industrial CT real-time imaging system, with high resolution. It was designed by American Bio-imaging Research Inc. and China University of Mining and Technology Beijing. The X-ray source, detector and image analysis system constitute the main components of the instrument. The cylinder specimen with a height of 50 mm and diameter of 25 mm was placed between the X-ray source and the detector. X-rays penetrated a certain section of the specimen which was rotated regularly until finishing the entire specimen scan. The intensity of X-rays was captured and measured by the detector after passing through the specimen and the information was transferred to the computer system for analyzing and rebuilding sliced images. It took around 50 s to complete each scan and generate a 16-bit grey image with 1024 × 1024 × 1440 pixel views. The scanning resolution of the sliced image was approximately 10 μm.  Unreinforced specimens showed distinct splitting after the peak strength was reached. However, fibre reinforcement enabled these split blocks to continue to act in unison, providing further resistance to compressive load, even after first yield occurred. This allowed the development of additional deformation without further strength loss. In other words, the fibre addition resulted in a significant increase in the ductility of CPBs due to the mobilisation of resisting forces by fibres crossing developing failure planes. The potential benefits in a backfilling application are that significant movements of an exposed backfilled stope would be clearly apparent well before ultimate strengths were mobilized. Contrast this with the unreinforced backfill, where little or no warning of impending failure would occur due to the brittle behaviour of this material.  Fibre inclusion enhances particle–particle (and particle-fibre) interaction, with the fibres interlocking with the cemented structure as the tensile strength of fibres is mobilised. However, the fibre reinforced specimens are also affected by curing time, as shown in The resistance to load of an unreinforced specimen has two components, the cohesive strength (provided by cement bonding) and the frictional component. As discussed by   The beneficial effect of adding polypropylene fibres to cemented paste backfill was investigated in this paper. A series of uniaxial compression tests were conducted and X-ray computed tomography was used to explore the internal failure mechanism of non-reinforced and fibre-reinforced CPB specimens. From the results of the tests, the following conclusions can be drawn. The fibre inclusions substantially enhanced the UCS and the ductility of CPB specimens. Specimens prepared with 5% cement and 0.5% fibre had a strength increase of 70–90% compared to unreinforced specimens with 5% cement. The axial strain at failure was about three times larger for the reinforced specimens and the ductility was vastly improved, with little or no post-peak loss of strength. Conversely, unreinforced cemented specimens displayed distinctly brittle behaviour. Increased cement content improved the compressive strength of reinforced CPB specimens but had no influence on the increase of strain values at peak strength. Inspection of failed specimens using X-ray computed tomography clearly demonstrated the beneficial contribution of fibres; the propagation of cracks was arrested by the development of fibre tensile forces across the developing crack. In contrast, failed specimens of unreinforced CPB generally showed one or two major cracks that ran virtually the entire length of the specimens and were much wider than the cracks developed in the reinforced specimens. Fibre-reinforced specimens maintained their integrity throughout the application of load in the UCS tests, contrary to the unreinforced cemented specimens that exhibited significant spalling during testing. This points to the potentially beneficial effect of these small polypropylene fibres in improving the ductility of CPB in-situ, potentially preventing the fall of blocks and the dilution of ore. As with any major change to mining methods, implementation of a fibre-reinforced cemented paste backfill technology is unlikely to happen overnight. Nevertheless, the results presented in this paper provide a potentially inexpensive technique for reducing a major safety and financial risk when using the cut-and-fill method of underground mining. Future studies will investigate the effects of reinforcement with different fibres, test the durability of fibres in CPB and explore the tensile behaviour of fibre reinforced CPB. The first author would like to acknowledge the