Gold ores containing carbonaceous matter and sulphidic minerals are generally referred to as double refractory. Extraction of the gold from such ores usually requires an oxidation step to both liberate the ultra-fine gold from the matrix of the sulphides and remove the carbon that preg-robs the dissolved gold. In this investigation, a double refractory flotation concentrate was microwave roasted to oxidize both the sulphides and the carbonaceous matter. The concentrate was characterized by thermogravimetric and infrared analysis and the microwave absorbtion characteristics were quantified by determining the permittivities. The microwave heating behaviour studies showed that the sample temperature increased with increasing incident microwave power, processing time and sample mass. Due to the hyperactive response of the concentrate to the microwaves, a low incident power of 600W was found to be suitable for roasting, as higher powers resulted in sintering and melting of the concentrate. The gold extraction values after cyanidation were over 96% and these were similar to those obtained by conventional roasting. The main advantages of microwave roasting were that both the total carbon removal rates and the heating rates were higher and the specific energy consumptions were lower than in conventional roasting.The two major causes of refractoriness in gold ores are the presence of carbonaceous matter and ultra-fine gold particles in a sulphide matrix. When refractoriness is due to the presence of both sulphides and carbonaceous matter, the ore is called double refractory. The carbonaceous matter in the ore adsorbs dissolved gold and as a result the gold recovery is reduced during cyanide leaching. This phenomenon is known as preg-robbing. The most important classes of carbonaceous preg-robbers are organic carbon and elemental carbon. The constituents of the organic carbon are hydrocarbons, humic acids and other biological substances while elemental carbon may be graphitic or amorphous ( Microwaves could be utilized as an alternative source of energy for the treatment of ores in some of the unit operations such as drying, calcining, roasting and smelting. Carbon and metal sulphides are known to be very good microwave absorbers and they can be rapidly and selectively heated. The flotation concentrate, with 80% passing size of −75 The partial chemical composition of the refractory concentrate is given in Samples were characterized using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Thermogravimetric analysis of the concentrate was performed on a Netzsch STA-409 high temperature (1575 Both the heating and the roasting tests were performed in the experimental apparatus shown in The variables studied were: incident microwave power, processing time and sample mass. For the microwave roasting tests, samples weighing about 15–20 Preg-robbing tests were conducted on both pretreated and untreated concentrate samples. Five grams of samples were placed in a 20 Cyanidation was carried out on 50 The flotation concentrate was found to contain 12.5% sulphide sulphur and a total sulphur content of 14.1%. This difference was assumed to be due to some sulphate sulphur, since copper sulphate is used as an activator in the flotation process. The X-ray analysis as shown in The IR spectrogram of the demineralized sample is shown in The TGA and DTGA results are given in  As discussed above, it would be expected that the permittivities of the oxides produced as a result of roasting would be lower than their corresponding sulphides. A comparison of The effects of processing time and microwave power on the sample temperature for a 25  For comparison purposes, oxidation of the sulphides and the carbonaceous matter in the refractory concentrate was carried out in both the microwave system and a conventional resistance furnace. At an incident microwave power of 800  The heating rate in the conventional roasting process was 31 The preg-robbing behaviour of the as-received concentrate and the roasted products are presented in The oxidation reactions of sulphides are exothermic and if heating is not controlled, there is the tendency for sintering and/or melting to take place. In microwave heating it is more difficult to control the temperature, than in conventional roasting. As a result, some local melting occurred and there was some sintering and formation of some glassy material. This can arise even in conventional roasting of double refractory gold ores ( Microwave roasting could find application in the minerals industry as a pretreatment method for refractory gold concentrates. Many processing plants, where refractory gold ores are treated, incorporate a flash flotation system where coarse flotation is done and the flash concentrate is milled further in a regrind circuit. Microwave roasting could be integrated into such a system to make pretreatment faster and more economical. A flowsheet of the proposed process that includes microwave roasting in the circuit is shown in The roasting of a refractory gold concentrate using microwave radiation has been investigated. The TGA results in air show that there was a continuous mass loss from room temperature to 1000 For microwave roasting, both the heating rate and the carbon removal rates were higher and the specific energy consumptions were lower than the corresponding values for conventional roasting. In both roasting processes, the sulphide sulphur was readily eliminated. Due to the high temperatures generated in microwave heating, sections of the calcine had sintered and were reground to release the encapsulated gold. Gold extractions of 96–97% were achieved for both conventional roasting and microwave roasting. The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for supporting this research. Also, Ron Hutcheon of Microwave Properties North is thanked for the permittivity measurements.