This paper describes the effect of acid leaching on the hydrodynamic properties of agglomerated copper tailings. Both the suction and the hydraulic conductivity curves were obtained before and after acid application in laboratory columns under unsaturated flow conditions. Using a classical approach originally developed for water and soil, we determined whether the post-acid application characteristic curves could be obtained from the pre-acid application ones. Results showed that acid modified the hydrodynamic properties of agglomerated tailings. Both the macropore volume and the saturated hydraulic conductivity decreased. For the same water content, the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity decreased and the suction head increased. The pre-acid application characteristic curves can be used to estimate the corresponding post-acid application curves.Recovering copper from mine tailings has become a process of great significance in the mining industry. Mine tailings have large quantities of low-grade copper minerals that can be extracted to improve mine yield. The most common process to extract copper and other metals from mine tailings is heap leaching. Roughly 15% of the world's copper and gold are produced by heap leaching ( Agglomeration of tailings is the process of bringing fine particles together to form porous structures (i.e. agglomerates) using an agglomerating agent or binder. When specific reagents are added to the agglomerating solution, the agglomeration process begins to dissolve the minerals from the tailings before irrigation (this process is also known as curing). Thus, when the agglomerated tailings are heap leached, the leaching kinetics is accelerated and the recovery is faster. Agglomerates are nonetheless potentially subjected to physical alterations during leaching, which can modify their hydrodynamic properties ( The fluid flow through a heap is typically described using soil mechanics, hydrogeology or porous media theory, chemical engineering theory, and experimental data ( The objectives of this study are: (1) to determine whether the hydraulic properties of agglomerated copper tailings change as an acidic solution is applied, (2) to quantify these changes, and (3) to develop a predicting model for these changes. Leaching experiments were conducted in columns under unsaturated flow conditions, and the hydrodynamic parameters were determined before and after acid leaching. A scaling theory for porous media ( The structure of the paper consists of mathematical models and scaling theory of porous media in The 1D movement of solution in an unsaturated porous medium is described by the Richards equation ( Using sand columns, For the same water content  The implications of both methods can be observed in In this study we compare the characteristic curves before and after acid application to determine whether they are rescaled versions of single curves (i.e. the pre- and post-acid application curves are similar). Although in our study we are not considering spatial variability, we expect that the medium structure (i.e. porosity and solid particles arrangement) of tailings after acid application will change when compared to pre-acid application. Thus we adopted the method of Warrick et al. to assess the scalability. According to Copper tailings were obtained from the Cauquenes tailings pond at the El Teniente Division of Codelco, Chile. Mineralogical analysis reported 0.6% chalcopyrite (CuFeS The experimental setup consisted of two Plexiglass columns of 51 In order to quantify the effects of acid application on the hydrodynamic properties of tailings, the following experimental sequence was used: (a) water was applied for 650 The pre and post-acid application suction curves were determined by means of Tempe pressure cells on each of the 3 samples collected from each column. The samples were placed on a porous membrane, and subjected to different pressures through an air compressor. This allowed the characterization of the section of the suction curve ranging from 0 to 1500 Bed compaction occurred mostly at the beginning of the experiment ( The pre- and post-acid application suction curves, as well as the unsaturated hydraulic conductivity curves, are shown in The changes observed in the hydrodynamic properties can be explained by analyzing the parameter It is of interest to evaluate the possible link between the pre- and post-acid application characteristic curves (suction and unsaturated hydraulic conductivity curves). For this purpose we applied a scaling analysis to evaluate the similarity between these curves as proposed by An analysis of the scaling coefficient Statistical nonparametric tests were performed to validate the scalability of the suction and hydraulic conductivity curves. In these tests we considered Hydrodynamics in columns of agglomerated copper tailings were monitored pre- and post-acid application. The acidic solution caused more settling of the bed, increasing the air-entry pressure and increasing the pore-size distribution index of the bed. The suction curve and hydraulic conductivity changed after acid application. Using the scaling theory proposed by Warrick et al. for unsaturated water flow in soil, the pre- and post-acid application suction curves and the pre- and post-hydraulic conductivity curves were found to be related to one another, respectively. Recognizing the change in the hydrodynamic properties after acid application is the first step in improving the performance of heap leaching with respect to design and operating considerations. Future research should better characterize the temporal and spatial changes caused by acid application. The authors thank the two anonymous reviewers for their very useful comments which strengthened the manuscript. We also thank Dr. Francisco Suarez for reviewing the final version of the paper. The preparation of this manuscript was partially funded by a