The decolorization and the mineralization of the Orange G dye in aqueous solutions with hydrogen peroxide in a heterogeneous system, involving a new catalyst, obtained by the adsorption of Cu(II) ions onto a macroporous chelating polymer functionalized with diethylenetriamine, was investigated. Special attention has been paid to the effect of solution pH, H2O2 and dye concentration, reaction time, temperature and amount of catalyst on the decolorization efficiency of Orange G containing water. The decolorization kinetics of Orange G by this catalytic system was also elucidated, based on experimental data. The oxidation reaction was found to follow pseudo-first-order kinetics with respect to dye concentration. The rate constants for temperatures ranging from 24 to 50 °C and the activation parameters were calculated. Activation energy, as well as activation enthalpy and entropy were calculated using the Arrhenius and Eyring equations, respectively. The new tested catalyst displayed good stability and was efficient for the decolorization and mineralization of Orange G dye under mild reaction conditions. Complete color removal was achieved in 30 min at 24 °C and in 15 min at 50 °C (pH = 7, [H2O2] = 130 mmol L−1, in the presence of 0.06 g of the catalyst) at an initial dye concentration of 50 mg L−1. The tested heterogeneous catalyst is a new cost effective alternative for the treatment of wastewaters containing Orange G dye.Industrial discharge of effluents containing dyes influences the natural aspect of rivers and has a negative impact upon aquatic life because of interference with the transmission of sunlight which diminishes the action of photosynthesis. In addition, some azo dyes and their degradation products are highly toxic and even carcinogenic Orange G (OG) is a synthetic azo dye used in different domains, such as in histology in many staining formulations, and as a dye for textiles (wool and silk), paper, leather, wood stain, coloring inks and copying pencils. Extended exposure to this dye may lead to irritation of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract. It also affects anaerobic biomass in aqueous solutions Among the methods applied for OG decolorization, one can first refer to biological processes The photodegradation of the OG azo dye has also been investigated under various conditions, such as: UV-irradiated titania The interactive oxidation by photoelectrocatalysis and electro–Fenton catalysis for azo dye decolorization (including OG), using TiO The decolorization of resistant dyes with hydrogen peroxide by a heterogeneous catalytic reaction is one of the most effective methods for the wastewater treatment. This method consists of using catalysts, such as: silica, alumina and cation exchange resins in the form of transition metal complexes. The reactivity of the catalysts is correlated with the redox potential of metal ions, the amount of the complex on catalytic support, the type of the support and the structure of the dye. The most common homogeneous catalytic methods for pollutant degradation use Fe Copper can also be used as a catalyst, preferably in a heterogeneous system. Copper is known to undergo Fenton-type reaction and has been used as an activator in the decomposition of H The aim of this paper is the investigation of the degradation process of the OG dye using H The monoazo dye OG, as sulfonic acid sodium salt ( Aqueous dye solutions of 1 g L Hydrogen peroxide ∼30% H The catalyst was obtained by the adsorption of Cu(II) onto a weak basic exchanger in four steps, as following: Firstly, a crosslinked acrylic copolymer containing 10% divinylbenzene (DVB), 10% vinyl acetate (VAc), and 80% acrylonitrile (AN) was synthesized by radical copolymerization. The reaction has been conducted in aqueous suspension, in an inert medium (toluene), using benzoyl peroxide as initiator (1 wt%) and ammonium salt of poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride) as polymeric stabilizer in the aqueous phase (0.5 wt%). The aqueous/organic phase ratio was 3:1 (v/v). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 4 h at 65 °C, 6 h at 75 °C, and 8 h at 85 °C. After polymerization, the copolymer beads were washed with warm water and then extracted with dichlorethane in a Soxhlet apparatus to remove traces of residual monomers, linear oligomers and toluen. Finally the copolymer beads were vacuum dried at 50 °C for 48 h. The functionalization of this polymer was performed with DETA, following a polymer–analog reaction, at 110 °C, during 8 h The functionalized weak basic resin (in the shape of spherical beads) was further treated with NaOH (1 mol L The polymer was swelled with double distilled water, at room temperature, for 24 h. The saturation of chelating resins with Cu(II) ions was obtained at pH = 5.2 by adding an excess of 0.1 mol L The surface and internal texture of the functionalized polymer, before and after Cu(II) ion adsorption, was studied with a LEITZ scanning electron microscope (SEM), using an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. The samples were fixed with colloidal silver on aluminum support and then covered with a thin gold layer. The chemical composition of the polymer A and Cu(II)-A catalyst was evaluated by infrared spectroscopy by using a Vertex 70 Bruker FTIR spectrometer. Transmission spectra were recorded in KBr pellets using a standard sample holder. Other chelating acrylic resins, containing 3% divinylbenzene (DVB), 20% acrylonitrile (AN) and 77% ethylacrylate (EA) were prepared as described in ref Different amounts of catalyst were added to a known volume of dye (20 mL for the pH effect study and 50 mL for the other experiments) with a given pH and H CO Total organic carbon (TOC) was measured in the aqueous solutions resulting from the oxidative treatment using an Analytik Jena 3100 TOC/TN analyzer. Reported TOC values represent the average of at least two measurements. Before TOC measurements the reaction was stopped by adding an excess of Na Initially we tested the catalytic capacity of some products resulting from the saturation of some weak basic ion exchangers, described in ref The resin A, functionalized with DETA, is able to form stable complexes with metallic ions and a high affinity for Cu(II), comparative with A1, was observed (  The SEM micrographs in The chemical composition of the polymer A and Cu(II)-A catalyst was evaluated by infrared spectroscopy ( As In the decolorization and mineralization experiments, the pH value of the dye solution has significant influence on the catalytic system efficiency because: (i) it can affect the catalyst stability and (ii) it influences the catalytic reaction which controls the production rate of hydroxyl radicals In order to find the optimum pH for the decolorization of OG, a series of experiments at initial pH values in the range 3–10 was conducted. At a pH between 1 and 2 a release of Cu(II) in the solution was noticed, thus no decolorization determination were performed in that pH range. As The effect of H As can be seen in Decolorization of certain dyes, mainly azo, with activated hydrogen peroxide in heterogeneous systems, using different insoluble catalysts with Cu(II) was already studied This could explain why increasing H The changes of the absorption bands reflect the evolution of the chromophores of OG and useful information could be provided by the analysis of the UV–vis spectra. The UV–vis spectral changes as a function of reaction time of H The UV–vis spectrum of the untreated initial solution of OG recorded at pH = 7.0 ( The variation of the decolorization efficiency of the OG dye with H As The catalyst Cu(II)-A was tested at pH = 7 for different concentrations of the OG dye, after 60 min of reaction time, at three temperatures: 24 °C, 35 °C and 50 °C ( As The amount of catalyst is an important parameter for the OG decolorization and for the decolorization efficiency. This effect was studied by varying the amount of catalyst from 0.01 g to 0.06 g in the following optimal conditions: pH = 7, [H As The stability of the catalyst has been tested following the amount of Cu(II) ions released in the solution after decolorization with Cu(II)-A/H In the conditions of temperature and dye concentration given in The reaction intermediates obtained during the oxidation of azo dyes could be stable and even more toxic than the initial dye It is worth noting that during the decolorization of the OG solution using H CO However, TOC analysis is more accurate and appropriate method for evaluating the decontamination of polluted waters containing organics, since it takes into account all the residual carbon contained in the reaction products The TOC removal ratio (TOC In As In order to investigate the reaction kinetics, the decolorization of OG with H For each experiment, absorption spectra in the 400–700 nm range were recorded at different time intervals. After calibration, the time dependence of the dye concentration in the solution was calculated. The obtained kinetic curves were normalized by converting them into the time dependence of the conversion degree In formal kinetics, the reaction order model provides the following equations for the time dependence of the conversion degree: The time dependence of the conversion degree at different temperature and for four different initial dye concentrations is shown in As it is obvious in The apparent activation energy was calculated using the linear form of the Arrhenius equation: The activation enthalpy and the entropy were calculated using the Eyring equation in the thermodynamic formulation Linear regressions of ln The value of the apparent activation energy estimated from the linear regression in Linear regression of the ln( Some literature data on decolorization and mineralization of OG dye by different methods, comparative with that obtained in this paper, are summarized in As The oxidative decolorization of OG, in the presence of a heterogeneous system involving hydrogen peroxide and a new catalyst obtained by the adsorption of Cu(II) ions onto a macroporous chelating polymer functionalized with DETA, has been studied in this paper. The effect of pH, H The mineralization degree of OG dye is favored by the increase of temperature and decreases with increasing dye concentration. The decolorization and mineralization degree of OG dye is favored by the increase of temperature, with maximum TOC removal ratio of 94% at 50 °C for dye solution of 50 mg L The financial support of this research by the Grant No.