In addition to size, density, composition and mineralogy (mineral type, texture, liberation, etc.), surface characteristics of sulphide minerals affects flotation behavior of sulphide ores considerably. The variations in surface characteristics of sulphide minerals can be related to the variations to the degree of surface oxidation which is known to influence the flotation performance. Surface oxidation affects dissolution behavior of sulphide minerals, activation/depression and adsorption of collectors, i.e. their flotation behavior. Therefore, a methodology, called “Oxidation Index” was developed to measure surface oxidation of sulphide minerals quantitatively and predict flotation behavior of different ore types. The methodology is based on derivation of an ore specific calibration curve and prediction of flotation performance of different ore types from the same deposit by using the calibration curve. The results of the test works performed using a complex Cu–Zn sulphide ore from Çayeli Bakır İşletmeleri A.Ş., Turkey are discussed in this paper.Mineralization in sulphide ore deposits is generally not homogenous. In the same ore deposit, it is likely to observe ore types with different mineralization, different degree of liberation and also surface oxidation ( Oxidation of sulphide ores may occur due to weathering process during formation, mining, stockpiling, crushing, milling or flotation. In literature there has been many techniques used to determine the degree of oxidation which are basically Eh ( Ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid, widely abbreviated as EDTA is a polyamino carboxylic acid and a colorless, water-soluble solid acetate. EDTA has the ability to dissolve and form complex with the oxidation products of sulphide minerals, however does not react with metal sulphides ( Therefore, the aim of this work was to develop a new measure based on EDTA extraction technique to determine the degree of oxidation of sulphide ores quantitatively. The surface oxidation as measured by the new methodology was then related to the changes in flotation performance. In this paper, a copper–zinc massive sulphide complex sulphide ore from Çayeli Bakır İşletmeleri A.Ş., Turkey, containing about 70% sulphide minerals is used. The average composition of the ore are given in In Çayeli ore, chalcopyrite, pyrite and sphalerite are the main sulphide ore minerals. In addition to that bornite, galena and chalcocite are found in variable proportions in different ore types in the same deposit. There are many techniques to measure degree of oxidation in literature but among these techniques, EDTA extraction was found to be the most suitable for plant applications ( In the EDTA extraction technique, 10–20 Degree of oxidation is evaluated based on two methods of calculation, Es and Em. Es ( Flotation tests are conducted in a 3 The flotation products were assayed for Cu, Zn and Fe using AAS. Flotation rate constants calculated by using first order flotation rate equation. Factorial design was used to test the influence of different parameters in the optimization tests and the results were evaluated by using Design Expert 7.1.5. Surface area of the different size fractions was measured using BET technique.  In the calculation of Es Cp, chalcopyrite was assumed as the only copper mineral in the ore. Similar calculations can be done for the other minerals (sphalerite, galena, pyrite, etc.) by using the concentrations of the other metals (Zn, Pb, Fe, etc.). Em Total can be calculated as the ratio of total amount of dissolved metal by EDTA to the amount of ore used in the extraction and unit surface area (Eq. Another significant parameter for extraction is the time of extraction. There has been many research works in the literature investigating the effects of surface oxidation on flotation performance. Some of these techniques are qualitative or at best semi-quantitative and does not give a quantitative index representing the degree of oxidation of a sulphide ore. Therefore, a quantitative measurements method is required to establish the relationship between oxidation and flotation performance of a given ore. Flotation tests were conducted in a 3 For this purpose, “Oxidation Index (OI)” is developed to determine the degree of oxidation of an ore in terms of percentage (%) as given in the following equation. Em total values for min and max oxidation conditions are required to derive an oxidation index and calculate oxidation degree in percentage. For this purpose, a calibration curve is derived by oxidizing the ore to different levels artificially using hydrogen peroxide. For derivation of the calibration curve, an ore sample with good flotation response was selected from the Çayeli ore deposit. The representative samples from the ore were ground in a ring mill to obtain a product of 80% −38 The variation of Oxidation Index (OI) is given in The relationship between cumulative copper recovery, flotation rate constant and peroxide concentration is given in In order to test the flotation performance prediction capability of the Oxidation Index methodology, ten different ore types having different mineralogy and chemical composition were obtained from Çayeli mine. The chemical composition of the ore samples are given in Chemical and mineralogical composition of the ores were very different from each other. Mineralogical analysis of the ores was performed using the optical microscopy equipped with Clemex image analysis system. The results showed that the main copper mineral was chalcopyrite ( Degree of oxidation of each ore was determined by the EDTA extraction tests as described in Section Batch flotation tests were conducted to determine the flotation performance of each ore type and establish the relationship between the oxidation index and flotation performance. As it was shown in Both flotation recovery and rate of the copper minerals decreases with oxidation index. The results showed that the oxidation index derived for Çayeli copper ore can be used successfully to predict flotation response of different ore types from the same deposit. This suggests, it will be possible to predict the flotation performance by performing an EDTA extraction test using ore samples from flotation feed, stock piles or from drill cores to determine degree of oxidation quantitatively. This would help the plant metallurgist to plan the blending strategy and take necessary precautions for plant performance optimization. As it was explained in the previous sections, it is possible to predict floatability of sulphide ores by using the Oxidation Index methodology. Hence, the methodology was tested using the samples taken from the stockpile and also flotation feed of the plant for five days. The calibration curve derived for Çayeli ore was used to predict the flotation performance.  A similar study was conducted by the plant metallurgists for longer period. Ore samples were collected between 15 and 18 June 2010 from different ore types in the stockpile and flotation feed to validate the methodology and test the compatibility of the calibration curve and the measured degree of oxidation values. The chemical analysis of the ores used in this study are given in The oxidation index derived for the Çayeli copper ore can be used successfully to predict the flotation response of different ore types from the same deposit. Effects of surface area (particle size) and extraction time were found to be as important parameters for the EDTA extraction. The amount of oxidized material on mineral surfaces increases proportional with the increases in the surface area and extraction time. Therefore, the equations were modified to include surface area at constant extraction time. “Oxidation Index” methodology was developed to express degree of oxidation quantitatively. In this methodology, the ore is oxidized artificially to different degree of oxidation by using hydrogen peroxide solutions. Based on the EDTA extraction tests applied to the artificially oxidized samples, the degree of oxidation is expressed in terms of percentage (oxidation index, %) and related to flotation performance. The relationship between oxidation index and flotation recovery and rate is used as the calibration curve for prediction of flotation performance of an unknown ore sample from the same deposit. Therefore, the “Oxidation Index” methodology can be used to predict flotation performance of the ore types before they are fed to the flotation plant. Ore blending and also flotation conditions can be modified according to the OI values determined by a simple and quick test. The “Oxidation Index” methodology was tested by using Çayeli Cu–Zn complex sulphide ore (high sulphide mineral content). It was possible to predict flotation response of different ore types with an acceptable accuracy. This work proved that the Oxidation Index methodology is an effective tool to predict flotation response of different ore types in plant operation. However, more work is required to improve the methodology for prediction of floatability on a size by mineral basis. So that the “Oxidation Index” can be included as an ore parameter to the “Floatability Component Model”. A patent (Application Number: PCT/IB11/052707) application for Oxidation Index methodology has been applied and Cayeli Copper Mine has started to use this technique as a standard diagnostic tool. The authors gratefully acknowledge technical and financial support of Çayeli Bakır İşletmeleri A.Ş. and financial support of The Scientific and Technological Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) Project No: 107M275.