Perfluoromethylcyclohexane (PMCH) is a member of the perfluorocarbon tracer (PFT) group of compounds. PMCH has been widely used in various tracer gas studies to characterize ventilation systems, atmospheric transport patterns, and pollution distribution schemes. PMCH exists as a volatile liquid at room temperature and pressure, a characteristic that prevents PMCH from being deployed using traditional means. This paper presents a design for a permeation plug release vessel (PPRV) for PMCH. The PPRV is designed to passively deploy PMCH vapor at constant rate as a function of temperature and plug thickness for quantitative tracer gas studies. Details regarding the development process and the release rate analysis are included.PMCH is classified as a perfluorinated cyclic hydrocarbon. Other compounds in this group classification include perfluoromethylcyclobutane (PMCB) and perfluoromethylcyclopentane (PMCP) ( PMCH is a perfluorinated cyclic hydrocarbon whose chemical structure is composed of perfluoroalkanes ( The PMCH molecule is composed of two main parts: the cyclohexane ring and the methyl group bonded off to the side. This fully fluorinated molecule has a molecular weight of 350 Building ventilation is one area that has implemented PFTs. PFTs have been used to investigate air infiltration into single family homes using passive PFT permeation sources coupled with passive capillary adsorption tube samplers (CATS) ( In the field of atmospheric tracing, PFTs have been used to characterize down-valley flow, canyon outflow, and interacting circulations on the lower slopes of the Wasatch Front ( The aforementioned examples of PMCH applications demonstrate the versatility of this compound and show that PMCH may be applied to analyze underground mine ventilation systems and to assist in the remote analysis of airflow patterns during emergencies. Although many applications of PMCH as a tracer have been introduced in various fields, little attention is paid to the actual release mechanism, which is a crucial element of any tracer study. In order to successfully deploy PMCH, the release source must not only be able to perform a controlled release, but it also must withstand ambient environmental conditions, such as dust and water. This paper presents a design for a permeation plug release vessel (PPRV) for PMCH. The PPRV is designed to passively deploy PMCH vapor at constant rate as a function of temperature and plug thickness. Details regarding the design of the PPRV, the development process, and the release rate evaluation are also provided. Underground mining conditions were not replicated in this study to isolate the release rate from being affected by uncontrolled, random variables. This isolation will establish a baseline for the PPRV's performance for further experimentation under different external variables. Future testing at an underground mine will be used to evaluate the ability of the release source to perform under field conditions. The basic concept of the PPRV detailed in this study was initially introduced by Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). The BNL source has been the predominant means of deployment for PFTs in tracer gas studies. However, limited information is provided regarding the source's operation or replication. Additionally, no advancement of the basic design has been introduced since its inception. In order to provide a cursory understanding of how the PPRV operates, the gas diffusion mechanism must first be discussed. The controlled release of PMCH is facilitated by the permeability characteristics of silicone rubber. The passage of a gas through rubber-type mediums such as silicone is a well-documented phenomenon that has undergone extensive study for over 50 years ( Silicone, or polysiloxane, is a name used to define any compound derived from polymerized siloxanes. Polymerized siloxanes are substances whose molecular structure is created by combining monomers into large chains of alternating silicon (Si) and oxygen (O) atoms. The alternating atoms (e.g. Si Silicone is typically composed of a long chain, consisting of hundreds to thousands of repeating PDMS groups, thus classifying silicone as a linear polymer ( Methyl vinyl silicone (VMQ) is the most common type of silicone rubber. VMQ has the same overall structure as PDMS with some of the methyl groups replaced with vinyl groups to create the reactive double bond necessary for cross-linking. The structure of the VMQ molecules, which is represented in The basic PPRV design consists of a hollow aluminum cylinder with one end of the cylinder open to atmosphere and the other end closed. Liquid PMCH is injected into the aluminum vessel and sealed with an oversized silicone plug pressed flush to the end. The state change from liquid to vapor occurs internally. Vapor is produced immediately once the PMCH inside the PPRV is exposed because of its high vapor pressure of 106 Once the PMCH equilibrates within the plug, vapor PMCH begins desorbing to atmosphere from the plug at a predictable rate directly proportional to temperature ( The study presented in this paper examined 36 PPRVs with varying plug thicknesses and fill levels across six temperatures under controlled laboratory conditions. Barometric pressure and ambient room temperature were also captured as covariates to monitor any significant impact from these environmental variables. Relative humidity was not captured because the experiment was executed in a laboratory in which the humidity was kept at a constant 40%. The varying PMCH fill levels were applied to the sources to determine the effect of PMCH depletion over time. In order to determine the effect of temperature on the release rate, six different temperatures were applied in random time order over the course of the study. This experiment was completed in two main parts: assembling the PMCH release sources and determining the mass flow rate of each release source. The following section details the experimental parameters from preparing the PPRVs to executing the experiment. The PMCH release source components and designs will first be discussed. The main body of the release vessel was comprised of an aluminum cylinder that was 6.35 As such, the shell can contain up to 2.5 Four PMCH fill levels, 0.100 Two duplicates were created for each unique set of factors (e.g. two PPRVs are created with 0.100 The PPRVs were then randomly assigned to one of the two 500 The PPRVs were given 48 This experiment, as previously described, utilized a strip-plot design model with two factors and two covariates. The first factor was the combination of plug thicknesses and PMCH fill levels. This factor was applied randomly to the first whole-plot unit of the PPRVs. Each of the 16 treatment combination levels was given two duplicates. The one exception was the 0.600 The second factor was temperature, which was assigned randomly to the second whole-plot unit of time in weeks. Two replicates were used for each of the six temperature treatment levels. The response release rate (i.e. change in PPRV mass per unit time) was obtained using the split-plots. The split-plots were determined using the intersection of the whole-plots. The two covariates, or variables that were measured but not directly manipulated, were ambient room temperature and mean sea level barometric pressure. All factor and covariate terms were assumed to be fixed effects.  Each temperature treatment was applied uniformly across all the plug thickness – PMCH fill level combinations. For example, the water bath was set to 35 The plug thickness–PMCH fill level combinations were held constant to decrease the amount of PMCH needed for the experiment. The application of a more traditional randomized design, such as a split-plot design, would have required the manufacture of new PPRVs for each temperature treatment to maintain independent experimental units (EU). This type of experimental design would not have been cost or labor effective according to the constraints of this study. In order to improve the efficiency of time utilization, the temperature treatments were applied in a uniform manner across all PPRVs, thus reducing the number of overall trials. The compiled results of the PPRV study are presented in  The experiment was analyzed as a strip-plot design model using SAS Version 9.3. The PPRV study presented in this paper was successfully able to derive an equation to predict release rate as a function of temperature and plug thickness.  The PPRVs were given 48   The ANOVA analysis presented in The weak interaction effects shown in The two covariates, ambient room temperature and barometric pressure did not have a significant impact on the release rate. The largest concern between these two covariates was from barometric pressure. If barometric pressure was found to be a significant effect, it would have needed to be included in the final regression. Theoretically, normal ranges of barometric pressure should not have a significant impact on vapor pressure, the driving force of the PMCH release, which was confirmed by this result. The insignificance of the two monitored covariates confirms that the major environmental factors present in the laboratory did not affect the release rate. PMCH fill level was also found to have an insignificant impact on the release rate. The insignificance of the PMCH fill level supports the low variance between PPRVs displayed in Using the significant effects, a regression equation was generated to predict the PMCH release rate as a function of temperature and plug thickness. The coefficient of determination, or model In Eq. Based on the ANOVA analysis in The authors wish to thank Dr. Russell Dietz, Brookhaven National Laboratory, who has been generous with his time and knowledge of perfluorocarbon tracers; Rudy Maurer Jr., Dyno Nobel, who has been instrumental in supplying the aluminum shells used in this experiment; and the researchers at the Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Statistical Analysis (LISA) at Virginia Tech for their assistance. This publication was developed under Contract No.