Positron emission particle tracking (PEPT) has been combined with high speed digital imaging to track a particle within a foam column. The tracer was sufficiently large (diameter 2.5mm) to allow visual verification of the tracer trajectory recorded with PEPT. This enables validation of the technique for use with smaller, less visible, tracers in the future. A difference in recording rates of PEPT and the high speed camera necessitated the use of a weighting function to interpolate the discrete PEPT data set into a continuous function. A kernel width of 200ms was used to ensure a confidence level of 95% that the tracer position calculated from PEPT and measured visually were the same, within error limits of ±2.7mm. The largest contribution to the error was the resolution of the images. Images of dynamic foam structure can now be paired with PEPT measurement to observe the tracer trajectory relative to individual bubbles.Foam has a distinctive structure, where gas cells are separated by film surfaces, and the film edges meet to form a network of channels called Plateau borders ( The flow dynamics of the foam liquid network have already been measured by liquid dispersion in an individual Plateau border ( Positron emission particle tracking (PEPT) utilises the pairs of back-to-back gamma-rays from positron-electron annihilation events, which can penetrate the opaque surfaces, to determine the location of a radioactive tracer particle by triangulation. PEPT was developed at the University of Birmingham as a variant of the medical positron emission tomography (PET) technique (  This paper presents a technique developed to synchronise images of dynamic foam with PEPT data so that the tracer motion can be observed relative to individual bubble behaviour. In this way, small scale tracer velocity changes can be correlated to specific foam structures or events. This work employed a tracer large enough to verify the tracer location with image analysis. However, the true potential of the technique will be realised with smaller tracers which are more representative of the particles found in flotation, but which are too small to be optically tracked. The experimental set-up is shown in The foam column was placed centrally between the detectors, with the largest face perpendicular to the detectors to facilitate filming of the bubble profile. The PEPT scanner detectors were spaced at maximum separation (∼800 A high speed camera (Casio Exilim EX-FH20) video recorded the foam behaviour onto SD memory at 210 The column contained 20 A hydrophilic tracer particle with an initial activity of 340 A time weighting function was applied to interpolate and smooth the set of discrete PEPT data points into a continuous function; necessary due to a difference in recording frequency between PEPT (56 For each final PEPT co-ordinate, The kernel is shown in A software programme was written to overlay the final correspondence co-ordinates ( The tracer was manually dropped in the top of the column, reaching the base after 14.3 For a sample sequence of 500 frames, the linear distances between each final correspondence co-ordinate and the image co-ordinate ( The r.m.s. deviation, or spread of the data at a time kernel width of 200  This experimental technique has verified the tracer position recorded by PEPT measurement, enabling future experiments with smaller tracers that are not visible to a video camera. It is also possible to track a particle in a dynamic foam with PEPT and correlate its motion to local foam structure. The PEPT detectors are less sensitive in the horizontal This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London. The authors gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC for their financial support of this project.