To fabricate the aluminum alloys with good drawability, the textures evolution of the AA5052 sheets after rolling and subsequent annealing was studied. The measurement of the deformation textures was carried out for the sheets in which were cold rolled with high reduction ratio by using the symmetric roll. In addition, the change of the recrystallization texture was investigated after heat treatments of the rolled sheets with various heat treatment conditions. Rolling without lubrication and subsequent annealing led to the formation of favorable rot-CND {001}〈110〉 and γ-fiber ND//〈111〉 textures in AA5052 sheets. From the results, the γ-fiber ND//〈111〉 component well evolved during rolling at high reduction ratio (reduction over 92%, l/d parameter over 6.3). Among shear deformation textures, the γ-fiber ND//〈111〉 was not rotated during recrystallization (350°C). The 5052 aluminum alloy sheet after rolling at high reduction ratio and subsequent annealing had the higher plastic strain ratio, however, the planar anisotropy of this sheet was higher than before.In order to apply the 5052 aluminum alloy sheets to the automotive body panels, the roll formed metal sheets having good drawability and the lower planar anisotropy are needed and these characteristics are closely related with textures evolution The initial state of the 4.5 Specimens for the measurement of the pole figure in order to analyze the textures of the rolled aluminum sheet were prepared after mechanical polishing and those of surface deformation layer of 10 The plastic strain ratio is the important barometer to evaluate deep drawing capability and the anisotropy of the sheet. In general, since the roll formed sheets have the planar anisotropy following tensile orientation, the specimens were prepared with different specimen angles, 0°, 45° and 90° to the sheet rolling direction. The plastic strain ratio ( In addition, the plastic strain ratio was obtained from the average value of 0.05–0.10 tensile strain and average plastic strain ratio (    The analysis of pole intensity of γ-fiber ND//〈1 Since the preferred orientations might rotate and change to the random orientation increasingly during annealing, the measured (1 In case of the shear deformation, because most of slips occur to the rolling direction or rolling plane, dislocation structures of the shear-deformed materials have more planar than those of the plane strain compressive materials.  From the symmetric rolling with the high shape parameters ( The 5052 aluminum sheets with γ-fiber ND//〈1 The rolling process and heat treatment conditions that shear deformation texture, γ-fiber ND//〈1 This research was in part financially supported by a grant from the Center for Advanced Materials Processing (CAMP) of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program funded by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE), Republic of Korea.