Copper electrodeposition in the presence of various types of aromatic and aliphatic amines was studied. The effects of operating variables including organic additives concentrations and temperature on the limiting current were investigated by the potentio-dynamic polarization technique. The effects of amines on the surface tensions of the solutions were measured; the results showed that amines reduce solution surface tension. The adsorption of all inhibitors on copper cathode was found to obey Temkin, Flory–Huggin and kinetic adsorption isotherm. The calculated free energy of adsorption (ΔGads.) of inhibitor on copper surface indicated that the adsorption reactions were spontaneous (ΔGads.
                     <0). The thermodynamic activation parameters (Ea, ΔH*, ΔS* and ΔG*) were estimated and discussed. It was found that activation energy values for copper electrodeposition in the inhibited solutions were higher than that for the uninhibited solution. The high inhibitor efficiency was discussed in terms of the strong adsorption of inhibitor molecules on the copper surface.Electrodeposition of metals is used widely in industry to perform the following technical processes: (i) electroplating; (ii) electroforming; (iii) electrorefining of metals; (iv) electrowinning of metals from their natural ores; (v) recovery of heavy metals e.g.: Cu, Cd, Hg, Pb, Ag from waste solutions discharged from metal finishing industries and metallurgical industries ( In the above applications it is usually required to improve the quality of the electrodeposit by organic additives. The introduction of small amounts of organic additives results in beneficial quality changes on the deposits. The specific activity of the amines is generally understood in terms of adsorption at the cathode surface, during electrodeposition, and depends on concentration of additives molecules. The adsorption of organic additives that aggregates onto electrodes can have large effects on the kinetics of electron transfer and consequently on the electrodeposition process. The effect on the electron transfer rates includes blocking of the active sites by the organic additives, and electrostatic interactions between electro-active species and adsorbed additives. Therefore, we have undertaken a potentio-dynamic study of copper deposition from acidic sulphate solutions in the presence of amines. Moreover the effect of blocking additives, due to its adsorption on the cathode surface, may be estimated from the limiting current values measured in the presence and in the absence of the organic molecules ( During electrodeposition of metals such as zinc and copper using an insoluble anode such as Pb, oxygen bubbles are produced at the anode, these bubbles induce solution circulation through the cell with a consequent increase in the rate of mass transfer and the rate of deposition of the metal on the cathode ( In the present work, an attempt was made to examine the effects of aromatic and aliphatic amines on the copper electrodeposition from sulphate electrolyte using an insoluble lead anode. It is believed that this investigation would be useful for various technical processes involving metal deposition such as electrorefining, electrowinning, electroforming, electroplating and heavy metal removal from industrial waste solutions. The present study was conducted under natural convection where the rate of mass transfer of Cu At the end of electrodeposition process, the morphology of specimen after experiment is monitored using scanning electron microscope (SEM). The study of SEM to graphs supports the experimental measurements. Analar grade CuSO Each experiment was conducted using freshly prepared solution. A concentration of 0.15 The density was determined using DA-300 Kyoto Electronics at 25, 30, 35 and 40 The limiting current density was measured using two vertical parallel plates cell, with a lead anode and copper cathode having similar dimensions. The cell consists of a rectangular plastic container (5.1 At the beginning, electrodes were mechanically polished with different grades of silicon carbide papers and washed with distilled water and degreased by acetone. The backs of the cathode and the anode were coated with epoxy resin and also the surface of cathode except an area of (5 Surface tension was measured at 298 SEM micrographs of copper electrodeposits prepared from different plating solutions were obtained employing a scanning electron microscope (Cambridge Stereoscan 360 SEM). The electron source was LaB Polarization curves with a well-defined limiting current plateau  It is obvious from Aromatic amines: Aliphatic amines: The surface tensions of test solutions are listed in ( The degree of surface coverage for the organic additives was evaluated from the equation: The Langmiur isotherm is given by: The Temkin adsorption isotherm is given by The equation of Flory–Huggins isotherm is given by: The kinetic–thermodynamic model is given by: The slope y of the linear relation between log [θ The free energy of adsorption (∆G From Eq. The effect of temperature on the Cu electrodeposition rate in absence and presence of all investigated amines was determined in the temperature range of 298–313 In this research, the thermodynamic parameters such as change in free energy (∆G*), enthalpy (∆H*) and entropy (∆S*) were calculated in the same way as the related researches did in literature ( The results show positive sign for ∆H٭, reflecting the endothermic nature of the adsorption process. The negative values of ∆S٭ pointed to a greater order produced during the process of activation. This can be achieved by the formation of activated complex representing the association or fixation with consequent loss in the degree of freedom of the system during the process. ∆G٭ values show limited increase with rise in the concentration of organic additives i.e.: ∆G٭ values of the inhibited systems were more positive than that for the uninhibited systems revealing that weak dependence of ∆G٭ on the composition of the organic additives can be attributed largely to the general linear composition between ∆H٭ and ∆S٭for the given temperature ( In order to determine whether these changes were reflected in the deposit morphology and composition, a scan electron microscope (SEM) study was performed. It can be noted that the surface morphology was markedly affected by the nature of the organic additives ( The morphologies of the copper deposits obtained under described hydrogen co-deposition conditions are presented in   The values of inhibition efficiency of Cu deposition increase with increasing inhibitor concentrations and decrease slightly with temperature. Addition of amines did not change the diffusion controlled mechanism of Cu deposition to a charge transfer controlled mechanism. The adsorption of all inhibitors on copper cathode obeys Temkin, Flory–Huggin and kinetic adsorption isotherm. The values of both K The activation energy values for copper electrodeposition in the inhibited solutions are higher than that for the uninhibited solutions indicating good inhibitor characteristics associating with physical mechanism. Addition of