Surface crystallization of calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum) on a series of polymeric surfaces was studied using a quartz microbalance system. Polyelectrolyte multilayer films (positively and negatively charged surfaces) were formed on the quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensors utilizing a layer-by-layer spin-assembly method. The kinetics of gypsum surface crystallization was quantified in terms of the evolution of gypsum mineral scale on the different surfaces. For comparison mineral scaling was also evaluated on silica and polyamide surfaces. For surfaces of the same charge polarity (+/-), the mass density of gypsum scale was lower (PSS<PAA, PEI<PAH) for smoother surfaces. The extent of surface mineral scaling (quantified in terms of both mass density and aerial coverage) were the combined result of the rate of nucleation and crystal growth kinetics. Although aerial scale coverage correlated with the crystal mass density, the crystal number density did not correlate with the extent of surface scaling. Surface crystal size, morphology and crystal number density varied significantly at similar roughness levels, suggesting that surface chemical functionality may also affect surface crystallization. The present results suggest that there is merit in exploring methods for mitigation of mineral scaling on polymeric surfaces via alteration of surface both surface topography and chemistry. In this regards, an expanded systematic study is needed in order to quantitatively clarify the interplay between the above two factors in controlling surface crystallization.Surface mineral scaling on polymeric surfaces is of considerable importance in various industrial processes such as those involving heat exchange Although extensive theoretical and experimental investigations have been reported on mineral salt nucleation and crystal growth in the presence of polymeric additives In the present work, mineral surface crystallization was studied on polymeric films of different surface charge and roughness using a QCM flow cell. The polymeric films were formed on QCM sensors via multilayer spin-assembly and where scale development was followed by real-time monitoring of the accumulation of mineral scale on the QCM sensors. Gypsum (calcium sulfate dihydrate) was selected as the model membrane scalant given its common occurrence in brackish water desalination Calcium chloride and sodium sulfate solutions were prepared by dissolving CaCl QCM measurements were performed with a QCM 100 unit (Stanford Research Systems, Sunnyvale, CA) with a 5 The feed solutions were delivered to the QCM cell ( The process of crystallization onto the polymer-modified QCM sensor was followed by detecting the change in mass, Δ Thin polymer layers were deposited onto the QCM sensor surface by a sequential approach, whereby spin-assembly of polyelectrolyte multilayer (from polymer solutions) was employed for creating stable films The formation of multilayer polymeric films (consisting of 9–10 bilayers) was achieved using solutions of PEI, PSS, PAH or PAA (3 Prior to the film deposition, the QCM sensor and silicon wafer substrates were cleaned by immersion in a piranha solution at 80 In addition to the multilayer polymer films, for comparison, surface crystallization experiments were also carried out with relatively hydrophobic PA6,6 film and hydrophilic SiO Aqueous solutions of CaCl Prior to initiating a crystallization experiment, the QCM sensor was fitted in the radial flow cell and the CaCl Contact angle measurements were carried out by the sessile drop method using DI water (Kruss EasyDrop Standard Contact Angle Measuring System, Palo Alto, CA). Each reported contact angles is the average from at least five positions on the substrate. Surface topography of the polymer films was assessed by atomic force microscopy (Veeco MultiMode Nanoscope IIIa, Veeco Instruments Inc., Plainview, NY) in tapping mode scanning in order to avoid surface damage. AFM imaging of the polymer-modified surface was obtained for films structured on the surrogate silicon wafers (cut to 1 The QCM sensor surfaces were imaged, post surface crystallization, by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S4700 Field Emission SEM, Japan) at 1–5 The polyelectrolyte films ( The contact angles were in the range of 22.4–58° for the polyelectrolyte films, 76° for the least hydrophilic PA6,6 and 9° for the most hydrophilic SiO The kinetics of gypsum surface crystallization quantified in terms of the mineral mass accumulation on the various surfaces ( Comparison of the pairs of polyanions (PAA vs. PSS) and polycations (PAH vs. PEI) indicates that same-charge surfaces ( Significant differences in morphology, size, and number of gypsum crystals are apparent in the SEM images of the different surfaces ( From a practical viewpoint, it is of interest to also assess the surface coverage by mineral crystals. Accordingly, the percent of the surface scaled with gypsum crystals was determined at the termination of the 48 The present study revealed that surface type can have a significant impact on the rates of surface nucleation and crystallization as well as the morphology of surface crystals. Mineral scaling propensity for both positively and negatively charged surfaces was greater than for the essentially neutral PA6,6 surface. It should be recognized that surface crystallization is a complex phenomenon that is governed by surface roughness and surface chemistry, and possibly complex ionic interactions between surface functional groups and the Ca A systematic approach was developed to explore gypsum surface crystallization on polymeric surfaces. Utilizing layer-by-layer spin-assembly of polyelectrolyte method, thin films with surfaces of different charged-characteristics (positively and negatively charged) and surface topography were created on quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) sensors. The kinetics of gypsum surface crystallization on different polymeric surfaces was monitored using a QCM system. For surfaces with the same charge polarity, the mass density of gypsum scale was higher for rougher surfaces (PAA This work was funded, in part, by the California Department of Water Resources, the US Environmental Protection Agency and a National water Research Center research fellowship to Ms. Nancy Lin.