In ungauged catchments or catchments without sufficient streamflow data, derived flood frequency methods are often applied to provide the basis for flood risk assessment. The most commonly used event-based methods, such as design storm and joint probability approaches are able to give fast estimation, but can also lead to prediction bias and uncertainties due to the limitations of inherent assumptions and difficulties in obtaining input information (rainfall and catchment wetness) related to events that cause extreme floods. An alternative method is a long continuous simulation which produces more accurate predictions, but at the cost of massive computational time. In this study a hybrid method was developed to make the best use of both event-based and continuous approaches. The method uses a short continuous simulation to provide inputs for a rainfall-runoff model running in an event-based fashion. The total probability theorem is then combined with the peak over threshold method to estimate annual flood distribution. A synthetic case study demonstrates the efficacy of this procedure compared with existing methods of estimating annual flood distribution. The main advantage of the hybrid method is that it provides estimates of the flood frequency distribution with an accuracy similar to the continuous simulation approach, but with dramatically reduced computation time. This paper presents the method at the proof-of-concept stage of development and future work is required to extend the method to more realistic catchments.Flooding is one of the most frequently occurring natural hazards worldwide, and often causes major damage to our society. For example, every year in Australia, floods incur millions of dollars damage to critical infrastructure and threaten humans lives. Appropriate designs of flow regulation structures, such as dam spillways, bridges, pipelines and flood detention basins are vital for flood mitigation and the protection of important domestic and commercial resources. These designs rely on the estimation of both the frequency and the magnitude of extreme flow events. However, due to the highly variable and complex climatic and hydrological processes that drive flood extremes, it is a major challenge to provide reliable predictions. Existing flood estimation methods can be broken down into two major groups: flood frequency analysis and derived flood frequency methods ( Flood frequency analysis involves fitting a distribution model to streamflow data so that the flow magnitude associated with a certain occurrence probability can be calculated using the mathematical equation of the fitted distribution. The success of the analysis depends on achieving a reliable fit for the distribution, which requires a sufficiently long and high quality streamflow record. Unfortunately it is not available in the vast majority of catchments. Furthermore if the catchment has undergone significant land-use or climate changes in the past, the historical record cannot support an accurate estimation of the flood frequency distribution. Derived flood frequency methods have been developed to overcome the limitations of flood frequency analysis. These approaches use meteorological data (rainfall, potential evapotranspiration) as inputs for a rainfall-runoff (RR) model to generate streamflow data. In general, historical rainfall data are longer and have more reliable records than streamflow data and only a relatively short streamflow record is required to calibrate the RR model. Furthermore, to provide projections of the impact of climate change, a weather generator can be used to simulate the meteorological data for a certain climate scenario. The simulated meteorological data is then input into the RR model to generate streamflow data, from which the flood frequency distribution (FFD) under the projected climate condition can be derived. Derived flood frequency methods are, therefore, generally preferred over flood frequency analysis, and have been developed as both analytical and simulation approaches. Analytical methods were initiated in the early 70 Recently, numerical simulation methods for deriving flood frequency distribution have undergone considerable development. These simulation techniques can be classified into two groups: continuous simulation (CS) ( In the following, two mainstream event-based (EB) approaches, i.e., the design storm and the joint probability approaches will be reviewed, followed by a brief discussion of continuous simulation (CS). Among the EB methods, the most widely adopted one in the guidelines of the world practicing water resource institutions (for example, Australian Rainfall and Runoff AR&R In order to overcome the problems of the ARI neutrality assumption, To account for the joint probability nature of the estimation of extreme flood events, event-based Monte Carlo simulation techniques have been developed ( The major challenge of these techniques is to obtain the correct input distributions from the causative events of the annual maximum extreme flows that are of interest. These are very difficult to obtain because long-term historical records with many extreme events are not readily available. Moreover, catchment soil moisture conditions are not routinely measured, which requires calibrating a RR model to flood events. Currently, practical guidelines (e.g., RORB by As these procedures use the annual maximum rainfall as input and take into account the joint probability of rainfall and catchment antecedent soil moisture condition, we will collectively name these methods as AMXJP methods hereafter, where In contrast to event-based approaches, continuous simulation (CS) ( The major limitation of the CS approach is that it is computationally demanding. For instance, as will be shown in Section The main contribution of this paper is to develop a hybrid event-based approach which overcomes the limitations of current EB approaches with a significantly reduced computational time compared with a long-term CS. This hybrid method uses a short CS run (e.g. 30–100 The paper is organised as follows: Section The hybrid-CE approach combines continuous simulation and event-based approaches. A long CS of rainfall provides the rainfall distribution and a short CS of the rainfall-runoff process provides the soil moisture distribution. Together, they drive an EB simulation of the rainfall-runoff process to produce the streamflow distribution. Unlike the AMXJP method, for the hybrid-CE method the input rainfall and soil moisture values are drawn from the distributions that are estimated from causative events to produce an A schematic diagram shown in In the following discussions, the capital letters Although rainfall records are more numerous than streamflow records, they may not be available at the time scale or location of interest. In general, stochastic rainfall models (e.g. As in the event-based part of the hybrid-CE method the rainfall distribution is needed, the continuous part of the hybrid-CE approach first runs the rainfall simulation to generate a long-term rainfall record based on the assumption that the rainfall simulation runs much faster than the RR model. The grounds for this assumption will be addressed in Section After that a short-term continuous simulation of the RR model is run using part of the generated long rainfall record as input. From this short term CS of the RR process, a short time series of soil moisture values as well as streamflow values are obtained. Given that soil moisture is less variable than rainfall, this short record of the soil moisture is sufficient for the estimation of its distribution. The short streamflow record will be used to assess the POT model parameters, as will be discussed in Section After obtaining the rainfall and soil moisture distributions, their values ( Assuming that the RR model is deterministic, with no prediction error, the conditional exceedance probability of the streamflow conditioned on the rainfall and soil moisture values, Based on the total probability theorem, the unconditional exceedance distribution The double integral in Eq. In the hybrid-CE method, we developed an efficient numerical integration for extreme events (ENIEE) to solve Eq. Compared to the SMC technique, the ENIEE is more efficient, as the input Like the AMXJP methods, the mathematical theory underpinning the event-based part of the hybrid-CE method is also the Hence the term One may argue that the The POT method ( In the POT method, the number of peaks over the selected flow threshold Under the assumption that the peak magnitudes are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) with function In summary, the hybrid-CE approach requires the following steps: A long-term CS is run for the rainfall simulation at the streamflow event time scale of interest to generate a long time series of rainfall data. The rainfall distribution is estimated from this record. A short rainfall record sampled from the simulated data is put into the RR model for a short-term CS run at the same event time scale to generate a series of soil moisture values for the estimation of the soil moisture distribution. The streamflow record generated by the short CS is used to estimate the POT model parameters ( The RR model is run in an event-based manner using the rainfall and soil moisture values sampled from the estimated distributions and the ENIEE method is implemented to evaluate the The POT method is applied to convert the The flow chart of the above steps is illustrated in A synthetic case study is presented to demonstrate how the assumptions underpinning the DS and AMXJP approaches impact on the estimation of the annual FFD. It also shows that the hybrid-CE approach can avoid this bias and provide more reliable estimates of the annual FFD in an efficient manner. The rainfall data of the synthetic catchment were generated through a 1-D continuous rainfall simulation model. The simulated rainfall data were input into a lumped RR model to generate a long-term (10,000 Simple lumped rainfall and RR models were applied in this case study, because the aim was to demonstrate the problems of the existing approaches and the relative efficacy of the hybrid-CE method. Extensions of the hybrid-CE method to a more complicated RR model using realistic catchment data will be undertaken in future research (see Section The daily rainfall simulation model consists of two parts: an occurrence model for the generation of the dry-and-wet-day sequence and a model for the generation of the rainfall amount on wet days ( The dry/wet day sequence is modelled by a first order stationary Markov chain ( The rainfall amount on wet days in the case study was drawn from a log-normal distribution with parameter values The applied RR model is a simplified HBV model ( To test the performance of different EB approaches under different climate conditions, wet and dry climate scenarios were generated using different parameter settings for the rainfall simulator and HBV model. The selection of the parameters for the two climate scenarios was based on a comparison of the annual rainfall and runoff statistics from a database of 330 Australia catchments ( After the model setup, a 10,000-year continuous simulation of the rainfall and rainfall-runoff models was carried out at a daily time step for both climate scenarios. As mentioned at the beginning of the case study, the output streamflow data were used to derive the In EB joint probability approaches, the distribution of the input rainfall is required. In this case study, access to the long-term synthetic rainfall record (10,000 Given the ARI neutrality assumption of the DS approach, annual maximum rainfalls should be used as inputs into the RR model to derive the annual FFD. In this case study, the annual maximum rainfalls were extracted from the simulated 10,000-year daily rainfall series. Regarding the antecedent catchment wetness condition, the primary assumption of the DS approach is that it uses a single fixed representative loss value. Typically, a rainfall loss model (e.g, proportional, initial/continuing) and a runoff routing procedure are used to convert rainfall to runoff (e.g. For this case study we used the simplified HBV model to convert rainfall to runoff in the DS approach because it was exactly the same RR model used to generate the For AMXJP methods such as  In the application of the hybrid-CE method, first the dependence between the daily rainfall depth and soil moisture amount was investigated using Pearson’s In addition to the input distributions, the occurrence model of the peaks over threshold and its parameters have to be specified for the POT method to convert the daily flow distribution to the annual FFD. First of all, the peak threshold should be chosen. Two different models of the occurrence rate of peaks were considered, the Poisson and the negative binomial distributions. Visual inspection of the frequency curves of the number of peaks per year from the 10,000 Therefore the negative binomial distribution was adopted. The model parameters In the following application of the hybrid-CE approach, the POT model parameters (  The results highlight an overall under-estimation. For the very small flood values, however, the DS approach produces a slight over-estimation.  The purple dashed lines representing the results of  As shown above, the predictions of As stated in Section Several statistics (daily mean, median, standard deviation and skewness) and different record lengths were tested (30–100   The AMXJP approach provided good predictive performance on average, however, it produced the largest prediction uncertainties among the three methods. This good performance was despite using arbitrarily chosen SM distributions, that were not based on the causative events. The hybrid-CE method provided good predictive performance on average except for a slight overestimation for the low flows in the dry case. The resultant estimation uncertainty was smaller than for the AMXJP approach, but higher than for the DS approach. The DS approach produces the narrowest prediction band simply because it does not take into account the variability of SM conditions unlike the other two methods. Despite the additional complexities in the hybrid-CE method (estimating input distributions and POT model parameters) when compared with the AMXJP approach, the hybrid-CE produces smaller prediction uncertainties. This demonstrates the relative robustness of the hybrid-CE method. Note that the relative uncertainty due to sampling variability is greater in the dry case than in the wet case for all three methods. This is likely to be because of the larger coefficients of variation of the rainfall and runoff data ( A comparison of the relative prediction errors of the three different methods for different record lengths is presented in These results indicate that if a single short record is randomly selected it is likely that the hybrid-CE method will produce more accurate estimates of the annual FFD than the DS and AMXJP approaches, particularly for the dry case. In addition, Section The previous section showed that the hybrid-CE method provides more reliable predictions of the annual FFD than the DS and AMXJP methods. The main advantage of the hybrid-CE approach over the long-term CS approach is its computational efficiency. For example, to achieve a prediction error less than 20% for the exceedance probability of the 1 in 100 The synthetic case study demonstrated that the hybrid-CE method outperforms the traditional DS and AMXJP event-based methods in terms of prediction accuracy. For the DS method, the ARI neutrality assumption and the use of a fixed representative SM value lead to significant under-prediction (13–46% for the dry case and 2.3–17% for the wet case on average) of the annual FFD. This under-estimation is due to a combination of assuming a fixed value of the SM and the non-linear increase in event runoff response when the SM increases. Although in practical applications it is likely that the negative bias is compensated by low biased design values of losses (high soil moisture) and possibly high biased temporal patterns of rainfall, these results should sound a warning for flood engineers who use DS approaches. For the AMXJP method, the use of the SM distribution instead of a single value resulted in improved performance relative to the DS approach, but with a lower predictive accuracy and higher predictive uncertainty than provided by the hybrid-CE method (see As mentioned in the introduction, CS has the greatest potential to provide reliable estimates of the FFD for both current and changed climate scenarios, but is the most computationally expensive method, particularly as RR models are likely to become complex in the future (e.g. TOPKAPI, Hydrogeosphere). The hybrid-CE approach is approximately 100–1000 times faster than the CS approach. Though the hybrid-CE approach does require some additional calculations related to the EINEE and POT methods, the additional computational time of these is minor compared to the computational efficiency resulting from a 100 to 1000 times reduction in the runtime of a complicated distributed rainfall-runoff model. This would further improve if parallel computing was utilised, since event based approaches are far easier to parallelise than a single long run of CS. Given the conceptually sounder approach of using causative events and the improved predictive accuracy compared with existing EB approaches, and the vastly increased computational efficiency compared with the CS approach, the hybrid-CE approach ranks ahead of the other approaches for estimating the annual FFD. However, there is still significant work required to further develop the hybrid-CE approach in order to provide the practically relevant estimates of floods in more realistic case-study catchments. The advantages of the hybrid-CE method were demonstrated in this paper using a simplified synthetic case study where the extreme daily flow volumes were estimated. Future research will extend the hybrid-CE method to provide flood predictions for more realistic practical applications. Of primary interest is estimating the instantaneous peak flood rate instead of the daily flow volume. As mentioned in the previous section, this will require using a more realistic subdaily rainfall model, that takes into account spatially and temporally varying rainfall characteristics and a RR model that captures spatial variability of catchment properties and runoff-routing at the subdaily time steps. The EB component of the hybrid-CE model must be run for the entire event duration, as opposed to a single time step. As the current AMXJP method ( One of the major assumptions of all the derived flood frequency methods is the ability of the rainfall model and RR model to properly capture the dominant physical processes which produce extreme flood events. Inherent in the development of any environmental model is the predictive uncertainty produced by data errors and model structural uncertainty (refer to This paper has introduced a new hybrid causative event method for providing an efficient and robust estimation of annual flood frequency distribution. The method uses a short continuous simulation of the rainfall-runoff process to provide inputs to an event-based approach for estimating the distribution of streamflow events at the time scale of interest. The peak over threshold method is used to convert this distribution to the annual frequency distribution. It successfully combines the accuracy of continuous simulation method with the efficiency of event-based methods. It takes into account the joint probability nature of the rainfall-runoff process, which avoids the potential for predictive bias in the widely adopted design storm approach. The use of causative events provides a conceptually sounder approach than the AMXJP method by avoiding reliance on arbitrary assumptions about relevant soil moisture distribution and compensatory errors. Significantly, it reduces computational demand compared with a long continuous simulation run of the rainfall-runoff model. The study reported here demonstrated the advantages (more efficient and reliable predictions) of the hybrid causative event approach over existing approaches using a simplified case study which estimated extreme daily flow volumes. Future work will extend the hybrid causative event approach to more realistic practical applications which estimate extreme instantaneous peak flows, taking into account the spatially and temporally varying characteristics of the rainfall and rainfall-runoff processes. The procedure of the ENIEE method is outlined as follows: The range of the streamflow The ranges of the rainfall depth The outmost loop starts from the highest value of The innermost loop also begins by first starting at the highest value The Step 5 moves onto the lower end of the Then a set of the recorded The exceedance probability of The As this procedure moves beyond the previously recorded The exceedance probability of This procedure repeats for the rest of the 