Introduction
                  The modified Stoppa approach for acetabular fractures has become popular. However, the possibility of injury to the obturator nerve with this approach has not been sufficiently considered. We have experienced a case of nerve entrapment in severely displaced fractures. Therefore, we performed a retrospective study to: (1) evaluate the incidence of obturator nerve injury in the modified Stoppa approach for acetabular fractures; (2) analyze the relationship between the extent of displacement of the quadrilateral plate and injury to the obturator nerve.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We hypothesized that obturator nerve injury would be related to a marked medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  We conducted a retrospective cohort study of 22 patients with acetabular fractures that were surgically treated with the modified Stoppa approach. The medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate was measured on a three-dimensional reconstruction image with the inlet view. Postoperative electrodiagnostic tests were performed based on clinical suspicion of neurological injury. Nerve injuries were divided into initial trauma or postoperative complication, and recovery of nerve function was evaluated. We identified the incidence of obturator nerve injury and analyzed the relationship between obturator nerve injury and medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate.
               
                  Results
                  The incidence of obturator nerve injury was 2/22 (9.1%), and all injuries resulted from the initial trauma. The average displacement of the quadrilateral plate was 15.9±13.4mm. Patients were divided into two groups, using a displacement of 24mm as a cutoff point, identified using a receiver operating characteristic curve analysis. There were 16 patients in group 1 (<24mm) and 6 patients in group 2 (≥24mm). The incidence of obturator nerve injury from trauma was 0/16 (0%) in group 1 and 2/6 (33.3%) in group 2 (P
                     =0.018).
               
                  Conclusions
                  No cases of postoperative obturator nerve injury were identified. Preoperative obturator nerve injury was more common in patients with a displacement of the quadrilateral plate≥24mm.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective study.Displaced acetabular fractures are intra-articular fractures of the weight-bearing joints, and best treated through open reduction and internal fixation evaluate the incidence of obturator nerve injury in the modified Stoppa approach for acetabular fractures; analyze the relationship between the extent of displacement of the quadrilateral plate and injury to the obturator nerve. We hypothesize that traumatic injury to the obturator nerve would be related to the extent of medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate. This study was a retrospective cohort study. The medical records of patients who presented with acetabular fractures and were surgically treated, between January 2011 and June 2015, were extracted from our institutionally approved, single-center, orthopedic database. The inclusion criteria were patients with acetabular fractures who were surgically treated with the modified Stoppa approach. The surgery was performed by a single surgeon at our level I trauma center. The exclusion criteria were pathological fractures and < The modified Stoppa approach has been well described by several authors, and our technique was identical to that previously described The clinical course was reviewed to extract: time from injury to surgery, the incidence of surgical complications, such as an infection, and nerve injury in the immediate postoperative period, as well as through to the end of the follow-up period. The initial radiological evaluation included pelvis radiography (anteroposterior, Judet and inlet/outlet views) and pelvis 3D computed tomography (CT). The CT images were reformatted at 2-mm intervals in the axial plane, and 3D reconstructions from the set of axial source images were performed using a standard workstation (Siemens, New York, NY, USA). The medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate was measured in mm, to a resolution of one tenth of a decimal, on the 3D reconstruction of the pelvis, including the inlet view ( An experienced orthopedic surgeon routinely evaluated patients for neurological deficit: tactile sense of the medial thigh preoperatively, and tactile sense and adductor muscle strength postoperatively. When neurological injury was suspected clinically, electrodiagnostic tests were performed at postoperative week 2. Nerve injuries were classified as either an initial trauma or postoperative complication. The incidence of preoperative and postoperative obturator nerve injury was determined, with assessment of the recovery. Functional outcomes were evaluated using the Harris Hip Score (HHS) All continuous variables were expressed by mean standard deviation and range, while non-continuous variables were exposed by proportions and percentages. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the threshold of displacement of the quadrilateral plate that best differentiated patients A neurological injury was identified in 5/22 patients (23%). In 1 case, injury to the sciatic nerve developed as a postoperative complication, whereas in the other 4 cases, nerve injury occurred at the time to trauma: 2 cases of obturator nerve injury, 1 case of sciatic nerve injury and 1 case of lumbosacral plexus injury. The incidence rate of obturator nerve injury from trauma was 2/22 (9%), with no incidence of postoperative obturator nerve injury. The average displacement of the quadrilateral plate was 15.9 We explored the obturator nerve in all cases; no cases of torn or ruptured obturator nerve were found ( The modified Stoppa approach achieved a successful reduction of acetabular fractures ( In this study, we identified an incidence rate of obturator nerve injury of 2/22 (9%), attributed to the trauma, with no additional nerve injury attributed to the modified Stoppa approach. We questioned “Does a marked medial displacement of the quadrilateral plate of the acetabulum increase the risk of obturator nerve injury?” The result of our study represented that all of the obturator nerve injuries were from trauma and the injuries were related with marked extent (≥ This study has several limitations. First, it was a retrospective review with a small number of patients. A large number of patients are needed to validate the conclusion of our study. Second, a preoperative electrodiagnostic test was not performed due to pain and the need for immobilization, as well, electrodiagnostic testing is not reliable in acute stage of nerve injury after injury. Therefore, we depended on careful physical examination preoperatively, and the nerve injury was confirmed with postoperative electrodiagnostic testing. It is reasonable to diagnose nerve injury from initial trauma when hypoesthesia and decreased tactile sense was observed preoperatively and the nerve injury was confirmed with postoperative electrodiagnostic test. In addition, the test was performed in clinically symptomatic patients and, therefore, there is a possibility that other cases of nerve injury may have been missed. However, we thoroughly examined the patients before surgery, the bias would be minimized. The obturator nerve is an important landmark in the modified Stoppa approach. After finding and retracting the nerve, the quadrilateral plate can be exposed ( An incidence of postoperative obturator nerve injury associated to the modified Stoppa of 0% to 9.5% has been reported The quality of the reduction is one of predictors of postoperative outcome of acetabular fractures The incidence rate of obturator nerve injury from initial trauma was 9% in the modified Stoppa approach, and this injury was related to the extent of displacement of the quadrilateral plate. Surgeons should pay attention to possible obturator nerve injury in acetabular fractures, and can explore and release the obturator nerve by using the modified Stoppa approach. Therefore, we strongly recommend the use of the modified Stoppa approach when obturator nerve injury is detected preoperatively in two-column acetabular fractures. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.