The degree of hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite was determined by contact angle measurements on polished chalcopyrite surface in electrochemically controlled conditions. Results have shown that the increase in solution pH adversely affect hydrophobicity due to heavy surface oxidation. Maximum contact angles were measured at moderately oxidizing potentials, which proposed that slight oxidation is necessary for a hydrophobic chalcopyrite surface. Sodium diisobutyl dithiophosphinate (DTPI) displayed better results than potassium diethyl dithiophosphate (DTP): even at highly oxidizing potentials, contact angle did almost not change in the presence of DTPI as compared with the collectorless condition and in the presence of DTP.The flotation separation of sulfide minerals is achieved by controlling surface hydrophobicity, which is often described in terms of contact angle. The hydrophobicity of sulfide minerals can be controlled by different variables, such as pH, pulp potential and added sufactants (e.g., collector, frother, etc.), which change the interfacial tension satisfying the contact angle to become finite. It is well known that sulfide minerals are semiconductors and can accept or donate electron which show the importance of electrochemistry on the floatability of sulfide minerals. A great concern has been given on the hydrophobicity of sulfide minerals in electrochemically controlled condition in last few decades Chalcopyrite is the most abundant copper sulfide mineral. Effect of xanthate on the hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite has been investigated extensively Highly mineralized rock specimens (>98% CuFeS Collectors investigated were potassium diethyl dithiophosphate and sodium diisobutyl dithiophosphinate. DTP is a product of Aldrich. It is in analytical grade (97% DTP). DTPI is a commercial product under the name of AEROPHINE 3418A of Cytec Technology Co. Its assay is 50–52% DTPI. Contact angle measurements were performed in a three-electrode system electrochemical cell by using a Ramé-Hart goniometer. A calomel electrode, a platinum plate electrode with 1 Hydrophobicity of sulfide minerals is strongly dependent on pulp potential due to their semiconducting property Contact angle measurements were performed to elucidate the effect of collectors and solution potential on the hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite in slightly acid solution ( Chalcopyrite oxidizes at moderately oxidizing potential (reaction (1)) to form hydrophobic CuS and S Effect of pulp potential on the hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite could hardly be distinguished at higher pHs due to lower contact angles ( Effect of DTP on the hydrophobicity would be distinguished from contact angle measurements in neutral and slightly alkaline conditions ( Contact angle measurements were also performed with DTPI to establish the effect of pulp potential on the hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite in neutral and alkaline condition ( Hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite has been examined in collectorless condition and in the presence of dithiophosphate and dithiophosphinate by contact angle measurements. Maximum contact angle was obtained at moderately oxidizing potentials. DTP displayed similar behavior with collectorless condition: contact angle increased from reducing to moderately oxidizing potentials (200–300