A hydrometallurgical process has been developed for the recovery of cobalt from a zinc plant residue. The residue contains a great quantity of active carbon and zinc sulfate. In addition, it contains naphthol derivative complexes with cobalt, nickel, iron, copper, and other metals. The process consists of the following six major unit operations: (1) washing: 0.5 mol L−1 sulfuric acid, L/S ratio of 10:1, 75 °C, 30 min; (2) roasting and leaching: first, roasting at 800 °C, then sulfation roasting at 250 °C, followed by roasting at 550 °C, lixiviating with water, L/S ratio of 7–8:1, 95 °C, 3 h; (3) precipitation of iron and manganese: first at pH 3.5, 95 °C, 1 h, then pH 4–4.5, 95 °C, with dropwise addition of 10% ammonium persulfate solution; (4) separation of zinc, cadmium, and copper by anion-exchange resin: 2 mol L−1 chloride ion, pH=4, where copper was first reduced to monovalence at a Na2SO3/Cu2+ weight ratio of 2.7:1 and pH 4.5; (5) separation of nickel by selective extraction of cobalt: 25% P507 in sulfonated kerosene, pH 4–6, O/A ratio of 1.6:1, stripping with 3 mol L−1 hydrochloric acid, O/A ratio of 1:1.5; (6) precipitation of cobalt: pH 1–1.5, (NH4)2C2O4/Co2+ weight ratio of 3.3:1. After roasting at 700 °C, pure cobalt oxide with cobalt in excess of 74% was obtained. The total recovery of cobalt was found to be approximately 94%.In zinc hydrometallurgy, the ordinary methods for cobalt elimination in the zinc sulfate solution, from which zinc is electrowon, have some disadvantages The residue came from Huludao Zinc Smelter (China). The anion-exchange column (Φ30×150 mm) containing 201×7 strong base gel-type styrene-divinylbenzene (S-DVB) resin was manufactured by Shanghai Chemical Reagent (China). The commercial extractant, P507 [(2-ethylhexyl) 2-ethylhexyl phosphonate, EHEHPA], was kindly donated by ZhuZhou Hard Alloy Industry (China), and utilized without any further purification. The concentration of P507 in the organic solution was 25% by volume. The diluent was civil kerosene, which was sulfonated as follows: kerosene-to-concentrated sulfuric acid ratio at 5:1 by volume was stirred for 15 min, the phase of sulfuric acid was discarded, then the kerosene was scrubbed with one portion of diluted alkali solution followed by scrubbing with clean water until the kerosene was neutral. Other reagents were of analytical reagent grade quality. Distilled water was used throughout. Washing tests were carried out using sulfuric acid solution. In each test, 100-g residue was contacted with 1-L dilute sulfuric acid solution in a 2-L beaker under stirring, except for the tests on the effect of L/S ratio. The scrubbing solution and insoluble residue were separated by filtration, prior to a determination of the concentrations of each metal in the solution. The insoluble residue was dried under 100 °C for later use. Roasting tests were carried out with the actual washed residue in three-stage operations. First, a 50-g residue was roasted in a muffle furnace to convert the metal naphthol derivation complexes to metal oxide. Then the cooled and crushed residue was contacted with a suitable amount of concentrated sulfuric acid and was roasted in a muffle furnace at 200–300 °C for 4 h to convert the metal oxide to metal sulfate. Finally, the temperature was raised to a higher value for another 30 min to decompose the iron sulfate to iron oxide in order to separate iron during the leaching process. The leaching tests were carried out using water in a 250-mL beaker for 30 min. In each test, L/S ratio was controlled to obtain a leach solution containing about 20 g L The separation tests of iron and manganese from leach solution were carried out using a 250-mL beaker in two-stage operations. In the first stage, a 100-mL leach solution, after an addition of 0.5 g ammonium sulfate, was adjusted to an appropriate pH value by the addition of a dilute sodium carbonate solution and heated to 95 °C for 3 h to precipitate the main proportion of iron as ammonium jarosite. In the second stage, additional iron was precipitated as goethite under 95 °C and an appropriate pH value for 1 h. At the end of the second stage, manganese and remaining iron were precipitated by 10% ammonium supersulfate solution at a relatively high pH value, in the course of which the pH value should be maintained constant by addition of dilute sodium carbonate solution to make up the variation of pH value. The purified solution and precipitate were separated by filtration. The content of each metal in the filtrate was measured. A solution containing a certain amount of sodium chloride and sodium sulfite, and adjusted to a certain pH value by dilute hydrochloric acid solution, was preliminarily prepared as a treating solution. The batch tests were carried out using a 60-mL separatory funnel. In each test, 5-g resin saturated with treating solution was contacted with 1-mL sample solution and 50-mL treating solution, followed by shaking for 15 min using a Kangshi Electric shaker. The aqueous phase was then analyzed for each metal. The column tests were carried out in a three-stage procedure at a flow rate of 1.8–2.0 mL min Extraction and stripping tests were carried out batchwise by contacting organic and aqueous phases in a 100-mL separatory funnel and for shaking a KangShi Electric Shaker. After equilibrium was achieved, the phases were allowed to separate. The aqueous phase was then taken to determine the pH and the concentrations of cobalt and nickel. In the studies of the effect of pH on the separation of cobalt and nickel, the pH of the aqueous phase was adjusted using dilute hydrochloric acid or dilute sodium hydroxide solution. The organic phase in turn was saponified by treating it with concentrated ammonia matching the pH value as the aqueous phase. The cobalt was precipitated from the strip liquor of the extraction circuit based on the use of P507 as an extractant by addition of excess ammonium oxalate. The consumption of ammonium oxalate was studied. The precipitated cobalt oxalate was filtered, washed with clean water and the filtrate was taken to analyze the concentration of residual cobalt. The oxalate was calcined in a muffle furnace at 700 °C to convert the cobalt into oxide. The concentrations of metals in all aqueous solutions were determined by atomic absorption spectrometric (AAS) method using a NanFen model WFX-110 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (NanJing, China). Those in the organic phase were calculated according to mass balance. The residue was dried at 105 °C and grinded. Experimental work was conducted with the portion with a particle size of −50 μm. The chemical constituent of the residue was analyzed by total dissolution with aqua regia. The results are, in wt.%, 65.50 active carbon, 9.43 Zn, 1.40 Fe, 0.68 Co, 0.28 Mn, 0.26 Cu, 0.040 Cd, 0.0059 Ni. It shows that the residue was basically composed of active carbon and zinc sulfate, whereas the other metals (iron, cobalt, copper, manganese, nickel, and cadmium) accounted for less than 3%, of which cobalt was only 0.68%. The effect of four variables, viz., sulfuric acid concentration, liquid-to-solid ratio, temperature and reaction time were studied The relationship between the percent metals separated and the sulfuric acid concentration is shown in The effects of the L/S ratio and temperature on this procedure are shown in Time dependency of the removal of metals with 0.5 mol L Based on the above experimental results, the final optimum conditions for the washing procedure were determined to be 0.5 mol L It was found that following direct sulfation roasting of the residue without any pre-treatment resulted in leaching of cobalt, less than 64%, due to the existence of cobalt naphthol complexes resisting a conversion into sulfate. In this test, the calcination was carried out in three-stage operations. In the first stage, the residue was calcined to convert the naphthol derivative complex of cobalt into oxide. Furthermore, the calcination could eliminate any active carbon and organic material. Investigations into the sulfated calcination of materials containing cobalt oxide have shown that a two-step procedure should be conducted The cobalt sulfate in the roasted residue was easily leached out by hot water at a L/S ratio of 7–8:1 for 40 min. The resulting leaching solution contained, in g L It is well known that iron is inclined to hydrolysis to colloidal iron hydroxide, which is difficult to filter. For the removal of iron from leach solution, several commercial processes are available The pH value of the actual leaching solution was 1.5–2.0, which was exactly the same as the optimum pH value for jarosite precipitation step. Thereby, the two processes, leaching and jarosite precipitation, could be merged into one. Now when prolonging the neutral leaching to 3 h, a removal of iron as jarosite precipitation and a nearly complete leaching of cobalt were achieved as well. A matching leaching solution containing, in g L  To complete the goethite precipitation, ammonium supersulfate was used to precipitate both Fe It was found that chloride ion affects the precipitation of manganese seriously, which is probably attributed to the oxidation of manganese oxide. The standard redox potentials are: E Based on the above experimental results, the best conditions for the iron and manganese separation from the leach solution using two-stage selective precipitation are: pH 3.5 at a temperature of 95 °C for 1 h and pH 4–4.5 at the same temperature for 40 min with an addition of 10% ammonium persulfate solution. As a result, there was only 0.0010 g L Before separation, copper (II) in the sample solution was reduced to copper (I) by sodium sulfite. It was found that a high initial pH value benefited the reduction reaction over the examined range pH 1.5–4.5. According to the reduction reaction expressed in Zinc, cadmium, and copper (I) form stable complexes with chloride of a relatively low concentration and can be adsorbed on 201×7 strong base-type resin, whereas cobalt requires a high concentration chloride. Therefore, under suitable conditions, zinc, cadmium, and copper can be separated from cobalt by anion-exchange using a proper resin. The effects of two variables, viz., chloride ion concentration and pH on the adsorption of zinc, cadmium, and copper (I) on anion-exchange resin were studied under batch conditions.  The pH dependency of the sorbing of metals on anion-exchange resin from a sample solution containing 2 mol L Based on the above batch experimental results, a suitable treating solution should be 2 mol L Zinc, cadmium, and copper (I) sorbed on the anion-exchange column could be quantitatively eluted stepwise by a series of suitable solutions. Copper (I) when oxidized to copper (II) by 0.1 mol L P204, P350, P507, P204+P350, P350+P507, and P204+P507 were tested as extractant for separation of cobalt and nickel, but only P507 proved to be satisfactory. P204 was found to give poor separation factor, P350 had no extraction strength and furthermore, no synergetic effects between P204, P350, and P507 could be observed. Therefore, P507 was the natural choice as a cobalt selective extractant. Studies with P507 proved that the extraction rate of cobalt and nickel was very fast. Contacting 10 mL organic phase and 25 mL sample solution at 1-min shaking time was enough to obtain the extraction equilibrium curve. The extraction of cobalt and nickel as a function of equilibrium pH value is shown in Further tests showed that a temperature above ambient gave a little increased extraction of cobalt and nickel, but that this increase was very limited. So the extraction was conducted under ambient temperature. When 20 mL organic phase was contacted with 20 mL sample solution, nearly complete extraction of cobalt, as well as nickel, took place. On the other hand, when 20 mL organic phase was shaken with 40 mL sample solution, nearly 99% of cobalt but only 2% of nickel was transferred to the organic phase. Thus, in the P507–Co–Ni system the separation factor between cobalt and nickel increased with the increase of the loading of cobalt. If the cobalt amount in the sample solution was smaller than the organic extraction capacity, the extraction of nickel begun to occur. So we can come to a conclusion that in the P507–Co–Ni system, cobalt was the better-extracted metal. The effect of better-extracted metal in a binary mixture has been explained by  Earlier work related to the precipitation of cobalt as oxalate is well documented After calcination under 700 °C, the contents of elements in the obtained cobalt oxide were determined to be, in wt.%, 74.28 Co, 0.00082 Zn, 0.010 Cu, 0.0029 Fe, 0.013 Ni. No cadmium and manganese were detected by AAS, and thus, the National Standard GB 6518-86 Co The hydrometallurgical process developed for the separation and recovery of cobalt from a zinc plant residue consists of the following six major unit operations: (1) washing with dilute sulfuric acid; (2) roasting and leaching; (3) selective precipitation of iron and manganese from cobalt; (4) elimination of zinc, cadmium and copper from cobalt by 201×7 strong base-type anion-exchange resin; (5) cobalt and nickel separation by solvent extraction with P507; (6) precipitation of cobalt as oxalates and calcination to cobalt oxide. A conceptual total flow diagram of the process has been proposed The best conditions for washing procedure were found to be 0.5 mol L The washed residue was roasted under 800 °C for 1 h prior to sulfation roasting at 250 °C for 30 min, followed by roasting at 550 °C for another 30 min. The calcine was leached with water at a temperature of 95 °C and a L/S ratio of 7–8:1 for 3 h. Under these conditions, about 99% of cobalt, 99% of zinc, 98% of cadmium, 84% of nickel, 97% of manganese, and 64% of copper could be leached out, whereas the leaching of iron was only 5%. Iron was removed by precipitation from the leach liquor at pH 3.0–3.5 for 1 h, at the later stage of which manganese was precipitated by 10% ammonium supersulfate at pH 4.0–4.5. As a result, about 99.9% of iron and 99.8% of manganese could be separated from cobalt. The loss of cobalt was about 1.5%. Zinc, cadmium, and copper were isolated from cobalt using a 201×7 strong base-type anion-exchange resin using a conditioning solution containing 2 mol L The cobalt and nickel were separated by solvent extraction with 25% P507 in kerosene in a single contact at pH 4–6 and an O/A ratio of 1.6:1, nickel remaining in the raffinate. The cobalt-loaded organic phase was stripping with 3 mol L The cobalt in the stripping solution was precipitated as oxalate using saturated ammonium oxalate solution at a (NH