Three blended cements prepared by intergrinding 6–35% slag with clinker and gypsum, and a control portland cement, were sieved to yield 0–10 μm, 10–30 μm, 30–50 μm, and >50 μm subgroups. Clinker/slag/gypsum contents, and oxide compositions of the subgroups differed significantly from the unsieved cements. Fine subgroups always contained more gypsum and had lower slag-to-clinker ratios than coarse subgroups. Heat evolution was investigated up to 48 h using isothermal calorimetry. Contribution of slag to early heat evolution was limited. 0–10 μm particles evolved up to 5–10% of their heat in the first 30 min. Particle size affected the peak rate of heat evolution but not its timing. A linear relationship was observed between heat evolved from 0 to 24 h and from 24 h to 48 h. Median size or slag content of subgroups affected the positions of data points on this line. Heat evolved up to 24 h (or 48 h) was found to be closely related to particle size. Rate of heat development does not appear to be strongly influenced by particle size above ∼30 μm.For environmental, economical, and technical reasons, nearly 75% of cement produced in Europe now contains different proportions of one or more of ground granulated blast furnace slag, natural pozzolans, fly ash, silica fume, and limestone Ground granulated blast furnace slag (slag) is a latent hydraulic material which, when mixed with hydrating portland cement, can be activated by the alkalis present and the calcium hydroxide produced. It can modify the structure of clinker hydration products Blended cements were prepared by intergrinding a slag with a clinker and gypsum rock in a laboratory ball mill. A control portland cement (C) without slag was also prepared. The slag contents of the blended cements were 6% (S6), 20% (S20), and 35% (S35) of the combined clinker and gypsum. The amount of gypsum added to C and S6 was 5% (by mass of clinker + gypsum). It was reduced to 4% for S20 and S35 due to reduced amount of clinker. All four cements were ground to a Blaine fineness of ∼375 m2/kg. The cements were subsequently sieved using an ultrasonic sifter that combines vertical and mechanical shaking with ultrasound application to agitate the particles and prevent blocking/blinding of the mesh. Four “subgroups” were obtained from each cement: 0–10 μm, 10–30 μm, 30–50 μm, and >50 μm. So, a total of 20 cement powder samples (16 sieved and 4 unsieved) were obtained. Samples were named to reveal whether they were obtained from a control cement (C) or a cement containing 6, 20, or 35% slag (S), and the sieve interval they were sieved to, as explained with the following examples: 0 C is the control cement sieved to 0–10 μm; 30S6 is the cement containing 6% slag sieved to 30–50 μm; US35 is the “unsieved” cement containing 35% slag; etc. A comparison of the grinding times required to achieve the target fineness gave an idea about the relative resistances of the original materials to comminution. While the control cement (C) took 45 min of grinding in the ball mill to achieve the desired Blaine, S35 took slightly over 60 min, indicating an increased difficulty in grinding due to the addition of slag. The clinker, slag, gypsum contents of the sieved subgroups were determined using CEN/TR 196-4 Before any subsequent analysis could be performed, it was necessary to check that the sieving was successful. This was done first by visual observation of the different sieved subgroups using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Although only 2-D, SEM images can show the presence of particles finer or coarser than the bottom and top sieve openings. The particles in The subgroups have most of their particles between the top and bottom sieves used to obtain them. For example, 0 C has D The chemical compositions of the unsieved cements and the sieved subgroups are given in The amount of free CaO in the measured CaO, useful for estimating clinker compound percentages in the control subgroups or estimating their heats of hydration were measured as 3.14%, 1.95%, 1.85%, and 1.99% in 0 C, 10 C, 30 C, and 50 C, respectively. Free CaO content is observed to have a nearly linear relation with loss on ignition, for all the cements and is significantly higher in the 0–10 μm subgroups than in coarser subgroups, for all cements with different slag contents. This is probably related to the prehydration or carbonation of the fine particles. As such, LOI decreases with increasing particle size. LOI also slowly decreases with increasing slag content for a given size subgroup (e.g. it is higher in 0 C and 0S6 than in 0S20 and 0S35) due to the LOI of the slag being very low and the higher gypsum contents of the cements containing less slag. The high SO3 amounts in the small sizes also support this. Also, a greater fraction of the added gypsum ends up in smaller sizes due to gypsum being softer than either clinker or slag. The drop in LOI with slag addition is steeper for the coarser sizes suggesting that the different sizes contain different amounts of slag, not necessarily equal to the amount present in the unsieved cement. Since slag is expected to be less brittle and harder to grind, most of it must end up in coarser sizes. Öner For the control cement, the CaO/SiO Chemically speaking, based on the oxide analyses, the unsieved control cement appears to be roughly similar to the 10 C subgroup, which is logical because the median of the unsieved cement would fall into the 10–30 μm. The unsieved slag-blended cements appear to be similar to a weighted average of the 10–30 μm and 30–50 μm subgroups. This is due to the coarse and fine fractions within the unsieved cement having higher and lower clinker/slag ratios, respectively. So, it could be said that the chemical median particle size is greater than the physical (volume) median particle size. Since ground slag is typically harder to grind than the clinker In The potential compound composition (C The clinker phase contents of the cements are lower than those of the clinker, due to the presence of gypsum and/or slag. Also, for slag-containing cements such as S20 and S35, the amounts of the clinker phases decrease with increasing particle size since slag/clinker increases. One could test the success of this method for the control cements by directly inputting the measured oxide contents in  For both C and S35, the 0–10 μm subgroups attain much higher rates of heat evolution than the coarser subgroups. This is mainly due to their large specific surface areas. Since specific surface area (SSA) increases linearly with decreasing particle diameter, looking at The dormant period rate of heat evolution minima occur at similar times for all C subgroups, and for the 0–10 μm subgroups of all cements. However, it is delayed with increasing slag content and for the coarser subgroups (30–50 μm and >50 μm) of the slag-blended cements (S6, S20, S35). This is reasonable because a greater fraction of the slag in the unsieved cement ends up in the coarser size subgroups. S20 and S35 have lower initial gypsum contents than S6 and C. After sieving, gypsum/clinker ∼0.06–0.08 in the 0–10 μm subgroups, while it is 0.015–0.035 in coarser subgroups. 10S6 has the highest gypsum/clinker ratio among the 10–30 μm subgroups and also has the earliest dormant minimum. The dormant minimum occurs at ∼90 min for 0 C and for 0S35 while it occurs at ∼110 min for 50 C and at ∼165 min for 50S35. The ordering of the dormant period rate of heat evolution among different cements and subgroups is as would be expected: the 0–10 μm subgroups have the highest “minimum” rate of heat evolution, rate decreases with increasing particle size, and within each size subgroup rate decreases slightly with increasing slag content. Adding 6% slag does not delay the dormant heat evolution rate minimum much but beyond 6%, the main peak is delayed and supressed. A shoulder peak is observed on the descending branch of the main hydration peak (the C The 24-h and 48-h heat evolved for the unsieved U6, U20, and U35 are ∼68%, ∼83%, and ∼94% of the heat evolved by UC. Hence, total heat evolved at early ages appears closely related to the clinker content in the cement and increasing slag content simply dilutes the cement. More interestingly, a linear relationship (r If the ultimate (total) heat of hydration for an unsieved cement or a sieved subgroup is known, then the degree of hydration (doh) at any time can be predicted using the measured cumulative heat of hydration up to that time. The ultimate heat of hydration can be measured by continuing isothermal calorimetry until heat evolution ceases. Since heat evolution was measured only up to 48 h in this study, the ultimate heat of hydration can alternatively be estimated using an approximate equation. One such equation that uses the amounts of various compounds in the clinker has been suggested by Bogue Inputting values from Using Eqn. As mentioned earlier, W/P was 0.6 for the 0–10 μm instead of 0.4. The relationship between the ultimate doh reached and W/P can be described by a hyperbola and experimental results suggest that a higher W/P leads to a higher hydration rate Using W/P = 0.4 in this equation, the ultimate doh for C should be ∼0.7. Even at W/P = 0.6, the ultimate doh becomes only ∼0.77 yet in Within the finer subgroups (0–10 μm and 10–30 μm), the measured peak heat evolution rates are similar for the cements, slag-blended or not. For the coarse subgroups, significantly lower peak rates are observed with increasing slag content. Heat development is noticeably slower for the coarse subgroups. The total heat evolved up to 24 h or 48 h is similar for the 0–10 μm subgroups, and slag addition lowers this heat. However, the reduction in the heat evolved by the slag-containing subgroups is smaller than what would be expected solely based on the slag content of their unsieved parent cements. 0S20 evolves ∼10% and 0S35 evolves ∼25% less heat than 0 C. Looking at Although the cumulative heat evolved up to 48 h by the different cements and the different subgroups of the cements differ significantly, this is mainly due to the differences between the slag/clinker ratios and normalization using the amount of clinker + gypsum in each subgroup shows that heat evolved up to 24 h or 48 h is very closely related to particle size ( An example of this normalization follows: For 0S35, the total heat evolved at 48 h is 265.1 J/g (from The following example explains how the curves in Similar to the slope in Naturally, the slag/clinker ratio of a cement subgroup influences the total amount of heat it evolves up to a chosen time. Also, the influence of slag becomes more apparent with time, the difference between the cumulative heat for a particular particle size being greater at 48 h than at 12 h. However, the curve shapes remain similar for all cements. There seems to be a critical particle size (∼30–40 μm) above which the size of cement particles does not strongly influence the rate of heat development. Several studies have reported ∼25 μm as the upper limit of a critical size range that makes the greatest contribution to strength development The net effect of slag on early hydration can be investigated Of the slag-containing subgroups, only those sieved from S6 and S20 evolve slightly greater (less than 5%) heat than the control subgroups with the same size. All S6 subgroups evolve more heat than their control counterparts up to 12 h, and only the finer subgroups of S20 do so. By age 24 h however, only 10S6 is slightly higher than 10 C. In addition to diluting the system, fine mineral admixture particles, even if inert or latent hydraulic, can provide added nucleation sites for hydration products and as such increase rate at very early ages The chemical compositions and heat of hydration evolution of size fractions (subgroups) obtained by sieving four interground slag-blended cements, containing 0–35% slag, into 0–10 μm; 10–30 μm; 30–50 μm; and >50 μm intervals were investigated. For interground slag-blended cements: Particles can be separated into size groups with considerable success using ultrasonic sifting. Hence the gypsum, clinker, and slag contents of different size portions of interground blended cements can be studied. The slag-to-clinker ratios of the finer and coarser subgroups of the cement can differ greatly from the ratio for the unsieved cement. Slag, being harder than clinker or gypsum, ends up in coarse sizes and fine size groups have lower slag/clinker than coarse subgroups. Hence the influence of different-sized particles on early-age properties can differ due to compositional differences in addition to physical size differences. Partial clinker replacement with slag results in a nearly direct reduction in early heat. The contribution of slag to early hydration is limited, and only at very early ages. Addition of slag delays the dormant period, more for coarse subgroups. The peak rate of heat evolution is significantly affected by particle size, however its time of occurrence is not as much. 0–10 μm particles can evolve significant amounts of heat in the first 20–30 min of hydration, up to ∼5–10% of their ultimate heat. The cumulative heat evolved at early ages is closely related to the clinker content in the cement and increasing slag content simply dilutes the cement. A nearly linear relationship exists between heat evolved from 0 to 24 h and from 24 h to 48 h. The ratio of the heat evolved by the unsieved cement from 24 h-to−48 h to the heat evolved in the first 24 h is much lower (∼0.2) for the fine subgroups than for the coarse subgroups (∼0.8). Normalizing the cumulative heat evolved by the different cements and subgroups using the amount of clinker + gypsum in each subgroup shows that heat evolved up to 24 h (or 48 h) is strongly related to particle size. The influence of increasing slag content on the normalized heat is greater for coarse size subgroups. The degree of hydration of the 0–10 μm subgroups can reach 0.5–0.6 in the first 24 h. Particles smaller than 2–3 μm probably hydrate completely during this period. There appears to be a critical particle size around 30 μm, above which the size of cement particles does not significantly influence the rate of heat development. Slopes of the cumulative heat vs. time graphs during the acceleration period are similar for the same size subgroups of different cements but decrease with increasing particle size. The decrease in slope with median size follows a negative power equation, which could be useful in modelling hydration rate. The authors would like to thank the Turkish Cement Manufacturers' Association (TÇMB) for supplying the materials used in this study, and for performing the oxide analyses.