Spent NdFeB magnets are highly appealing secondary resources for rare earth elements (REEs), especially for Nd. The goal of this study was to investigate electrochemical leaching of Fe and rare earths from NdFeB magnets with sulfuric and oxalic acids at different acid concentrations and current densities and reveal the mechanism of the leaching in varying conditions. The metals were leached from polished magnet surface and from crushed magnets using a 3D-printed Ti basket. Electron and atomic force microscopic analysis showed a highly heterogeneous structure of the magnets containing on average 60 wt-% of Fe and 25 wt-% of Nd. According to Kelvin probe force microscopy, the Volta potential difference between the matrix and the REE-rich grains was over 500 mV. Addition of oxalic acid (H2C2O4) in the sulfuric acid leach solution allows leaching at lower cell voltage and separation of the REE-oxalate precipitates. Some incorporation of rare-earth element oxalates in the cathodic sediment was also observed. Finally, the leaching mechanism is discussed.The demand for rare-earth elements (REEs) is nowadays higher than the supply and the prices of these metals are expected to increase in the near future. Especially, concerns are arising due to a monopoly and strong export quota on rare earths of China and scarcity of rare-earth ores in Europe. While new alternative materials do not exist, the most effective way to solve the problem is developing an affordable recycling technology ( Fluorescent lamps ( High concentration of Nd and Dy in the NdFeB magnets makes them an important material for recycling. Many different technologies for REEs recovery have been proposed (). Among them are chlorination ( Besides conventional acid leaching, Parkash et al. ( However, it is vitally important to find connection between the mechanism of NdFeB alloy dissolution and possibility for direct recovery of REEs. In this study, dissolution of NdFeB magnets were investigated both with chemical and electrochemical leaching. Moreover, the alloy was extensively characterized before and after leaching using electron (SEM, EDX) and atomic force microscopy as well as chemical analyses. We were able to show effectiveness of electrochemistry-aided leaching and the underlying mechanisms were also explored. The novelty of our approach in linking understanding of the magnet composition to the leaching behavior. Furthermore, electro-leaching of the polished surfaces was extended to a more realistic system, where crushed magnets are leached in a specially designed holder. Spent NdFeB magnets from Webcraft GmbH (Germany) with the diameter of 35 mm and thickness of 5 mm were used in all experiments. The samples were demagnetized at the Curie temperature of 310 °C for 1 h in an Entech muffle furnace. For proper demagnetization of the working area, the samples were connected by edges. In electrochemical studies NdFeB magnet was used as the anode and copper plate as the cathode (0.2 dm In order to determine the total elemental composition, 0.1 g of the NdFeB magnet was dissolved in a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids (volume ratio HNO Sulfuric acid was used as a leaching agent and it was prepared by diluting concentrated acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%) with MilliQ water (Merck Millipore Q-POD) to a desired concentration. Oxalic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, >97.5%) was used as a strong complexing agent for the REE ions. All leaching experiments were carried out at 22 ± 1 °C in a 150 mL glass beaker. In the electrochemical leaching experiments with the polished magnets, current densities of 10, 20 and 50 A/dm In order to choose the optimal leaching conditions, the concentration of sulfuric acid was varied between 0.05 and 0.5 mol/L. Concentration of oxalic acid in all experiments was 0.05 mol/L. Solid to liquid ratio was kept at 0.05 dm Potentiodynamic polarization scans were performed using a potentiostat-galvanostat (Autolab PGSTAT 302 N, Methrom) in a three-electrode glass cell. Polarization curves were recorded at a potential sweep rate of 1 mV/s from the open circuit potential (OCP) until 1 V. The NdFeB magnet was used as the working electrode, while Pt and a saturated Ag/AgCl were used as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The potentials reported in the text were recalculated to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) scale. The morphologies of the leached magnet surfaces and electrodeposited coatings were imaged using Hitachi SU3500 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Elemental composition was measured by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, Thermo Scientific UltraDry SDD). Precipitates obtained after dissolution in mixture of sulfuric and oxalic acids were washed thoroughly with water, digested and analyzed with ICP-MS. The chemical composition and crystal structure of the NdFeB magnet before and after leaching was further ascertained using X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Bruker D8 Advance) with Cu Kα irradiation. The 2 For the optimization of electrodeposition conditions, current efficiency ( The scanning Kelvin probe force microscopy (SKPFM) technique of the polished magnet samples was used to determine the local Volta potentials of the microstructure and relative nobility of the REE-rich regions. Volta potential mappings were carried out in air using atomic force microscope (MultiMode 8, Bruker) in a double pass mode (Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy): first pass measures topography (height) and second pass the local potential difference in lift mode. The mapped area (40 × 40 μm) was scanned with Bruker SCM-PIT probe with spring constant of ~2.8 N/m, resonant frequency of ~75 kHz and tip radius of ~20 nm. The tip speed was 8 μm/s, image resolution 512 × 512 pixels, and tip lift height 50 nm. AFM data was analyzed using Nanoscope Analysis V1.8 software. The first order plane fit and zeroth-order flattening were used to process the height maps. The potential maps were neither flattened nor was any filter applied to smooth the data. All the experiments were done in triplicate to ensure statistical reliability of the results. The studied system is composed of highly heterogeneous solid phase in contact with a solution, where number of dissociation, complexation and precipitation equilibria are present. The composition of the polished magnet surface is first discussed in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 deals with dissolution of the metals with/without electric current and in view of the complex solution chemistry. Electro-leaching of crushed magnet is finally discussed in Section 3.3. Microscopic examination of the polished NdFeB magnet ( The maps clearly show that Fe is most abundant in the matrix, while Nd and Pr are located in the grains and concentrated on the grain boundaries. Dy and Ce are nearly evenly distributed over the surface. Boron was not analyzed. It should be noticed that carbon, which is evenly spread in this alloy, inhibits the leaching process ( According to The Volta potential indicates the relative tendency of metals for oxidation and can help to assess the severity of localized dissolution in the systems with complex microstructures ( In summary, EDX, SEM, and SKPFM data confirmed the presence of domains with different chemical composition and high differences in local Volta potential, which both have important impact on the leaching process as discussed below. The leaching experiments discussed in this Section were made on polished NdFeB magnet surface using different leach solutions and current densities. Measurements made at Weight loss of NdFeB alloy during chemical and electrochemical leaching is listed in In the presence of oxalate, the weight loss of NdFeB alloy was less at all concentrations, which is most likely due to the formation of insoluble oxalates on the NdFeB surface. It should be noticed that the mass losses during the electrolysis differ from those calculated theoretically according to Faraday's law because of the high reactivity of the magnet and mechanical degradation of the matrix during the leaching (  In the presence of oxalic acid ( According to the leaching data, NdFeB alloy is highly reactive with sulfuric acid even without electric current. Chemical dissolution in sulfuric acid can be described by following overall reactions ( Boron is further converted into its oxide and sulfur dioxide is released as shown in Eq. Dissolution in a mixture of sulfuric and oxalic acid takes place according to the same mechanism, but the dissolved metals form stable oxalate complexes and eventually precipitate as crystalline hydrates as shown for Nd in Eq. In electro-leaching, anodic dissolution of the NdFeB alloy takes place according to the reactions shown in Eq. (6). Electrooxidation of Nd has two following steps with sequential transfer of electrons (Eq. (6a, 6b)) with obtaining Nd Moreover, oxidation to ferric ions (Eq. Due to According to the measured polarization curves shown in Electro-leaching of crushed magnet in a basket was studied in order to further improve the leaching efficiency and to make the process practically more feasible. Fe and REEs leaching from the powdered spent NdFeB magnet at different cell voltages is presented in Based on the obtained data on chemical and electrochemical leaching, following mechanism of dissolution can be proposed ( Micrographs and EDX results of the cathode coatings are presented in As mentioned above, REEs have strong negative reduction potentials and cannot be reduced in aqueous solutions, but EDX data indicated substantial amount of these elements in the cathode sediments. This most probably stem from mechanical inclusion of the REE precipitates in the growing deposit layer. Large amount of oxygen shows that oxides of Nd and Pr were included in the iron coatings and in the presence of H The cell voltages measured during the electrolysis at different conditions are presented in In this study we investigated the leaching process of spent NdFeB magnet via chemical and electrochemical methods for the recovery of REEs. XRD and SEM/EDX analyses revealed the presence of Nd As a step towards realistic separation process, electro-leaching of powdered NdFeB magnet was studied using a 3D-printed titanium basket as the holder. The obtained results verify the efficiency observed with polished magnets and give basis for further development. The present paper indicates a clear potential for the electrochemical leaching methods to recover REEs from the magnet waste. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support of this work from  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at