The alumina content of iron ores for sintering is gradually increasing with the growing depletion of high-grade iron ores, which is harmful to the sintering process. Therefore, it is essential to reveal the action mechanism of alumina on sinter quality. In this paper, the aluminum occurrence of various iron ores was determined by applying X-ray diffraction (XRD), optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectrum analysis (SEM-EDS). Then, the effects of iron ore type, aluminum occurrence (free alumina, gibbsite, diaspore, alumogoethite and kaolinite) and alumina content on formation characteristics of SFCA bonding phases as well as sinter matrix strength were investigated based on laboratory compact sintering tests. The results show that the discrepancy of aluminum occurrence contributes to different SFCA formation characteristics and then sinter matrix strength, due to different reactivity of various aluminum-containing minerals with iron oxides and fluxes. Increasing alumina content generally results in an increase in the porosity of sinters and deterioration of sinter matrix strength for all aluminum occurrence. Aluminum in the form of kaolinite is more conducive to form dendritic or acicular SFCA with superior sinter matrix strength compared with other aluminum occurrences. In contrast, aluminum occurring in free alumina presents greatest adverse impacts on sinter matrix strength due to its poor reactivity and high porosity of resultant sinters.The quality of iron ores for sintering process has been worsening due to the increasing depletion of high-grade iron ores. Especially, high-alumina iron ores are used as raw materials for sintering worldwide to accommodate with the huge demand for iron ores or for economic considerations The effects of Al In this work, a series of iron ore types from Australia, Brazil, India, South Africa and Sierra Leone were characterized in terms of aluminum occurrence by applying XRD, optical microscopy and SEM-EDS. Furthermore, the effects of ore type, aluminum occurrence and Al Eight typical iron ore fines for sintering, including Australian ores (1#, 2# and 3#), Brazilian ores (4# and 5#), Indian ore (6#), South African ore (7#) and Sierra Leonean ore (8#), are chosen for tests. The chemical compositions of iron ores are shown in Five Al-containing additives are adopted to simulate the real aluminum occurrence of iron ores. In this case, the effect of aluminum occurrence on sinter strength can be isolated and not interfered with other factors as much as possible. Alumina and aluminum hydroxide reagents with chemical grade are both produced from Aladdin company and used to represent free alumina and gibbsite respectively. Notably, LOI content of aluminum hydroxide reagent reaches as high as 33.84%, which may lead to porous structure of sinter products The fluxes adopted for compact sintering tests are calcium hydroxide and silica reagents with chemical grade produced from Aladdin company. Both have small particle size with 100% passing 0.074 mm. The mineralogical study of the iron ores was carried out to demonstrate the aluminum occurrence by means of FEI Quanta-200 scanning electron microscope (SEM)and an EDAX32 genesis spectrometer (EDS). Iron ore samples were crushed to −0.5 mm and then pressed into cylindrical compacts with 10 mm in diameter and 8 mm in height. The compacts were dried and prepared in an epoxy mount and polished. The microstructure of the samples was demonstrated by using a Leica DM4500P optical microscope. Moreover, the phase analysis of eight iron ores was performed by using D/max 2500 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with copper target (40 KV, 250 mA) in the scanning range of 10°–80° at a rate of 8° per minute.  Compacts preparation and sintering tests of various iron ore types The −0.5 mm fractions of iron ores samples were screened out and homogenized with calcium hydroxide reagent at binary basicity (CaO/SiO Effect of aluminum occurrence on the sinter matrix strength Due to its low Al  Effect of ore types The −0.5 mm fractions of iron ores samples and calcium hydroxide reagent were homogeneously mixed at a binary basicity of 3.0 and then pressed into cylindrical compacts with 10 mm in diameter and 8 mm in length under the constant force of 200 Newton. Afterwards, eight dried compacts were uniformly put into the corundum sample boat and roasted at 1280 °C for 5 min in air using the same temperature profile presented in Effect of aluminum occurrence and alumina content As binary basicity and SiO Interface reaction tests between the base iron ore 5# and different Al-containing additives were conducted to clarify the formation mechanism of SFCA from iron oxide and different aluminum occurrence. Iron ore 5# of −0.5 mm, Ca(OH)  As confirmed in  On the other hand, the microstructure of sinter is also greatly affected by aluminum occurrence. As shown in To further understand the influence of aluminum occurrence on SFCA formation characteristics, the formation mechanism of SFCA from different Al types is of great necessity to be investigated. Compared with free alumina and gibbsite, aluminum occurring in diaspore is more conductive to forming higher strength SFCA with acicular morphology. Besides, the pore size, number of cracks and amount of unreacted alumina at the reaction interface are reduced markedly. In the case of aluminum occurring in alumogoethite, a significant increase in the formation amount of dendritic or acicular SFCA can be observed, contributing to an increase in sinter strength. Similarly, kaolinite helps form more liquid phase (SFCA and silicate) at high temperatures, and hence no unreacted Al-containing additives can be found at reaction interface between kaolinite and iron ore 5#. And SFCA presents mainly in dendritic or acicular shape, while silicate phase is also extensively formed from high SiO Overall, Fe-oxides, CaO, SiO  In contrast, iron ore 2# contains low iron grade of 58.09%, Al Compared with the ore types mentioned above, iron ores 1#, 3# and 8# contain high Al  Based on the analysis of aluminum occurrence in different types of iron ores, SFCA formation characteristics and sinter matrix strength under various aluminum occurrence and alumina content were investigated. The conclusions are drawn as follows: Aluminum occurrence in iron ores varies with iron ore types and has significant impact on SFCA formation and sinter strength. The quantity of SFCA formed and sinter porosity increase with an increase in the Al Different aluminum occurrence tends to form SFCA bonding phases with different morphology due to their difference in chemistry and chemical reactivity. Kaolinite and alumogoethite are more beneficial to form dendritic or acicular SFCA with high strength. In contrast, both diaspore and gibbsite tend to form lamellar or tabular SFCA, while free alumina favors massive formation of disseminated SFCA with poor strength. Aluminum occurrence has significantly influenced the strength of sinter matrix formed from the fine fractions of iron ores. Sinter matrix strength tends to be weakened with an increase in the Al The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Financial support from the