Objective
                  To formulate radiological indexes based on CT for further MRI examination to detect posterior ligamentous complex injury (PLC) or disc injury in thoracolumbar burst fractures without neurological deficit in the emergent setting.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Patients with a single thoracolumbar burst fracture and no neurological deficit were included into this study. Radiological indexes on CT included canal compromise (CC), anterior and posterior vertebral height ratio (PVH and AVH ratio), local kyphosis (LK) and regional kyphosis (RK). PLC and disc injury were assessed on MRI. Statistical analysis was performed to identify the predictive power for radiological indexes for any MRI findings either or both disc and PLC injury.
               
                  Results
                  Eighty-four patients were included in this study. According to MRI, patients with no PLC and disc injury were allocated into MRI finding negative group, others were defined as positive group. There was no significant difference in AVH ratio, PVH ratio and RK between these two groups. The CC and LK were significant higher in positive group than that in negative group (p < 0.001).The areas under receiver operating characteristic curve were 0.826 and 0.893 for CC and LK respectively and without significant difference. The best thresholds for CC and LK were 0.19 (sensitivity: 69.4%; specificity: 87.5%) and 14.00° (sensitivity: 83.3%; specificity: 83.3%), respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The presence of CC > 0.19 and/or LK > 14.00° on CT scan can predict MRI findings including PLC and disc injury. These thresholds may be the guideline for MRI examination in patients with neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fracture in the emergent condition.Thoracolumbar burst fractures are common traumatic injuries, and approximately half of such injury are neurologically intact [ However, the complete radiological examination will no doubt increase medical cost and MRI is not a routine standard of examination in most trauma centers because of its availability, and difficulties of applying an MRI in patients with multiple trauma [ As the standard imaging modality in the initial workup of spine injuries in emergency departments, CT is employed to assess bony damage including loss of vertebral body height and segmental kyphosis to predict the instability [ The present study was approved by the Committee of Medical Ethics and the institutional review boards of our hospital. Retrospective review of prospectively collected spinal fracture database was conducted from 2015 to 2016. Inclusion criteria were patients with a single vertebral thoracolumbar burst fracture (T11-L2) and no neurological deficit who were between 18 and 55 years old. Exclusion criteria were: (a) pathological fractures, spinal tumor, spinal infection, (b) osteoporotic compression fractures (considered for age over 55 years or T scores ≤ −2.5 in dual x-ray absorptiometry), (c) multilevel contiguous and non-contiguous injuries, (d) neurological deficit, (e) dislocation or translation fractures, and (f) disc degeneration in the uninjured discs. Then demographic data and radiographic evidence including CT and MRI were collected. Base on CT scan, morphological grading was classified according to the new AOSpine classification [ The status of PLC was assessed by MRI signal of the supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, and ligament flavum. As the high Kappa value of detecting PLC injury and moderate predictive power with operation finding as reference, the method proposed by Heba et al. was employed. According to Heba et al., PLC injury was defined as a discontinuity or nonvisualization of the black stripe presenting the supraspinous ligament on sagittal T1- and/or T2-weighted images, and a high signal intensity of interspinous space sagittal T2-weighted images [ According to the classification for disc injury proposed by Sander et al., the status of adjacent discs were divided into four categories from Grade 0 to Grade 3 based on morphologic changes and signal alterations of disc on MRI [ Sagittal-plane vertebral body measurements: Angular and height measurements were performed on a reconstructed midsagittal CT scan. Anterior and posterior vertebral height ratio (AVH and PVH ratio) were calculated according to the formula H2/[(H1 + H3)/2]. H1 indicated the height of the adjacent vertebra above the injured vertebra; H2 indicated the height of the injured vertebra; H3 indicated the height adjacent vertebra below the injured vertebra [ Axial-plane central canal measurements: The anteroposterior diameter of the spinal canal was measured on an axial CT scan. The mid-sagittal canal diameter (MSD) was measured as the distance from the posterior canal border to anterior can border. Canal compromise was calculated according to the formula [(D1 + D3)/2-D2]/[(D1 + D3)/2], where D1 indicated the MSD at the adjacent level above the injured level, D2 indicated the MSD at the injured level, and D3 indicated the MSD at the adjacent level below the injured level [ All assessment and measurement were independently done by two surgeons who were blinded to the patient data on the Picture Archiving and Communication System (GE Healthcare CentricityRIS CE). CT scan were performed using a 64-MDCT scanner (Philips Brilliance) with a slice thickness of 0.6 mm, a tube voltage of 120 kV, and a tube current of 250 mA. The MRI were performed using a 1.5 T device (Signa; GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). According to MRI, patients with no PLC and disc injury were allocated into MRI finding negative group, others were defined as positive group. Then 2-tailed Student All comparisons were performed with a significance level of P < 0.05 (SPSS17.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). The ROC curves were performed with MedCalc 12.7.0.0 (MedCalc Software, Ostend, Belgium). A total of 84 patients with single acute neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fractures formed the study population. The demographic data of these patients are presented in Regarding the status of upper adjacent disc above fractured vertebra, 28 were Grade 0, 29 were Grade 1, 17 were Grade 2, and 10 were Grade 3. Regarding the status of lower adjacent disc below fractured vertebra, 62 were Grade 0, 12 were Grade 1, 10 were Grade 2, and 0 were Grade 3. Regarding the status of PLC, 67 were intact and 17 were injured. According to the disc and PLC assessment on MRI, there were 48 patients with intact disc and PLC, and 36 patients with injured disc or/and PLC. Thus, there were 48 patients in negative MRI finding group ( The mean CC for the negative group was 0.11 ± 0.08 when compared to mean CC of 0.28 ± 0.15 in the positive group (p < 0.001). The mean LK for the negative group was 9.30 ± 5.17° compared to mean LK of 18.93 ± 5.37° for the positive group (p < 0.001). There was no significant difference in AVH ratio, PVH ratio and RK between two groups. Then CC and LK were chosen as the significant variables to evaluate the possibility in predicting negative MRI findings ( In the management of thoracolumbar burst fracture, surgeons heavily rely on radiologic findings to make decisions. A complete radiologic assessment including plain radiograph, CT and MRI is frequently performed for better understanding of the bony damage, canal compromise, status of spinal cord and soft tissue. However, there is considerable controversy about indications for ordering a MRI in a particular patient, especially without neurological injury. In the latest review of radiological assessment in acute thoracolumbar fractures, Javier Pizones et al. strongly recommended MRI in the early assessment as its key role in accurate fracture classification, detection of soft injury and therapeutic decision making [ For patients with neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fractures, the potential significant findings provided by MRI are PLC and/or disc injury, which could also alter the final clinical decision. Based on its anatomy and biomechanics, the status of PLC was considered as one of the three components in thoracolumbar injury classification and severity score (TLICS) classification system which provides recommendations for therapy. According to MRI, PLC integrity is assigned a certain point for each status: intact = 0, indeterminate = 2, or disrupted = 3. In theory, therefore, the TLICS score of a particular patient without neurological injury ranges from 2 to 5 (neurologically intact = 0, column burst fractures = 2, and PLC = 0, 2 or 3). A total score of 5 points indicates the need for a surgery and a score of <4 points guide conservative treatment, whereas a score of 4 points can be managed according to surgeon’s preference. Apart from PLC and osseous components, disc is another key contributor to spinal passive stability. As its instability and poor healing capability, an increasing number of studies demonstrated that injured disc can result in progressive sagittal kyphosis and instability which lead to poor outcomes [ However, the incidence of PLC and disc injury is relative low in neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fracture. According to the study by Patrick W. Hitchon et al., the rate of PLC injury in neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fracture was only 18% (15/83) [ After the analysis of correlation between bony damage and presence of positive MRI findings, our results showed that the presence of CC > 0.19 and/or LK > 14.00° can predict MRI findings including PLC and disc injury. These thresholds may be the guideline for MRI examination in patients with neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fracture. Previous studies have demonstrated the correlation between PLC injury and parameters of bony damage in thoracolumbar burst fracture [ This study further assessed the predictive value of these significant indexes. When considering them as individual factor, there was no significant difference between LK and CC. When combining LK and CC as predictive factor, there was an improvement as compared with CC while there was no significant difference between LK and combination of LK and CC. From the angle of statistics, even single index, LK or CC, is powerful enough to predict positive findings on MRI. In other words, the presence of CC > 0.19 and/or LK > 14.00° can predict MRI findings including PLC and disc injury. In this study, when taking the incidence of positive findings on MRI into account, the negative and positive predictive value were all around 80% which means these indexes are reliable enough for surgeons to abandon or order a MRI for a particular patient in the emergent setting. Although taking all the possible positive MRI findings into consideration, the missed diagnosis of injuries is a matter of great concern to surgeons and patients when applying these index in the trauma center. On the one hand, prospective studies should be carried out to verify the predictive ability of these indexes and to collect potential consequence of the missed injuries. On the other hand, these indexes are just used as the initial screening in the emergent setting for further MRI examination, the integrative diagnosis and emergency observation are all necessary to minimize the missed diagnosis. Furthermore, sample size in this study was relatively small. Larger sample study should be conducted to improve predictive power for better medico-legal protection for surgeon. Although MRI is a very useful tool to detect soft tissue injuries, the incidence of PLC and disc injury on MRI is relative low in thoracolumbar burst fracture without neurologic deficit. The presence of CC > 0.19 and LK > 14.00° on CT scan are verified to be able to predict MRI findings including PLC and disc injury. These thresholds may be the guideline in the emergent setting for MRI examination in patients with neurologically intact thoracolumbar burst fracture especially when medical resource is limited or patients suffer from multiple trauma. None. This study was supported by