Density functional theory and molecular dynamics were used to study the adsorption of sulfuric acid on two surfaces. One is graphene modified with titanium with high metal coverage (C2Ti). The other is a [001] titanium surface. We considered cis and trans molecule conformers at 300K, and atmospheric pressure. We found that the molecule (trans and cis) is dissociated and chemisorbed on the graphene–titanium layer, in several ways, forming a conductor surface. We also found that the molecule (cis and trans) is dissociated on the [001] titanium surface in only one, but a different way. In this case, all four oxygen atoms are chemisorbed, forming titanium oxide (TiO). The remaining sulphydric acid is physisorbed, and it desorbs at 700K.Sulfuric acid is a central substance in the chemical industry. It has a wide range of applications. Its principal uses include mineral processing, fertilizer manufacturing, oil refining, wastewater processing, chemical synthesis, electrolyte in lead-acid batteries, and various cleaning agents There has been in the past, a great interest on graphite intercalation compounds in general Recently, we studied the adsorption of H In this work, we are interested in the adsorption of sulfuric acid molecules in a graphene layer modified with titanium, with high metal coverage (C As we did in We used density functional theory (DFT), and molecular dynamics (MD) within the Born–Oppenheimer approximation and the Quantum Espresso code, which uses a basis set of plane waves Non-relativistic, spin polarized and non-spin polarized calculations were performed. The results were the same for both spin polarized and non-polarized calculations. This fact implies that we have a non-magnetic system. The cut-off energy was 1100 After optimization of the titanium–graphene system (C From Löwdin population analysis it is found that 75% of C atoms present a net charge of − In order to validate our pseudo potentials, the following calculations were carried out. The H Performing a Löwdin population analysis for an isolated H Then we studied the adsorption of the sulfuric acid molecule on the graphene–titanium system. As we mentioned above, in order to make a comparison, we also studied the adsorption of this molecule on the [001] Ti surface at 300 We defined the adsorption energy of the molecule, M on the We are interested in the reaction of the sulfuric acid molecule with the two surfaces, at room temperature. However, optimization, i.e. a standard minimization procedure, as the conjugate gradient (CG), or the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) to investigate the reaction is not sufficient for our purpose. The temperature effect is not taken into account when minimization and optimization procedures, like CG, or BFGS are used. The thermal agitation of the molecule, and of the atoms in the surface, has an important effect on the interaction between all them. Therefore, for each initial position of the H It is convenient to mention that, in practice, it is difficult to place dispersed titanium atoms on a graphene surface. As mentioned in In this system, the sulfuric acid molecule is adsorbed, and dissociated into two or three parts. In the first case, the molecule is broken in one hydrogen atom and the radical HSO For all initial positions, we located the sulfuric acid molecule in such a way, that the sulfur atom was at a distance of 4 The molecule conformer with C To the unit cell, which we have considered above for the C The positively charged titanium atoms pulled the negative oxygen atoms towards the surface. This force is larger than the initial repulsion on the H and S atoms by the same. For the first orientation, the molecule is adsorbed, and separated into two parts. One is a hydrogen atom, which traps electronic charge from a titanium atom, becomes negative, and it is bound to a titanium atom of the lower plane of the surface. The other part (HSO Using the second orientation, the molecule is adsorbed, and dissociated into three parts: two hydrogen atoms and the radical SO Then, we studied the interaction of the molecule conformer with Cs symmetry ( For the first orientation, the molecule is adsorbed, and divided into two parts, see The other part (HSO In the case of the second orientation, the molecule is adsorbed, and separated into two parts too, see For the third orientation, the molecule is adsorbed, and dissociated into three parts: two hydrogen atoms and the radical SO To the unit cell, which we have considered above for the [001] titanium surface, we added the sulfuric acid molecule (see In this system, the molecule ( It is known that the resistance of titanium to corrosion is due to a stable, protective, strongly adherent oxide film. This reduces the chemical reactivity of the surface. Our calculation partly explains why titanium is resistant to the corrosive action of sulfuric acid. After the first acid molecules are adsorbed and dissociated on the metal surface, we can see oxygen atoms forming titanium oxide (TiO) on that surface. It was found that the sulfuric acid molecule is adsorbed and dissociated on the graphene–titanium surface. The molecule is dissociated into two or into three parts. In the first case, the adsorption energy is − For comparison, we calculated the interaction of the sulfuric acid molecule with the [001] titanium surface. We found that the molecule ( Clearly, the sulfuric acid molecule is adsorbed and dissociated in several ways on a graphene–titanium surface with a high metal coverage. The same molecule is adsorbed and dissociated in only one, but a different way on a [001] titanium surface. We must mention that we could not find neither theoretical nor experimental results on the adsorption of sulfuric acid on titanium, or on the graphene–titanium system. We are including the coordinates of the atoms within the unit cell, for each of the final surface configurations as supplementary material for online publication. We thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at