The titanium powder metallurgy with TiH2 powders is a hot topic at present, and it is essential to control the size and distribution of the TiH2 powders during mechanical milling. The fractal behavior of the TiH2-milling is investigated in this paper based on the fractal fragmentation of rock mechanics, characterized by SEM, particle size analysis and calculation. The TiH2-milling system shows multiple-valued fractal dimensions during the different length scales. The particle size distribution of the milled TiH2 powders is limited strictly by the fractal process during short time milling and the weight percentage of a selected particle size range keeps an extremely low rate of change. The results show that the fractal process is useful to explain or estimate the phenomena of the particle size distribution during milling.Powder metallurgy (PM) is an important process for titanium industry with the advantages such as near-net-shape capabilities, low buy-to-fly ratio and cost saving The HDH process, compared with the PREP method and GA method, is a much more cost-effective way. Nowadays, it attracts wide attention that TiH Although the size and distribution of TiH Fractal particle size distribution is one of the main parts in fractal fragmentation of rock mechanics. In fact, the fragmentation for rocks is a fractal process, not only macroscopic fractures but also microscopic damages In a word, in order to make the milled TiH The self-similarity at various scales is one of the most noteworthy characteristics in a fractal model, These similarities are shown not only on rock microstructure but also categories such as fragmentation process during milling. The fracturing of rocks involves fragmentation at all the scales. The size distribution of fragments does have fractal properties and it obeys the Trucotte relationship    All variables in the formula except Raw sponge titanium for this experiment is supplied by Panzhihua Iron and Steel Group Co., Ltd with oxygen content The tubular reactor was gas-washed first by high pure hydrogen twice in order to get rid of the impurity gas. Afterwards, raw sponge titanium materials were heated in reactor within 10 The powders of selected particle size scales were observed by scanning electron microcopy (SEM). The errors of sieves were revised by measuring the pore sizes with a particle size analyzer. The actual mean diameter values of sieves pores are shown in The SEM morphologies of milled TiH The results of double logarithm curves and their linear fittings (>  The cumulative frequencies of volume for the fine powders (< For From The fragmentation process of TiH From In Eq. That all means TiH From Relationship between weight percentage and particle size distribution is important for PM industry. How the fractal influences the weight percentage of a selected particle size range is of practical significance. The weight percentages of different particle size ranges, milling without balls in various time, are shown in According to This stability for the middle ranges can be easily described as the reason that there is a conditional dynamic balance between the TiH The fragmentation process of the TiH The selected middle particle size range ( If Define Eq. For Eq.  A high error-tolerance of the estimation according to Eq.  The weight percentages of milling with/without balls are shown in All the results show that a ball milling system is still limited strictly by fractal process, but it is also not easy to get a perfect particle-size-controlled distribution. That means the effects of milling balls for the particle size distribution controlling are limited. TiH During a short time milling of TiH The milling effects of adding balls are strong in the larger scales but weak in the smaller scales, which means that the effects of balls to control the particle size distribution are limited. All the results show that, in order to control the particle size distribution of the TiH  the total number of the cracked particles whose feature size the fractal dimension in fragmentation process (–) the total mass of all the powders with feature size less than the total mass of the system (g) the feature size of the maximum particle in the system (μm) the weight percentage of all the particles with size less than the fractal dimension calculated from the length scales larger than 65 the fractal dimension calculated from the length scales smaller than 65 the total number of the cracked secondary level elements (–) the crushing probability of an aim particle (–) the similarity ratio of two size levels (–) the length of the minimum value of the selected size scales (–) the length of the maximum value of the selected size scales (–) the ratio between the ratio between the weight percentage of the selected particle size range ( The author would like to thank the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Sichuan University (SCU), Chengdu, China, the Panzhihua Iron and Steel Group Co., Ltd for providing technical support.