Biomimetic mineralization is a promising technique in biomedical applications. To understand the mechanical behavior of biomimetically mineralized collagen material (BMC), we examined the composition and structure of the mineral deposition in BMCs mineralized by the polymer-induced liquid precursor (PILP) process and applied wide angle x-ray scattering (WAXS) with in situ tensile testing to investigate the mineral-to-tissue co-deformation in the material. We found that the PILP process is able to achieve good biomimetic mineralization in bulk collagen matrix. Compositionally, the mineral deposition showed high crystallinity with no carbonation. However, the morphology of extrafibrillar mineral deposition and the preferential crystal orientation were different from natural bone. Further, the Young’s modulus and mineral-to-tissue co-deformation ratio of the BMC were significantly lower than both natural bone and partially demineralized bone with similar mineral volume fraction. It was concluded that while biomimetic mineralization can achieve good mineral deposition volume in the BMC, the mechanical behavior of the material was different from natural bone.Bone is a biphasic composite material, consisting of an organic collagen matrix and a reinforcing mineral phase formed from carbonated hydroxyapatite. ( In this study, we investigated the mechanical behavior of the BMC by using wide angle x-ray scattering (WAXS) in combination with Healthy adult (24 months old) bovine femurs sourced from a local farm (Tokachi Federation of Agricultural Cooperatives) were used in this study. Specimens were stored at −40 °C until needed. After removing all soft tissues and performing visual check for bone abnormality, cortical bone blocks were harvested from the diaphysis using hacksaw. The bone blocks were then trimmed and cut into thin slices measuring approximately 15 mm by 4 mm by 0.15 mm (length × width × thickness) with low speed diamond wheel saw (South Bay Technology Model 650, DWH Diamond Abrasive Wheel) under constant water irrigation. Care was taken during the process to ensure the long axis of each slice was approximately aligned with the femoral anatomical axis. A total of four types of samples were prepared for this study, namely natural (NT), partially demineralized (PDM), fully demineralized (FDM), and remineralized (RM-xx, where ‘xx’ represents mineralization time). NT samples were prepared immediately before the scheduled experiment date. No further treatment was applied to the samples, and they were air dried in room temperature for 24 h. Samples from the PDM, FDM, and RM-xx groups were further treated with 14% EDTA solution at 4 °C with agitation (150 min for PDM samples and 4 days for FDM and RM-xx samples) ( Following full demineralization, each sample slice prepared for biomimetic mineralization was placed in 100 mL mineralization solution under vacuum condition for 30 min to remove air bubbles. Then, the degassed samples were kept at 37 °C for 14 (RM-2w) days. The mineralization solution was prepared according to readily available protocol in literature ( The Co-deformation behavior of the RM-2w (n = 15) group, which was presented as a ratio between the mineral strain and the tissue strain during loading, was compared to the NT (n = 14) and the PDM (n = 14) groups. The mineral volume fractions of all groups were measured using the X-ray absorption method described by For the tensile testing, sample was screw mounted into a custom-built tensile device, which was fitted with a 50 N uniaxial load cell (LUX-B-50N-ID, Kyowa, Japan) and a DC motorized linear stage (TSDM40-15, Sigma Koki Co., Ltd, Japan) ( For the X-ray diffraction measurements, the tensile device was mounted into a nano-scale X-ray analyzer (Rigaku MicroMax-007HF high flux X-ray source, Cu Kα source, 1.2 kW output, 300 × 500 µm beam size). The WAXS pattern from each sample, under 0 mm, 0.04 mm, 0.08 mm, and 0.12 mm applied displacements, were captured using a BAS-SR 127 imaging plate (IP) (FUJIFILM, Japan) placed approximately 80 mm away from the sample ( Mineral strain was calculated by measuring the amount of position shift of the corresponding (0 0 2) peak intensity along the tensile loading direction using a custom MATLAB script. Preferential crystal alignment was also examined by plotting azimuthal intensity profile of the (0 0 2) diffraction ring and identifying the intensity peak locations. Compositional properties from all sample groups (NT: n = 14, PDM: n = 15, RM-2w: n = 15, FDM: n = 15) were studied using Raman Spectroscopy (Renishaw invia, UK). Spectra at 20 random locations along the center of each sample cross-section were taken and averaged to get a representative spectrum (785 nm laser source at 150mW power, 20 accumulations of 1 s acquisition). Raw spectra data was baseline subtracted using the modified polynomial method with 4th order polynomial fit and 200 iterations ( Fibril-level sample structure was examined using SEM (JSM-7400F, JEOL, Japan) before and after the mineralization process. FDM (n = 3), RM-2w (n = 3), and NT (n = 3) Samples were firstly dehydrated using hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) (  Representative Raman spectra of all four sample groups are shown in Structurally, at the fibril-scale level, SEM results showed that the demineralization treatment had produced very clean collagen matrix as shown in  The azimuthal intensity distribution in the (0 0 2) peak can be used to interpret the preferential mineral crystal orientation inside the samples. We defined the 0° mark at the intersection of the (0 0 2) diffraction ring and a horizontal line that passes through the X-ray beam center on the right-hand side of the IP (dashed arrow in   Conventional mineralization technique such as simulated body fluid (SBF) immersion only leads to mineral deposition on the surface of the immersed material ( The collagen matrices were successfully mineralized in this study. 14 days was chosen as an optimal mineralization period because Burwell and coworkers (2012) have shown that, during the PILP mineralization process, the tissue property gains were the most rapid between 7 and 14 days with smaller changes thereafter. The average Young’s modulus of the samples increased gradually over the mineralization period ( No carbonation was present in the mineral phase of the RM-2w group ( Extrafibrillar mineral deposition within the collagen matrix was clearly visible in the RM-2w samples ( Previous studies on hydroxyapatite crystal orientation in bone have suggested that the majority of the crystal particles are aligned approximately in the direction of the bone axis, which is parallel to the collagen fibrils ( The RM-2w samples showed the lowest stiffness in the tensile testing results, despite having similar mineral volume fraction to the PDM samples ( To conclude, the PILP process was able to achieve good bulk mineralization with high crystallinity and no carbonation. However, the mechanical behavior of BMCs created using the PILP process was different from natural and partially demineralized bone samples. There were some limitations to this study. Firstly, air dried samples were used for the tensile testing due to difficulties in keeping constant sample moisture level during the x-ray irradiation. Dehydration alters the mechanical properties of biological tissues. However, this would not introduce any error when making inter-group comparisons, because the same air-drying protocol was applied to all sample groups. The EDTA demineralization process has great ability in preserving the natural hierarchical structural organizations of the collagen matrix in bone ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) for providing financial support. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: