This work evaluated different combined glass electrodes by means of an interlaboratory comparison in order to determine the pH of fuel ethanol. Four electrodes with different reference electrode systems (Ag/AgCl or Pt/redox pair), liquid junctions (single or double) and internal filling solutions (aqueous KCl or ethanolic LiCl) were used in comparison with the Orion Ross Sure-flow® N° 8172 BN electrode, a specific electrode advised by the ASTM D6423 standard. Three fuel ethanol samples with different water contents (0.1, 0.6 and 6.8%, w/w) were analyzed by nine laboratories. The results showed that all the electrodes with aqueous KCl filling solution and single liquid junction, including the Orion® electrode, presented equivalent results. The sole electrode with ethanolic LiCl filling solution showed pH results lower than the other electrodes, whereas the sole electrode with double liquid junction, showed pH results slightly higher than those with similar filling solution containing single liquid junction. On the other hand, only the latter two electrodes presented acceptable repeatability limit values. The results indicate a need to revise the ASTM D6423 standard with the purpose of enlarging the number of electrodes that can be used to measure the pH of ethanol fuel, as well as support the harmonization of the different regional standards used to measure the pH of fuel ethanol.Ethanol has becoming an important alternative to petroleum derived fuels since it can be produced from renewable sources, such as sugarcane and corn, and the products of ethanol combustion are lower pollutants. In order to guarantee the quality of this fuel, several analytical parameters and their limit values have been established so that ethanol can be commercialized as fuel. The pH, which is defined as the negative logarithm of the activity of hydrogen ions, is one of the parameters used to assess the quality of fuel ethanol. The pH value indicates the corrosion potential of the fuel ethanol, which can reduce the lifetime of the fuel tank and of the automobile engine. The pH is related mainly to the amount of strong acids, whose presence in fuel ethanol is derived from both the fermentation and distillation processes and from possible contaminants Although the pH of ethanol, sometimes called pHe, is defined as the acid strength of ethanol, the pHe measurement uses the same measuring equipment (the glass electrode) and the same aqueous buffer solutions for calibration as its aqueous counterpart, but without a detailed understanding of the measurement being made, or with the traceability to the SI that is available for aqueous pH measurements In recent years, several issues were discussed regarding the pH measurements in non-aqueous matrices, especially in ethanol, such as the use of different combined glass electrodes, traceability to the International System of Units (SI), and the metrological reliability of the measurements. Firstly, the pH measurements in non-aqueous matrices, such as ethanol fuel, are not made at equilibrium and, in the samples with low water content, pH measurements have shown some problems, including unstable readings, long response time and device dependent results. These problems were likely the result of the low conductivity of the sample, dehydration of the glass electrode membrane and large junction potentials. Only in the mixtures whose water contents are greater than 30%, the pH measurement can be considered as being water dominated and the electrode behaves similar to a fully water based sample In 2007, technical experts from Brazil, the European Union (EU) and the United States of America (US) elaborated a document called “White Paper on Internationally Compatible Biofuel Standards Tripartite” Additionally, the “White Paper” indicated three parameters that cannot be compared due to the different test methods used in their measurement, one of which is pH. The specifications of the pH of ethanol were classified in “Category B”, which contains specifications with significant differences between parameters and methods, but which might be harmonized by work on documentary and measurement standards. The limit placed on the pH results of ethanol by the US and Brazil is quite similar (6.5–9.0 and 6.0–8.0, respectively), however, the Brazilian specification is only for hydrous fuel. Furthermore, the test methods used by US and Brazil indicate the use of different glass electrodes to measure pH of ethanol fuel. According to the US standard In 1998, a technical report from a IUPAC group dealing with pH in non-aqueous solutions established predictive equations for estimating the primary pH of the potassium hydrogen phthalate buffer in any aqueous–alcoholic mixture Therefore, this work presents an evaluation study of five glass electrodes (including the one recommended by the US standard In the preparation of the samples approximately 90 The methodology described in the US standard Before the analyses, the measurement system (glass electrode and pH meter) was calibrated using two pH certified reference materials (INMETRO, pH 4.001 The homogeneity and stability studies of the fuel ethanol samples were carried out according to the ISO Guide 35 Five kinds of combined glass electrodes, with different reference electrode systems, liquid junctions or internal filling solutions, were used in the pH determinations, which were carried out by an interlaboratory comparison involving nine laboratories. As described in For the evaluation of the homogeneity and stability data and the results of the laboratories, Grubbs tests were previously used to verify the existence of outlier values For the homogeneity study, the data were evaluated using the one-way analysis of variance (One-way Anova) For each sample and electrode, were calculated data regarding relative standard deviation (RSD), repeatability and reproducibility standard deviations ( Moreover, Furthermore, the results of the different electrodes were evaluated using principal component analysis (PCA) The One-way Anova data from the homogeneity study showed that all ethanol samples were homogeneous ( The The precision, repeatability and reproducibility data are also shown in The Multivariate methods consider the correlation among many variables simultaneously, allowing for the extraction and visualization of a significantly greater amount of data This work presented a full evaluation study of five combined glass electrodes, by means of an intercomparison involving nine laboratories, to measure the pH of fuel ethanol. The study was motivated by the existence of different regional standards for pH measurements of fuel ethanol, suggesting the use of different kinds of electrodes, which has led to problems when comparing results obtained in different countries. Moreover, the US standard (ASTM D6423) indicates the use of a specific electrode from a specific manufacturer (Orion Ross Sure-flow In this work, the A (Orion), B (single junction with aqueous KCl) and D (redox pair with aqueous KCl) electrodes presented equivalent pH results. On the other hand, the results obtained by the E and C electrodes were different from those of the A electrode. After analyzing the results, it is possible to claim that the combined glass electrode's internal filling solution significantly affects the pH results of the fuel ethanol. In addition, the kind of the liquid junction, single or double, slightly affects the pH results for ethanol fuel. However, the same does not apply to the kind of the reference electrode system (Ag/AgCl or Pt/redox pair), which does not significantly affect the results. Although the C and E electrodes presented different results, only the measurements obtained using these electrodes showed repeatability limits lower than the value established by the US standard; the other electrodes presented repeatability limits up to three times higher than the acceptable value. Furthermore, only the C electrode showed reproducibility limits as low as reported in the US standard. Due to its remarkable precision, the C electrode presented a good compromise between trueness and precision, since its pH results were only slightly higher than the results obtained with the A, B and D electrodes. This makes the C electrode a very good candidate for pH measurements of fuel ethanol. Finally, future studies are still necessary to develop a methodology for primary pH measurements of fuel ethanol, in order to evaluate which glass electrode would provide the most correct pH result The authors would like to thank the following laboratories for participating in this interlaboratory comparison: Agência Nacional do Petróleo, Gás Natural e Biocombustíveis; Centro de Tecnologia Canavieira; Digimed-Digicrom Analítica Ltda; Metrohm Pensalab Instrumentação Analítica Ltda; Mettler Toledo Indústria e Comércio Ltda; Centro de Pesquisas da Petrobras; SGS do Brasil Ltda and Instituto Nacional de Tecnologia.