Incorporating high-speed camera technology, an experimental system of high-speed digital image correlation is established and extended to blasting research. Based on the model experiment, the effects of the filling medium and the decoupling coefficient on stress evolution in decoupled charge blasting are studied. Different filling media are found to have a significant effect on the transmission of blasting energy. Compared with coupled charge blasting, decoupled charge blasting with air as the filling medium reduces the blasting stress peak in the specimens; while within a certain decoupling coefficient range, the decoupled charge blasting with plasticine as the filling medium increases the blasting stress peak in specimens. The blasting stress attenuation index in specimens exhibits the trend of an initial increase and then a decrease with increasing decoupling coefficient, where the decoupling coefficient corresponding to the maximum stress attenuation index is determined by the filling medium. In addition, the numerical simulation results show that, in decoupled charge blasting, the filling medium greatly reduces the pressure at the borehole wall. With increasing decoupling coefficient, the pressure at the borehole wall attenuates with a mild degree of attenuation.Drilling and blasting, as a traditional and effective construction method, is widely used in tunneling (  Using air or water as the filling medium, The current research has primarily used research methods that focus on the effects of the decoupling coefficient and the filling medium in decoupled charge blasting, in situ tests of rock blasting, and blasting model experiments on concrete and other rock-like materials. While the data collection of these methods is limited, the test results tend to have large discrepancies and even be inconsistent with objective understanding owing to the anisotropism of rock and rock-like materials. These large differences make it difficult to provide reliable data references for theoretical analysis and numerical simulation. Therefore, understanding of the decoupled charge blasting mechanism requires more elaborate experimental support. In addition, the stress characteristic at the borehole wall in decoupled charge blasting and the stress attenuation rule still lacks adequate study. In view of this, this paper adopts an experimental system of high-speed digital image correlation (DIC) to carry out model experiments that focus on the effects of the decoupling coefficient and the filling medium on the stress evolution in decoupled charge blasting. In addition, owing to the extremely high temperatures and pressures present in the borehole during blasting, there is still a lack of effective and accurate measurement techniques to determine the stress at the borehole wall. Herein, therefore, using the LS-DYNA finite element code, the effects of the decoupling coefficient and the filling medium on the initial pressure at the borehole wall in decoupled charge blasting are also studied. The basic principle of the DIC method ( The main components of this experimental system comprised a high-speed camera, a lighting system, and a synchronous control system. The high-speed camera (Kirana-5M, Specialised Imaging Inc., UK) can achieve a shooting speed of 5 × 10 The lighting system (SI-AD500, Specialised Imaging Inc., UK) consists of a controller and two flash devices. The controller was a four-channel CU-500 controller that can control simultaneous and sequential multichannel operation. The flash devices are FH-500 xenon lamps, which can achieve 2 ms lighting with a constant light intensity. This system effectively satisfies the high-speed camera shooting-on-exposure requirements. The synchronous control system is designed and developed in-house, and allows a starting sequence and a delay time of the detonation, lighting and shooting, to achieve microsecond-level control. For blasting research, a start trigger mode is used in the experimental system. When the trigger signal is manually given, the lighting system is initiated. After 50–100 μs, the intensity of the light field reaches a steady value and the high-speed camera begins to acquire images. At the same time, the explosive in the borehole is detonated by the metal probe which is controlled by the synchronous control system. This experimental workflow ensures that information regarding the entire blasting process is effectively recorded by the high-speed camera under stable exposure conditions. For rock and rock-like materials, numerous random cracks are generated around the borehole under blast loading, even for a relatively small explosive dosage. The main purpose of the experiment herein was to study the entire process of strain characteristics and stress evolution in decoupled charge blasting, and thus it was necessary to avoid generating blast-induced cracks in the test specimens as much as possible. For this reason, polycarbonate (PC), which is a kind of isotropic material with good toughness, was chosen as the specimen material instead of rock or rock-like materials. Lead azide (Pb(N As shown in The size of the subset used in the experiment was 29 × 29 pixels, and the calculation step was 7 pixels. The explosive initiation time was recorded as Considering the borehole center as the pole and the right horizontal direction as the positive Because the accuracy of the DIC strain measurement depends on the image resolution and the speckle quality, the speckle quality must be calibrated before the experiment. In a static condition without blast loading, Under the strong impact of blast loading, the area close to the borehole is damaged or undergoes significant plastic deformation, while the stress in the specimen attenuates exponentially with distance from the borehole. In the experimental conditions herein, when the distance from the gauging point to the borehole center was  Using these time curves for the different blasting conditions, the radial and circumferential stress peaks of the gauging points are listed in The blasting shock wave acts directly on the borehole wall because there is no cushioning effect from the filling medium between the explosive and borehole wall. Compression deformation of the borehole wall is thus significant, with a large part of the blasting energy used to cause compression damage in the borehole wall. Engineering practice has proven that coupled charge blasting typically causes a large crushed area around the borehole, resulting in the irrational or uncontrolled use of the blasting energy. The wave impedance of air is much less than that of the test specimen, but the blasting shock wave is buffered somewhat when it propagates through the air. The air is greatly compressed and dissipated, resulting in a large consumption of blasting energy during transmission. Compared with the coupled charge blasting, the cushioning effect of air reduces the compressive damage of the blasting shock wave on the borehole wall. Further, owing to the excessive dissipation of the blasting energy by the air filling, the stress peaks of the gauging points in the specimens are reduced, with a 13–43% reduction for the radial stress peaks and a 19–30% reduction of the circumferential stress peaks compared to the coupled charge blasting results. The wave impedance of plasticine is close to that of the test specimen, and the viscoelasticity of plasticine enables it to absorb and accumulate energy. On the one hand, compared with coupled charge blasting, plasticine as a buffer medium prevents direct damage by the blasting shock wave to the borehole wall and reduces uncontrolled dispersal of blasting energy. On the other hand, compared with an air-decoupled charge, plasticine as a good energy transfer medium, reduces excessive dissipation of blasting energy transfer. As a result, plasticine as a filling medium improves the blasting energy efficiency and increases the blasting stress peak of gauging points. Compared with a coupled charge blasting, the radial stress peaks of gauging points are increased by 43–73%, and the circumferential stress peaks of gauging points are increased by 92–105%. Under blast loading, the attenuation law of stress in a specimen is governed by the equation ( Using Eq. The stress attenuation index Notably, Eq. Owing to the limitation of existing test methods, the initial stress at the borehole wall is difficult to measure accurately when the explosive is detonated. Therefore, the LS-DYNA finite element code was used to calculate and analyze the initial stress at the borehole wall for different blasting conditions. A single-layer solid grid method was used to establish a numerical model with a model size of 300 × 300 cm and a charge diameter of 4 cm. Similar to the model experiment above, two model groups were created using air and clay (similar to plasticine) as the filling media. The diameters of the borehole wall in each group were 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14 and 16 mm and the corresponding decoupling coefficients were 1 (i.e., coupled charge), 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5 and 4. Rock was used as the specimen by employing the rock material model of MAT_PLASTIC_KINEMATIC, which is a mixed model related to the strain rate and that considers a failure condition. The effect of the strain rate on the strength is considered in the Cowper-Symonds criterion, wherein the relationship between yield stress and strain rate is given as The material model of the explosive employed herein was MAT_HIGH_EXPLOSIVE_BURN, which corresponds to the Jones-Wilkins-Lee equation of state. The relationship between the pressure and the specific volume in the detonation process is given as When air was used as the filling medium, the material model of air employed was MAT_NULL, which corresponds to the LINEAR_POLYNOMIAL equation of state. When clay was used as the filling medium, the material model of clay employed was MAT_SOIL_AND_FOAM, which is suitable for simulating the large deformation behavior of soil and foam materials and can directly simulate the failure behavior of soil under large deformations. In the numerical simulations, the densities used were 1.29 kg/m In the numerical calculation, the Lagrange algorithm was used for rock and clay, while the arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian algorithm was used for the explosive and air. The connection between the two algorithms was established by a fluid–structure interaction. The pressure peaks of the element at the borehole wall for different blasting conditions were extracted to obtain the changing curves of the pressure peak The model experimental results show that the transmission of the blasting energy in decoupled charge blasting differs significantly with different filling media. In air-decoupled charge blasting, the energy transfer efficiency of air is very low. Consequently, while reducing the crushing area around the borehole it also causes excessive dissipation of the blasting energy, which significantly reduces the stress peak in specimens. In plasticine-decoupled charge blasting, the stress peak in the specimen initially increases and then decreases with increasing decoupling coefficient. In other words, unlike coupled charge blasting, the plasticine-decoupled charge blasting can increase the stress peak in specimen within a certain range of the decoupling coefficient. For the experiments herein, the decoupling coefficient range of the plasticine filling that maximizes the stress peak in the specimen is 2.5 < In coupled charge blasting, the blasting shock wave acts directly on the borehole wall. The numerical simulation results show that the pressure peak at the borehole wall is as high as 3.85 GPa, resulting in a wide crushing area around the borehole and causing the irrational use of blasting energy. In other words, in coupled charge blasting, although the pressure peak at the borehole is extremely large, a large amount of the blasting energy is consumed in the process of crushing the surrounding medium and thus the transfer of blasting energy to the peripheral medium is very limited. In contrast, the plasticine-decoupled charge blasting can prevent the direct impact of the blasting shock wave on the borehole wall and can reduce the excessive fragmentation of the surrounding medium, thus allowing more blasting energy to be transmitted to the peripheral medium. In addition, the blasting energy is initially transmitted to plasticine and then the plasticine acts on the borehole wall again. Such a process reduces the loading rate of the blasting stress and increases the action time of the blasting stress on the specimen. Therefore, compared with coupled charge blasting, in a certain range of the decoupling coefficient, the plasticine-decoupled charge blasting increases the stress peak in the specimen. Also within this decoupling coefficient range, the energy transfer advantage of plasticine is strengthened as the decoupling coefficient is increased. Of course, with further increase of the decoupling coefficient the blasting stress in the plasticine attenuates geometrically and the advantage of energy transfer is not sufficient to compensate for the energy dissipation caused by the geometrical attenuation, and thus the stress peak in the specimen decreases accordingly. Under blast loading, the radial and circumferential stresses of the medium are both initially compressive and subsequently tensile, though the radial stress is dominated by the compressive stress and the circumferential stress is dominated by tensile stress. The circumferential stress attenuation of the gauging points in the specimens is significantly larger than the radial stress attenuation, and both the radial and circumferential stresses initially increase and then decrease with increasing decoupling coefficient. In the experiments herein, in the air-decoupled charge blasting the stress attenuation index reaches its maximum when the decoupling coefficient is The numerical simulation results show that, in terms of the peak pressure at the borehole wall under blast loading, the change of the charge structure from coupled to decoupled is a qualitative process. In decoupled charge blasting, the filling medium greatly reduces the peak pressure at the borehole wall. With increasing decoupling coefficient, the pressure peak at the borehole wall attenuates with a mild degree of attenuation, which is a quantitative process. In addition, in decoupled charge blasting, the difference in the transmission efficiency of the blasting energy of the filling medium leads to the difference in the pressure at the borehole wall. The authors would like to acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for their valuable and constructive comments. This research is supported by the