In this study, the oxygen evolution and corrosion behavior of Pb-MnO2 composite anodes produced by powder pressing with low MnO2 content (1–7wt%) were systematically investigated in H2SO4 solution and compared to pure Pb and Pb–Ag (1wt%) anodes. Galvanostatic polarization, weight loss, and ionic equilibrium techniques were employed to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity and corrosion resistance of the composite anodes. The results demonstrated that Pb-MnO2 composite anodes presented lower potential than that of the Pb–Ag anode during a 72h polarization period, and the potential of composite anodes decreased as MnO2 fraction increased. The corrosion resistance of composite anodes was higher than that of the Pb–Ag anode. The surface morphology and phase composition of the anodic layer after 72h polarization were examined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the results indicated that anodic layers on Pb-MnO2 composite anodes were both thinner and denser than that of the Pb–Ag anode, confirming excellent corrosion resistance in H2SO4 solution electrolysis.The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is an important counter reaction for metal reduction during the electrowinning of non-ferrous metals such as Zn, Cu, Ni, Co, Cr, and Mn ( Lead-based alloy anodes are often used to produce high-purity zinc, as they have advantageous corrosion resistance properties in acidic sulfate solutions. There are still several inherent problems for lead-based alloys, however, including high OER over-potential, cathodic product contamination due to anode dissolution, poor mechanical properties, and over-consumption of Ag ( In effort to solve these problems, different metal elements were added to the Pb anode. These element additions can be classified into three main groups ( In effort to minimize the OER over-potential of lead-based alloys, many previous researchers have attempted to fabricate another form of anode called “dimensionally stable anodes” ( Conductive lead matrix composites with active dispersed MnO Pb-MnO Compactness of pressed samples is an important factor that can be calculated as follows: The as-prepared samples, including Pb and Pb–Ag, were converted into electrodes in the following stepwise manner: Insulated copper wire was soldered to the samples at one circular section. The electrode was enclosed in epoxy resin, leaving the surface of the other circular section (12 After 12 The chronopotentiometry experiment was performed in a square glass electrolytic cell containing 160 In this experiment, “anode corrosion” referred to dissolution of the anodes and anode slime sloughing off the anode surface. Ionic equilibrium and weight loss methods were adopted to measure the corrosion rate as accurately as possible. Before and after 72 Microscopic morphologies of the anode surface were observed after 72 In order to compare the electrochemical activity among samples, each anode was measured by chronopotentiometry for 72 As shown in As also shown in In a similar study, Mohammadi et al. found that ( It is commonly known that MnO The purity of cathodic products is determined according to the lead concentration in the electrolyte ( Both the Pb and Pb-MnO During zinc electrowinning, Mn Due to the formation of precipitated anode slime in Pb and Pb-MnO Surface micrographs of the Pb, Pb–Ag, and Pb-MnO According to XRD patterns of pure Pb, Pb–Ag, and Pb-MnO In summaries, the electrocatalytic activity, degradation rate and corrosion behavior of low content Pb-MnO The Pb-MnO The authors are grateful to Ms. Junjie Shen, Ms. Yongjuan Tian, Dr. Changquan Zhang, Dr. Liang Li and Prof. Jungang Hou from University of Science and Technology Beijing for providing support and help.