Switchgrass is a promising feedstock for value-added applications due to its high productivity, potentially low requirements for agricultural inputs and positive environmental impacts. The objective of this paper is to review published research on the conversion of switchgrass into bioethanol and other value-added products. Environmental benefits associated with switchgrass include the potential for carbon sequestration, nutrient recovery from runoff, soil remediation and provision of habitats for grassland birds. Pretreatment of switchgrass is required to improve the yields of fermentable sugars. Based on the type of pretreatment, glucose yields range from 70% to 90% and xylose yields range from 70% to 100% after hydrolysis. Following pretreatment and hydrolysis, ethanol yields range from 72% to 92% of the theoretical maximum. Other value-added uses of switchgrass include gasification, bio-oil production, newsprint production and fiber reinforcement in thermoplastic composites. Future prospects for research include increased biomass yields, optimization of feedstock composition for bioenergy applications, and efficient pentose fermentation to improve ethanol yields.Switchgrass ( Research on the feedstock potential of switchgrass has been effectively summarized in previous studies such as those presented by With newer varieties of switchgrass, yields in excess of 20 While the conversion of lignocellulosic materials has been previously summarized, a review of the significant amount of research specific to the conversion of switchgrass has not been presented to date. The objective of this paper is to review published research on the conversion of switchgrass into bioethanol and other value-added products in addition to discussing research on potential environmental benefits associated with switchgrass. When the United States Department of Energy chose switchgrass to be a major focus of research for bioenergy production, among the reasons cited was the expected positive environmental impact as evidenced by results from the conservation reserve program (CRP). The US Congress established this program in 1985 to remediate the negative effects of decades of row-crop production. The program designated 90% of impacted land areas to perennial grasses like switchgrass. Since soil tillage is only required in the establishment year, there is a reduced risk of soil erosion (   The use of switchgrass to improve surface water quality has also been examined.  Switchgrass also has positive impacts on wildlife by providing a suitable habitat for grassland birds that are rapidly declining in numbers ( With the steady increase in energy consumption and current dependence on crude oil to meet energy demands, there is considerable and immediate interest in developing alternative energy sources.  The major components of lignocelluloses are cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin; which are closely associated in a complex crystalline structure. The purpose of pretreatment processes is to reduce crystallinity of cellulose, increase porosity of the biomass and achieve the desired fractionation ( Physical pretreatment of lignocelluloses typically involves size comminution by grinding, milling or chipping. The goal is to reduce the crystallinity of the cellulose fibers in the biomass. Size reduction of lignocelluloses is also necessary to eliminate mass and heat transfer limitations during the hydrolysis reactions (   The three types of physico-chemical pretreatments discussed in literature are steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX), and CO To date, AFEX is the only physico-chemical pretreatment that has been applied for the pretreatment of switchgrass to improve enzymatic hydrolysis. Chemical pretreatment of lignocelluloses includes the use of ozone, acids, alkali, organic solvents and peroxides. Ozonolysis is carried out at room temperature and is effective at lignin removal without the formation of toxic by-products ( Dilute acid pretreatment of switchgrass for bioethanol production was first examined by Dilute acid pretreatment of switchgrass does not significantly impact lignin removal.  Lime (calcium hydroxide) pretreatment of switchgrass was investigated by A combined microwave–alkali pretreatment of switchgrass by Biological pretreatment involves the use of microorganisms that selectively degrade lignin and hemicellulose. Several studies have shown that white-rot fungi are the most effective microorganisms for pretreatment of lignocelluloses such as wood chips ( As shown in Enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose is typically carried out by cellulases. Unlike conventional hydrolysis using concentrated acid or alkaline reagents, enzymatic hydrolysis requires mild conditions (pH of 4.5 and temperature of approximately 50 Endoglucanase randomly cleaves cellulose chains to form glucose, cellobiose and cellotriose. Exoglucanase attacks the non-reducing end of cellulose to release cellobiose units. Cellobiase cleaves cellobiose units into fermentable glucose units. Most fungal cellulases are deficient in β-glucosidase activity which must be supplemented since cellobiose accumulation results in cellulase inhibition ( Complete hydrolysis of xylan involves three main enzymes: endo-β-1-4-xylanase which primarily targets the internal β-1-4 bonds between xylose units, exoxylanase that releases xylobiose units and β-xylosidase that releases xylose from xylobiose and short chain xylooligosachharides (  The supernatant from enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocelluloses can contain both hexoses and pentoses (if both cellulose and hemicellulose are hydrolyzed). Depending on the lignocellulose source, the hydrosylate typically consists of glucose, xylose, arabinose, galactose, mannose, fucose and rhamnose ( In addition to separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF), other approaches include direct microbial conversion (DMC) and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF). DMC involves the use of microorganisms that simultaneously produce cellulase to hydrolyze cellulose and ferment the resulting sugars into ethanol.  Combustion of biomass like switchgrass is problematic because of the presence of alkali metals that react to form sulfates, chlorides, silicate and hydroxides that contribute to slag formation and fouling of combustion systems ( Pyrolysis of Although wood is the most common raw material for pulping applications, environmental issues such as forest preservation and reduction of CO  Kraft pulp from switchgrass has short fibers with a high proportion of fines ( Switchgrass is a promising feedstock for bioethanol production, thermal energy conversion and pulping applications. The positive environmental benefits associated with switchgrass include enhancement of wildlife diversity, improvement of soil and water quality, reduced pesticide use and carbon sequestration. Most current research has focused on bioconversion into ethanol with an emphasis on pretreatment methods. While the technology for corn-to-ethanol is well established, the conversion of lignocellulosic feedstock to ethanol has challenges such as cost of pretreatment methods, cost of hydrolytic enzymes and inefficient fermentation of pentoses. The economics of bioethanol production from switchgrass can also be improved by developing value-added by-products. For example,