The impacts of calcination on the leaching recovery of rare earth elements (REEs) and other critical metals from a Baker seam coal refuse material were investigated in this study. Acid leaching test results showed that leaching recovery of the REEs, especially the light REEs, was increased significantly from around 24% to 80–90% after calcination under 600–750 °C for two hours. By considering the major element leaching kinetics and the mineralogical changes of the dominant minerals caused by calcination, two mechanisms were proposed for the improved leaching performance: (1) decomposition of difficult-to-dissolve REE-bearing minerals into soluble forms; and (2) liberation of REE-bearing minerals encapsulated in clays after calcination due to the dehydration and disintegration of the layered clay structure. Sequential chemical extraction tests showed that a significant fraction (around 75%) of the REEs in the raw material were present in an insoluble form. After calcination under proper temperatures (600–800 °C), the majority of the insoluble light REEs (LREEs) were converted into soluble forms. Changes in the modes of occurrence of the LREEs and phosphorous based on leaching rate and sequential leaching correlated well as a function of the calcination temperature. This finding in addition to SEM-EDX results tends to indicate the potential that the LREEs occur primarily as rare earth phosphates such as monazite in the untreated coal refuse material. The acid leaching and sequential chemical extraction results show that co-extraction of REEs and other critical metals such as Co, Mn, and Li is possible using a calcination-acid leaching procedure.Average contents of rare earth elements (REEs) in the World coals and coal ashes were estimated to be 68.5 ppm and 403.5 ppm, respectively A systematic density fractionization study of the Baker and Fire Clay coals showed that the high-density fractions (e.g., 2.2 specific gravity sink) contained more REEs relative to the low-density fractions REE recovery from coal refuse using physical methods such as gravity separation and flotation is inefficient Several studies indicated that REEs were more likely dissolved when coal and coal refuse samples were treated under high temperatures for a certain period prior to acid leaching In addition to REEs, other critical metals such as germanium, gallium, and niobium are also enriched in some coal deposits A representative plant feed sample was collected from a coal preparation plant located in western Kentucky USA which processed Baker seam coal. The coal is classified as high volatile, bituminous coal having a total sulfur content of around 5% of which approximately 50% is pyritic. The sample was air-dried and the material coarser than 10 mm was obtained by dry sieving. The oversize fraction was density fractionated using a dense medium bath of 2.2 specific gravity (SG). After separation, the resultant sink material was air-dried at room temperature and pulverized to a top particle size of 0.18 mm. The pulverized material was used for the rare metal extraction, calcination, and mineralogy characterization tests in this study. High-purity kaolinite was purchased from Ward’s Science, USA and used for adsorption tests. Hydrochloric acid (37 wt% concentration), nitric acid (67 wt% concentration), and hydrofluoric acid (50 wt% concentration) of trace metal grade were used for the sequential chemical extraction, solid sample digestion, and acid leaching tests. Other chemicals used for the sequential chemical extraction tests included magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl The pulverized sample was calcined in a muffle furnace under different temperatures (500–1000 °C). For each batch of calcination tests, twelve ceramic crucibles with 60 g of the pulverized sample (5 g per crucible) were placed into the furnace. The temperature in the muffle furnace was elevated at a rate of 10 °C/min to the target temperature. The sample was calcined under the target temperatures for 120 min. After calcination, the temperature in the muffle furnace was naturally cooled to room temperature, which took around 12 h. A static air condition was used during the overall calcination process. After calcination, calcination products in the crucibles were collected and used for the acid leaching and the sequential chemical extraction tests as well as the mineralogy characterization study. The sequential chemical extraction method has been widely used to quantify the modes of occurrence of trace elements in coal and coal combustion byproducts The sequential chemical extraction protocol used in this study as shown in Results obtained from the sequential extraction tests related to phosphorous indicated that metallic and non-metallic species may re-adsorb onto mineral particle surfaces (such as clay minerals) after being leached into solution. In the first two stages of the process, re-adsorption is unlikely to occur since a significant amount of cations and anions (e.g., Mg Among the mineral particles present in the Baker seam coarse refuse, kaolinite has the largest, highly charged surface area and thus the highest potential for adsorbing charged elements in solution. Therefore, adsorption tests using selected rare earth elements (La and Y) and phosphorous were performed in separate tests with both untreated and 600 °C-calcined pure kaolinite. The initial concentration of the selected elements was 10 ppm. The same experimental conditions and reagents as the metal oxide extraction step ( Acid leaching tests were performed on both the original and the calcined samples to evaluate the impacts of calcination on the leachabilities of REEs and other critical metals including Co, Cr, Li, Mn, Sr, and V. The leaching tests were performed in a three-neck round bottom flask and the leaching temperature was maintained at 75 °C, which was achieved using a water bath. A schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in Leaching recovery ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization was performed using a Bruker-AXS D8 DISCOVER diffractometer which was configured in a parallel-beam geometry with Cu-Kα radiation. XRD patterns were recorded over a 2θ range of 5–70° with a step size of 0.02°. XRD patterns were analyzed using DIFFRAC, which is a commercial software developed by Bruker Corporation. Mineralogical changes of the major minerals as a function of calcination temperature were identified using the XRD analysis. A field emission scanning electron microscopy SEM (FEI Helios Nanolab 660) in conjunction with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer EDX (Oxford EDX detector) was used to study the mineralogy of REEs present in the unroasted material. An EDX map of a large area (0.5 × 0.5 mm) was obtained by scanning the specimen automatically over a period of 12 h. After completion of the scan, the images of the large area EDX map were visibly analyzed to identify REE-enriched particles. To measure the elemental compositions, solid samples were digested following a modified ASTM D6357-11 method For each batch, a standard solid sample supplied by the National Institute of Standards and Technology of the U.S. Department of Commerce was digested together with the solid samples. Elemental composition of the solutions obtained from solid digestion was measured using the ICP-OES. REE contents in the standard sample were also measured using the same ICP-OES for quality control. Differences between the measured contents and the values provided by the supplier were ± 10%. In addition, a continuing calibration blank (CCB) solution and a continuing calibration verification (CCV) solution were measured periodically during the ICP analysis for quality control. Liquid samples that generated from the acid leaching and sequential chemical extraction tests were directly analyzed following the same procedures as the solutions obtained from solid digestion. Proximate analyses indicated that the Baker material (2.2-SG sink fraction of the plant feed sample) contained 88.47% of ash and, after calcination under 500–1000 °C for two hours, the organic matter was completely removed. Mineralogical changes of the major phases in the Baker material caused by calcination were studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. As shown in To assess the effects of calcination on the leachabilities of the rare earth and major elements, the Baker material was calcined under different temperatures, and acid leaching tests were performed on both the raw and calcined samples under uniform conditions, i.e., 10-g/L solids concentration, 75 °C reaction temperature, and 1.2 M hydrochloric acid concentration. Leaching recoveries of total, light, and heavy REEs as well as selected individual REEs (Ce, Nd, and Y) are shown in Leaching characteristics of a few major elements including Al, Fe, K, Ca, and Mg were analyzed to understand the enhanced leaching efficiencies of the REEs. As shown in The leaching characteristics of phosphorous in the calcination product were found to be similar to the LREEs. As shown in As stated previously, the improvement in the HREE recoveries was much lower than the LREEs. As shown in The effects of calcination on the leaching recoveries of other critical metals including Co, Cr, Li, Mn, Sr, and V are shown in The modes of occurrence of metals in coal and coal ash have been investigated using various approaches such as SEM-EDX characterization, XAFS spectroscopy, sequential chemical extraction, and density fractionation As stated in the experimental section, the elements in the raw and calcined materials were classified into five different modes of occurrence including ion-exchangeable (IE), carbonate (CA), metal oxide (MO), acid soluble (AS), and insoluble (IS) (see Similar to the REEs, the majority of the phosphorous (about 60%) occurred as an insoluble form. As evidence of the potential association of phosphorous with the LREEs, two particles enriched in REEs were found using SEM-EDX large area mapping, which was conducted for a total period of around 24 h (e.g., two large area maps). As shown in After calcination under 500 °C for two hours, the insoluble fraction of LREEs was significantly reduced by 65% (from 78% to 13%), which corresponded to increases in the CA, MO, and AS fractions (see Evidence of the thermal decomposition of the rare earth phosphate minerals was also provided by the sequential chemical extraction results for phosphorous. As shown in As shown in The impacts of calcination on the modes of occurrence of the other critical metals present in the Baker material are shown in The impacts of calcination on the leaching recovery of REEs and other critical metals including Co, Cr, Li, Mn, Sr, and V from a Baker refuse material (2.2-SG sink of the plant feed) were investigated in this study. It was found that the recoveries of the REEs, especially the LREEs, were significantly enhanced from around 20% to 80–90% when the material was calcined under 600–750 °C for 2 h. Unlike the LREEs, HREE recovery values were less (e.g., 32–45%) by calcining under the optimum temperature of 750 °C for two hours. The leaching kinetics of both the LREEs and HREEs from properly calcined materials were characterized by quick reactions at the beginning (e.g., the first 5 min) of the leaching processes followed by minimal gains in recovery after a prolonged reaction duration. When the calcination temperature exceeded 750 °C, recovery values decreased sharply, which was explained by the inclusion of the REE-bearing minerals into the amorphous aluminum silicate matrix formed by the fusion and sintering of clays present in the material. Calcination caused similar impacts on the leaching kinetics of Cr, Li, Mn, Sr, and V, thereby creating an opportunity for the co-extraction of REEs and other critical metals from the material. XRD analysis, SEM-EDX characterization, and sequential chemical extraction were used in this study to understand the changes in the modes of occurrences associated with the rare metals resulting from the calcination of the Baker 2.2 SG sink coarse refuse material. Two mechanisms were proposed for the enhanced leachabilities of REEs caused by calcination: (1) Difficult-to-dissolve REE-bearing minerals may be decomposed into soluble forms; (2) REE-bearing minerals encapsulated in clays may be liberated after calcination due to the dehydration and disintegration of the layered clay structures. By comparing the leaching kinetic curves of the major and rare earth elements, it was found that their leaching characteristics were distinct, which excluded the possibility that the REEs present in the material were chemically dispersed in the major minerals. Sequential chemical extraction test results clearly showed that a significant fraction (around 75%) of the REEs present in the Baker material occurred as insoluble species, whereas the insoluble fraction was reduced to 14% after calcination under 700 °C for two hours, which corresponded to large increases in the more soluble carbonate and metal oxide fractions. The sequential chemical extraction findings agreed with the enhanced leaching recovery values observed in the acid leaching tests. The changes in the modes of occurrence for phosphorous were found to be similar to the LREEs over a range of calcination temperatures after considering the effects of phosphorous adsorption onto the clay surfaces during the metal oxide step of the sequential extraction procedure. This finding supports the hypothesis that rare earth phosphate minerals present in the raw material were decomposed during calcination. The conversions from insoluble forms into easy-to-leach species were also observed for the other rare metals such as Li and Sr present in the Baker material.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This material is based upon work supported by the U.S.