Rapeseeds were used for the production of biodiesel via alkaline transesterification. The effect of direct sonication (24kHz) during in situ and conventional transesterification was studied without the use of external heating and was compared to that of mechanical stirring (600rpm, 60°C). In the in situ transesterification the use of ultrasonication and mechanical stirring led to a similar high % FAME content (97.2±0.4 and 95.7%±0.8 respectively) after 120min. However the % yield of the extracted methyl esters using mechanical stirring was considerably lower compared to ultrasonication (37.0 and 80.6% respectively) when same conditions were applied (7.5% NaOH w/w of oil, 400:1 methanol to oil molar ratio). The kinetics study of the rapeseed oil methanolysis process via direct sonication and mechanical stirring showed that the reaction rate constant is not affected by the method of stirring under specific conditions. Properties of rapeseed biodiesel determined agree with the specifications of the European Standard EN 14214.Biodiesel is defined as the monoalkyl esters of vegetable oils or animal fats ( It has been demonstrated that extraction and transesterification can be performed simultaneously using methanol which acts as an extracting solvent and at the same time as a reagent ( Research on Rapeseed ( In order to improve the performance of transesterification and thus reduce biodiesel production cost it is important to develop new production methods and novel reactor types. Ultrasonic irradiation has been studied as a new and more efficient mixing tool for biodiesel production, as higher yields and shorter reaction times can be achieved using a lower amount of catalyst and energy compared to conventional methods ( In the present work direct sonication was used for the production of biodiesel from rapeseeds Methanol, hexane, and sodium hydroxide [purity In this study an ultrasonic processor (Model UP 400S, Dr. Hielscher GmbH) was used. The sonicator power output was 400 Unrefined rapeseed oil (80 The reaction was stopped after one hour and the two phases of the mixture were separated using a separatory funnel. After removal of glycerol phase the ester phase was acidified to pH: 2–3, using 4% w/v methanolic solution of citric acid and washed with warm distilled water to adjust pH to 7. It has been shown that the washing water temperature influences the rate of mass transfer of glycerol from the biodiesel into water achieving better purification. A higher washing temperature gives a higher diffusivity of glycerol from biodiesel to the water phase increasing the mass transfer coefficient ( In order to determine the optimum conditions for the Rapeseeds were dried overnight in an oven (120 Same reactants as above were placed in a 250 Methyl ester content in biodiesel was determined according to EN14103. More specifically: 100 FAME content % expresses the conversion of triglycerides extract to methyl esters ( For Fatty acid composition and free fatty acid percentage of rapeseed oil were determined according to European Committee regulation No. 2568/91. Moisture was determined using a KERN, model MLB50-3, moisture analyzer (Balingen, Germany) by weighing 3 Biodiesel physical and chemical properties were determined in the General Chemical State Laboratory in Piraeus, Greece according to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) norms and standard test methods. For A Two-Way ANOVA was performed for each one of the two dependent variables (% FAME, % yield) to determine the influence of the methanol:oil molar ratio and the % NaOH and the possible interaction between the two. For the analysis of In each case the model applied was of the form: Experiments were replicated twice and two determinations were run for each replicate. Means and standard errors were calculated in all cases. Significance was defined at Fatty acid composition of rapeseed oil extracted from seeds was: 4.8% Palmitic acid (16:0), 2.1% stearic acid (18:0), 63.4% oleic acid (18:1), 23.7% linoleic acid (18:2) and 5.7% linolenic acid (18:3). Moisture and oil content of seeds were determined to be 8.7 and 43.0% respectively. The seeds were used after drying thus reducing the moisture content to 4.2%. The moisture of the unrefined rapeseed oil was 8.0%. Dried oil was used for the reaction with a moisture content of 3.6%. The free fatty acid percentage of oil was 1.0%. Given this value, alkaline transesterification was chosen for experimental biodiesel production.  Furthermore, the interaction of % NaOH w/w and methanol concentration is highly significant in all cases ( Nevertheless, in all cases % FAME content was high (>93%), even at low methanol or catalyst concentrations. As a result, the high amount of methanol that is required for Most studies suggest that the required methanol to oil molar ratio for conventional transesterification is 6/1 ( The effect of catalyst and methanol concentration on methyl ester extraction yield is shown in The interaction of % NaOH and methanol concentration is significant in all cases ( In order to achieve maximum extracted methyl ester yield, a lower amount of methanol is required by increasing the catalyst concentration. Specifically, according to Extraction yield of the methyl ester increases with increasing amount of methanol for a specific NaOH concentration. More specifically, for catalyst concentrations, 3.5, 5.5, 7.5 and 9.5% w/w of oil, the yield increases from 51 to 87%, 54 to 76%, 71 to 81% and 72 to 87% respectively by increasing the amount of methanol from 170:1 to 550:1 methanol to oil molar ratio. For higher methanol to oil ratios (400 and 550/1) there are no significant changes regarding extraction yield by increasing catalyst concentrations. Other studies also reported similar results ( In line with the present study, the optimum conditions for the  The According to the statistical analysis for On the contrary, both NaOH and methanol concentration influence extraction yield significantly ( As shown in In addition, it was observed that when mechanical stirring was used for In order to further compare the two mixing methods, the progress of alkali-catalyzed According to all the above results it can be stated that direct sonication performs a different and more intense type of mixing compared to mechanical stirring. In line with the literature, the proposed mechanism regarding Application of ultrasonic power in a liquid produces microbubbles which grow over a few cycles and finally collapse (cavitation), ( Along the above line of reasoning, use of ultrasonication may increase the degree of extraction of the products. On the contrary, mechanical stirring reduces mass transfer resistance only by creating turbulence while having no effect on particle size reduction or disruption of the oil cells. This is the reason why a higher methanol to oil molar ratio and reaction time are required in order to achieve a high extraction yield of methyl esters. The above are confirmed by  There are only a few studies in the literature comparing ultrasonication to mechanical stirring during Additionally, Both ultrasonication and mechanical stirring were also applied for the transesterification of rapeseed oil using 1% NaOH w/w of oil as catalyst and 7:1 methanol to oil molar ratio. Using ultrasonication, the reaction was completed in 20 The methanolysis reaction is a liquid–liquid two phase process consisting of chemical (reaction) and physical (diffusion) stages. As a result, kinetics of the process will be affected by the chemical reaction and some kind of mass transfer between the two liquid phases. According to For the purpose of modeling the following assumptions were made: (a) the overall reaction was: TG In relation to assumption (c), a second order reaction plot of According to assumption (d) the integrated equation describing the methanolysis reaction rate close to equilibrium is ( The common equilibrium constant can also be calculated from the experimental degree of TG conversion at equilibrium, According to the above, the initial stage of the methanolysis reaction involves an irreversible pseudo second order reaction and close to equilibrium, a reverse second order reaction. In order to confirm this kinetic model the experimental data were plotted versus time using Eqs. The kinetics of ultrasonic assisted methanolysis, have not been studied in depth. The kinetics of base-catalyzed methanolysis of soybeans Biodiesel properties should meet standard specifications, those of the American ASTM 6751-08 or the European EN14214. The purity and the quality of biodiesel fuel can be influenced from the quality and the type of the feedstock and the process used to convert the feedstock to biodiesel ( Use of ultrasonication without external heating increased process rate, for both conventional and Authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the