The satiety values of six breakfast items commonly consumed in India were determined on the basis of area under the curve. A repeated measures design was used wherein energy intake, hunger, and satiety scores were assessed for one rice-based, three wheat-based and a rice–pulse fermented preparation, using white bread as the reference. Subjects were provided equi-caloric portions of the six breakfast items on separate occasions, and satiety ratings were recorded every 15min over a 120min period, after which time they were free to consume whatever they desired. Satiety scores were in the order of fermented cereal–pulse preparation>savoury broken wheat preparation>whole wheat flour flat bread>savoury semolina preparation>savoury rice flakes preparation>white bread standard. Among the various factors examined for their influence on satiety scores, fibre content, energy density and cooked weight of the food items positively influenced satiety scores. Neither fat nor carbohydrate content showed any correlation with satiety scores. These data indicate that isoenergetic portions of various foods influence satiety to different extents. Thus results suggest that consumption of high protein, high fibre and foods with greater water/volume leading to low energy density may be effective in delaying the return of hunger.The number of overweight and obese people around the world has continued to increase over the last decade. Dietary and lifestyle factors account for the principal causes of overweight and obesity. Therefore, behavioural management is used for achievement of desired body weight. Some individuals may adopt very low calorie diets to produce rapid weight loss. However, this strategy may be counterproductive since severe caloric restriction is associated with some potentially serious side effects, example risk of gall stone formation, increased plasma uric acid levels as well as adverse short-term health effects (  In order to minimize this problem, one strategy for weight control would be to adopt a diet based on foods which are highly satisfying/satiating in order to help people control their energy intake without having to overtly restrict their eating or endure high levels of hunger in between meals. Hence, a measure of the relative degree of fullness produced by common foods would be quite useful. The feeling of fullness that relates to a state of inhibition over eating is referred to as satiety. Certain important characteristics of foods that may influence their satiating efficiency include macronutrient composition, energy density, physical properties such as osmolarity, viscosity, particle size, volume/weight and palatability ( Some short-term studies indicated that fat is as satiating as carbohydrate ( Thus the variable nutrient composition of foods could be an underlying factor responsible for foods differing in their capacity to increase and maintain the feeling of fullness, even if they contain the same amount of energy. In view of this, the present study was conducted in order to compare the satiating effects of equi-caloric portions of selected common Indian breakfast foods. Comparisons were made between rice-based and wheat-based items and cereal–pulse combination preparation. A within-subject, repeated measures design was used. Each subject acted as his or her own control; being tested at the same time of the day and under as similar conditions as possible. Initially, 40 healthy female subjects aged 19–24 years were recruited, among whom 8 subjects dropped out at different times for personal reasons. Therefore 32 subjects participated in the study. The participants were recruited from among the undergraduate and post-graduate students of the Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey (SNDT) Women's University, Mumbai. Each subject was explained clearly the protocol of the study at the time of recruitment and informed consent was obtained from all individuals. Subjects were, however, not informed of the true purpose of the study, in order to minimize the subjectivity in the appetite or satiety ratings. Among the 32 subjects, 16 were staying in the university campus itself and the other half were day scholars. Students who were taking prescription medicine or who were suffering from any illness or food allergies were excluded from the study. None of the subjects were dieting and did not show excessive concern with regard to eating or body weight as inferred from the restraint and disinhibition subscales of the three factor eating questionnaire ( Equal-calorie (250 All of the breakfast foods tested were cereal-based preparations. The foods were selected in order to compare satiating effects of purely rice-based product vs purely wheat-based preparation vs a rice–pulse combination. Wheat-based preparations:  A savoury preparation made from 50 To elicit the effect of fibre two preparations of whole wheat were used:  A savoury preparation made from 50  A flat bread prepared from 60 Rice-based preparations:  A savoury preparation made from 54  A rice+pulse combination preparation. A fermented and steamed preparation with a typically mildly sour flavour made from These represent a range of foods most commonly consumed for breakfast by people living in different regions of the Indian subcontinent and were generally consumed at least once a week by the subjects. All five preparations were savoury. The paratha and idli were served with 5 The protocol of the present study was modelled on the lines of the experiment by Subjects were to report to the Nutrition laboratory on an empty stomach on the morning of the test day, after having completed an overnight fast (≥10 Equal-calorie (250 Subjects were seated 3 At the end of the 120 Each subject recorded her food intake on the day prior to the test. Intakes were recorded in terms of household measures that were subsequently converted to standard measures. The cooked amounts of food specified by each individual was converted into the corresponding raw weight (in g), before further calculations of the nutritive values were done. Nutrient intakes including energy, protein, total carbohydrate, total fat and crude fibre were estimated using computerized software based on the nutritive values given by The Indian Council of Medical Research ( Assessment of post-meal satiety was done by asking subjects to maintain a record of their food intake on the day of the test, after leaving the laboratory inclusive of the subject's next major meal. Calculations of nutrient intakes were done as in the case of the 24-h diet recall. Subjects were also asked to quantify the amount of water consumed. Subjective assessment of satiety/hunger and hedonic properties of foods were recorded at stipulated timings on equilateral seven-point rating scales anchored at −3 (‘extremely hungry’) with a midpoint at 0 (‘no particular feeling’) through to +3 (‘extremely full’). Similarly a five-point rating scale was used for rating the previous day's intake and activity as −2 (‘much less than usual’) to +2 (‘more than usual’). 100 The TFEQ developed by Calculation of satiety scores was done according to the method proposed by  The energy density of each test food was calculated, both prior to cooking and after cooking. The energy density of the test food prior to cooking was calculated using a modification of the formula given by Westerterp-Plantenga (2001) wherein alcohol intake was not taken into account since none of the subjects consumed it. Energy density of the cooked test product was estimated by directly dividing the calorific value by their cooked weights. In addition, energy density was calculated by taking into account the water consumed along with the test food. Analysis of data for correlations of satiety scores with other parameters was carried out using Pearson's correlation coefficient. Comparison of parameters among different foods was carried out using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the use of The body weights of the 32 female subjects ranged from 39.2 to 81.8 The TFEQ developed by The mean satiety scores for the 5 test foods ranged from 112.7 to 206.2%. The fermented rice–pulse preparation had the highest satiety score, while the rice flakes preparation had the lowest score among the test foods ( The time required by subjects to finish the portion of test food varied. Similarly palatability ratings also significantly differed among the test foods The time taken to eat was highest for the broken wheat savoury preparation (‘Dalia upma’), followed by the fermented rice–pulse preparation (‘idli’), in contrast to the flat bread (‘Paratha’), made out of whole wheat flour and the rice flakes preparation as shown in In contrast, mean palatability rating was the highest for the whole wheat flour flat bread and least for the broken wheat savoury preparation. There was no significant correlation between satiety scores and mean palatability rating. Macronutrient composition as well as energy densities of the test foods varied ( Cooked weights of foods ranged considerably from 82 Protein content was highest in the fermented rice–pulse combination preparation (‘idli’) and lowest in the rice flakes savoury preparation (‘poha’). Among wheat-based preparations the whole wheat flour flat bread had the highest protein content>broken wheat preparation>semolina preparation. Total carbohydrate content was highest in the fermented rice–pulse preparation followed by the rice flakes preparations. The whole wheat flour flat bread had the highest total carbohydrate content>semolina preparation>broken wheat preparation. Fat content was highest in the broken wheat preparation>semolina preparation>the whole wheat flour flat bread. The rice flakes preparation had a comparable fat content while the fermented rice–pulse preparation had the lowest fat content among all the test foods. In all test foods, 5–6 All test foods prior to cooking had energy density lower than the reference food, white bread. With respect to the cooked test foods (without accounting for water consumed with test food), ED of poha was only slightly lower than white bread. Semolina upma, dalia upma as well as idli had approximately half the ED of white bread. The lowest energy density was seen for the broken wheat preparation and the highest for the whole-wheat flour flat bread (paratha). When the water consumed along with the test food was used in calculating ED, ‘paratha’ and ‘poha’ had ED similar to white bread. The lowest ED was found for the broken wheat preparation followed by the ‘idli’ and ‘semolina upma’. ED was significantly and negatively correlated with cooked weight of test food per se ( The prospective consumption ratings obtained from the VAS used to assess subjects' desire for food was correlated with the satiety scores ( Regression analysis indicated that satiety scores were positively correlated with fibre content of the test food ( Further, satiety scores were correlated to time taken for the return of hunger. Correlations between fasting hunger and the return of hunger were also assessed ( Analysis of variance indicated that time taken for the return of hunger significantly differed for the test foods ( For all six foods a positive and significant correlation was observed between mean satiety scores (SI%) and time taken for return of hunger, with the lowest correlation seen with whole wheat flour flat bread and highest with rice–pulse combined fermented preparation. When mean fasting hunger and time taken for the return of hunger (min) were correlated, a highly significant positive correlation was established in the case of whole wheat flour flat bread. The findings of the present study revealed that iso-caloric servings of different breakfast foods varied distinctly in their satiating capacity. Bread, the reference food was found to be least satisfying of all. Although all foods were cereal-based, the rice-based preparations had satiety values at the extremes, with the rice flakes preparation, ‘Poha’ exhibiting the least satiety and the rice–pulse fermented preparation, ‘Idli’, the highest. Various factors seem to influence the satiating effect of foods; some of these include palatability, weight or volume of the food, which is a measure of the portion size, particle size, macronutrient composition, energy density, etc. The influence of these factors on satiety of particular foods has been assessed in the present study. Whereas some researchers are of the opinion that palatability of a particular food decreases as it is consumed ( In the present study, although no significant differences were obtained between the mean palatability ratings of the breakfast foods tested, the finer whole wheat flour flat bread was most liked and received the highest palatability rating, whereas the broken wheat savoury preparation was least liked. Also, no significant correlation was found between SI scores and palatability ratings for all five preparations. This observation suggests that in the present study, palatability did not play a role in influencing satiety. The weight or volume of food is known to influence the satiety responses of individuals. It is believed that human beings are accustomed to consuming a certain fixed weight/volume of food before they experience satiety ( Weight and volume might not be the only factors influencing satiety. The macronutrient composition of food has been outlined as a potentially important factor influencing appetite regulation. Macronutrients differ significantly in their capacity to induce feelings of satiety, post-ingestion. There appears to be a hierarchy in the satiating efficiency of macronutrients. The current general consensus drawn from available literature is that calories from protein generate the strongest suppression of subsequent hunger and eating, followed by carbohydrates and then by fat ( Studies on the satiating efficiencies of fat, carbohydrates and proteins have fixed the energy content of a preload at one level of energy while varying the macronutrient ratios within these preloads. The satiating efficiency was established by measuring motivational ratings on food intake and by assessing subsequent energy intake (De Graaf et al., 1992). In the present study, a comparison between the wheat-based preparations including white bread showed that the differences in their satiating capacities could be due to the differences in their protein and crude fibre contents, since a significant correlation was observed between the fibre content of the test foods and satiety scores. However, protein and fat content were not significantly correlated with the satiety scores. Among the four wheat-based preparations—protein content was lower in the semolina preparation, ‘Upma’, than in the broken wheat preparation, ’Dalia upma’. The wheat flour flat bread, ‘Paratha’, had slightly lower protein content than white bread. Thus, higher satiety value of the whole wheat preparations may be attributed to the higher fibre content. The rice–pulse fermented preparation had the highest protein content. Also the satiating efficiency of the cereal–pulse combination was highest suggesting that the higher protein content as well as the protein quality (being a cereal–pulse mixture) could be reasons for the high satiety value. Further a wide range of unusual storage dietary fibres are commonly associated with legumes and many of them are water-soluble polysaccharides which swell to a gel in water. Black gram ( Second in order of satiating effect was the savoury broken wheat preparation, ‘dalia upma’. The effect of the comparatively larger particle size in this case was quite evident even as the time taken to eat this particular food was maximum. These observations are in accordance with the inherent properties of broken wheat. The larger particle size and greater fibre content resulted in considerable effort and time required to chew this food. Energy required to break the product down into smaller particles—referred to as the comminution energy, increases with the dietary fibre content of the food ( Among the wheat-based preparations, the flat bread made from whole wheat flour showed a satiety score higher than semolina preparation even though the particle size was comparatively smaller. This could be because the flour being processed from whole wheat grains resulted in higher fibre content. The semolina preparation was shown to have a higher satiety value as compared to white bread, as the latter is prepared from refined wheat flour which has been entirely stripped off its fibre content and is of much smaller particle size. The type of fibre present also seems to play an important role in influencing satiety. Similarly, broken wheat also might have a higher insoluble fibre content, owing to which the effect on satiation was more pronounced than on satiety as most subjects found the broken wheat preparation to be more filling as compared to the other foods tested. The results of the present study are based on the crude fibre contents of foods. However, values for crude fibre underestimate the unavailable carbohydrate in most foods and therefore analysis of the dietary fibre contents would possibly reveal the presence in foods of such fibres that swell up on absorbing moisture and thereby produce more significant effects on satiety. Further, the fat and crude fibre content of ‘idli’ was lowest, among the five test foods, but it gave the highest satiety. ‘Dalia upma’ and ‘paratha’ were both prepared from whole wheat and therefore their crude fibre content was not very different. Dalia upma had a slightly higher fat content. However, these two preparations differed considerably in water content, cooked weight and energy density. Hence lower cooked weight, lower water content and higher energy density of ‘paratha’ was associated with slightly lower satiety scores. Energy density, which is a direct consequence of nutrient composition of foods, appears to be another crucial regulatory mechanism of energy intake. Energy density and satiety appear to be inversely linked. Foods with higher energy density are less satiating than foods with lower energy density and vice versa. Typically high-fat diets are high in energy density, whereas low energy density diets are essentially those with high water and/or fibre content ( In the present study, isoenergetic portions of the different breakfast foods varied both in energy density as well as weight. ED of the test foods were found to be significantly and negatively correlated with satiety scores. The results of the present study are in line with other reports that foods with higher energy density confer lower satiety. It has been reported ( However, no significant correlations were found between mean palatability ratings and nutrient composition of foods or even weight/serving of the food. Thus as suggested by Also, these data indicated that in the short-term, low energy density foods such as the rice–pulse fermented preparation and broken wheat preparation promote greater satiety and/or decreased hunger compared to high energy density foods. Similarly, the correlations between prospective consumption and SI scores suggest that both satiation and satiety were highly dependent on the energy density of foods. Foods with low energy density (low kcal/g) were seen to be relatively more satiating, being inherently high in fibre (as in case of broken wheat preparation) or water (both the rice–pulse fermented preparation and broken wheat preparation) and hence were of much greater volume and weight than the others. In addition, they were relatively more difficult to eat and probably produced greater gastric distension which thereby inhibited further intake. Conversely, the higher fat containing foods like the rice flakes preparation, semolina preparation and whole wheat flour flat bread were relatively more palatable, easily consumed and served in smaller amounts. In conclusion, it may be stated that several factors were found to affect the satiety scores of the five test foods. It is difficult to pinpoint exactly which of these may be effecting satiety more than others. However, data on satiety values of breakfast foods that are commonly consumed could prove useful in planning of diets not only for weight reduction but also for other therapeutic conditions. Knowledge of the satiety: energy ratio of foods could be used in order to devise a diet that would help reduce hunger pangs and increase compliance to low energy intake. This area of study warrants further research in order to examine other foods and food preparation techniques for their effects on satiety, since there are several factors which influence satiety.