In this work, effective two-step processes for recovering manganese (Mn), as well as zinc (Zn), from a rich Mn residue, that mainly consists of Mn and carbon with lesser amounts of Zn and Fe, are proposed. First, three different methods (conventional, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted) were evaluated for reductive acid leaching of the residue. Subsequently, two different strategies for purification of Mn from the leachate were considered: oxidative precipitation of Mn with persulfate and solvent extraction with Cyanex 302 as the extractant. The results showed that microwave-assisted leaching was the most effective in terms of the percentage of metal leached (with 98 and 100% of Mn and Zn, respectively) as well as the effectiveness of time and reagent consumption. Both Mn purification strategies were effective; with the oxidative precipitation, a 99.7% pure MnO2 precipitate and 3.30 g/L Zn solution with a purity of 99.9% were obtained at a global yield of 97.4 and 94.8%, respectively. Solvent extraction resulted in a 32.6 g/L Mn solution with a purity of 99.9% and 35.2 g/L Zn solution with a purity of 98.4%, with global yields of 96.3 and 100%, respectively. Based on these results, a sequential two-step procedure for recovering all valuable products (Mn, Zn and graphite) with high efficiency from a Mn rich residue is proposed.In our modern society, manganese (Mn) is a key element for many of our daily activities. To list some of its applications: it is used in alkaline and zinc-manganese (Zn-Mn) batteries; in steelmaking ( According to the U.S. Geological Survey report, in 2016, a total of 16 M metric tons of Mn were produced from primary sources. The world’s largest ore extraction site is located in South Africa, totalling 4.7 M metric tons of metal extracted. South Africa also holds the largest ore reserves ( Since the end of 2015, the price of Mn has been increasing steadily from 1.5 to slightly over 2.0 U.S dollar/Kg ( Even though, currently, pyrometallurgical processes still continue to be the most widely used to recycle Mn at an industrial scale ( Among the various reductants mentioned above, glucose seems to be a good option considering its availability, price and reductive power. The leaching process using glucose as the reducing agent has the following overall reaction ( Compared to H Moreover, glucose is also economically more attractive and safer to use, as H In recent years, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted leaching have been proven to be more environmentally friendly alternative options for metals dissolution from various solid phases than the traditional conventional method, since lower energy consumption and reagent use can be achieved ( To positively address the requirements of circular economy, subsequent purification of Mn from the leachates is needed to obtain high purity value added products. For this purpose, several strategies can be considered. Selective and controlled precipitation of Mn compounds or contaminants is an attractive option, since it is simple and cheap. The most common way to do so is by metal hydroxide and sulphide precipitation. ( Another option to purify Mn from the leached solution is the use of extraction procedures. Solvent extraction-based methods have the advantage of delivering high-purity metal products. Among the extractants available, di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) is one of the most widely used ( The aim of this work was to recycle Mn efficiently and selectively from a rich Mn residue using a simple environmentally friendly two-step process. With this work, we seek to obtain high grade Mn compounds from this residue with the minimum overall use of reagents while recovering simultaneously the major contaminants (mainly Zn and graphite) as valuable products. For this purpose, a two-step methodology based on first efficient leaching of the metals and the subsequent purification of Mn (and Zn) was developed. Considering the high Mn content present in the residue, its recycling makes it a valuable asset to reduce both the extraction of Mn from primary sources and environmental contamination by Mn. Analytical grade H In this work, three different strategies (conventional method, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted leaching) were first tested to evaluate their potential ability for leaching Mn totally from the residue. Glucose was chosen as reductant for solubilizing Mn(IV) to Mn(II). Conventional leaching was conducted in a shaking water bath at 70 °C and 200 rpm (OLS200, Grant) for 4 h with 1.5 M H For ultrasound-assisted leaching, a Bandelin Sonopuls HD 2200 ultrasonic homogenizer (power of 200 W and output frequency of 20 kHz ± 500 Hz) with a 3 mm titanium microtip (Berlin, Germany) were used. Ultrasonic parameters were kept at 0.1 s and 20% for pulse time and wave amplitude, respectively. The leaching experiments were conducted using 1.5 M H The microwave-assisted leaching assays were performed in a domestic microwave oven (800 W, 2.45 GHz) with polytetrafluoroethylene bombs (container volume of 23 mL). For each test, the bombs were heated separately and placed in the centre of the microwave oven to maximize efficiency. Microwave heating was performed with different L/S ratios (between 5 and 20), H After leaching assays, all the solutions were filtered (in the case of microwave-assisted leaching, only after 20 min cooling time to lower the extreme temperature and pressure created during the experiment) and the filtrate was analysed by atomic absorption spectroscopy with flame atomization (AAS-FA), as described later, to determine metal concentration and extraction yield. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and all of the results are the average of three replicates. Two procedures for Mn purification were performed from the microwave-assisted leachate: a purification by oxidation and a solvent extraction procedure. The recovery of Mn, as MnO The recovery of Mn with Cyanex 302 liquid-liquid extraction was performed using kerosene as diluent. First, the pH of the leachate solution was adjusted to 3, and a 1:1 v/v solution of Cyanex 302 and kerosene was added to the leachate in an aqueous/organic (A/O) ratio of 5:1. This mixture was vigorously shaken (∼30 min) to promote the capture of Zn by Cyanex 302. The pH was controlled at 2.7 throughout the whole procedure. Because the pH continuously decreased in the extraction process, NaOH was added to restore the initial pH of 2.7. At the end, the organic and aqueous phases were allowed to separate and settle. The Zn in the organic phase was then stripped using 4 M H Metal chemical speciation calculations were evaluated using the computer program Visual MINTEQ (Ver. 3.0, KTH, Sweden). All chemical equilibrium concentrations of all species considered in the model by the program reactions were generated based on component stability ( The determination of the qualitative composition of the initial feed residue, as well as the purified solid obtained by oxidative precipitation, were performed by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis with a Philips X’Pert X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation under operating conditions of 40 mA and 45 kV with a step size of 0.026° and a scan step time of 96.4 s. Quantification of the metals remaining in the residue was performed by AAS-FA after total acid reductive digestion. Digestion was performed using 2 M H Complementary, a semi-quantitative analysis of the metal content in the feed residue was performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Panalytical AXIOS-Advanced WDXRF (wavelength dispersive) spectrometer fitted with an SST-MAX X-ray source (rhodium target) with a 4 kW output. Obtained data were expressed as percentage of total elemental mass. Metals were determined in solution by AAS-FA with an air-acetylene flame using a PerkinElmer AAnalyst 400 (Norwalk, CT, USA) or an Analytik Jena novAA 350 spectrometers (Konrad-Zuse, Germany). The feed residue used in the present work was obtained from the ultrasound-assisted acid leaching (1 M H In addition to this analyses, the metal quantification of the main metals present in the residue was obtained by total acid reductive digestion. The metal composition of the residue is provided in Finally, a semi-quantitative XRF analysis was performed to verify the results obtained by the total digestion. Manganese was confirmed as the major component (carbon is out of the range for the technique) counting for >94% (w/w) of mass analysed. Zinc is the second most abundant element with 3.71%. Other metals were also shown to be present, such as potassium (0.8%) and iron (0.5%). The differences found in values obtained from the total acid digestion and XRF are likely due to the semi-quantitative nature of the technique. Nonetheless, both methods agree in the relative abundance of the main metals present in the residue. Firstly, metal extraction was conducted using conventional leaching. The results are provided in For both metals, an increase of the L/S ratio resulted in a slight increase of the leaching yield. For the ratio of 20, total extraction of Zn was achieved ( Subsequently, ultrasound-assisted leaching was evaluated. Under these conditions, the extraction yields were: 9.3 and 41.8% for Mn and 41.0 and 78.8% for Zn, after 2 and 14 min, respectively ( Comparatively, these results were worse than those obtained with the conventional method ( In a third attempt, microwave-assisted leaching was tested. To determine the suitability and best conditions for microwave-assisted leaching, different test conditions were used ( By using similar experimental conditions (L/S ratio of 20, test A, The use of microwave leaching brings the advantage of reduced time and amount of reagent (glucose) consumed together with an increasing of the efficiency of the leaching procedure. This is easily observed by comparing the results obtained with conventional and microwave-assisted leaching. Furthermore, the comparison with other works is also elucidative: for example, Fattahi The residue left over from reductive microwave-assisted leaching was analysed by XRD. The analysis revealed that the main component in the residue is carbon (graphite), with no other substantial peaks for other species (data not shown). The total digestion of the remaining residue confirms that most of the metals were leached from the original residue, as very low quantities were found: Mn: 3.87 mg/g; Zn: 0.15 mg/g; Fe: 0.036 mg/g. Considering its composition and the fact that it is already ground, this residue may be suitable for the lubrification industry or manganese dioxide graphite composite electrodes ( The final metal concentrations obtained using each leaching strategy under optimized Mn leaching conditions are described in Even though a fairly concentrated Mn solution was achieved (33.2 g/L) using the microwave-assisted leaching process ( Precipitation can be used effectively to remove Fe from the solution, as it is predicted from the chemical speciation simulations, since it precipitates readily at low pH (pH ≈ 2.5–3.5) with a minimum loss of both Mn and Zn ( So, in this work, the ability of oxidative precipitation or solvent extraction for recovering Mn with high yield and purity was evaluated. These two strategies were first preceded by the quantitative removal of Fe by precipitation, as a rust-brown gelatinous solid indicative of the formation of Fe(OH) However, this did not occur since almost all Fe (97.2%) ( In this work, sodium persulphate was chosen to oxidize Mn(II). Even though a higher pH favours the oxidation of Mn(II) to Mn(IV) (see Eq. The XRD analysis of the solid recovered from the S In this work, the ability of Cyanex 302 for the simultaneous Mn purification plus Zn concentration and purification from our leached solution using a single stage extraction was evaluated. The main results obtained after this extractive procedure are presented in Even though both purification processes were demonstrated to be able to recover Mn with high efficiency (≥98.2%) ( Both purification strategies fulfil the principles of a circular economy since both metals (Mn and Zn) were almost totally recovered with high purity, which allows their effective reuse. In this work, a simple zero-waste hydrometallurgical strategy for recycling all main constituents (Mn plus Zn and carbon) from a rich Mn residue is described. For this purpose, two bi-stage sequential processes, which combined a reductive (glucose used as the reductant) acid (sulphuric acid) leaching step for the metals present in the residue followed by a subsequent purification step to recover Mn (plus Zn) from the leachate, were developed. Among the three (conventional, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted) leaching methods tested, microwave-assisted leaching was revealed to be the fastest (one cycle of 90 s) and most efficient (≥98% of Mn and Zn leached), using lower amounts of chemicals, and was used to produce leachate for subsequent purification experiments. Subsequently, two different purification strategies (persulphate to selectively precipitate MnO This work was performed in the framework of the financing with reference LAQV (UID/QUI/50006/2013 – POCI/01/0145/FEDER/007265) with financial support from FCT/MEC through national funds and co-financed by The authors declare that no conflict of interest exists.