In this paper, the outputs of a generic flowsheeting model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) are tested using three scenarios, against a literature study on cellulase. Further, using the outputs, an environmental assessment is performed to determine the impacts of producing 1 kg of cellulase. It is shown that the model can provide material and energy balance data with accuracy within 30% for key variables. When converted to environmental impacts (Life cycle assessment), results were typically within 20% of the literature values, but with fewer extremes, due to the lower impact of small volume chemicals that were less accurately modelled in the material data calculations. The results also show that energy and electrical inputs form the majority of the LCA impacts and should be a critical part of early-stage modelling. In future studies, the importance of reducing energy use should not be overlooked.Conversion of biomass to biofuels, including bioethanol and biogas, is receiving increasing attention owing to the depletion of fossil fuels ( In the development of processes such as this, the economic and environmental impacts can be required, even at an early stage of the design. However, at this early stage, the detailed information that may be required is often missing, with only basic laboratory information available. To define a flowsheet for such calculations, preliminary material and energy balances, with other basic design considerations, are needed. If this basic information is available, it is possible to determine estimates for operating and capital costs as well as environmental indicators for the process. To enable such an early design of microbial processes, the authors have developed a generic flowsheeting model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) to give all the required information for further studies. Detailed background and general model assumptions of this MS-Excel model are provided in other readings ( Type of fermentation (aerobic or anaerobic); Principle unit operations in the process; Raw material inputs; and Process conditions and basic parameters for the unit operations. The model includes a built-in database of parameters, including yields, chemical formulae, growth rates, and more. These can be used to provide default values should specific information not be available. The model does not extend to economic modelling, primarily because the costs of capital, raw materials and energy are very sensitive to location and time, but the economic modelling is substantially facilitated by the information provided. Similarly, environmental assessments can also be undertaken using the information provided. This paper presents the material and energy results for cellulase production (batch fermentation of Several studies are available detailing the production of cellulase from The cellulase production model considered here was an aerobic production by submerged cultivation, traditionally referred to as submerged fermentation (SmF), of the extracellular enzyme using A three-stage inoculum development required three seed bioreactors. All feed streams to these reactors were individually steam sterilised. Downstream processing was limited to a rotary vacuum filtration unit to remove biomass and an ultrafiltration unit which separated wastewater with unreacted raw materials from the cellulase product stream ( Additional values required for the model were obtained from the cellulase production models in literature ( From these material and energy results, comparative LCAs of the different cellulase scenarios were carried out to compare first estimates of environmental impacts. This was done using SimaPro v7.1 and the CML 2 Baseline 2000 v2.03 assessment method. Ecoinvent v1.3 datasets were used, with the ETH-ESU database providing information on coal mining (electricity). The systems were defined to include all materials, including all raw material and agricultural inputs for the production of cellulase, with the foreground process including the data provided by the model in the material and energy balance data, with background data including the inputs to the model (with the exception of electricity). Since the focus is on a comparative system, both to the literature and each of the scenarios, the transport distances and other location specific information was not included. The LCA data for cellulose was modelled as having originated from wood chips, corn liquor from maize starch, ammonia from ammonium nitrate, water as municipal water supply and electricity based on coal fired systems as common locally in South Africa. Electricity data was obtained from the national supplier (Eskom) annual reports and entered as individual processes originating from the coal mining, through to power plants to provide final energy inputs. The process plant and equipment impacts were excluded, as was wastewater treatment. A functional unit of 1 kg of cellulase was used. From the model, the material and energy inventories obtained to produce 1 kg cellulase – containing product ( For Scenario 3, the material and energy inventory from the generic model showed large differences when compared to Scenarios 1 and 2. The outputs from the model for ammonia, corn liquor and steam requirements were some 350-, 450- and 250% higher respectively, than in previous scenarios. The high ammonia and corn liquor requirements resulted from the specifications for nitrogen source 2 and carbon source 2 respectively. The increase in the steam requirement (by mass) was a result of reduced heat integration with no preheating in steam sterilisation and lower steam quality. Cellulose and nutrient requirements were lower in Scenario 3 following the definition of lower excesses and increased use of carbon source 2 and nitrogen source 2. As both the material inputs and the downstream separation efficiencies were similar, the outputs of Scenarios 1 and 2 were similar. In Scenario 3, poor downstream separation efficiencies led to the cellulase lost in wastewater being 25 times greater than previous scenarios. These poor separation efficiencies also led to larger volumes, aggravating the higher steam requirements. However, cellulose, corn liquor and nutrient outputs were lower in Scenario 3. As a lower excess was used, all other outputs were higher in Scenario 3 than Scenarios 1 and 2. Comparing the results for Scenario 1 to the published data of For each kilogram of cellulase produced as pure product excluding impurities, 79-, 71- and 93 kg of water was required for Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 respectively. The data of The amount of carbon dioxide exiting the modelled scenarios was more than double that reported by For 1 kg of cellulase LCA results were obtained and presented ( The global warming equivalent scores were all between 4.60 and 8.11 kg of product. This was a result of the CO The impacts of Scenario 2 were all lower than LCA results which are within 5% of each other may not be significantly different from each other owing to uncertainty in the inputs and LCA inventory datasets. Process contributions of six LCA impact categories were investigated from the In all categories, electricity, cellulose and corn liquor formed the greatest portion of the LCA scores. In the abiotic depletion impact category, electricity formed 76% of the total impact and wood chips, the assumed source of cellulose, contributed 20% of the impact ( Electricity (73%) and cellulose (25%) again formed the greatest impacts in photochemical oxidation scores ( Using the CeBER Bioprocess modeller, it was possible to obtain quick accurate material and energy balance information. Even with reduced inputs, certain raw materials and outputs obtained were still within 10% of literature values. While LCA results obtained were also comparable, the results of the most accurate model were sometimes less comparable to the literature  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.