The convergence-confinement method used for tunnel analysis is based on the simplifying assumption of axisymmetric conditions. This paper presents a method for tunnel support design which is not limited to the hydrostatic loading simplification. With knowledge of the unsupported tunnel displacements, a circular beam equivalent to the plane strain tunnel boundary is found. Then, the distribution of field stresses between the ground and support system can be readily computed. The proposed method allows utilizing existing solutions for plastic deformations around excavations under non-hydrostatic loading, such as the solution derived by Detournay (1986), in order to compute the non-uniform support response. Significantly less computational resources are required compared to the finite-element method; hence, this method is well suited at the preliminary stage of a project to conduct extensive sensitivity analyses and identify critical support scenarios.Tunneling projects are considered to be high cost civil engineering projects. Tunnel support is a major component of the costs associated with tunnel construction, and can greatly vary depending on the geological conditions ( For the design of tunnel support there are a number of methods available, including analytical, empirical, and numerical methods. There are no universally accepted guidelines, and design practice tends to vary greatly. Hence, the designer must apply engineering judgment in order to determine if his design is acceptable ( The Kirsch equations ( Numerical codes based on the finite-element method (FEM) codes have become a powerful tool for tunnel support design. Most of the limitations that apply to analytical methods do not apply to FEM. However, there are a number of drawbacks associated with FEM. FEM models are sensitive to mesh and boundary effects, and may yield erroneous results if these are not properly handled. Yet, these issues can be overcome by experienced users that can set up and compute such models in a relatively short time. A more significant disadvantage of using sophisticated FEM codes for geotechnical design in the early stage of a project is related to the inductive nature of the design process in soil and rock engineering, whereby limited observations, experience, and engineering judgment are used to infer the behavior of poorly-defined problems. In this context, shortage of data at the beginning of a project (i.e. data uncertainty) makes it difficult to describe the observed variability of key geological parameters, and in the presence of data uncertainty even the most advanced FEM models would yield inaccurate results, see In addition, many experienced engineering practitioners and educators have pointed to a hazard that may arise, paradoxically, from the great appeal of FEM codes; FEM codes operate in a black box manner and can become a substitute for fundamental thinking. During construction there may be cases in which the rock or soil behave in a different manner than the one predicted by the models, and the engineers would be forced to make quick and crucial decisions. At this point, analysis must be executed in a short period of time, often under high pressure. Due to these reasons, it is desirable to develop methods that are simpler and more intuitive, as well as computationally efficient. Whereas these methods do not overcome the issue of data uncertainty, they allow for multiple scenarios to be simulated in a shorter period of time, thus it is possible to identify key support design scenarios, and at the same time use the results to drive the data collection process required by sophisticated analysis methods. One such approach that is widely used and studied is the convergence-confinement method ( The convergence confinement method assumes a hydrostatic stress field (i.e. the coefficient of lateral pressure The clear disadvantage of assuming a hydrostatic stress field is that this is seldom the case in most rock engineering problems. Typically, the coefficient of lateral pressure is different than one The displacements and stresses are non-uniform and vary along the tunnel boundary, including zones of stress concentration and relaxation. The tunnel liner is subjected to bending moments. Bolts at different locations are subjected to different axial stresses, and in turn have a different impact on stress and strain results. Therefore, it would be highly beneficial to develop a more generalized method that accounts for non-uniform loading conditions. Oreste has published several important papers in the field of tunnel support analysis, and developed a numerical method for tunnel support analysis that does not require the assumption of hydrostatic loading, termed the Hyperstatic Reaction Method (HRM) ( Guided by the same rational as the convergence-confinement method, the Equivalent Boundary Beam (EBB) method presented in this paper attempts to calculate the stresses and displacements that develop in a tunnel support system without the need of building a finite element mesh of the surrounding ground. Instead, the ground is represented by an equivalent beam. There are advantages of using a beam for this purpose; first, compared to springs which lack connectivity, beams behave in a manner that is more similar to the ground. Additionally, tunnel support mainly includes concrete liners, and in some cases arched steel sets. Since liners and steel sets can be efficiently modeled using beam elements, using the same elements for the tunnel boundary allows the convenient computation of the distribution of forces between the tunnel and support. This paper builds upon a previous paper, where a similar methodology was used for solving simpler SDOF ground-support interaction problems including pillars in room and pillar mining, and vertical circular shafts ( For the implementation of the proposed EBB method, the software The basis of the proposed method for tunnel support analysis is deriving a circular beam (hereinafter referred to as the Equivalent Boundary Beam) that behaves in a manner equivalent to the tunnel boundary. For a circular tunnel under elastic conditions and a constant gravitational stress field, the displacements can be found using the Kirsch equations. The equations for the radial and tangential displacements of the excavation boundary are: For an infinite cylinder shaped beam, subjected to a uniform radial pressure Using In order to address the more complex and realistic condition of non-hydrostatic in-situ stresses, the fictitious forces that act upon the tunnel-support boundary must be found. Note that these forces are fictitious, as they are not identical to the initial forces acting upon the excavation in the plane strain problem, as these two structural entities respond differently to equal loading. The two main computational steps used to solve the problem ( The unsupported tunnel displacements are initially used to obtain the vector of fictitious forces; and The fictitious forces are than applied upon the combined stiffness matrix of the ground and support to find the displacements of the supported tunnel. Once the displacements of the supported tunnel are found, the inner stresses in the support components can be deduced using basic mechanical theory. It is noted that the proposed method would apply to both concrete liners applies and steel sets, as the inputs would be the same. For composite supports such as steel sets embedded in shotcrete or concrete reinforced with rebar, an additional analysis step must be applied for finding the distribution of stresses between the concrete and steel components. This technique was proposed by ( There are various methods for solving beam problems. For this paper, the Direct Stiffness Method (DSM) is used. The DSM is a well-known matrix method that makes use of the members' stiffness relations for computing member forces and displacements in structures. The procedures for solving with DSM are explained in many standard textbooks, and will not be repeated here. The elements used for assembly of the boundary beam stiffness matrix are beam elements. The beam elements consist of a line with two nodes, and three degrees of freedom for each node: translational, axial and rotational movement. The tunnel boundary is divided into a series of beam elements as shown in As discussed above, the proposed method relies on the unsupported tunnel displacements as an input. In order to solve a beam problem, nodal rotations, as well as translational displacements, are required. The nodal rotations As the problem is symmetric in both axes, it is possible to treat only one quarter of the tunnel. Constraints are defined at the tunnel crown and wall accordingly, as shown in  Minor deviations between the two methods are inevitable, due to two reasons: (1) FEM codes do not provide solutions in exact agreement with the analytical solution; and (2) the proposed EBB method itself provides an approximate solution due to its reliance on the assumed equivalent parameters. Given the observable heterogeneous nature of physical parameters and/or geological processes, the current deviations could be considered as negligible. Rock bolts are a common type of support used in underground mines and civil tunnels. Generally, support can be classified as being either active or passive. Pre-tensioned rock bolts apply to the first category, while un-tensioned bolts, or cables, are considered as passive support. Modeling of these two bolting methods using the proposed EBB method will be addressed in the following section. In the case of passive support in the form of ungrouted mechanically anchored bolts, the bolts are assumed to resist the ground deformation and to share the load imposed by gravity with the surrounding ground. This action of the bolts can be integrated into the methodology discussed in 2, by adding spring elements to the equivalent beam representing the ground. Based on elastic theory, the stiffness of a bolt, without accounting for the interaction with the ground, is equal to: The procedure for integrating pre-tensioning forces into the proposed method, can be achieved by simply adding the pre-tensioning forces into the vector of fictitious forces (found from Step 1 in To summarize, the passive effect of bolts is integrated into the proposed method by modifying the equivalent beam stiffness matrix, whereas pre-tensioning forces are added into the fictitious force vector. A comparison over varied parameters of a tunnel supported by both liner and bolts, is presented in Throughout the last decades, great efforts have been invested in attempts to obtain closed-form solutions for the problem of a circular tunnel in plastic ground under non-uniform loading. However, knowledge of the tunnel plastic displacements alone still lacks to provide a sufficient basis for calculating the actual stresses that develop in the support system. In this section, the procedure outlined in In numerical analyses involving plasticity, where the stress-strain relationship is non-linear, an iterative solution process must be applied. It is clear that ground weakens as it deforms, as the zone of plastic failure increases. Hence, it is proposed to reduce the stiffness of the equivalent beam in each stage of analysis. In order to obtain the proper degree of reduction, the following steps are proposed: The problem is divided into From the elastic analysis procedure discussed in The global stiffness matrix of the equivalent beam representing the ground is taken from the elastic procedure as well, where The displacements for each stage are computed, initially equal to the elastic displacements; using an iterative process, the stiffness matrix representing the ground is gradually decreased, until the displacement results are approximately equal to the known plastic displacements. It is important to note that the decrease in ground stiffness mentioned in Step 5 is not trivial, as there are an infinite number of ways to decrease the stiffness of the equivalent beam. Preliminary analysis showed that decreasing Once steps 1–5 are completed, the ground support interaction can be computed. This requires an additional computation process, as illustrated in In this example, the problem was divided into 4 stages. In order to avoid unnecessary iterations, the load increment As an example, a circular tunnel in weak plastic rock obeying the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion is computed.  Once the maximum axial force and bending moment that develop in the liner are known, the maximum inner stresses can then be calculated using the relationship from beam theory: Based on the results listed in In terms of solving and post-processing time, results for the proposed method are generated almost instantaneously. By comparison, simple FEM models can be setup and calculated by experienced users in approximately 10 min. One may argue that the difference is not large enough to conclude there is a significant advantage in using the proposed analytical method. However, a large number of iterations would be required in order to assess the cost of different support systems under varying ground conditions. For such extensive analyses the difference in the time required for both solving and analyzing results would increase considerably, rendering the proposed method highly beneficial. This was demonstrated in a recent paper ( Much effort has been invested by various researchers in developing solutions for circular tunnels, as most tunnels are circular or near circular. Nevertheless, there are still many practical instances, such as high walled horse-shoe shaped tunnels, where results can differ significantly from idealized circular tunnels. In order to extend the proposed method for solving such problems, a number of difficulties must be addressed. First, for these problems, there may be no available solutions for the unsupported displacements. Additionally, estimation of the stiffness of the equivalent elements of irregular excavation shapes is presumably more difficult to obtain than for a circular excavation. The feasibility of such modification is questioned. Nevertheless, it is possible that rather than attempting to derive analytical or semi-analytical solutions, these problems could be solved by developing efficient algorithms that calibrate the equivalent boundary to match FEM results.  This paper has introduced a new Equivalent Boundary Beam method for tunnel support analysis. In this method, an equivalent beam is used to represent the ground surrounding the tunnel boundary. This allows converting the plane-strain problem to a simple beam problem. The method allows the analysis of different types of tunnel support, including concrete liners and rockbolts. The method is easy to reproduce and is computationally efficient. The obtained results are in good agreement with analytical solutions and 2D FEM models. The authors believe this method represents an enhancement of the convergence-confinement method to include the common and more complex condition of non-hydrostatic loading conditions. The method relies on the unsupported tunnel deformations as an input. For plastic analysis, the solution derived by In its current version, the method is well suited for the analysis of simple geometries (circular shaped tunnels); Work is ongoing to extend the formulation to more complicated ground-support problems (e.g. non-circular tunnels, deep excavations, etc.). Comparison of results obtained from 2D numerical analyses conducted in RS2 and in the proposed EBB method are presented in the following tables. The models generated in RS2 consisted of 6 noded triangle elements, with 6000–8000 nodes. Parameters were varied, not including the vertical pressure and Poisson ratio that were kept constant: a vertical pressure of 10 MPa, and Poisson ratios of 0.25 and 0.2 were used for the rock and concrete liner, respectively. All models consist of a single stage, with no application of initial relaxation prior to support installation.  