In this study, ultra-fine lead oxide, lead carbonate and lead hydroxyl carbonate particles were synthesized and modified by a surface sulphidization route to form a sulphide surface layer which is interesting in electronic and optoelectronic device as well as vacuum tribological applications. All the samples were characterized using XRD and nitrogen adsorption/desorption techniques to obtain information on the crystal structure and the specific surface area of the samples. The surface physical-chemical properties of the samples were studied by potentiometric titration, adsorption of xanthate, and measurements of contact angles and zeta potentials. The sulphidization mechanisms of xanthate for various lead oxide samples were also discussed.There are two crystalline structures of lead monoxide, i.e. dark red litharge (α-PbO) and yellow massicot (β-PbO) ( Lead sulphide, with a narrow band gap (0.41 eV), has attracted much attention in recent years due to its excellent properties in donor–supply electrode to enhance performance in colloidal quantum dot solar cells ( Main lead-containing minerals are galena (PbS) and various types of lead oxide minerals including cerussite (PbCO Due to the differences in the mineral solubility, the reaction of conventional sulphide ions (S In this work, we aim to report the surface sulphidization of ultrafine lead oxide particles and discuss the reaction mechanism. This study is expected to provide valuable guidance for the process of metal oxide sulphidization and the synthesis of core/shell QDs of the metal chalcogenide. Lead nitrate, sodium sulphide, sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, sodium nitrate, carbon disulphide, acetone, petroleum ether, ethanol, octanol and ethyl xanthate are all the analytical grade reagents and were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. (China). Octyl xanthate was synthesized using carbon disulphide, octanol and potassium hydroxide as source materials and recrystallized three times using acetone and petroleum ether to obtain the required purity (>99%). Doubly distilled water was used throughout the entire study. Metal oxide samples were prepared by titrating a metal ion solution with hydroxide ions slowly in an aqueous solution in the presence of polyethylene glycol (PEG) 2000 to form well-dispersed metal hydroxide sols or precipitates. The precipitates were separated from the suspensions by centrifugation at 15000 rpm for 20 min and then heated at 400 °C to obtain a fine metal oxide powder. The α-PbO, β-PbO, PbCO The thermolysis of metal xanthate was originally used to produce metal sulphide nanoparticles ( Thermogravimetric (TG) measurements were performed using a Perkin Elmer TG/DTA instrument (PE Diamond) in the temperature range of 50–600 °C in an air flow at 10 °C per minute heating rate. The water contact angles on the surface of metal oxide sample with and without sulfidization were measured using a Dataphysics OCA40 instrument at the ambient temperature. The images of water droplet were obtained by an equipped Teli CCD camera. All the measurements were repeated five times, and the average values with corresponding standard deviations were reported. The sample suspension was titrated with diluted nitric acid or potassium hydroxide solution to establish the acid-base properties of the surfaces. The potassium ethyl xanthate (KC The surface sulphidization of various lead oxides was achieved by the adsorption of xanthate on the lead oxide sample in aqueous solution, followed by thermolysising of the xanthate coated metal oxide samples at 180 °C for 4 h. Zeta potential was measured using a Zeta meter (JS94H) based on the mobility of electrophoresis. The zeta potential measurements of the sample as a function of pH were carried out in the solution with the ionic strength of 1 mM NaNO The samples of different solids in 50 mL of 0.1 M NaNO The adsorption test of ethyl xanthate on various samples (0.4 g/L) was conducted at 25 °C. A series of 50 mL polyethylene test tubes with caps were used to contain 25 mL of 0.40 mM xanthate solutions in the pH range of 5.0–12.5. The pH was adjusted by HCl and NaOH solutions. These samples were shaken continuously in a thermostatic shaker for 60 min to reach equilibration. After the pH measurement, the suspension was then partially centrifuged at 16000 rpm for 10 min. The residual concentration of xanthate in the supernatant was determined spectrophotometrically by measuring the absorbance at The speciation modeling of the solution species was carried out using the computer program MEDUSA and the relevant equilibrium constants were collected from the MEDUSA database and literature ( The synthesized lead oxide samples were characterized using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. As shown in The results of thermogravimetric (TG) measurements of potassium ethyl xanthate (PEX) are shown in The XRD results of massicot, Pb The acid-base titrations of the mineral suspension were conducted to confirm the significant change of the surface properties after the surface sulphidization. Ht is defined as the total acid concentration added during the titration, Ht = (V The results of contact angle measurements with water on the solid surface of massicot, Pb After the surface sulphidization, the contact angle between water and the solid surface increased substantially from 22 (left) and 22 (right) to 99 (left) and 98 (right) for PbCO The possible formaion of a surface sulphide layer after sulphidization implies that the surface should be similar lead sulphide. However, the contact angle between water and a freshly prepared lead sulphide surface was only 46 (left and right) as shown in The main reactions are presented as follows: (1) (2) In this case, the adsorbed xanthate is decomposed during the thermolysis and provides the sulphur source for the sulphidization. The sulphidization process of lead oxide may be visualized by In order to evaluate the surface oxidation of the sulphur species, the surface speciation of sulphur containing species as a function of redox potential was established by means of computer calculation using the software Medusa. The relevant chemical reactions of the formation of sulphur species and the corresponding equilibrium constants are listed in From Zeta potential can give important information about the surface charge of minerals that affects the type of adsorption taking place in the mineral suspension. When the surface is positively charged, the anions in the suspension will be preferentially adsorbed and vice versa. The adsorption type can be physical or chemical. However, both cations and anions can be adsorbed at the mineral surface with the same charge for chemical adsorption. Therefore, the zeta potential of synthesized lead oxide particles before and after surface sulphidization as well as after adsorption of xanthate with varying solution pH was measured. The results are presented in From The surfaces of Pb The results of the zeta potential measurement of lead carbonate and lead hydroxyl carbonate before and after the surface sulphidization as well as on the xanthate adsorption are presented in The results of xanthate adsorption at the surface of litharge and massicot before and after the surface sulphidization as a function of pH are shown in In order to compare the results with their sulphide counterparts, the results of xanthate adsorption at the surface of synthetic PbS are also included. When the solution pH is lower than 9, the xanthate was strongly adsorbed at the surfaces of litharge and massicot before and after the surface sulphidization as well as on the synthetic PbS. The xanthate adsorption at the samples of litharge and massicot before the surface sulphidization decreased drastically with increasing pH values. However, with respect to the samples of litharge and massicot after sulphidization as well as to the synthetic PbS, the xanthate adsorption decreased slightly at pH > 9 and remained unchanged or increased at pH > 10. These results indicate that the desorption behavior of xanthate at these mineral surfaces with increasing pH is in the order of PbO > S@PbO > synthetic PbS. In this study, ultra-fine lead oxide, lead carbonate and lead hydroxyl carbonate particles were synthesized and modified by a surface sulphidization method to form a sulphide surface layer. The following conclusions can be drawn: The thermolysis of xanthate coated metal oxides can achieve the surface sulphidization of lead oxide minerals. The sulphidization process can increase the surface hydrophobicity and keep the bulk crystal structure of metal oxide unchanged. Xanthate may adsorb at the surfaces of litharge and massicot and form lead sulphide layer directly without the heat treatment, but the thermolysis procedure can speed up this process. The surface of Pb Xanthate can be strongly adsorbed at the surface of PbS, S@PbO and PbO, however, with increasing solution pH, the desorption order of xanthate is PbO > S@PbO > PbS. Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. Financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: