This chapter first briefly describes in situ rock stresses and the strategy for estimating them. Then the various methods for making preliminary estimation of in situ rock stresses are presented, including the World Stress Map, the empirical correlations between vertical and horizontal stresses and depth, and the different analytical models. The effects of different factors such as topography, discontinuity, anisotropy on the in situ rock stress state are also discussed.The distribution of in situ rock stresses is a major concern of rock mechanics and rock engineering, both with respect to understanding basic geological process such as plate tectonics and earthquakes, and the design of structures in and on rock masses ( “The basic motivations for in situ stress determination are two-fold: To have a basic knowledge of the stress state for engineering, eg, in what direction and with what magnitude is the major principal stress acting? What stress effects are we defending ourselves and our structures against? In what direction is the rock most likely to break? All other things being equal, in what direction will the groundwater flow? Even for such basic and direct engineering questions, a knowledge of the stress state is essential. To have a specific and “formal” knowledge of the boundary conditions for stress analyses conducted in the design phase of rock engineering projects.” Stress is a tensor quantity containing nine components: three normal stress components and six shear stress components (see There are different methods for measuring in situ rock stresses. These methods can be classified into two main categories ( An exact determination of in situ rock stresses is very difficult and for all practical purposes impossible because “the current stress state is the end product of a series of past geological events and is the superposition of stress components of several diverse types. Further, since rock masses are rarely homogeneous and continuous, stresses can be expected to vary from place to place in a rock mass. In situ stresses not only vary in space but also with time due to tectonic events, erosion, glaciation, etc. The problem is further complicated in that the present rock fabric may or may not be correlated at all with the current stress field ( Because of the special nature of in situ rock stresses, they should be estimated using several methods and in a progressive process. The International Society of Rock Mechanics recommended an approach strategy to progressively build up a knowledge of the in situ rock stress tensor ( The ISRM further suggested a method for establishing the final rock stress model (FRSM) at a site or an area as shown in As can be seen above, an important task for establishing the FRSM is to estimate the in situ rock stresses in order to develop the BESM. In the following sections, the various methods for making preliminary estimation of in situ rock stresses will be presented, including the empirical correlations or observations obtained from stress measurements made in the past and the different analytical models. The reader can refer to The WSM is a global database of contemporary tectonic stress of the Earth's crust ( earthquake focal mechanisms (72%); wellbore breakouts and drilling induced fractures (20%); in situ stress measurements (overcoring, hydraulic fracturing, borehole slotter) (4%); and young geologic data (from fault slip analysis and volcanic vent alignments) (4%). The uniformity and quality of the WSM is guaranteed through quality ranking of the data according to international standards, standardized regime assignment, and guidelines for borehole breakout analysis and other methods. Each stress data record is assigned a quality between A and E, with A being the highest quality and E the lowest. A-quality indicates that the orientation of the maximum horizontal compressional stress is accurate to within ±  Stress maps of major continents and different countries can also be provided by the WSM ( As a first estimation, it is often assumed that the three principal stresses of an in situ rock stress state are acting vertically and horizontally. The validity of this assumption has been checked by many researchers based on in situ stress measurements, including  It needs to be noted that Eq. The horizontal stresses in rock are much more difficult to estimate than the vertical stress. In many cases, the horizontal stresses at the same location in a rock mass are different in different directions. The maximum horizontal stress     Normally, the average horizontal stress is related to the vertical stress by the coefficient   Some other variation forms of    A plot of Eq. The average horizontal stress to vertical stress ratio The WSMs and the stress versus depth relationships presented in the above two sections can be useful in estimating the in situ rock stresses. However, these maps and relationships should be used with caution and the important issues presented in the following should be considered. The assumption that the principal stresses are vertical and horizontal with depth breaks down when the ground surface is not horizontal ( Open discontinuities in the rock mass change the directions and magnitudes of the principal stresses (see The anisotropy of the rock mass also affects the directions and magnitudes of the principal stresses ( The ordering of in situ stresses may also change with depth. The hydraulic fracturing tests conducted by The orientation of in situ stresses may also change with depth.