Wrist arthroscopy has today become an important adjunct in the management of displaced intra-articular distal radial fractures, with reduction of joint incongruencies as well as detection and treatment of associated soft-tissue injuries. However, standard upright arthroscopy makes it difficult to combine arthroscopic-assisted reduction with additional treatment of the often comminuted, extra-articular fracture component. This article describes a modified arthroscopic technique in which the arm is blocked in pronation with the traction horizontally over a handle on a normal hand table, without any other changes in the arthroscopy itself. The author has operated on 17 patients using this horizontal technique in combination with arthroscopic-assisted reductions, closed and open osteosynthesis, and soft-tissue procedures. The horizontal technique allows complete treatment of comminuted, unstable distal radial fractures, intra-articular and extra-articular reduction, and bone grafting, as well as assessment and treatment of associated soft-tissue injuries.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 17, No 1 (January), 2001: pp E5–E5Distal radial fractures cause significant problems, such as chronic wrist pain and osteoarthrosis. As in all cases of wrist arthroscopy, the arthroscopy mobile cart, including television monitor, video camera, video recorder, and light source, is positioned at the foot end of the patient (Fig 1). Arthroscopy is usually performed under axillary block or general anesthesia 2 to 5 days after the trauma. After exsanguination of the arm, an elastic dressing is wrapped around the forearm to minimize the risk of extravasation into muscle compartments. The traction is applied on the index and long finger with the traction force (4 to 5 kg) horizontally over a handle on a regular hand table (Fig 2), instead of being held in an overhead traction boom or in a traction tower. The normal landmarks for the portals are often distorted as a result of swelling in distal radial fractures. By combining a line along the radial side of the long finger together with palpable bony landmarks, such as the tip of the radial styloid and the distal dorsal rim of the radius and the ulnar head, the 3-4 portal can be approximated. A needle is introduced at the 3-4 portal and some of the hemarthrosis is aspirated to confirm proper positioning, after which 5 to 10 mL of saline lotion is injected into the joint. The trocar is introduced and a small joint arthroscope is connected. The procedure is started with an extensive lavage through an outflow portal in the 6U portal, which is positioned close to the hand table. By using the 4-5 or 6R portals as working portals, blood clots and debris can be removed with a motorized, small-joint shaver. Continuous irrigation with saline lotion by gravity flow from an elevated bag is used. With this method, the intra-articular pressure is kept as low as possible in order to minimize the risk of extravasation of fluid, thus decreasing the risk of carpal tunnel syndrome and compartment syndrome. After having cleared the view, the examination of the wrist starts by performing radiocarpal and midcarpal assessment of injuries to the scapholunate (SL) and lunotriquetral (LT) ligaments (Table 1 The reduction of displaced fracture fragments is performed in the same way as in the standard upright position and is started by mobilizing the fragments with a probe or with an elevator. K-wires are placed centrally in each fragment. Depressed fragments are elevated, often through a separate 1- to 2-cm skin incision over the fracture. Under arthroscopic control, the fracture fragments are sequentially being reduced by working with the K-wires as joy-sticks, starting with the largest fragment and driving the K-wires into the next fragment. Afterward, the realignment of the joint surface is determined arthroscopically, with fluoroscopic confirmation that the pins are in proper position and of appropriate length. Hereafter, the extra-articular fracture and the cancellous defect, as well as associated injuries are evaluated and additional treatment is considered. The horizontal technique allows one to continue with any additional technique that seems necessary, without changing the traction and the position of the wrist, thus securing the achieved intra-articular and extra-articular reduction. To evaluate the horizontal technique, 17 patients (10 women, 7 men) with a median age of 50 years (range, 24 to 86 years) were operated on using the modified technique (Table 2). No patient had any complications secondary to the arthroscopy itself. However, 1 patient had a rupture of extensor tendons caused by the dorsal subcutaneous K-wires. He underwent a secondary tendon reconstruction that healed uneventfully. The horizontal technique facilitates the complete management of unstable, comminuted distal radial fractures, with arthroscopically assisted realignment of the intra-articular incongruency, cortical treatment with open reduction, osteosynthesis with plates and screws, and additional cancellous support with bone graft or bone substitute. Furthermore, associated injuries can be detected and treated. The horizontal technique is especially useful when the extra-articular component has a combined dorsal and volar comminution. In this situation, both dorsal and volar plating is often needed, which is virtually impossible to do in the upright position. With the standard arthroscopy technique, the hand would have to be taken down for the additional treatment, with the risk of losing the reduction achieved by the traction force. The horizontal technique, however, permits arthroscopic evaluation and treatment, after which the horizontal traction on the normal hand table allows the forearm to be rotated to facilitate volar and dorsal open reduction combined with bone grafting for cancellous support. Under these circumstances, there is very little risk of losing the reduction created by the traction. All associated injuries to the intercarpal ligaments and the TFCC can be treated with the horizontal technique. SL ligament injuries grade 1-2 ( Regarding the current recommendations for associated TFCC injuries, both the upright and the horizontal techniques might be used in treating central perforations (IA), ulnar avulsions (IB), and radial avulsions (ID) as classified according to Palmer. The horizontal technique would be useful in cases where an instability of the distal radioulnar joint might be suspected, without a peripheral tear of the TFCC as the cause for the instability. In these cases, Geissler et al. Wolfe et al. The standard, upright position is still a very good option in cases with, for example, single die-punch fragments or if arthroscopic-assisted reduction is chosen to be combined with bone graft and external fixation alone. In these situations, it is my experience that the procedure might be performed completely in the upright position. However, if the arthroscopy reveals any unexpected injuries, the procedure might become difficult. In conclusion, the horizontal arthroscopy technique is successful in dealing with comminuted, unstable intra-articular distal radial fractures and associated injuries. It is sometimes more technically demanding, but is otherwise carried out with the method known to all arthroscopists. It allows realignment of the joint surface, combined with the facility to add any additional treatment of the fracture or associated injuries.