The present paper reports experimental results relative to the on-line characterization of particle size during a wet grinding process—thanks to an optical analyser (Turbiscan On-line, FORMULACTION). During batch grinding processes, the optical system, based on the multiple light scattering method, is placed in a derivative loop and the light flux is analysed to characterize the kinetics of fragmentation. In the case of continuous processes, the optical analyser placed on-line at the outlet of the mill allows to determine a characteristic size of the fragments without preliminary dilution. The influence of various operating parameters (solid volume fraction, feed flow rate) on the sensibility of the answer of the system is discussed. Moreover, the sensor allows determining the delay time to reach a steady state when starting the process or furthering to a disturbance.Dispersing and fine wet grinding processes are used in numerous industrial applications, notably for the production of fillers, pigments, paints, varnishes, and during the elaboration of cosmetics, pharmaceutical or food products. In these different applications, the production of dense suspensions composed of fine particles with a defined size is a problem of relevance. However, the characterization of the particle size in dense suspensions is not often done on-line of the processes, which makes it difficult to control the quality of the ground products and the implementation of control procedures on such processes. In this paper, we report experimental results relative to the characterization of the physical properties of ground dense suspensions by means of an optical analyser based on the multiple light scattering principle. The multiple light scattering method considers the interaction of a focused light beam with particles randomly distributed in a fluid. Incident photons undergo multiple scattering events before absorption, backscattering or transmission through the sample. In the framework of the diffusion approximation, the characteristic lengths involved in conservative multiple light scattering (no light absorption phenomena) are the photon mean path, The optical analyser (Turbiscan On-line), developed by FORMULACTION (France), uses a near-infrared focused LED ( During the grinding process, the particle volume fraction remains constant and the surface mean diameter of the particles can be derived from the measurements of the transmission and backscattering levels. Remember that the mean diameter representative of scattering phenomena is the surface mean diameter or Sauter diameter: The product used in this study is a precipitated pure calcite (purity >99%, Merck) corresponding to the rhombic form of the calcium carbonate. The initial powder is composed of large open agglomerates The interpretation of the data collected by the optical sensor in terms of particle average size is based on the knowledge of the transmission and backscattering levels evolution according to the physical properties of the suspension. The agglomeration of large and compact calcite particles weakly changes the scattering area per unit volume since light waves cannot resolve the structure of large agglomerates. Considering particles with an average diameter of 10 μm, in accordance with the microscopic observations, and a refractive index of calcite particles, The scattering model can be used to derive the calcite size dependence of the backscattering level In usual grinding conditions, dense suspensions are handled and only the backscattering level can be considered. Preliminary experiments were performed in order to analyse the influence of the suspension flow rate in the cell of the optical analyser on the measure of the backscattering level. For this purpose, a calcite suspension was introduced in a well-stirred reactor and a peristaltic pump circulated the suspension through the cylindrical cell of the optical analyser. The influence of the stirring rate and the suspension flow rate in the external loop on the transmission and backscattering levels was first studied for the initial calcite particles.  Other experiments were done using more concentrated suspensions and previously ground particles. The minimum stirring rate to homogenize the suspension increases with the volume fraction and particle diameter. Thus, for a volume fraction of 13.7% and a stirring rate of 250 rpm, the backscattering level decreases at around 0.5% in a lapse of time of 1 min. For ground particles ( Grinding experiments were performed in a laboratory-stirred bead mill (Drais Perl Mill PML-V/H). The thermostated grinding chamber (0.8 l in capacity) is agitated by means of four disks mounted on a driven shaft. About 80% of the grinding chamber is filled with zirconium grinding beads with size ranging from 400 to 600 μm. During the runs, the beads are kept in the grinding chamber by means of a separation gap located at the outlet of the mill. For batch grinding experiments, the optical sensor is placed in an external loop Firstly, the grinding chamber and the tubes are filled with the suspension. Due to the sedimentation of particles, in the absence of shear, the initial backscattering level is relatively low (around 25%). After 1 min, the peristaltic pump is turned on, followed by the mill after a few seconds.  The particle volume fraction remains constant during the process so the backscattering measure allows estimating the photon mean path and the scatterers surface mean size. Continuous grinding runs were performed with calcium carbonate powder suspended in water with or without a dispersing agent (sodium polyacrylate, SPA). The use of a dispersing agent is necessary to handle calcium carbonate dense suspensions ( At the beginning of an experiment, a precise amount of calcium carbonate powder was introduced in the feeding tank previously filled with distilled water so that a known particle volume fraction suspension was prepared. The procedure used consists of, firstly, feeding the grinding chamber with water, and secondly, suddenly feeding it with the suspension by means of the peristaltic pump at a controlled flow rate. The grinding process was followed with the optical analyser by measuring time variations of the backscattering level, BS( Whatever the experimental conditions, the backscattering level is initially low, since the mill is filled with water. Then, the diffuse reflectance BS sharply increases as the grinding process starts before reaching a stationary level after a few hundred seconds with signal fluctuations less than 0.2% (see  For fixed calcium carbonate volume fraction, time evolution of the particle surface mean diameter can be derived from the measurement of the backscattering level, assuming that the refractive index of particles remains equal to 1.52 during the grinding process. The corresponding values, mentioned in Sodium polyacrylate was used to obtain more dense calcium carbonate suspensions able to be pumped and to flow in the grinding set-up pipes. Sodium polyacrylate is one of the most used additives allowing to prevent the aggregation phenomenon and to decrease the viscosity of the ground suspensions The stirring rate is an important parameter in the wet grinding process of a stirred bead mill since it has both an effect on the number of collisions between beads and on the intensity of these collisions. Moreover, as mentioned before, there is an acceptable agreement between the particle surface mean size derived from the backscattering light flux and the Sauter diameter measured by the laser sizer. The optical sensor can also be used to determine the delay time, For the present experiments, the delay time An experimental investigation is reported concerning the on-line optical characterization of physical properties of dense suspensions during batch and continuous grinding process. Changes in the operating parameters (feeding rate, particle volume fraction, stirring rate) significantly affect the backscattered light detected by the optical sensor at the outlet of the mill. Thus, the optical analyser can be used to optimise the operating conditions. Despite crude approximations, the multiple scattering model reasonably describes the changes of the particle mean size in good agreement with electron microscopic observations and size analysis done in diluted conditions. On-line control of particle size from measurement of the backscattering level could be envisaged, assuming the particle volume fraction is known, since the backscattering level is dependent both upon the particle size and the solid concentration. The Turbiscan On-line is also suited to analyse the transitional grinding process and thus allows optimising the operating time. Parameter accounting for boundary reflections (–) Backscattering level (%) Average particle diameter (μm) Sauter diameter (μm) Detector height (m) Detector width (m) Normalized surface light flux (–) Fluid refractive index (–) Particle refractive index (–) Feed flow rate (l/h) Radial distance from the centre of the spot light (m) Tube radius of the optical analyser cell (m) Time (s) Scaling time (s) Transmission level (%) Stirring rate (rpm) Volume of the grinding chamber (m Detection angle (°) Particle volume fraction (%) Critical particle volume fraction (%) Photon mean path (m) Photon transport path (m) Light wavelength (m) Mean residence time (s) Delay time (s) The authors would like to thank the Formulaction Company (Toulouse, France) for its financial support for this study.