Thoracolumbar malunion is the result of loss of correction, insufficient correction or even no correction (both in the frontal and sagittal planes) of a thoracolumbar fracture. The main causes are incorrect assessment of the fracture's complexity (burst fracture), its potential progression to kyphosis and associated disc or ligament damage. It can also be the result of a poorly conducted initial treatment. The types of malunion have changed over the years because of the introduction of vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty. The malunion can be well tolerated if there is only a moderate deformity. However, the functional and pain-related limitations can be severe with large deformities. Functional limitation is mainly related to sagittal imbalance, but also to sequelae associated with the injury in various ways (non-union, disc degeneration, spinal cord compression, syringomyelia, etc.). The deformity and its consequences are evaluated globally using full-body standing radiographs (EOS), CT scan and MRI. Comparison of MRI images taken in a lying position to weight bearing views or even dynamic ones is an additional means to evaluate whether the lesions are reducible. Differences in spine morphology and compensatory mechanisms to combat the sagittal imbalance induced by the deformity must also be analyzed. These provide more complete information about the consequences of the malunion and help to establish the best corrective strategy. These compensatory mechanisms consist of accentuation of lumbar lordosis along with reduction of thoracic kyphosis. As a last resort, the pelvis and femur contribute to this compensation when there is a large deformity or a stiff spine due to preexisting osteoarthritis. Treatment strategies are fairly well standardized. When the deformity is reducible, a two-stage surgery is indicated. When the deformity is not reducible, posterior transpedicular closed wedge osteotomy is the gold standard. Nevertheless, the best way to treat thoracolumbar malunion is to prevent it.Malunion of the thoracolumbar (TL) junction is an acquired, secondary deformity. This deformity affects the T11 to L2 vertebrae in all three planes. The increased risk of kyphosis deformity of TL malunions can be explained by the topography of this transition area, which is subjected to high mechanical loads. While malunion can occur in the post-infection or cancer context (spondylodiscitis, Pott's disease, pathological fracture), post-traumatic malunion is the most common, thus will be featured in this lecture. Malunion is the result of incorrect assessment of the initial lesion or inappropriate treatment. To avoid malunion, it is essential to know which types of injuries are likely to evolve to malunion and how they should be treated. Treatment of thoracolumbar malunion is challenging TL fractures are common and make up 40% to 60% of all spine fractures (150,000–160,000 per year in the United States) and their annual incidence is estimated at 30–90 per 100,000 persons Appropriate initial treatment will prevent the development of malunion. There are several classification systems to support the treatment decision but no treatment consensus The AO classification by Magerl is used to evaluate the fracture type. It has become a key element of the treatment decision and is supplemented by measurements of vertebral kyphosis and regional traumatic angle (RTA). The Thoracolumbar Injury Classification and Severity (TLICS) scale The McCormack load-sharing classification (LSC) has been validated and is reliable Based on these classification systems, the initial strategy ( The literature is perfectly clear here – these fractures must be treated surgically. Anatomical reduction and fusion are vital. The aim is to restore regional balance in the frontal and sagittal planes, no matter which technique or instrumentation is used. The goal is to restore a neutral regional angle. Posterolateral fusion is preferred in most cases. An additional anterior procedure is recommended if the adjacent levels require more than 50% correction Stable AO type A1 and A3 fractures with small kyphosis (RTA AO type A2 fractures require posterior instrumentation along with anterior grafting and corpectomy. Since the disc is invaginated in the frontal vertebral body wall, bone healing is impossible through a posterior approach only. AO type A3 fractures (pure compression), which have been described as benign, can have a very poor outcome. These fractures have a real risk of malunion. In cases of initial kyphosis around 15° Pure compression fractures treated functionally or with a back brace, or even neglected fractures – can turn out to be unstable AO type B fractures. This instability is due to the associated posterior ligament distraction. If this instability is missed initially, there is a high risk of progression to non-union or malunion Overall, the highest risk fractures are the ones that appear the most innocuous and are the most common. A patient who is above 50 years of age, has a BMI These treatments have transformed and simplified the management of some spinal fractures. Cementoplasty (vertebroplasty) by intracorporeal injection of polymethylmetacrylate (PMMA) cement provides immediate pain relief. Kyphoplasty by vertebral expansion using stents, balloons or jacks, also provides fracture reduction. Short-term pain relief is obtained in more than 85% of cases; the length of the hospital stay is reduced and patients are able to regain their autonomy earlier. However, data from the literature suggest that osteoporotic fractures treated in this manner are at risk of developing kyphosis. Why is there a risk of malunion after cementoplasty and/or kyphoplasty? Cementoplasty preserves the deformity ( These techniques are not always sufficient for preventing the development of malunion. There is a true risk of progression towards uncompensated sagittal imbalance. Similarly, vertebrae packed with cement can induce fractures in the adjacent levels due to a nutcracker effect, leading to complex malunion cases. This vertebral fracture cascade generally develops in the years following one of these procedures in 40% to 50% of cases. We are now faced with the problem of treating malunion in one or more vertebrae packed with intrabody, pedicular or even extra-vertebral cement The risk of progression justifies using kyphoplasty to achieve vertebral expansion in younger patients instead of simply using cementoplasty. This is an alternative to percutaneous fixation for type A1 or burst fractures with about 15° local kyphosis Elements contributing to malunion are present at multiple levels on the vertebral segment. The seat of the deformity can be the bone when the initial injury only affects the vertebral body. The deformity can also be related to posterior bone and ligament damage that was missed initially or not treated sufficiently. The disc(s) adjacent to the fracture can also be the seat of neglected injuries and the source of progressive kyphosis The deformity (malunion architecture, neurological status, vascular status), its reducibility/flexibility and the overall behavior of the spine must be analyzed systematically. Evaluation of the deformity and its regional and global impact is based on an X-ray assessment focused on the TL junction. Analysis of sagittal and frontal balance and pelvic parameters is based on full-spine weight bearing sagittal and frontal views (EOS assessment), encompassing the external auditory canals, sacrum and femoral heads. The Cobb angles are used to determine the severity of the malunion, its extent, the mechanical repercussions and the compensatory mechanisms implemented by the patient. A CT scan is used in every patient to evaluate the bone architecture at the callus, intrabody bone loss, disc void and condition of the vertebral arch and facet joints. It is also used to assess whether fracture healing has occurred, both anteriorly and posteriorly. The stability or failure of instrumentation, quality of the graft and presence of non-union can also be assessed on CT. MRI with T1-weighted, T2-weighted, STIR or FLAIR sequences is essential for analyzing the spinal cord and the altered vertebral envelope (spinal cord compression, intramedullary remodeling or damage: hyperintense signal, syringomyelia, etc.). It also allows the adjacent discs to be assessed using the Pfirmann and/or Modic classification systems and to determine whether the posterior facet-joints are arthritic. A syringomyelic cavity can be centered over the deformity or an adjacent medullary area. It is important not to miss a narrowed sub-jacent lumbar canal. MRI examination is also used to determine the limits of a future fusion procedure based on the condition of the adjacent discs. An arteriogram is justified to locate the artery of Adamkiewicz when an extended posterolateral approach is planned. Physiologically, the Cobb angle at the TL junction is nil (0° The reducibility of the deformity must be evaluated before defining the treatment strategy. Classically, this has been done by measuring the mobility (change in Cobb angles) between weight bearing and dynamic views. It would be relevant to further develop this method to measure local mobility based on recommendations of the North American Spine Society Dynamic lateral views in forward flexion and maximum extension appear to be less relevant for showing hypermobility than the differences found between lying and standing views. Dynamic X-rays can actually underestimate the reducibility of the malunion. This is due to an increase in muscle activity and pain when dynamic views are taken, whereas these factors are neutralized when the patient is lying down. In dorsal decubitus, the functional discomfort is limited and the compensatory mechanisms disappear. However, not all the examinations performed with the patient lying down have the same predictive value. The duration of an MRI examination with the patient lying is long enough to allow reduction of what is reducible and for the compensatory mechanisms to subside, which is not the case with a CT scan that has a faster image acquisition time This reducibility at rest, due to the weight effects and compensatory mechanisms disappearing, is also observed in cases of degenerative spondylolisthesis Overall, it is especially important to compare measurements between weight bearing X-rays and MRI to evaluate the reducibility of the deformity; the resulting information must be taken into account during the pre-operative planning The pelvic parameters ( The pelvic and spinal parameters help to determine the patient's original spinal morphotype. The latter is defined using the sagittal profile and pelvic incidence. Four morphotypes were described by Roussouly et al. When the TL deformity is not completely stiffened, the first compensatory mechanism counters the regional kyphosis, with opening of the adjacent discs to compensate for anterior sagittal imbalance. When the TL deformity is stiff but the lumbar and thoracic spine are still flexible To re-establish the sagittal balance, patients with a type 1 morphotype ( In a patient with a type 4 morphotype ( For patients with type 2 or 3 morphotypes, the compensatory reserves are distributed in the thoracic and lumbar spines, with fairly well-balanced correction reserves. But in reality, the situation is not always so simplistic. When the lumbar spine is stiffened (older patient, degenerative spine, fusion), its lordotic ability is eliminated. In this case, the adaptation occurs through pelvifemoral tilting with pelvis retroversion, hip extension and knee flexion in order to reposition the entire inflexible spine above the femoral heads These observations are decisive factors during the pre-operative assessment and when planning the corrective surgery. The PI is useful in differentiating between an original conserved profile (TK and LL consistent with PI) from a profile modified by combating sagittal imbalance. Malunion is typically not painful in itself when it is not associated with non-union. It is the associated-adjacent architectural modifications and in particular, the axial imbalance, which are more symptomatic and not as well tolerated. The malunion can be silent for a very long time. Published data does not establish a significant relationship between the degree of deformity and the patient's function. In reality, the malunion is stable in certain cases. A new balance is established by the patient who remains asymptomatic. The compensatory mechanisms, as described above, are more effective in a patient with a type 4 morphotype than a type 1 morphotype. In the latter morphotype, the compensatory mechanisms are more quickly used up and require greater effort. Intolerance to the malunion is mainly related to the sagittal imbalance and the progression of sub-jacent degenerative osteoarthritis (stenosis, degenerative spondylolisthesis). Some authors have found a correlation between worsening of the kyphosis deformity and severity of pain The underlying compensatory lumbar hyperlordosis will cause damage to the sub-jacent joints and adjacent discs. Hyperlordosis increases the pressure on the posterior articular facets and accelerates their arthritic degeneration; it is more or less associated with the appearance of degenerative spondylolisthesis. It also leads to embedding of the spinous processes (Baastrup's sign or kissing spine). Overloading of the discs adjacent to the malunion also contributes to disc diseases. They stiffen the spine and reduce the possibility of compensatory lordosis, triggering the pelvic and femoral adaptation mechanisms. This regional arthritic progression is responsible for exhausting the compensatory mechanisms, which triggers an imbalance – that had been previously been stable and painless – to become symptomatic. The malunion can be painful in situations where non-union develops after conservative or surgical treatment. This mechanical pain is increased by excessive anterior movements, accentuated by disc gaping or by adjacent disc disease. Failure of the instrumentation with implant fractures (fracture of rods and/or screws) increases the symptoms. Associated neurological signs: compression of conus medullaris, spinal cord or syringomyelia. The neurological deficit may be initially absent and reveal itself later on due to compression of the spinal cord or the conus medullaris, or be secondary to syringomyelia. Worsening or secondary development of a neurological deficit are signs of potential syringomyelia The goal of surgery is to alleviate the patients’ pain and improve their function In reality, various surgical strategies can be adopted. The main points to consider during planning and decision making are: the patient's spine morphotype; whether the deformity is reducible or not; whether a neurological deficit is present; whether sub-jacent lumbosacral arthritic degeneration is present. The persistent mobility within the vertebral body (i.e. in case of non-union) or at an adjacent disc leaves open the possibility of an easier correction. Two treatment options can be proposed; their common corollary is performing a circumferential fusion due to the high biomechanical stresses and the large moment arm in this area The first anterior approach by phrenolombotomy in lateral decubitus allows complete disc excision by removing the retracted anterior vertebral ligament that prevents correction of the local kyphosis. At this stage, the defect can be filled with a tricortical graft or a cage. It is preferable not to use anterior instrumentation, as this would prevent any additional correction during the posterior procedure. The posterior approach with instrumentation allows additional reduction to be performed and decompression if needed. The initial posterior approach in ventral decubitus is mainly used when the deformity is fairly flexible with the possibility of distracting (or) opening the discs. It also allows a decompression procedure, Ponté or Smith–Petersen posterior column osteotomy, or even multilevel facet-joint procedures. The additional anterior procedure aims to fill the open anterior disc spaces. Anterior instrumentation can be added in this case. The absence of local or regional mobility means it is unrealistic to attempt to restore satisfactory sagittal balance without performing a vertebral osteotomy. A three-stage osteotomy has long been considered the only treatment option The primary anterior approach by phrenolombotomy allows the anterior bone callus to be resected by corpectomy. The second posterior approach allows for a decompression procedure and posterior column osteotomy or even multilevel facet osteotomies, additional reduction, decompression and application of instrumentation. The third anterior phase aims to fill the anterior defects of the corpectomy and the empty disc spaces. Anterior instrumentation can be added. The reduction potential of this technique is incomplete and often less than what is needed. This surgery is long and the morbidity is high. Posterior TL transpedicular closed-wedge osteotomy has become the gold standard ( If a neurological deficit is present, anterior decompression by corpectomy or posterior decompression by lamino-arthrectomy lead to statistically similar results in terms of neurological recovery A degenerative, stiff lumbar spine or persistent sagittal imbalance can justify extension of the construct to the sacrum. In such cases, it may need to be combined with anterior fusion to reduce the risk of loss of correction A posterior closing-wedge osteotomy away from the malunion is always possible. This is called an “extra-anatomical” osteotomy. It avoids having to work in the medullary area but requires the construct to be extended to the sacrum. This strategy can be justified in patients who also have significant sub-jacent arthritic degeneration. The primary aim should be to prevent the development of malunion through a better understanding of injury mechanisms and by doing the best possible reduction of the initial lesions. In younger patients, it is essential to restore the vertebral height and regional curvatures and to preserve the sagittal balance. In case of malunion, the patient's spine morphotype must be evaluated to estimate his/her compensatory ability. Good clinical tolerance is mainly related to these various compensatory mechanisms. MRI in dorsal decubitus can be more effective for evaluating the reducibility of the deformity than standard dynamic X-rays. In every case, surgical treatment requires more or less complex osteotomy procedures. Posterior closing-wedge osteotomy procedures are preferred as they allow for large angle corrections. Performing the procedure at the medullary level does not seem to increase morbidity. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.