Background
                  The purpose of this study is to determine the clinical and radiographic outcomes of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) after failed open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) for proximal humerus fracture (PHF) and compare them to outcomes of primary RTSA for PHF.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective comparative study of patients who underwent RTSA between 2008 and 2015 at our institution by one of two fellowship-trained shoulder and elbow surgeons for an acute PHF or for continued pain or functional limitations following ORIF of a PHF. We compared the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) scores, Simple Shoulder Test (SST) scores, range-of-motion, and radiographic measurements between cohorts.
               
                  Results
                  In total, there were 20 patients treated with RTSA after failed ORIF and 30 patients treated acutely with RTSA for PHF. The average ASES score was significantly greater for primary RTSA (82.0 ± 13.5) than for delayed RTSA (64.0 ± 27.2, P = 0.016). The average SST score for primary RTSA (69.4%±19.1%) was significantly higher than the average for delayed RTSA (49.1%±8.9%, P = 0.020). Forward elevation achieved postoperatively was significantly greater for patients treated with primary RTSA versus those with delayed RTSA (130±31° vs 107±31°, P = 0.035). No difference was detected between groups in postoperative external rotation (P = 0.152) or internal rotation (P = 0.872). Radiographically, the tuberosities healed in an anatomic position in 70% of the primary cases versus the prior ORIF group in which the tuberosities were in an anatomic position in all cases (P = 0.007).
               
                  Conclusions
                  In an elderly population, primary RTSA for PHF resulted in better clinical outcomes compared to RTSA following failed ORIF in this retrospective cohort study.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level III; Retrospective Comparative StudyWith an aging population in the United States, the incidence of fragility fractures continues to rise, with proximal humerus fractures (PHFs) accounting for 10% There are a large number of surgical options available, each with its own advantages and disadvantages, including percutaneous pinning, open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) with various plate/cage/locking screw constructs, intramedullary nail (IMN) insertion, hemi-arthroplasty (HA), and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) [ While there are several studies investigating the patient-reported outcomes of primary RTSA and ORIF for PHFs, few studies have directly compared primary RTSA to delayed RTSA after failed ORIF for PHF [ With IRB approval, we conducted a retrospective comparative study at a single institution with a Level I trauma center. All patients who underwent RTSA between 2008 and 2015 at our institution by one of two fellowship-trained shoulder and elbow surgeons for continued pain or functional limitations following ORIF of a PHF were evaluated for inclusion in the study cohort. The cohort used for comparison was a prospectively-obtained cohort of patients who underwent primary RTSA for PHF during the same period by the same surgeons, outcomes for which have been previously reported All humeral components in the study were Zimmer Trabecular Metal (TM) humeral implants which consists of a conical, inset proximal configuration and a porous ingrowth surface that extends 3.5 cm down the stem to allow for bony ingrowth. Glenoid components were either Zimmer TM or a DJO Reverse Shoulder Prosthesis baseplates and glenospheres. The surgical procedure for the control cohort has been previously described The surgical procedure for the failed ORIF cases followed the same steps with the addition of hardware removal and with variation of how the lesser tuberosity/subscapularis was handled. In cases with lesser tuberosity nonunion, the fragment was treated similarly to the acute fracture cases noted above, with the fragment tagged initially and repaired with #5 cerclage sutures around the prosthesis with reinforcing #2 sutures in the rotator interval following component placement. In failed ORIF cases with union of the lesser tuberosity, a subscapularis tenotomy was used to expose the joint and was subsequently repaired after implantation of components with #2 non-absorbable sutures. For the sake of comparison, outcome measures for this study were chosen to be the same as the outcome measures used in the study of the comparison cohort For both cohorts, patients that met inclusion criteria were contacted and asked to fill out an ASES score questionnaire and a Simple Shoulder Test (SST) questionnaire. All patients were a minimum of 21-months from surgery at the time they were contacted. A pain score was obtained as a component of the ASES score, where patients are asked to rank their pain on a scale from 0 (no pain) to 10 (maximal pain). The composite ASES score (scale 0–100) and the Activities of Daily Living (ADL) component of the ASES score (scale 0–50) were both calculated Range of motion (ROM) data was obtained from the most recent clinical follow-up visit, and included active forward elevation, active external rotation and active internal rotation. Only patients with minimum one-year clinical follow-up were included in ROM analysis in either cohort. Internal rotation was based on the highest spinal level that the patient could actively reach with their thumb without assistance and was converted to numerical data as previously described for the Constant-Murley score: 0 = to the hip, 1 = to the buttocks, 2 = to L4–5, 3 = to L1–3, 4 = to T7–12, 5 = to T6 or higher [ For radiographic analysis, immediate postoperative and most recent follow-up radiographs (anteroposterior, axillary lateral, and scapular Y views) for each patient were evaluated by two board-certified radiologists with fellowship training in musculoskeletal radiology, blinded to patient outcomes. The films were compared to asses for evidence of implant loosening (subsidence or radiolucent lines > 1 mm), the development of heterotopic ossification (HO), and the healing, migration, or resorption of the tuberosity fragments. Anatomic tuberosity union was recorded if there was no migration of the tuberosity past the superior-most aspect of the humeral stem. In cases where the radiologists disagreed, the radiographs were evaluated by an orthopedic surgeon, blinded to patient outcomes, and a majority decision was determined. The previously-published study of the comparison cohort showed poor radiological outcomes in some patients with less than 12-month follow-up, and therefore all patients with greater than 4-month radiographic follow-up were included in that study. To be consistent with the previous study, 4-month radiologic follow-up was again used as the cut-off for inclusions in the radiographic analysis. Data analysis was performed using SPSS (Version 22; IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). The mean and standard deviation were computed for outcome measures including ASES scores, SST score, and ROM. Results of the radiographic analysis for both groups were also compiled with percentages calculated for each criterion. Before conducting intergroup analyses, continuous data was checked for normality. For data that were found to be normally distributed, statistical analysis was performed using an Independent T-Test. Non-normally distributed data was compared using a Mann-Whitney U Test. Radiographic measures were compared between groups using a Fisher's Exact Test. Significance was set at a There were 20 patients treated with RTSA after failed ORIF for PHF included in the study (delayed RTSA group). Of those patients, there were seven males (35%) and 13 females (65%). The average age was 66 ± 12 years at the time of RTSA. These patients were compared to 30 patients treated acutely with RTSA after PHF (primary RTSA group), results of which have been previously reported Patient-reported outcomes were obtained from 21 patients in the primary RTSA group and 16 patients in the delayed RTSA group ( Range of motion data with minimum 12-month follow-up was available for 19 patients treated acutely with RTSA and 13 patients with delayed RTSA ( Radiographs were available for 30 patients with primary RTSA and 20 patients with delayed RTSA ( We found in our dataset that RTSA immediately following PHF led to better clinical outcomes compared to RTSA following failed ORIF. Patients that received RTSA as their primary intervention had greater patient reported outcomes scores at minimum two-year follow-up and achieved greater forward elevation at minimum one-year follow-up. Patients that received RTSA as their primary intervention had greater patient reported outcomes scores at minimum 2 years follow-up and achieved greater forward elevation at 1 year follow-up. Furthermore, these better outcomes were achieved despite a tuberosity nonunion rate of 30% in the primary group. Geriatric patients who have suffered a comminuted proximal humerus fracture and have poor bone quality may benefit from a RTSA primarily. In addition, the data suggests that those patients that do receive an ORIF, but go on to need an RTSA for AVN, nonunion or malunion, may have inferior clinical results postoperatively. ORIF for elderly patients with PHF is still a viable option. Hinds et al. found similar clinical outcomes between patients greater than 65 years of age treated with ORIF and fibular strut allograft compared to younger patients treated with ORIF RTSA has proven to be a good salvage option for failed ORIF of PHF. Multiple studies have demonstrated improved functional outcomes after salvage RTSA following failed ORIF. Garcia-Fernandez et al. found an overall improvement in both mean Constant score and mean VAS in patients treated with RTSA after failed ORIF Despite the increasing popularity of RTSA for the treatment of geriatric PHF, few other studies directly compare the outcomes of RTSA as initial PHF treatment versus delayed RTSA after failed ORIF for PHF. Dezfuli et al. This study should be viewed in light of its limitations. This study did not include those patients treated with ORIF that had successful union and did not require a revision surgery. While this was not the purpose of the study, the inclusion criteria likely selected out patients with better self-reported outcomes. In addition, this study has a relatively small number of patients with relatively short-term and non-uniform follow-up. This is a result of the geriatric population of both cohorts of this study, making it difficult to get patients back for follow-up. Greater than two-year follow-up as well as larger cohorts would prove useful in further investigating the difference between RTSA immediately following PHF and that following failed ORIF. In an elderly population, primary RTSA for PHF resulted in better clinical outcomes compared to RTSA following failed ORIF in this case-control study. When faced with a geriatric patient with a comminuted PHF, the literature supports the use of either ORIF or primary RTSA, however, the treating surgeon should consider the improved functional outcomes after primary RTSA should ORIF fail and require salvage RTSA. J. Michael Wiater reports personal fees from Catalyst OrthoScience, Smith & Nephew, and Zimmer, stock or stock options from Catalyst OrthoScience LLC, Coracoid Solutions, LLC, Mpirik, and Hoolux Medical LLC, and research support from