In the treatment of unstable pelvic ring fractures, external fixators have the limitation of not adequately stabilizing the injured posterior elements. This article presents a novel and simple technique of temporary external fixation of the pelvic ring, able to produce compression of both the anterior and posterior pelvic elements. A curved flexible carbon-fiber rod is used, pre-tensioned before attachment to supra-acetabular Schanz screws. Although more extensive clinical experience is required, favorable preliminary results in a series of 13 patients with unstable pelvic fracture were encouraging: the aim of closing the posterior and anterior elements of the pelvic ring was achieved in all cases treated with this technique, and 12 patients survived. Radiological results were excellent in 3 cases and good in 9 cases. No major complications, such as secondary displacement, vertical re-displacement or deep infection, were observed. Mean operative time was 25min, compatible with emergency management.Anterior external fixation continues to play a fundamental role in the mechanical stabilization of pelvic ring lesions and in the control of hemorrhage. It also facilitates pain control, safe transfer of polytrauma patients and the conduct of complementary examinations For decades, orthopedic surgeons have tried to design anterior external fixation configurations capable of producing compression of the posterior pelvic elements In a recent biomechanical study using a synthetic pelvis, Queipo-de-Llano et al. In the period 2013–2015, the authors used the curved pre-tensioned external fixator as an emergency provisional treatment in 13 patients with unstable pelvic fracture. Eleven were males and 2 females. The average age was 44.3 years (range, 25–66 years). Pelvic lesions were classified following the AO/OTA, Young and Burgess and Isler et al. classifications All pelvic injuries were stabilized by the authors using the following surgical technique. Under C-arm radiological control and via a mini-approach, one 5–6 This curved rod, pre-tensioned and held by the tensor, was fixed to both Schanz screws with 2 adjustable clamps (AO tubular system clamps in 4 cases, and Hoffman III Stryker-Medical external fixator clamps in the others), so that the rod was in the same plane as the Schanz screws, as close as possible to the other fixator bar. The provisional straight rod and its respective clamps were removed and the surgeon proceeded to slacken off the tensor device. At this stage, the tensor was removed ( Mean operative time was 25.4 Radiological assessment, following Majeed There was 1 case of superficial infection on a Schanz screw track in a femoral and pelvic external fixator. No other complications, such as secondary displacement, vertical re-displacement or deep infection, were observed. Neurological status did not change after external fixator placement. In 11 of the 12 surviving patients, definitive treatment by internal fixation ( Anterior pelvic external fixation has the disadvantage of not being able to produce compression of the posterior pelvic ring elements. To solve this problem, several authors proposed technical modifications of anterior external fixation frames. Slätis and Karajarju With this surgical technique, closure of the posterior elements was obtained in all cases without opening anterior elements: i.e., preliminary results are encouraging. Compression is maintained by the elastic tension of the Schanz screws. Although mean compression across the sacroiliac in the previous biomechanical study Apart from its posterior and anterior compression properties, the present external fixator showed other advantages: it is radiotransparent, as highlighted by Gänsslen In all the present cases, application of the pretensioned external fixator was provisional. Before it can be considered as a definitive treatment, further clinical and biomechanical studies, assessing the axial load resistance of the construct, are needed for more comprehensive assessment of outcome parameters and to determine the conditions for weight-bearing. None. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.