Practices to control the processing of finely comminuted meat products are proposed. The objective was to test the practical value of both temperature and light reflection measurements made during emulsification as potential indicators of cooking losses and resulting gel texture in pork sausages emulsified within a wide range of temperatures and starch and fat levels. Prior to cooking, pork batters were chopped for different times to ensure final emulsion temperatures ranging from 5 to 50°C. The effects of the fat/lean ratio (0.25 and 0.67) and starch addition (0.8 and 3.2% w:w) on temperature and optical reflection were also investigated. The chopping increased the temperature and decreased the light reflection of fresh meat emulsion. There was no relevant loss of emulsifying capacity at emulsion temperature below 30°C and lightness values over 70 CIE units. The losses and textural parameters of cooked emulsions could be predicted by means of non-linear regression equations based on the temperature and color of the raw emulsion. The determination coefficients obtained ranged from 0.89 to 0.99. The prediction models needed to be fitted to each batter formulation, especially in the presence of reduced levels of gelation agents (meat protein and starch). Lightness was a better predictor than chromaticity, since it decreased constantly with chopping in the range of final emulsion temperatures studied (5–50°C). This confirms previous studies that lightness could be used for monitoring emulsion stability in meat batters.The emulsification process is a critical operation in the manufacture of finely comminuted meat products such as hot dogs (frankfurters or wieners) and bologna. Emulsification strongly influences essential gel properties such as cooking loss and gel texture, among others. Obtaining a stable meat emulsion depends on many factors (see recent review by Proper meat emulsification requires controlling chopping duration and speed as well as the emulsion temperature to prevent excessive water and fat separation, and the subsequent decrease in quality of the final products. Generally, the temperature reached during emulsification is an indicator of chopping intensity and/or duration, although Chopping is not the only factor that needs to be controlled to ensure emulsion stability. Lean, fat, water and starch levels are often modified during the manufacture of finely comminuted meat products to ensure emulsion stability and improve the final gel properties. An adequate proportion of functional protein is essential for both emulsion and gel stabilisation ( The fat/lean ratio is another important factor for emulsion and gel stabilisation. Since fat is replaced by protein, then, gel strength increases ( The objective of this work was to establish the practical value of both temperature and optical reflection measured during emulsification as a potential indicator of cooking losses and texture in comminuted pork meat emulsified within wide ranges of temperature, starch and fat/lean levels. In controlled room temperature conditions, pork batters were emulsified using seven different chopping times (CT) to give a heating ramp ranging from 5 to 50 Pork lean and fat, potato starch, ice, salt and commercial Frankfurter additives were used as raw ingredients to manufacture the emulsion. The fresh pork lean and backfat were obtained from a local industrial slaughterhouse, trimming the meat manually to remove connective tissue. Both the lean meat and fat were cut into small pieces (200 Temperature ( Pork batter aliquots of 50 The texture profile analysis (TPA) was made in cooked emulsions by means of two cycle compression test, as described by Data were analysed using Statistix for Windows 2.0 program (Analytical Software, USA). An analysis of variance was used to investigate the sources of variation of the dependent variables (i.e., TP, CL, The effects of the main factors (i.e., chopping time, fat/lean ratio and starch addition level) on the physical properties of fresh ( As shown in Emulsion color was affected by both chopping time and formulation as well as by their interaction ( Color changes in meat batters during chopping have been attributed to a combination of physical–chemical phenomena, probably associated with fat particle size variations, the presence of air bubbles and/or protein–fat interactions ( As mentioned, the fat/lean ratio affected The pH remained stable around ∼6 during the emulsification process. No significant ( Cooking losses were affected by chopping time, the fat/lean ratio and the level of starch addition, as well as by their interaction. The The texture profile was affected by chopping time, the fat/lean ratio and starch addition level, as well as by their interaction ( Whatever the reason, this lack of consistency was typically accompanied by a significant increase of CL. An increase in the fat/lean ratio also decreased gel strength, leading to lower hardness, cohesiveness, gumminess, springiness and chewiness, all of which was to be expected. Increasing fat level without a proportional increase in lean meat could lead to the relative lack of emulsifying agents, which would increase cooking losses and decrease gel consistency, especially in the case of over-chopping. This effect was reported by ANOVA gave good correlations between the physical properties measured prior ( The abilities of In agreement with the above mentioned ANOVA, the fat/lean ratio and starch levels modified the predictive equations. The most pronounced slopes were found for a 0.67 fat/lean ratio The chopping process increased the temperature and decreased light reflection in pork batters. Under the experimental conditions studied, no relevant loss of emulsifying capacity occurred at emulsion temperatures below 30