Background
                  We present a case of multifocal infection involving the left total hip replacement and the right total knee replacement of a patient, further complicated by an infected non-union of a periprosthetic fracture of the right knee. This required the unique simultaneous management of both infection eradication and fracture stabilization in the knee.
               
                  Methods
                  Both sites were treated with a two-stages procedure, including the novel use of a stemmed articulating spacer for the right knee. This spacer was made combining a retrograde humeral nail, coated with antibiotic-impregnated cement, and a pre-formed articulating cement spacer. The patient was able to weight-bear on this spacer.
               
                  Results
                  The fracture went on to unite, and a second stage was performed with the use of stemmed prosthesis and augments. She remains infection free two years after the second stage operation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The use of a stemmed articulating knee spacer can facilitate infection eradication and fracture stabilization while preserving some motion and weight-bearing ability in the two-stages management of an infected periprosthetic fracture of the knee.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level V (Case report).The incidence of infection in periprosthetic fractures range from 3% to 10% A 55 She presented to our clinic six months after her previous operations and complained of persistent pain over her left hip and right knee. There was no recent trauma. Plain radiographs demonstrated pelvic discontinuity, hip dislocation and superior migration of her acetabular cup. Computed tomography scans reported non-union of her right knee periprosthetic fracture. Her inflammatory markers were elevated. Hip and knee aspirations returned with elevated cell counts and raised neutrophils. Cultures eventually grew The locking plate and the prosthesis in her right knee were removed via their previous lateral and midline incisions respectively, with minimal bone loss. The fracture site demonstrated fibrous non-union. A thorough debridement was performed and the femoral canal was first reamed with flexible reamers. The reaming accomplished two purposes — debridement of the femoral canal and preparation for the stem of the spacer. A retrograde humeral nail (TRIGEN supracondylar nail, Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN, USA) was chosen as a stem for the spacer. The femoral canal was sized post reaming by inserting humeral nails of increasing width into the canal until it loosely fitted and its length bypassed the fracture site by at least two cortical diameters. The appropriate femoral spacer (Tecres Spacer K, Sommacampagna, Verona, Italy) that most closely matched the medial-lateral width of the original implant was then chosen. The nail was first inserted into the femoral canal and the femoral spacer was placed onto the distal femur to note the relative position of the two components. The point of attachment of the nail on the femoral spacer was marked out. Three bags of cement (Simplex P with tobramycin, Stryker, Mahwah, New Jersey, USA) were prepared and methylene blue was added to facilitate subsequent cement removal. One bag was used to coat a uniform thin layer of cement around the entire nail and to cement the nail onto the back of the spacer. A second bag was used to form a blob of cement, which was then placed onto the back of the spacer with five centimeters of the nail end embedded within it. More cement was used to build up the base and the two components were held together until the cement was fully polymerized ( The patient completed six weeks of antibiotics. She was kept in a wheelchair as she had difficulty balancing with her left hip. Notwithstanding this, she was able to place some weight on her right knee to facilitate the transfer. Her second stage was performed four months after her first stage via her midline incision and medial parapatellar approach, when all her inflammatory markers were normalized. The fracture site had united and her bone stock was well preserved. Consequently, only distal femoral augments were necessary to restore the joint line ( Periprosthetic fractures and periprosthetic joint infections are two challenging problems. Infections in periprosthetic fractures are uncommon Management of periprosthetic fractures in the setting of infection will require considerations different from those of non-infected periprosthetic fractures. Fracture stabilization has to be obtained without compromising infection eradication. Excessive metal may serve as nidus for infection and devascularize soft tissue attachments, further aggravating non-union. Locking plates and retrograde nails are commonly used in the treatment of distal femur periprosthetic fractures Static spacer with the use of a cemented tibiofemoral nail However, articulating spacers also have various limitations, especially in a knee with multiple previous operations. In the presence of extensive bone loss or ligamentous insufficiency, knee instability, dislocation and spacer extrusions have been reported. Therefore, intra-operative soft tissue balancing is essential during spacer implantation. Spacer breakage and periprosthetic fractures are also a possibility if the components are implanted too tightly, or with the use of a stemmed implant, if it results in knee malalignment. The conferred autonomy of weight bearing and flexion with an articulating spacer also requires a compliant patient to minimize potential complications Considering all factors, the use of our stemmed articulating spacer was beneficial in our patient. The use of the stemmed articulating spacer can facilitate infection eradication and fracture stabilization while preserving some motion in the two stage management of infection in periprosthetic fracture. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.