Ammonium bifluoride (ABF, NH4F·HF) is a well-known reagent for converting metal oxides to fluorides and for its applications in breaking down minerals and ores in order to extract useful components. It has been more recently applied to the decomposition of inorganic matrices prior to elemental analysis. Herein, a sample decomposition method that employs molten ABF sample treatment in the initial step is systematically evaluated across a range of inorganic sample types: glass, quartz, zircon, soil, and pitchblende ore. Method performance is evaluated across two variables: duration of molten ABF treatment and ABF reagent mass to sample mass ratio. The degree of solubilization of these sample classes are compared to the fluoride stoichiometry that is theoretically necessary to enact complete fluorination of the sample types. Finally, the sample decomposition method is performed on several soil and pitchblende ore standard reference materials, after which elemental constituent analysis is performed by ICP-OES and ICP-MS. Elemental recoveries are compared to the certified values; results indicate generally good to excellent recoveries across a range of alkaline earth, rare earth, transition metal, and actinide elements.Thorough matrix decomposition is a critical initial step in the determination of elemental and/or isotopic constituents in solid inorganic samples. Typical techniques include open and closed vessel acid digestions and fusions ( ABF is a solid compound at room temperature that melts between 125 and 126.5 Solid ABF salt is slowly reactive with oxide materials at room temperature. The addition of fine oxide powders (e.g., Y ( Then, samples were evaporated to salt residues at 160 Recently, the same sample decomposition method was replicated for elemental analysis (including In this paper, we describe the ABF-based decomposition of a diversity of amorphous and crystalline solids including glass, the refractory minerals quartz and zircon, and NIST soil and AQCS uranium ore standard reference materials (SRMs) ( Additionally, the ABF decomposition and sample solubilization method was performed on SRMs in order to assess the elemental recoveries on the final solubilized samples using ICP-OES and ICP-MS analysis. Mass concentrations of 19 elements were determined for NIST soil SRMs 2709, 2710, and 2711. These values were compared to the certified reference values. In the same fashion, U recoveries were determined for the AQCS pitchblende ore SRMs S-8, S-12, and S-13. The chemical recoveries of trace elements from these SRMs were, with a few exceptions, consistent with their certified values. The demonstrated matrix decomposition and subsequent elemental constituent solubilization efficacy of this method makes it a viable technique for applications in forensics, environmental analysis, geo- and cosmo-chemistry, and geochronology. Ammonium bifluoride (ABF) salt was acquired from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) at Puriss (≥ 98.5%) and Trace Metal™ (99.999%) grades. Optima™ grade nitric acid was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Solutions were prepared from double deionized water (18.3 Milled samples of the refractory minerals quartz (SiO Three soils were obtained from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, Gaithersburg, MD) as standard reference materials (SRMs) ( A custom heater tube (Thermcraft Fibercraft™ Low Mass Vacuum Formed Ceramic Fiber Heater (Winston Salem, NC)), controlled by a Model 270 temperature controller (J-Kem, Inc., St. Louis, MO) was sourced and assembled. One end of a 375 Decomposition of inorganic media by molten ABF was performed in sealed Teflon™ PFA reaction vessels (7 The decomposition of inorganic solids using molten ABF is accomplished via the method steps outlined in When evaluating the solubilization of a sample matrix, the dissolved fraction ( The filters were 47 Inorganic sample media processed using the ABF decomposition method was analyzed for multiple element concentrations from dissolved solutions taken through step F of the method. Analysis of dissolved solutions was performed by either inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) or inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Replicate samples were decomposed and solubilized as per the method described in Analysis of Ba, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Sr, Ti, V, Y, and Zn was performed using ICP-OES. The analysis was performed using an iCAP 6500 Duo ICP-OES in axial mode purchased from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA). A five point calibration curve was prepared from gravimetric dilution of 1000 Quantification of Zr, Mo, Ag, Hf, La, Ce, Nd, Th, and U in the dissolved solutions was performed by ICP-MS using an Agilent 7700X (Ventura, CA). Samples were delivered to the mass spectrometer with a fluoride resistant polyflouroalkoxy alkane sample intake and nebulizer (Glass Expansion, Pocasset, MA). A ten point calibration curve was prepared by gravimetric dilutions from 1000 Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were collected using a Rigaku Ultima IV powder diffractometer (The Woodlands, TX) equipped with a graphite monochromated Cu Kα X-ray source and a D/Tex silicon strip detector. Diffraction data was collected from 5° to 100° 2θ with a step size of 0.02° and a scan speed of 5° Particle size distribution of milled powder was determined with the use of a Microtrac S3000 (Montgomeryville, PA) laser diffraction analyzer. Up to 1 Commercially available ABF (Puriss, ABF distillations were performed between 160 and 200 The ABF sample decomposition method ( Based on the chemical composition of the materials, the stoichiometric quantity of fluorinating agent necessary to affect complete matrix fluorination was assessed. Due to its noncrystalline structure, glass was anticipated to be the simplest material to decompose. The dissolved mass fractions of the test glass are presented against the ABF melt time and mass ratios in The test glass base material contains 57.6% SiO Quartz, a crystalline material composed of interlinked SiO Quartz decomposition with the solid fluorinating agent ABF and residual matrix solubilization was evaluated with milled quartz flour. The quartz flour used in this study had good mineralogical purity, with an X-ray powder diffraction pattern shown in Fig. SI 2. The quartz flour solubilization data ( Within the sealed PFA jars, the reaction of ABF and HF decomposition products on SiO Zircon (ZrSiO Traditional laboratory-scale wet chemical dissolution methods for zircon crystals can result in poor solubilization. ( Although ABF was shown to be effective in destruction of milled zircon when present at hundreds of parts per million concentrations in rock flour (above), the efficacy of the ABF decomposition method on milligram quantities of essentially pure zircon was of interest. Milled zircon sand (50 While the glass and quartz flours were shown to decompose within 1 Whereas the initial fast decomposition rate can be explained by the ABF action on minute particles, along fractures (especially those induced by milling), and crystal defects in the particles, the secondary slow rate can likely be explained by the shrinking core model, in which the particle dissolution kinetics are driven by the ability of the reactant to penetrate the crystal surfaces ( It is interesting to note the reported ability of an ABF treatment to successfully decompose zircon present in GSP-2 (PSD Ultimately, fluorination of milled zircon sand during step C would likely result in (NH In subsequent process steps, the Si would be driven off as gaseous SiF The ABF decomposition method optimization process was also evaluated using two environmental materials: soil (NIST 2710) and low grade U (pitchblende) ore (AQCS S-8). ( The This study has significantly extended the diversity of solid materials decomposed and analyzed using molten ABF in sealed fluoropolymer vials heated to a temperature near the reagent boiling point. As noted by ( While treatment conditions that provided gravimetric-based quantitative dissolution of sample residues were mapped, it was also important to ascertain whether good chemical recoveries over a range of elements could be obtained. Traditional spectrometric analyses on the fully dissolved sample solutions (step F) were carried out using direct sample nebulization ICP-OES and ICP-MS after making appropriate dilutions of the solubilized samples. The evaluation was intended to assure that analytes were not lost during the sample decomposition and dissolution process due to (1) incomplete decomposition of minerals, (2) volatilization of some fluorinated elements, or (3) formation of intractable fluoride solids that are not taken up into solution prior to analysis. A suite of 19 elements were analyzed from three NIST soil SRMs ( Good chemical recoveries (i.e., recoveries at or near 100% at one sigma) were observed for the alkaline earth elements Sr and Ba, indicating complete mineral decomposition, no losses during processing, and successful transfer of the elements into solution prior to analysis. Strontium and barium fluoride have modest solubilities in H Chemical recoveries for the four determined rare earth elements (REEs), Y, La, Ce, and Nd were good for all samples, with the exception of Y in SRM 2711 (118 Finally, U and Th concentrations were determined for the NIST soil ( Uranium(IV) oxide, along with Th(IV) and Pu(IV) oxides, are well known to fluorinate in a similar manner to Ce(IV) per Eq. It is important to point out that the ABF-based fluorination reactions of U(IV) and U(V)/U(VI) oxide compounds present in UO For the majority of constituent elements examined, analyte recovery is high. The good chemical recoveries indicate that sample decomposition is effectively complete, the reaction products are solubilized with heating in nitric acid, and analyte loss due to volatilization (e.g., VF An improved distillation apparatus to increase the purity of ABF is described. A comparison of the transition metal contaminant concentrations from Puriss grade ABF in the resulting distillate were quite similar to concentrations in the Trace Metal grade reagent. The performance of the ABF decomposition method was evaluated across two variables: time duration of the molten ABF treatment step (1–6 Solubilized NIST soil and AQCS low grade U ore SRMs resulting from the described decomposition method were analyzed by ICP-MS and ICP-OES. Comparison of determined vs. reference element concentrations (19 elements) indicated good chemical yields overall, despite the small sample mass chosen for processing (50 It is of interest to note that while the present study employed a method that resulted in solubilization of the decomposed matrix in acid, opportunities exist within the method to analyze the sample as a solid: (1) after the molten ABF/sample mixture is solidified with cooling (step C), and (2) after the first acid solubilized sample is evaporated to salts (step E). At these points in the method, the elemental constituents in the sample attain a more homogeneous state within the salt residue. Furthermore, elemental or isotopic tracers can be added to the pre-reacted ABF/sample mixture to obtain a sample that can be analyzed by isotope dilution or standard addition. ( The work was funded by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at