In this study, the potentiality of Bangladesh zircon as a raw material for zirconia and zircon brick production was examined. Decomposition of zircon (ZrSiO4) into zirconia (ZrO2) was attempted by using caustic soda (NaOH) as the decomposition agent. 5–10μm size zircon, 5–30wt.% NaOH, and decomposition temperatures ranging from 1300 to 1500°C were investigated. X-ray diffraction method using Mo Kα radiation was used in order to find out the extent of decomposition of zircon into zirconia. Zircon bricks of 0.06mm×0.06mm×0.025mm shaped were made under a pressure of 15MPa. Carboxi methyal cellulose (CMC) and Fe2O3 were used as a binder. With increasing temperature and percentage of NaOH, decomposition of zircon increases. Crushing strengths and density of these bricks could be found as high as 53.36MPa and 3210kg/m3, respectively. Bangladesh zircon can be used successfully for preparation of refractory bricks for high temperature use.In recent years, zirconia (ZrO Dense zircon silicate bricks are installed in glass melting furnaces as soldier bricks in the melting and refining areas of borosilicate glass tanks. In electrical tanks, they are installed in the bottom and as rear lining. Owing to the low electrical conductivity at high temperatures, so-called electrode bricks for electric heating are also manufactured out of dense zircon silicate minerals. Casting nozzles may also be made of zirconium silicate, and in Japan, such bricks are used in steel ladles Zircon is one of the most important among the heavy minerals occurring in the beach sand along the coastal belt of Bangladesh. The reserve of zircon in Bangladesh coast is roughly estimated to be more than one and half a million tonnes Previous study by the same authors fully characterized zircon beneficiated at the Cox's Bazar Pilot Plant of Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission Pure zirconia can be prepared from a favas A higher purity grade of zirconia can be prepared in another way: The ore mixed with coke, in an amount sufficient to bind the total oxygen of the ore, and the mixture is heated at 800–1200 It is well known that zircon is decomposed at high temperature in reducing media. The decomposition temperature, however, is lowered when the silicate is mixed with fluxing agent such as NaOH Leaching with water of the decomposed mass removes the soluble sodium silicate and simultaneously hydrolizes sodium zirconate to hydrated zirconia. The impure hydrated zirconia is dissolved in concentrated HCl, HNO When a mixture of ZrSiO When zircon particles are introduced into a stable argon plasma reactor at a temperature range of 600–1500 Zircon can be thermally dissociated in an arc furnace or an electric reactor ZrO Decomposition of zircon into zircon (ZrO Refractory bricks were made from Bangladesh zircon in a local brick factory. Shaping of zircon bricks can be done by dry pressing, slip casting, ethyl silicate casting In this study, the effect of sodium hydroxide percentage and temperature on the decomposition of zircon is described. Symbols used in Now the effect of increase in temperature on the decomposition of zircon can be seen in Disintegration of zircon has been reported by a number of worker using NaOH The surface appearance of the fired as-received zircon bricks fired at 1360 The effect of binder on the properties of zircon bricks prepared from as-received Bangladesh zircon is given in The properties of zircon bricks made from the mixture of as-received and ground zircon fired at temperature 1430 Comparing The heating period of 30 The authors would like to thank Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission for supplying the zircon concentrate used in this study.