The paper reports about the comminution of cementitious composites in a laboratory jaw breaker. Two samples of cement paste, one mortar sample, one lightweight concrete sample, and samples of four standard concrete mixtures were investigated. Water–cement ratio and maximum aggregate size were varied. Based on sieve analysis, the fractal dimensions of the fragment samples were estimated. The fractal dimensions varied in a range between D
                     F
                     =1.90 and 2.22, whereas the lower value belonged to the mortar specimen. Materials with failed through a single, dominant fracture propagation mode could be approximated suitably with a one-parameter fractal model. Other mixtures could better be modelled with a bi-linear procedure.The annual amount of construction demolition waste is about 300 In that equation, The idea of considering fractal distributions for fragmentation processes was put forward by The parameters in Eqs. Only a few investigations into the fractal response of cementitious materials to different loading conditions have been performed. Eq. The parameters This paper attempts to investigate the effects of material composition of cement-based materials on the fractal dimensions of fragmentation products. Eight different cementitious mixtures were manufactured for this investigation: four concrete mixtures, one lightweight concrete mixture, one mortar mixture, and two hardened cement paste mixtures. The cement was a General Purpose Cement. As fine aggregate quartz sand (2.8 The fragment size distributions were estimated based on sieve analyses with a commercial mechanical sieve shaker. Five samples of each mixture were sieved for five minutes. The weight of the fraction of each sieve was measured with a balancer. The results of the sieve analyses were utilised for the estimation of the fractal dimensions of the mixtures according to Eqs.   The results of the fragment size analyses are displayed in The fractal dimensions (with the exception of mixture 4) were in the range The coincidence between measured values and one-parameter fractal model was sufficient for the cement paste mixtures (7 and 8) and for the concrete mixture 3. As can be seen in In All mixtures with a high degree of structural homogeneity, namely the two cement paste samples and the lightweight concrete, were characterized by high values for the coefficient of regression if the one-parameter model was applied. This result can be ascribed to the fact that a single mechanism was responsible for the failure of the samples. This is evidenced in  SEM-inspections of the fragments generated during the crushing process showed features of non-linear crack propagation, namely crack face bridging and crack branching. The fractal dimensions of the fragments ranged between 1.90 and 2.22. These rather low values pointed to a fragmentation process which was dominated by surface effects rather than by effects of volume. Materials which failed through a single, predominant fracture propagation mode could be characterized with a single-parameter fractal model. Materials which failed through multiple fracture propagation modes were characterized by bi-fractality. The preliminary observations made in this study need further support through a systematic follow-up study. This investigation was funded by the