In 1960, the volume of municipal solid waste (MSW) disposed in the US was on the order of 87.5 The cost today to dispose of all this waste exceeds $40 billion per year. Partly as a result of the high rates of economic growth in the US and partly as a result of our society's throwaway patterns, waste generation is projected to continue growing. In the face of increased landfill regulations, newer air emission regulations, and closure of dumps, landfills, and incinerators throughout the US, communities face a disposal problem, described by some as a crisis. The costs for waste treatment and recycling will continue to rise over time. The crisis is further exacerbated by a community attitude of “not in my backyard” (NIMBY). The need for new long-term methods to deal with our solid waste in an environmentally sound fashion has resulted in the following hierarchy of disposal alternatives established by the US EPA: reduction, recycling, waste-to-energy (also called resource recovery), and disposal in landfills. The focus here will be on “recycling.” There is some confusion regarding what actually constitutes household recycling. Recycling is an elusive concept about which everyone thinks they have a clear understanding until they begin to practice it. Many would argue that resource recovery facilities are a form of recycling because they burn garbage to produce electricity or steam. For example, a truckload of household waste can produce enough energy to replace over 20 barrels of oil. However, the focus will be on recycling of metals, plastics, glass, and paper and reuse of these materials in their current form rather than converting them into energy, oil, gas, or some other form. It is worthwhile to note that while some 25% of our waste is considered by the collecting communities to be recycled, the actual amount which is resold as finished products may be considerably less, the balance being processing wastes and residuals that go to landfills. There are many ways to implement a recycling program. The program can either be voluntary or mandatory. A community can pick up the recyclables at the household as in the case of a curbside collection program. Recyclables can be sorted by the homeowner at curbside ( The materials that are collected from household waste for recycling typically include the following: Paper: paper is normally collected in the form of newspaper (termed ONP or old newspaper), cardboard (termed OCC or old corrugated containers), or mixed paper (a low-grade frequently used for paperboard or insulation). Glass: glass can be collected either as mixed color or color sorted brown (termed amber), green (often termed emerald), and clear (also termed flint). Metal: Metal food and beverage containers can be collected including tin cans (termed ferrous metals) and aluminum cans (termed nonferrous metals). Plastic: plastic is found in numerous forms including: PET soda bottles (♯1: polyethylene terephthalate sometimes called PETE), HDPE milk and water bottles and detergent bottles (♯2: high density polyethylene), V or PVC bottles and sheet (♯3: vinyl or polyvinyl chloride), LDPE (♯4: low density polyethylene, typically a film plastic), PP (♯5: polypropylene for hot fill applications) PS (♯6: polystyrene, such as for foam cups but also packaging berries, etc.), and other (♯7: a resin other than the above six resins or a multilayer resin). Each of these plastics typically has a resin identifier marked on the bottom of each container within the “chasing arrows” recycling symbol. The resin identifier is a number from 1 to 7, referring to each of the above resins in the order listed. The various collection, consolidation, and processing approaches include: bottle Bill Returns including the use of reverse vending machines ( drop boxes, drop-off centers, or buy-back centers for recyclables ( curbside collection of homeowner separated materials, curbside separation of homeowner-commingled recyclables, collection of commingled recyclables followed by hand or automated processing at a materials recycling facility (MRF) ( mixed waste processing of recyclables collected as part of the trash stream, often called a front-end processing plant ( post-combustion processing of recyclables from incinerator ash after combustion at a mass-burning-type waste-to-energy plant ( When one accounts for all the different types of materials that can be included in a recycling program, the various methods for segregation and the various means and methods of collection, as well as the types of processing and separation systems that can be used, seem enormous and confusing. These are all discussed in a more comprehensive article by the author contained in the “Handbook of Solid Waste Management ( Rather than focusing on the various methods to collect and sort recyclable materials, the focus of this article will be on what materials are contained in household waste that can be recycled, and how these materials are actually recycled into end products and the special issues surrounding use of recycled feedstocks. In essence, rather than providing a treatment of alternative recycling management techniques, the focus will be on the materials that are typically produced by recycling technologies and how they differ from materials produced from nonrecycled (e.g., virgin) raw materials. The focus will particularly be on the recycling of metals, plastic, glass, and paper and the challenges that recyclable material create from a material engineering and design perspective. The two forms of metals typically recycled are ferrous (mostly iron and steel) and nonferrous (mostly aluminum). Three different forms of ferrous metals that are typically recycled are:    Aluminum is the principal nonferrous metal that is recycled. However, other nonferrous metals can also be recycled including copper, zinc, and stainless steel. Like ferrous metals, nonferrous metals are also recovered in three different forms: (b) (c) Old glass can be sorted by color and sold as glass-cullet, which is recycled into new bottle glass. The grades of glass include clear, green, or brown, often also referred to as flint, emerald, and amber, respectively. A photograph of glass cullet in each of these three grades after size reduction in a granulator is shown in As a container material, glass has many wonderful properties. It is inert, attractive, formable into complex shapes, and provides excellent gas barrier properties that are especially important to the shelf-life of carbonated beverages such as soda and beer. However, it must be manufactured with thick walls due to its fragility and thus adds substantial weight to the package. Accordingly, glass has lost much of its appeal to the packaging industry and is rapidly being replaced by lighter and more impact-resistant metals and plastic containers. One of the advantages of glass from a production standpoint is the low cost of the raw materials that go into it. However, strangely enough, this materials' cost advantage is actually a disadvantage from a recycling standpoint because the packaging material itself does not have much value after it has been used. This adds to the perception that the material is not very recyclable when in fact it is easily recyclable, but the costs to move the container to the recycling facility are high due to the fact that the shipping costs are high per container and the value per pound once delivered is very low. Glass recovered from bottle bill or deposit systems is very clean and pure, and highly recyclable. The situation can be quite different for glass recovered from curbside programs, especially commingled collection programs where compaction and processing result in significant breakage and contamination. Contamination is even much worse for glass recovered from mixed waste streams. The greatest problems in recycling MRF and glass recovered from mixed waste processing results from the fact that ceramic materials and refractory glass are often present. Moreover, stones from dirt, which frequently find their way into recycled containers, can also be a problem. These materials do not fuse or melt in the glass furnace batch melting process and produce “stones” in the glass, which are inclusions or defects causing the glass to break when pressurized with carbonation. As the glass bottles have become thinner to reduce the weight of the container, the impact of these defects has become even more important. Stones can be removed from recycled glass cullet by processing the glass using a method called “froth flotation,” which is a mineral beneficiation technique utilized in many mining operations, but this further adds to the cost of glass recycling and makes it less financially attractive. Recycled glass cullet is a low-melting eutectic requiring less energy to melt than the virgin raw materials that go into manufacture of new bottle glass. The value of glass is on the order of $30–$50 per short ton, only half that of ferrous metals and one-twentieth that of aluminum. If the end user bottling plant is more than 50–100 miles from the recycling center, this entire market value is lost to shipping and handling costs. However, if the alternative disposal site is a waste-to-energy plant, the glass contributes nothing to the combustion process, and adds to the ash disposal costs, which can be significant. So a community, when considering the addition of glass to its recycling program, should not only look at its market value, but also the alternative disposal cost that it will incur for ash disposal if its glass is not recycled. US plastic container demand in 2004 is projected by Fredonia to be about 13 billion pounds. Of that quantity, HDPE is estimated to make up 49% while PET will make up 39%. The balance is 6% PS, 3% PP, and 3% PVC, and others ( PET (sometimes called PETE) is the preferred resin for packaging soda because of its strong gas barrier properties. A photograph of various PET finished products is provided in High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is the most common household packaging material due to its low resin cost and easy formability. Of the 25% of household waste recycled, paper is the largest component by weight. There is no market for paper, as such. The demand is for a particular grade of paper. According to the Paper Stock Institute, there are 51 grades of paper, with some of the major recyclable categories being old newspapers (ONP), old corrugated containers (OCC), and brown Kraft grocery bags. If all of these grades are mixed together as “paper,” the product will not be marketable even though there may be an unsaturated demand for the individual components. From this example, we may infer a recycling mixing principal. One part of recyclable material no. 1 plus one part of recyclable material no. 2 produce two parts of lower-value recyclable material or alternatively equals municipal solid waste. It is the exception to the rule, and very unlikely, that the combined value of the mixture will equal the combined value of the parts. The key to securing strong, high-value markets for recyclable materials is quality, not quantity. Thus achieving unrealistically high recycling rates can actually destroy recycling, not contribute to it. It is necessary to segregate the materials into their various components or grades with minimal contamination and to produce products of consistent quality. Whenever industry representatives speak to citizens about obstacles to recycling, they constantly caution that it is necessary to keep supply and demand in balance and that the key to recycling is developing sufficient markets and demand for the finished products. However, they assume, perhaps incorrectly, that the product will meet existing material specifications designed around supply from virgin feedstock. These specifications assume a level of quality, which frequently is not achieved, in actual recycling practice. There must be, in place, sufficient end use demand and conversion capacity to absorb the raw materials and to provide the proper basic incentives to invest tens of millions of dollars in a high capacity project. There must also be dependable sources of quality raw materials available in appropriate quantities at the same time that the end use demand is sufficient to support conversion. But when we talk about demand for recycled materials, too often there is little or no discussion regarding the particular grade of product under consideration and the relationship between product purity and industry demand. However, this market differentiation is “the most critical factor” in assessing the demand and value of the product. For example, the product specification for newsprint consists of baled newspapers containing less than 5% of other papers. Prohibitive materials may not exceed 1/2% and total outthrows may not exceed 2%. A special news bale should consist of sorted, fresh, dry newspaper, not sunburned and free from paper other than newspaper, containing not more than the percentage of rotogravure and colored sections normally contained in newspaper delivered to the household. In addition, each particular customer for the recycled paper product may have special contamination requirements that are a function of its particular requirements or processing system. The issue here is that there may be substantial demand for clean, segregated product, but there is little or no demand for unsegregated, dirty product. If all 51 grades were blended together, the paper would be unmarketable as paper. As can be seen mixing in McDonald's bags, cups with plastic coatings and liners, hamburger wrappers, and pizza boxes would make the entire bale of newsprint unacceptable for use or reuse. Few households' recyclers really understand this fact. Their enthusiasm to recycle results in disposing not only the added nonspecification materials but also makes the basic specification grade newsprint with which it is mixed, nonrecyclable. In conclusion, while many materials may be theoretically recyclable, as a practical matter, these materials cannot be effectively recycled with the current recycling collection and processing systems. A recycling program, which seeks to achieve too high a recycling rate by including all grades of paper, could actually hurt the potential to recycle the larger part of our segregated waste paper, namely, old newspaper or old corrugated containers. This same principal is not only true for grades of paper, but also for the various grades of metal, plastic, and glass as well. A program that collects all of these materials, but does not adequately segregate them and keep the glass out of the paper and plastic, and the plastic out of the glass just creates a mess. While the mix may be picked up at curbside, and thus be considered by the household to have been “recycled” it will not actually be recycled and will add to the volume of municipal solid waste that is growing each year.