Gross phosphorus (P) fluxes measured in isotopic dilution studies with 33P labeled soils include the biological processes of microbial P immobilization, remineralization of immobilized P and mineralization of non-microbial soil organic P. In this approach, isotopic dilution due to physicochemical processes is taken into account. Our objectives were to assess the effect of inorganic P availability on gross P mineralization and immobilization in soil under permanent grassland, and to relate these fluxes to soil respiration, phosphatase activity and substrate availability as assessed by an enzyme addition method. We used soils from an 18-year-old grassland fertilization experiment near Zurich, Switzerland, that were collected in two treatments which differed only in the amount of mineral P applied (0 and 17kg P ha−1 yr−1 in NK and NPK, respectively). Water-extractable phosphate was low (0.1 and 0.4mg P kg−1 soil in NK and NPK, while hexanol-labile (microbial) P was high (36 and 54mg P kg−1 soil in NK and NPK). Extremely fast microbial P uptake under P-limited conditions in NK necessitated the use of a microbial inhibitor when determining isotopic dilution due to physicochemical processes. At the higher inorganic P availability in NPK, however, isotopic exchange parameters were similar in the presence and absence of a microbial inhibitor. Phosphatase activity was higher in NK than in NPK, while soil respiration, water-extractable organic P and its enzyme-labile fraction were not affected by P status. Together, the results showed that inorganic P availability primarily affected microbial P immobilization which was the main component of gross P fluxes in both treatments. Gross P mineralization rates (8.2 and 3.1mg P kg−1 d−1 for NK and NPK) during the first week were higher than reported in other studies on arable and forest soils and at least equal to isotopically exchangeable P due to physicochemical processes, confirming the importance of microbial processes in grassland soils.Phosphorus (P) in soils is present in inorganic and organic form. Inorganic P represents a continuum of lability, from orthophosphate in solution to highly recalcitrant forms ( In Swiss cropped soils, Availability of inorganic P can also have a direct effect on some microbial processes. For example, two different phosphate transport systems have been shown to exist in microorganisms such as While the quantification of gross P fluxes is important for a good understanding of the processes occurring in each system, only net organic P mineralization indicates the flux of P that actually becomes available for plant uptake. In the isotopic dilution approach, net organic P mineralization can be derived from gross P mineralization by subtracting microbial P immobilization ( Such a linkage of C and P mineralization assumes the dominance of biological oxidation processes governed by the need for energy rather than the dominance of biochemical processes, i.e. enzymatic hydrolysis, governed by the need for P. While pedogenetic studies have suggested the dominance of biochemical P mineralization ( Our main objective was to assess the effect of inorganic P availability on gross P mineralization fluxes in soil under permanent grassland, and to relate these fluxes to soil respiration, phosphatase activity and substrate availability as assessed by an enzyme addition method. Because short-term additions of inorganic P may interfere with the steady-state assumptions of the isotopic dilution technique, we used soils from a fertilization trial as a model. A preliminary experiment had pointed to microbial interference when establishing the baseline of physicochemical processes in the non-P-fertilized, but not in the P-fertilized treatment. For this reason we conducted the short-term batch experiment both in the presence and absence of a microbial inhibitor. Soil samples were taken on October 6, 2010 in a grassland fertilization experiment in Regensdorf-Watt (canton Zurich, Switzerland) with a randomized block design. The soil is a Cambisol with 22% clay and 34% silt ( We took 50 soil cores from 0–5 To start the preincubation ( The isotopic dilution method consists of the batch experiment to determine the baseline of isotopic dilution by physicochemical processes ( Parameters of isotopic exchange were determined in isotopic exchange kinetics (IEK) experiments in order to extrapolate the baseline of physicochemical processes. The experiments were done using unlabeled preincubated soil in the presence or absence of a microbial inhibitor (HgCl In detail, soil equivalent to 10 The following parameters were derived from the short-term batch experiment ( The incorporation of In detail, soils were equilibrated in triplicate for 16 The main aim of the incubation experiment was to follow the temporal development of In detail, on day 0 one portion of moist soil (equivalent to 305 On the day of starting the preincubation, a portion of soil was subjected to drying (40 Microbial C and N were determined during preincubation (5 days before the start of the main experiment) using the chloroform fumigation extraction method ( Phosphomonoesterase (phosphatase) activity was measured in a microplate design following the method of The aim of this analysis was to quantify the hydrolyzable substrate in the soil. We used an enzyme addition approach ( The assay for phytase-labile P was buffered by adding 60 Phytase-labile P was calculated from the release of phosphate in enzyme-amended soil suspensions (Pi The analytical procedures for water-extractable and buffer-extractable P were similar and always performed in duplicate. The supernatant after centrifugation was filtered through 0.2 Soil respiration was measured in duplicate on portions of moist soil equivalent to 20 The specific activity ( Resin-extractable and microbial P were determined in duplicate by simultaneous liquid fumigation and extraction with anion-exchange resin membranes (BDH #55164) in bicarbonate form for 16 In an isotopically labeled soil, the release of  We used formula Extrapolated The quantity of P in a soil pool that has been derived from a labeled P source can be calculated from the specific activities of the pool and the source, and the amount of P in the pool ( Net P mineralization was then derived as gross P mineralization minus microbial immobilization. We also calculated net organic P mineralization rates (in % of soil organic P mineralized d All statistics were performed with SPSS 17.0 (2008). General soil properties and other measurements taken only once (e.g. phosphatase activity) were tested by ANOVA with the factors fertilization treatment and field replicate, with effects considered significant for Soil from the P-fertilized treatment NPK had significantly higher values of total organic C, total P, organic P and N Phosphatase activity was significantly higher in NK than in NPK ( Incubation with MES-EDTA increased MRP by a factor of 13 and MUP by a factor of 4 compared to water extraction. Between 33–39% of MUP present under the conditions of the enzyme assay was phytase-labile, with no significant difference between the two fertilization treatments. The two treatments differed in parameters of isotopic exchange ( Extrapolated In the absence of HgCl The presence of HgCl In both treatments, daily soil respiration rates were approximately halved during the 30 days of preincubation and again during the 31 days of the main experiment ( Water-extractable phosphate was significantly higher in NPK than in NK, averaging 0.3 The difference in P For NK, Both extrapolated and measured The soils used in this study contained 74–78% of total P in organic P and 6–8% in P At the same time, absolute respiration rates were higher than in most other isotopic dilution studies (except While the declining rates of respiration in our study may violate the assumption of steady-state conditions, they are unlikely to affect parameters of isotopic exchange. For these, it is more important that water-extractable phosphate ( The most obvious difference of our study to other studies on gross P fluxes was in the high rates of gross P mineralization and of microbial P immobilization, especially in NK ( From a methodological point of view, the most important finding of our study was the large effect of the microbial inhibitor on In the study by The increase in From a biological point of view, the effect of inorganic P status on microbial P uptake during the batch experiment ( Microbial P turnover can be derived from the convergence of the specific activities in water-extractable and microbial P ( We applied no conversion factor (Kp factor) which would account for the fact that not all microbial P is rendered extractable by fumigation, since Kp factors have not been determined for the soils used in this study. Therefore, net P mineralization was probably overestimated since microbial P immobilization ( Since problems of calculating microbial P immobilization affect the calculation of net P mineralization rates, we also calculated net P mineralization from net C mineralization. This assumes that at constant microbial P all net organic P mineralization is derived from soil organic matter driven by the need for energy. For the first 8 days of incubation, this renders a similar daily net P mineralization rate of 0.4 The higher phosphatase activity in NK ( Very low inorganic P availability in the non-P-fertilized treatment was shown to induce extremely rapid microbial P uptake, with important consequences for the isotopic dilution method to determine gross P fluxes which was applied here for the first time to permanent grassland soils. In particular, the baseline of isotopic dilution due to physicochemical processes had to be determined in the presence of a microbial inhibitor. Gross P fluxes were thus dominated by microbial immobilization, especially in the non-P-fertilized soil. However, the exact determination of microbial immobilization was not possible. Based on soil respiration, a minimum net organic P mineralization of 0.4 We would like to thank Katharina Mahler and Angela Erb for technical help in the laboratory, and two anonymous reviewers for their useful suggestions. This study was conducted within a project funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation, with important linkages to a project within the COST action 869 funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education and Research.