The 6 This conference, which is a bi-annual event, promotes further the fruitful knowledge exchange between geoscientists and medical practitioners around the world while demonstrating the high standards of the scientific research that is being carried out in this reemerging discipline. The event has received considerable national and international attention. Over 150 participants representing 36 countries, namely Algiers, Brazil, Canada, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Portugal, Russia, Rwanda, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Ukraine, Uruguay and USA have attended this Symposium. The figures, 68 oral presentations and 67 poster presentations, highlight the importance of Medical Geology in current research, teaching and politics. The MEDGEO’15 Conference was composed of 3 parallel sessions over 5 days that included a variety of topics:: 1- Environmental contaminants in health and disease; 2 - Environmental toxicology, pathology and epidemiology; 3 - Climate change and human health; 4 - Therapeutic properties of minerals and waters; 5 - Urban medical geology; 6 - Modeling, mapping and monitoring of environmental hazards and diseases; 7 - Advances in analytical methods. The diversity of the subjects under investigation, the participation of colleagues from different countries and organizations, and the different viewpoints, have contributed to the richness of the discussion. The Special Issue hereby presented and entitled ”Dealing with contaminated soils, dust, sediments and groundwater: exposure models, risk assessment, remediation technologies, monitoring and management policies” addresses the environmental risk associated with the widespread contamination of environmental spheres caused by mining, mineral processing, agriculture, urban waste disposal and industrial activities. It is well known that numerous substances are potentially harmful to humans. However, the associated health risk varies with the physicochemical, mineralogical and biological characteristics of the solid/aqueous phase that contains the contaminant. Studies integrating environmental assessment with human exposure and health reveal the complex inter-relationships inherent to the resulting multidisciplinary datasets. The use of tools such as GIS, remote sensing or statistics, in modelling, mapping and monitoring of environmental hazards and human diseases allows the spatial/temporal analysis of social, environmental and health data as predictors of risk. The first two papers “ The study entitled “ The papers “ The papers “ Finally, the papers “ We would like to thank the authors for their hard work, the reviewers for their invaluable collaboration and the editorial office of Journal of Geochemical Exploration for their support.