Lithium ion battery (LIB) waste contains significant valuable resources that could be recovered and reused to manufacture new products. This study aimed to develop an alternative process for extracting metals from LIB waste using acidic solutions generated by electrolysis for leaching. Results showed that solutions generated by electrolysis of 0.5 M NaCl at 8 V with graphite or mixed metal oxide (MMO) electrodes were weakly acidic and leach yields obtained under single stage (batch) leaching were poor (<10%). This was due to the highly acid-consuming nature of the battery waste. Multistage leaching with the graphite electrolyte solution improved leach yields overall, but the electrodes corroded over time. Though yields obtained with both electrolyte leach solutions were low when compared to the 4 M HCl control, there still remains potential to optimise the conditions for the generation of the acidic anolyte solution and the solubilisation of valuable metals from the LIB waste. A preliminary value proposition indicated that the process has the potential to be economically feasible if leach yields can be improved, especially based on the value of recoverable cobalt and lithium.Rapid development, short life span and increased usage of information technology, have resulted in a serious waste management issue surrounding the production, collection and recycling of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). This unique and inherently complex waste stream is now considered as one of the fastest growing waste streams of the modern era ( The management of LIB waste has two primary aims: Stabilisation of toxic elements and reduction of pressure on land resources to reduce environmental impacts associated with the disposal of LIB waste on human and environmental health; and, Recovery of valuable and critical elements such as cobalt and lithium from LIB waste to supplement the primary resources that are required for the manufacture of LIBs. Due to the consumption and loss of these valuable elements and high proportions of metal value contained within the waste when compared to primary virgin mineral resources, LIB waste is now considered a valuable secondary resource and a prime candidate for urban mining ( In Australia, LIBs are not currently categorised as hazardous waste, although they are considered to possess significant safety, human and environmental health risks ( Approximately 3,000 tons of LIB waste was produced in Australia in 2016 ( Recovery of metals from LIB waste has thus far focussed on the application of traditional mineral processing technologies such as hydrometallurgy or pyrometallurgy to recover metals from spent LIB with mixed results ( In response to the gap in battery recycling infrastructure and technology in Australia, this research investigated the applicability and feasibility of alternative processes for the recovery of metals from LIB waste. The aim of this study was to develop a suitable process for extracting metals from LIB waste using the following process components: Electrochemical generation of acid from low cost substrates (i.e. NaCl, seawater and weakly brine solutions and wastewater); and, Hydrometallurgical recovery of metals with electrochemically generated acid. Here, we describe the electrochemical generation of acid from low cost substrates as well as the single stage and multistage leaching of LIB waste with the electrochemically generated acidic solutions under ambient conditions. Using electrolysis to generate the leaching solution from these low cost substrates has the potential to reduce the costs associated with leaching reagents and their regeneration, whilst also producing valuable secondary products, such as hydrogen gas, which can be a useful feedstock for other processes or as fuel. To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess the efficiency of leaching metals from LIB waste with an acidic anolyte solution generated by the electrolysis of salt or brine waters under ambient conditions. Waste LIB from laptops of various manufacturers were obtained from a local WEEE processing facility (Total Green Recycling Ltd. Co., Perth, Western Australia), and manually dismantled to remove battery cells from plastic housings. The battery cells were then passed through a coarse shredder (Shredder Type 600, Kew), followed by milling (Essa LM5 mill). The crushed material was screened at 16 mm, 10 mm and 5 mm to remove oversized metal casings. Material smaller than 5 mm was re-milled. Size fractions below 500 µm were obtained and analysed for metal and carbon content. The sub 500 µm fraction was used for this study. The composition of the battery waste was examined by x-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy by CSIRO Analytical Services Laboratory (Perth, Western Australia). The natural pH of the LIB waste was determined by mixing 10% (w/v) crushed LIB waste with distilled water. The pH of the mixture was measured periodically using a TPS Smart-CHEM meter with pH-TPS double junction sensor (Ag/AgCl reference electrode) until the readings were stable. The acid consuming nature of the LIB waste was assessed by determining the amount of protons (H The mass of HCl consumed was measured over time at 4 h, 12 h and 24 h. Initially, 10% (w/v) LIB waste was suspended in 100 mL of ultrapure water. The suspension was equilibrated with slow speed magnetic stirring for 30 min prior to dosing of acid (4 M or concentrated HCl, depending on the set point). The pH and acid dosing were computer-controlled using LabVIEW (National Instruments). The pH was recorded using TPS Ionide pH probes (Ag/AgCl reference electrode) that were calibrated with pH 7.01 and 4.01 standard buffers. Acid was dosed at a fixed flow rate and time using a peristaltic pump (Masterflex). The volume of acid delivered was translated into the mass of HCl required to maintain the pH of the slurry at the set value. This acid consumption was expected to be proportional to the natural alkalinity of the LIB waste used for leaching experiments. A laboratory-scale, two-chamber electrochemical cell was constructed with Perspex for the production of the acidic anolyte solution for leaching ( For initial experiments, both half cells were loaded with conductive graphite granules (KAIYU Industrial Ltd.; diameter: 3–5 mm; bulk density: 0.8 kg L The electrochemical cell was coupled with an external power supply (Array 3645 A, 108 W Programmable DC Power Supply), with the positive and negative terminal of the power supply connected to the anode and cathode, respectively. The negative lead was serially connected to a 1 Ω resistor and the cathode. Sodium chloride solution (0.5 M, AR grade) was used as the electrolyte for both half cells. The electrolytes (1 L each) were recirculated to the anodic and cathodic chambers at a flow rate of 150 mL min During the operation of the electrochemical cell, the voltage drop across the 1 Ω resistor was recorded using a data acquisition board (National Instruments USB-6218 DAQ Module) interfaced with LabVIEW (Version 7.1) software. The pH of the anolyte and catholyte solutions was continuously monitored using Ionode pH probes (Model IJ44CT, TPS; Ag/AgCl reference electrode calibrated with pH 7.01 and pH 1.81 standard buffers) mounted at the recirculation line of each half cell, with electronic signals transferred to the DAQ module via independent pH transmitters (Microchem, TPS). The sodium chloride electrolyte solution (0.5 M) was electrolysed at various applied voltages (4 V and 8 V) for 24 h to generate acidic anolyte solutions for leaching. The concentration of electrolyte was selected to reflect the chloride concentration of seawater. Electrical current (I) of the electrochemical process was derived from the measured voltage drop using Ohm’s law (I = V/R), where V was the voltage drop measured across the resistor (R = 1 Ω). Following electrolysis, the anolyte solutions were collected from the anodic compartment, and filtered through a 0.2 µm filter (PALL Life Sciences) and used for the single and multiple stage leaching. Initial LIB waste leach tests were conducted without pH control using a single stage approach, in which the LIB waste was leached once with anolyte solution. Anolyte solutions generated with both electrode configurations (graphite granules or MMO-Ti) with two applied voltages (4 V and 8 V) were tested for leaching. A solution of 4 M HCl was used as the positive leaching control as previous literature has shown that leach yields of most metals from spent LIB powder with this acid could reach >98% (e.g. The single stage leach tests were conducted with a solids pulp density of 10% (w/v) in shake flasks with 150 mL working volume at both 80 °C and ambient temperature (25 °C) with 200 rpm shaking for 2 h. Samples were taken at 0, 1 and 2 h for analysis of pH, redox potential and soluble metals. Solution pH and redox potential were measured immediately after sampling using a TPS Smart-CHEM meter with a TPS double junction pH sensor (vs. Ag/AgCl) and TPS MC-80 m with Ionode ORP comb electrode model PRFO (vs. Ag/AgCl), respectively. Solution samples were then filtered with a 0.2 µm syringe filter (Millipore) and acidified with 7 M HNO Duplicate leach tests were conducted at laboratory scale to assess the application of multistage leaching of the LIB waste. The pulp density remained the same as in previous leach tests (10% w/v), and a 100 mL working volume was maintained throughout the leach tests. The contact time for the first leach stage was 1 h, after which the residue was recovered by centrifugation (4,000 Total acidity of the anolyte solutions was measured by potentiometric titration to a pH end-point of 8.3 using a standard NaOH solution (10 or 100 mM) according to a standard method ( Solutions were analysed for soluble metals (Al, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu and Li) by inductively coupled plasma – atom emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) and chloride by ion chromatography (ICS-3000, Dionex, ThermoFisher Ltd.). Prepared LIB waste and leach residues were digested with aqua regia acid mixture and analysed by ICP-AES for the same major elements as the solutions. Total carbon in residues was analysed using a CS-2000 carbon and sulfur analyser (Labfit). Fluorine was determined using pressed powder X-ray fluorescence (XRF) ( Leach yields for each metal were evaluated according to A total of 45.3 kg of spent LIBs of various compositions were processed by shredding, milling and screening to produce a range of size fractions for testing. Metal contents of the <500 µm fraction of the waste used for the experimental work are shown in The <500 µm fraction of the milled and screened LIB waste comprised 23.1 kg (51.0%) of the total mass of LIB waste processed for this study. In addition to the metals (50.3%, Based on the XRD analysis, the LIB waste contained lithium-cobalt/nickel oxides (CoLiO The natural pH of the LIB waste composite sample was pH 9.6 ± 0.1. The acid consumption of the milled and screened LIB waste is shown in In all instances, the fastest rate of acid consumption was observed within the first 4 h of the experiment, after which, the rate of consumption decreased ( The possible reactions associated with the electrolysis of sodium chloride solution in the electrochemical system are shown in Reactions With an applied voltage of 4 V, the electrolysis of 0.5 M NaCl using the graphite electrodes generated an acidic anolyte solution with a final pH of 2.1 and acidity of 0.05 M equivalent HCl concentration (2742 mg L Electrolysis of the 0.5 M NaCl solution with graphite electrodes over 24 h and applied voltage of 8 V generated an acidic anolyte solutions with equivalent HCl concentration 0.14 M (6730 mg L In comparison to the graphite electrodes which had a relatively stable current of between 2750 and 3000 mA with applied voltage of 8 V, electrolysis with the MMO-Ti anode produced a similar initial absolute current (approximately 2500 mA) ( Compared to the MMO-Ti electrode, the relatively stable current recorded throughout the electrolysis with graphite electrode suggested that the anodic reaction was not substrate-limiting. Given the simplicity of the electrolyte solution (0.5 M NaCl), the substrates or reactants required for the theoretical anodic reactions were Cl Such a decrease in current was likely caused by a decreasing Cl The lower surface area of the MMO-Ti anode used in this study would also yield a much higher local current density, which would not be favourable for the oxygen production reaction (Reaction The addition of the graphite anolyte solutions to the milled LIB waste resulted in an increase in solution pH ( The redox potentials showed a decreasing trend for leach tests with graphite anolyte solution and 4 M HCl control ( The leach yields of metals from LIB waste were determined by analysing the metal composition of leached residue relative to the prepared LIB waste material (leach test feed). Leach yields for the ambient temperature single stage leach tests are shown in Except for copper, leach yields at ambient temperature for all metals were above 80% for the 4 M HCl control. This is consistent with the reactivity of the metals analysed here, whereby lithium, aluminium and manganese will react immediately with HCl, but cobalt and copper will react better in the presence of an additional oxidising agent (O Metal leach yields for leach tests undertaken with the anolyte solution generated with the graphite electrodes notably lower than the control across the suite of metals analysed, which was likely due to the low acid strength of solution and the high aluminium component contained within the waste. At pH values greater than 5 and redox potential values lower than +200 mV, it can be expected that aluminium, copper and nickel would preferentially form hydroxide and oxide precipitates during leaching with the acidic anolyte solutions ( The presence of high concentrations of aluminium and copper in the feedstock could be decreased by pre-treatment of the battery waste prior to leaching, which would ensure that acid consumption by aluminium is minimised. Given the results observed in the single stage leaching experiments, it was determined that a shorter period of time (i.e. <1 h) would be beneficial for the leaching of the LIB waste. In addition, the acid consumption and strong buffering capacity of the LIB waste were shown to reduce efficiency of leaching observed in the single stage leach tests, so multistage leaching was investigated. The multistage leach tests were conducted with anolyte solutions generated at 8 V with either graphite and MMO-Ti electrodes over 4 or 8 leach stages (total leach time 4 or 8 h). The solution generated with the MMO-Ti electrodes (initial pH 2.36) was less acidic than the solution generated with the graphite electrodes (initial pH 1.5). During the first stage of leaching, the pH of both multistage leach tests reached a maximum of pH 6. Over the course of 4 leach stages, this maximum pH was reduced to pH 4.5 in both tests, which was considered a suitable pH for solubilisation to occur according to the metal Pourbaix diagrams ( The efficiency of the leaching was notably improved by multistage leaching in comparison to single stage leaching with the 8 V graphite anolyte at ambient temperature ( When considering the metals leached at each stage of graphite anolyte solution leaching, the solubilisation of lithium, cobalt and manganese were favoured in the first stage, and then the amount of these metals leached in subsequent stages was reduced ( The final solution pH of the MMO-Ti generated anolyte solution leach test was slightly higher than that achieved with the graphite electrode generated solution ( When compared to their respective Pourbaix diagrams, lithium, manganese, nickel and aluminium will readily solubilise under the leach conditions observed in this study (i.e. pH < 5 and redox potential >0 mV Ag/AgCl) ( Previous studies have indicated that the mechanism for metal leaching from LIB waste was predominately acid dissolution (proton attack) ( Acid supplementation or pre-treatment by roasting or introducing a pre-wash step of the LIB waste prior to leaching with the anolyte generated with the MMO-Ti electrodes may be an effective way to overcome the acid consuming capacity of the LIB waste. Pre-treatment of LIB waste has previously been shown to improve leaching efficiency by removing acid consuming components (Al, Cu, C/organics) ( Compared with other inorganic and organic acids and other biohydrometallurgy methods, the use of the electrochemically generated anolyte as a lixiviant for recovering metals from LIB waste gave lower yields for metals such as cobalt, lithium and manganese ( In previous studies, optimal leaching was observed under elevated temperatures (35–95 °C). Ambient operating conditions are desirable to lower the requirement for energy and operating costs required to process LIB waste at large scale. Further assessment would be required to determine the optimal temperature for leaching with anolyte solutions. Another feature of the proposed process was the use of low cost resources, such as seawater or waste brines for the generation of lixiviants. Here, we demonstrated that weakly saline solutions (approximately the same molarity as seawater) could be readily electrolysed to produce an acidic solution for leaching. Through the subsequent leaching processes, the solution was proven as highly corrosive due to the formation of highly oxidising electrolytic products such as chlorine and hypochlorite ( In our study, no pre-treatment or amendment of the LIB waste was undertaken prior to leaching. In most studies, the LIB waste is thermally, chemically or mechanically pre-treated to make the waste more amenable to the leaching process ( The improvement of leaching yields with multistage leaching indicated that a multistage counter current reactor design may be suitable for the leaching of metals from LIB waste using acidic anolyte solutions as a way of reducing the acid consumption of the waste ( Using current commodity prices, the highest potential recoverable value from LIB waste was achieved from multistage leaching (four stages) with acidic anolyte solution generated with the graphite electrodes ( Multistage leaching would result in the production of low concentration, high volume solutions that would require further processing to recover the metals from solution into a usable solid product. Previous studies have successfully demonstrated the precipitation or recovery of soluble and critical metals from dilute leach solutions from WEEE and LIB waste ( The potential recoverable value calculated for yields obtained after 4 and 8 stage leaching with the MMO-Ti electrodes was reduced due to the poor solubilisation of cobalt ($US 243.49 for 4 stage leaching and $US 586.61 for 8 stage leaching). With the MMO-Ti electrodes, more nickel and manganese were recovered, but without cobalt solubilisation, the potential recoverable value from LIB waste will always be much lower due to the criticality of this metal and its limited resources in the current resource climate ( In addition to recoverable value from the waste, the energy to generate the lixiviant with electrolysis of saline solutions is competitive. The electricity consumption of the electrochemical cell to generate 1 L of lixiviant with 8 V applied voltage was 0.688 kW hours (kWh). In our study, we generated the electrolyte over a standard period of 24 h, but given that the lowest pH for the solutions was generated in approximately 2 h ( Regardless of the value return and cost of reagent generation, the adoption of technology for metal recovery from LIB waste also depends on factors associated with waste volumes produced and the cost of collection, transport and manual handling and sorting of the waste. Further research should be dedicated to characterising these costs and designing processes that account for low and variable waste volumes and decentralised processing to minimise transport and collection costs. In this study, we have shown the potential for the application of low cost resources such as sodium chloride, seawater or weakly brine solutions to generate reagents for processing difficult and complex LIB wastes. Single stage leach yields were low (<10%) due to the weakly acidic solutions generated by electrolysis and acid consuming nature of the waste, but these were improved when multistage leaching was undertaken. Graphite electrodes produced a more acidic solution, but were compromised due to the corrosive nature of the anolyte solution. The MMO-Ti electrodes were more robust under the highly oxidising conditions, but the solutions generated were less acidic which impacted the yields of cobalt and copper (<10%) but improved yields for other metals (31% Li, 59% Ni, 28% Mn). Whilst, generally, yields were still lower than what has previously been achieved with strong inorganic HCl, there is considerable room for technical improvement if the LIB waste is pre-treated and the leach test is supplemented with additional reagents to maintain optimal leach conditions, thus avoiding the production of hazardous wastes that accompany traditional hydrometallurgy processing and harnessing saleable by-products. The authors would like to acknowledge the