We report evidence of deformation at sub-freezing temperatures beneath Hagafellsjökull-Eystri, an Icelandic surge-type glacier. The bed of a piedmont lobe that advanced during the 1999 surge comprises deformed blocks of glacier ice set within frozen sediment. This material has also been injected through overlying ice to form a network of crevasse-squeeze ridges. This layer contains evidence for two phases of deformation under contrasting rheological conditions: (1) deformation under relatively warm conditions, when the blocks of glacier ice acted as competent clasts within an unfrozen deforming matrix and (2) subsequent deformation at sub-freezing temperatures when the ice blocks were attenuated into the surrounding frozen matrix along fractures and planar shears enriched with excess ice. This suggests that the basal thermal regime of the advancing ice margin changed from warm-based to cold-based during the surge event. The persistence and potential prevalence of subglacial sediment deformation at sub-freezing temperatures has fundamental implications for our understanding of the dynamic behaviour, sediment flux and geomorphic ability of cold-based glaciers.The premise that glacier motion can be driven by subglacial sediment deformation has become widely accepted within glaciology, with the process being linked to episodes of rapid glacier motion such as surges and ice streaming (e.g. The association of subglacial sediment deformation with high porewater and low effective pressures within the substrate has led to the assumption that the process is restricted to areas where the glacier, or ice-sheet, bed is close to the pressure melting point and characterised by net basal melting (i.e. warm-based glaciers; The assumption that basal processes are inactive at sub-freezing temperatures has been challenged by a range of field investigations. In addition, field evidence from formerly glaciated permafrost regions indicates that ice sheets frequently couple with frozen sediments. The possibility of basal processes occurring at sub-freezing temperatures has profound implications for our understanding of the glacio-dynamics and geomorphological potential of cold-based glaciers ( Direct field observations of basal processes at sub-freezing temperatures have been restricted to high latitude or high altitude sites. In this paper, we report evidence of deformation at sub-freezing temperatures beneath a surge-type glacier in Iceland. Hagafellsjökull-Eystri is an outlet glacier of the Langjökull ice cap in central Iceland ( The lateral piedmont lobes in the Jarlhettukvı́sl Valley form the focus of this paper and at the height of the surge were heavily crevassed ( This section is located on the south-west flank of the melt stream and has a north-east to south-west orientation ( The ice blocks are surrounded by a fine-grained diamict, consisting of predominantly subrounded (46%, This section is approximately 3.5 Approximately 4 Two key issues need to be considered when interpreting the sections described above, namely: (1) the origin of the ice blocks within the basal sediment layer, and (2) the nature and style of the deformation present. There are several possible origins for the ice blocks within the subglacial sediment layer. Firstly, they may have been entrained from buried ice preserved within ice-cored sediments left by earlier ice advances. This is considered unlikely as the depth to bedrock is limited (0.5–2 Turning to the nature and the style of deformation present, we argue that two phases are evident, each associated with contrasting thermal and rheological conditions. Firstly, the ice blocks show evidence of subglacial thermal and/or mechanical erosion, with sub-rounded profiles and patterns of imbrication consistent with those found in subglacial boulder pavements where clast ploughing has occurred ( Secondly, the matrix displays widespread evidence of brittle deformation in the form of ice-rich fractures. The concentration of ice within these fractures may reflect one or a combination of two processes. Firstly, the attenuation of ice blocks along the fractures. Secondly, the expulsion of excess porewater into these fractures associated with the formation and volumetric expansion of pore ice, and its subsequent freezing to produce ice-rich layers. Both these processes require a shift to sub-freezing conditions that would have resulted in a rheological change. Progressive freezing of water within the matrix to produce interstitial ice would increase the shear strength of the sediment ( We have evidence therefore of a transition from a warm deforming sediment layer to a cold frozen one in which deformation becomes increasingly focused along planar shear zones (fractures) which become ice-rich as freezing progresses and as ice blocks are attenuated along these zones. The rheological contrast between the blocks of glacier ice and the sediment changes in response to the falling temperature. Above freezing a contrast exists between the competent ice blocks and weak sediment matrix around them. At sub-freezing temperatures, however, the contrast in strength between the ice blocks and the matrix is reduced, and perhaps reversed, such that the ice blocks are deformed into and with the surrounding sediment-ice matrix. We argue that freezing and cold-based deformation occurred at the end of the surge and that the basal sediment layer has remained frozen since the cessation of the surge. It is conceivable, however, that subglacial freezing and subsequent deformation may have occurred following the surge during a post-surge winter advance ( The glaciological influence of basal processes operating at sub-freezing temperatures is rarely considered for two reasons. Firstly, as mentioned earlier, they are widely assumed to be inactive in such conditions. Secondly, the geographical extent of frozen bed conditions is considered limited, especially in the context of major ice-sheets ( The crucial importance attributed to the pressure melting point by many ice-sheet models as constituting a dividing line below which all basal processes cease, appears particularly inappropriate. Permafrost researchers have long appreciated that the freezing of porewater within unconsolidated sediments is a gradual process that commences at 0°C (in the absence of impurities), but which may not be complete until much lower temperatures. This is especially the case in fine-grained materials, which can retain significant amounts of unfrozen water below −5°C ( The glaciological implications of basal processes in general remaining active at sub-freezing temperatures are extensive, encompassing the dynamic behaviour, sediment fluxes and geomorphic potential of cold-based glaciers ( The financial support of the Royal Society, NERC Geophysical Equipment Pool (Loan 719), and the NERC Airborne Campaign (Iceland, 2001) is gratefully acknowledged. Oddur Sigur∂sson provided unpublished information about the 1999 surge. This work is covered by Rannis Research Declaration No. 5/2002. Alexandre Tomio would like to thank CAPES (Process BEX2287/01-3) and FAPESP (Process 99/11083-5). We would like to acknowledge reviews by Jim Rose, Jaap van der Meer and an anonymous referee.