Microfluidic photocatalytic reactors have advantages over conventional bulk reactors such as large surface-area-to-volume ratio and high control of fluid flow. Although titania nanotubular arrays (TNA) have shown enhanced photocatalytic degradation compared to nanoparticle films in a batch reactor configuration, their application in a microfluidic format has yet to be explored. The photocatalytic performance of a microfluidic reactor with TNA catalyst was compared with the performance of microfluidic format with TiO2 nanoparticulate (commercial P25) catalyst. The microfluidic device was fabricated using non-cleanroom based soft lithography, making it suitable for economical large scale manufacturing. The photocatalytic performance was evaluated at different flow rates ranging from 25 to 200μL/min. The TNA microfluidic system demonstrated enhanced photocatalytic performance over microfluidic TiO2 nanoparticulate layers, especially at higher flow rates (50–200μL/min). For instance, 12μm long TNA was able to achieve 82% fractional conversion of 18mM methylene blue in comparison to 55% conversion in case of the TiO2 nanoparticulate layer at a flow rate of 200μL/min. A computational model of the microfluidic format was developed to evaluate the effect of diffusion coefficient and rate constant on the photocatalytic performance. The improved performance of the TNA photocatalyst over the nanoparticle film can be attributed to higher generation of oxidizing species.Water based pollutants are a big concern and serious challenge in both developed and developing nations. Photocatalytic environmental remediation has been widely investigated for the degradation of water based pollutants Microfluidic systems have inherent advantages such as large surface to volume ratio, smaller diffusion distance, uniform irradiation over the whole catalytic surface, self-refreshing property Of the semiconductor materials studied for photocatalytic environmental remediation, titanium dioxide (e.g., nanoparticles, nanowires, nanotubes) is widely used due to its desirable properties. Titanium dioxide has successfully demonstrated photocatalytic degradation of a wide spectrum of metallic and organic pollutants A potential disadvantage with current microfluidic photocatalytic degradation systems is that the microfluidic devices needed are often complex and difficult to fabricate especially when cleanroom techniques are involved. This is especially critical when a large-scale array of microfluidic channels is required In this work, we demonstrate the use of self-ordered TNA for photocatalytic degradation in a microfluidic reactor. The degradation performance of TNA was also compared to P25 TiO We have also developed a model using COMSOL Multiphysics to examine how convection and diffusion of the reactant/pollutant molecules affect the performance of the microfluidic surface reactor system. Although models have been developed to understand the nature and reaction kinetics between a photocatalyst and reactant in batch reactors Titania nanotube arrays were synthesized by electrochemical anodization similar to an earlier reported protocol The P25 films were prepared by doctor blade method The microfluidic device was fabricated by soft lithography similar to a previous procedure The photocatalytic degradation of the device was evaluated using methylene blue (MB) as a model pollutant. This dye is non-biodegradable and commonly used in the textile industry. As a result, this molecule is widely used for testing photocatalytic activity A finite element model to simulate the degradation of MB in the microfluidic channel was created in COMSOL Multiphysics 4.3b. For simplicity, the model assumes the catalytic surface to be a flat surface rather than nano-structured. The model also assumes that the bulk MB solution is transported to the catalyst surface at the bottom of the channel and degraded. Fluid flows using 3-D model geometries were developed. The Navier–Stokes equations for conservation of momentum  In Eqs. The equation for convection-diffusion of the species in the fluid is given by (assuming constant diffusion coefficient)  The overall degradation of MB happens at the catalytic surface only and not the bulk solution. The boundary fluxes at the catalytic surfaces thus are denoted by   The crystalline structure is one of the critical factors in the catalytic performance of TiO The results of the degradation at different flow rates over TNA (12 The mechanism for the photocatalytic degradation of MB has been discussed in previous published work Heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation is not an elementary process, i.e., there are several reaction intermediates; moreover, the reaction intermediate species and/or dissolved oxidizing species can act as catalysts for the degradation of other intermediate species. As a result, the reaction order can change along the reaction coordinate. To overcome such complexities, we can assume that the non-degraded MB is in large excess compared to other degradation products. This is generally an adopted approach when examining the kinetics of photocatalytic reactions and is commonly referred as pseudo-order rate kinetics. Kinetic studies on the photocatalytic degradation of azo dyes using TNA Another possible explanation for the higher fractional conversion at higher flow rates (50–200 Titania nanotube arrays have been reported to have higher photocatalytic efficiency compared to P25 layers in spite of their lower surface area compared to the latter The results of the simulation showing fractional conversion of MB in comparison to experimental results (12 The better performance of TNA can be attributed to lower recombination rates of photogenerated electron–hole pairs But an enhancement in diffusion coefficient by five times the actual value seems an unlikely real world scenario even when a nanostructured surface is present. For instance, at a diffusion coefficient of 5 The degradation performance of other titania-based photocatalytic microfluidic systems has been complied and compared ( The photocatalytic degradation of a model compound, methylene blue, was examined in a microfluidic system using TNA photocatalyst under simulated AM 1.5 irradiation. The microfluidic device was constructed using a non-clean room, inexpensive, rapid prototyping technique. When compared to a film of commercial P25 photocatalyst, TNA demonstrated enhanced degradation over the range of flow rates examined. Analysis of the degradation kinetics reveals that a 12 A finite element model was developed to simulate the degradation of MB in the microfluidic channel utilizing COMSOL Multiphysics. From the model developed, the effect of diffusion coefficient and rate constant is discussed. The effect of the diffusion coefficient on the fractional conversion is more sensitive than that of the rate constant. The model can be easily modified to suit other channel geometries, pollutants with different diffusion coefficients, or different values of rate constants. The work presented here was supported by the