The present geometallurgical study shows the application of a machine-learning methodology to the prediction of material properties from the Nabbaren nepheline syenite deposit in Norway. The approach used in this study created and tested a shallow neural network along with cluster analysis for the prediction of laboratory concentrate yield and modal mineralogy. The input is bulk chemistry data from the mining company open pit database. The methodology proposed unveils general trends in the deposit to a suitable operational scale for the open pit mine. The accuracy of the prediction models is good, with one of the prediction models achieving a strong correlation coefficient of 0.9. The application of a neural network approach showed a successful attempt in the prediction of concentrate yield and modal mineralogy in the Nabbaren nepheline syenite deposit. However, further investigations in terms of deposit internal variation and mineralogical studies are needed for utilising these prediction models, to further improve the modal mineralogy prediction model by better domaining and for a more representative distribution of samples for modal mineralogy analyses.Geometallurgy is a holistic discipline aiming to incorporate information from the entire mining value chain including data describing the characteristics of the raw material, intermediate and final products, and the mineral processing involved. By incorporating all the information, it is possible to reduce operational risks and increase resource performance ( To develop geometallurgical models it is necessary to quantify the different characteristic properties of the material of interest like bulk chemistry or modal mineralogy. For example, it is known that mineralogical information can be linked to mineral processing performance indicators, like concentrate yield and product quality ( Mineralogical quantifications like modal mineralogy and laboratory tests of mineral processing performance indicators are key geometallurgical features that are costly and time-consuming (e.g. sample preparation and data acquisition), thus any improvement during data acquisition implies an economical benefit, and a possibility for real-time raw material or product quality control. In this regard, finding a way to estimate results of laboratory tests of mineral processing performance and modal mineralogy data is a time and cost-effective alternative to time-consuming laboratory tests and modal mineralogy analysis of large representative sample increment sets. At industrial mineral operations, where product specifications are mainly based on chemical content, bulk chemical analyses and laboratory tests of processing performance are often more common than modal mineralogy analyses. It would be beneficial to relate bulk chemistry to modal mineralogy estimations and results of laboratory tests of processing performance. Modal mineralogy estimations based solely on chemistry are known as element-to-mineral conversion (EMC), and have been developed during the last four decades ( Pattern recognition or machine-learning techniques, like artificial neural networks, have been used in identification, prediction and control of properties ( The present research aims to develop and test an artificial neural network methodology, based on bulk chemistry measurements, for the prediction of two performance indicators: the mass recovered in the concentrate from the feed material in percentage from magnetic separation laboratory tests, which is defined as concentrate yield, and the modal mineralogy from reverse circulation drill-hole samples. The development of this methodology aims to use bulk chemistry measurements from reverse drill-hole samples and their corresponding measurements due to the number of available samples in the company database. This geometallurgical approach would represent a faster and cost-efficient way of obtaining information on mineralogy and concentrate yield in many industrial mineral operations. This case study uses an industrial mineral mine located in northern Norway as example. The mine is exploited because of the economical value associated to the nepheline and K-feldspar content in the raw material. The mine currently uses bulk chemistry and laboratory mineral processing concentrate yield, using laboratory dry magnetic separation tests, to define raw material quality as an input to production planning and quality control. The study focuses on a methodology to estimate laboratory processing concentrate yield based on three different data inputs; bulk chemical data from the company open pit database, a location class based on lithological map and estimated modal mineralogy. The material in this study was obtained from the Nabbaren deposit, a nepheline syenite deposit, located on the Island of Stjernøy, Northern Norway ( The Nabbaren deposit is located within the Lillebukt alkaline complex in the Seiland province. The main rock types of the complex are hornblende clinopyroxenite, alkali syenite and carbonatite ( According to The Nabbaren nepheline syenite is in contact with a nepheline-syenite gneiss that has biotite and hornblende as the main mafic minerals, see The hornblende-rich syenitic fenite located in the southeast of the Nabbaren deposit, is rich in magnesium and iron. The amount of biotite in the syenitic fenite is associated to desilication, which decreased the plagioclase and K-feldspar content that additionally enriched the biotite and amphibole with potassium ( The two main minerals found in the Nabbaren deposit at Stjernøy are alkali feldspar (avg. 56 wt%) and nepheline (avg. 34 wt%). Common accessory minerals in the deposit are biotite, plagioclase (albite), calcite, magnetite, clinopyroxene, hornblende and titanite ( The deposit is mined both from an open pit and an underground mine (i.e. using an adapted open stoping as extraction method), from which roughly 80% and 20% feeds the processing plant, respectively. Both feed sources add up to a total of 550 kt of run of mine. Within the industrial mineral sector, production processes require strict quality control. Hence, strict mine planning and blending strategies are mandatory to avoid off-specification production or low product quality. According to As part of mine planning and grade control procedures, a drill-in-advance campaign (DIA) is conducted before each mining season to plan feed material blending strategies and perform deposit model reconciliation for each production level in the open pit. The DIA campaign is performed using reverse-circulation (RC) drilling to extract a sample 12 m long from a 10-by-10 m grid. Each drill-hole extracts around 120 kg of drill cuttings. The drilling rig at the mine site does not collect material smaller than 75 µm. The drill cuttings from the reverse circulation drill-hole are split, and then characterised using concentrate yield from laboratory dry magnetic separation tests. Bulk chemistry quantifications are done on feed and concentrate (i.e. non-magnetic material) from the magnetic separation tests. Mineral processing at Stjernøy comprises comminution and mineral separation in a dry process to produce pure concentrates consisting mainly of nepheline and alkali feldspar (K-feldspar). A key feature making the deposit economically feasible is the inexpensive removal of Fe-bearing minerals in the rock, mainly associated to magnetite, biotite, hornblende and clinopyroxene. The processing has multiple steps in comminution, particle size classification and magnetic separation. The mineral processing plant can be divided into In the laboratory magnetic separation internal procedure from the company uses a 2 kg subsample from each drill-hole sample. The magnetic separation test consists of seven magnetic separation steps with different settings similar to the company processing plant. The test performance of the samples is measured by its concentrate yield, a relative value calculated as the mass recovered in the concentrate from the feed material in a standardized magnetic separation laboratory test. The bulk chemistry data, obtained from the company, is done on pressed powder pills. The pills consist of 0.78 g of Licovax C and 6.50 g of representative sample. The samples are milled with a Fritsch Pulverisette 7 planetary mill. The pills are pressed using a Fluxana Vaneox manual press. The equipment used for the measurements was an ARL AdvantX Sequential spectrometer with OXSAS 2.2 software. The X-ray source used was a copper cathode. The analytical routine is set up specifically for the nepheline syenite at Stjernøy and calibrated with a nepheline syenite reference provided by the British Ceramic Research and the Bureau of Analysed Samples, and labelled BCS-RM No 201a. The analyses are run with an electric current of 15 mA and a voltage of 40 kV. Acquisition time for each analysis is 242 s. The dataset used in this study corresponds to the DIA drill-hole bulk chemistry (XRF) and laboratory concentrate yield data collected between 2015 and 2017 campaigns. The total number of drill-holes is 1055, distributed in three production levels in the open pit. From those drill-holes 46 were selected at random for modal mineralogy measurements. The locations of these samples are displayed in The deposit presents a significant spatial variability in the bulk chemistry of the samples in the north-east and south-west direction, see In this study the mineable area was separated into the mineable nepheline syenite area and the mafic dike swarm area, and the data were assigned a location code, see The location classes show differences in bulk chemistry. The nepheline syenite class has higher content of Al In order to implement the location class into the models, two extra columns were appended to the data for the nepheline syenite and mafic dike swarm classes. To indicate the class belonging to each point the corresponding column class had a 1 while the other class had a 0. The modal mineralogy data was acquired with diffraction analyses and quantified with Rietveld refinement on samples consisting of approximately 1 g of micronized material. Each sample was micronized using a McCrone Micronizing Mill for 2.5 min after adding 10 mL of ethanol, producing an average P The 2θ range in the diffractograms was from 3° to 65° with a step size of in 0.01°, a spinning speed of 60 rpm and 0.6 s counting time per increment. The total analysis time per XRD scan was 71 min. Rietveld modal mineralogy quantifications were performed with a standardized MS-DOS and TOPAS4.2 script routine. The routine used a fixed mineral list to quantify the modal mineralogy of each sample. The mineral list used in the routine comprised the 10 main minerals present in the deposit: nepheline, K-feldspar (orthoclase), albite, clinopyroxene (augite), hornblende, biotite, titanite, magnetite, pyrrhotite, calcite, and natrolite (tetra-natrolite). The values correspond to semi-quantifications obtained from mineral identification in the Bruker EVA® that were manually adjusted using the Rietveld fitting in the Bruker TOPAS4.2 software ( The mineral chemistry data obtained from mineral formula calculations based on EPMA analyses from The relation between the measured modal mineralogy, concentrate yield and bulk chemistry data was calculated using three correlation coefficients: Pearson, Kendall and Spearman. These coefficients return values between −1 and 1. Coefficient values close to −1 or 1 indicates a strong relationship between parameters, whereas a coefficient value closer to 0 indicates a weak relationship. The sign of the coefficient value indicates whether the relationship is negative or positive. Pearson’s coefficient, also known as linear correlation coefficient, defines the level of association between continuous variables assuming normal distribution. Unfortunately, Pearson’s coefficient is seriously affected by the presence of outliers ( The prediction models in this study were created following different workflows according to their objective. The work flows are shown in Before performing any estimation, data from both the DIA drilling campaign and Rietveld XRD mineralogy sets were standardized. The standardization procedure forces the input data to have zero mean and unit variance by subtracting the mean (µ The standardized datasets were split into three subsets: training, testing and validation ( A cluster analysis procedure was applied prior modelling to represent accurately the original datasets in each subset. The procedure used a hierarchical clustering using the inner squared distance between group pairs based on the Euclidean distance between points. This grouping technique is based on within cluster similarity ( To define the number of clusters a cluster-tree or dendrogram ( In addition to the bulk chemical and modal mineralogy data, location classes ( To estimate concentrate yield and modal mineralogy a neural network methodology was selected because they are considered as a non-linear approach to estimate the relationship between datasets that perform better than linear approaches. An example of these differences has been shown by  The model used in this study consisted of a feedforward neural network that was built with the The number of neurons used in the hidden layer of each model were determined by evaluating the network performance. The number of neurons were selected by a visual assessment of the average performance based on the best compromise between training and test performances by number of neurons using the same sub-sets to avoid data-leakage, as shown in If the prediction models estimated any negative values this was considered a flaw. When a negative value was estimated by the prediction model the whole input and output point was tagged as negative due to the model failure in estimating mineral quantities, and to have an idea of the location and range of these points. The modal mineralogy estimations were based on 46 randomly selected samples from the deposit and the locations shown in Three estimation models were developed for laboratory concentrate yield, using three different input sets. The first model (NN2) used the location class and bulk chemistry. The second model (NN3) used the location class and estimated mineralogy (nepheline, biotite, titanite, etc.). The last model (NN4) used location class, bulk chemistry, and estimated mineralogy as input. A summary of the input data used in each concentrate yield estimation model is displayed in After creating and comparing the three concentrate yield models, the model with the lowest Summary statistics of the 46 samples Rietveld XRD measurements and for the same dataset split into the two location classes are given in The correlation coefficients calculated between measured modal mineralogy, bulk chemistry and concentrate yield may indicate the type of relation between these parameters, and thus the type of methodology suitable to develop a prediction model. The values of the Pearson, Kendall and Spearman correlations are displayed in Strong relationships are considered for any coefficient above 0.5 (or bellow −0.5). The strongest correlation values are observed between MgO with nepheline (negative), hornblende (positive), biotite (positive) and concentrate yield (negative); K Cluster analysis was applied to the whole concentrate yield data from the company database, and to the Rietveld XRD data that was split according to location class (nepheline syenite and mafic dike swarm) because of the marked differences between one class to the other. From the cluster analyses six clusters were used for the concentrate yield, four clusters for the nepheline syenite class and three clusters for the mafic dike swarm class. An example of the similarity between subsets and original set distributions is shown in The number of neurons showing the best compromise between test and training performance, the final The correlation between measured and predicted mineralogical data can give an idea of the model performance. High positive correlation indicates good model performance. Differences between estimated and measured nepheline, hornblende, biotite, clinopyroxene, K-feldspar and albite are shown in ( The NN1 prediction model was applied to the full bulk chemical dataset of the company database to predict the mineralogy of each sample point. When applying the NN1 model to the whole bulk chemical dataset the modal mineralogy of 11 sample points were negatively predicted on one or several bulk chemical parameters. The sample points with negative estimated values are mainly located in areas further apart from the samples collected for Rietveld XRD quantification or along the northern boundary of the deposit and in the southern part of the mafic dike swarm area, as shown in The comparisons between measured and estimated concentrate yield from the three neural network models are shown in The concentrate yield prediction model NN2 had no negative estimations and a The summary statistics of the three indicator groups are displayed in The modal mineralogy is assumed to be known from the XRD analyses, though there is no benchmark to compare against. Hence the assumed Despite the limitations mentioned, it is believed that the effect of the uncertainties will not have a large impact on the modal mineralogy estimation results nor the general trends observed from the estimated modal mineralogy in the deposit. Also, the use of a standardized procedure, as the one used in the present study, is desired towards the automation of the XRD refinement. Other aspects to consider is associated to the EPMA analyses used during Rietveld refinements. These analyses are also prone to subtle uncertainties and limitations that should be mentioned such as the inability to detect the lightest elements i.e. H and thus hydrous minerals, nor to differentiate element valence states e.g. Fe Expanding the list of features to characterize the material is desirable and it could be relatively fast and cost efficient. Some examples are the use of loss-on-ignition (LOI), a major element list expansion i.e. by adding carbon, sulphur, etc., or minor element measurements. The LOI indicates the presence of volatile components in the material such as carbonates, hydrous minerals or sulphides; minor elements can provide proof of the presence of a certain mineral (i.e. similarly to the assumption of phosphorus to apatite). These extra measurements can complement the company’s database and its internal procedures. Other automated techniques, such as SEM automated mineralogy software, with lower detection limits and the capability to quantify other sample features (e.g. liberation degree, mineral associations, etc.) can provide extra data to improve knowledge and have a positive impact in the predictions. Nonetheless, this type of technique could struggle with perthitic textures ( Previous geological investigations ( The measured data of concentrate yield ( An aspect introducing variability in the data that could affect parameter correlations and the outcome of the prediction models could be the reverse-circulation drilling sample acquisition method. These samples do not represent a The presence of moderate amounts of mafic dikes should not impact the concentrate from magnetic separation according to The correlations between measured data showed a relation between modal mineralogy, bulk chemistry and concentrate yield. Some of the highest correlation values from The Pearson’s coefficient from Unfortunately, often the relation between datasets cannot be explained only by modal mineralogy and bulk chemistry. There are multiple influencing factors such as mineral textures ( The performance of the prediction models is reflected in the obtained The predictions for the different minerals, had different performances ( Despite the possible biases from the NN1 model, when applying the model to the bulk chemical database of the deposit, only 9 points predicted negative mineralogy i.e. at least one negative mineral for the sample. The prediction of modal mineralogy could suffer from lack of sample representativeness in parts of the location areas and surrounding rock, due to the spatial constraints of the data set, and limited number of samples in some areas. One way to deal with the lack of representativeness is by measuring extra samples for a re-evaluation and confirmation of the models, which can be done by the company in further investigations. For example, by studying samples at different locations in the open pit or by re-sampling using a more compact sampling grid over certain areas. Alternatively, the use of artificial samples based on original dataset statistics could be an option to increase the number of points to create the prediction model as done by The concentrate yield prediction models did not have the same lack of representativeness problem as the modal mineralogy prediction models. The database consisting of 1055 measured points in the open pit was large enough to cluster and representatively allocate concentrate yield points into the different subsets prior to modelling, as illustrated in The processing behaviour, such as the magnetic separation concentrate yield, may be explained using bulk chemical data, although mineralogical data is generally regarded as more suitable for this type of task ( When studying further the prediction accuracy of the NN2 model it is expected for the data regarded as outliers to be somehow influenced by their location. In general, the further the estimation is from the centre of the deposit, the further the estimation is from the one-to-one line in The model structure like a one-hidden layer neural network is another aspect to consider. This type of structures can predict basically any output, though the predictions can be improved by using more complex structures ( The neural network methodology implemented for the prediction of concentrate yield and modal mineralogy show potential for improvement and implementation in operations for fast-track data. For example, the use of predicted modal mineralogy can be of great use for the interpretation of any underlying geological information that otherwise would be invisible with bulk chemical data. This type of information can help differencing and interpreting geological features, which has potential in mine planning or resource assessment e.g. defining a meaningful classification system for the deposit based on the database. The predicted concentrate yield has even more potential because the model can be implemented for fast-tracking results that otherwise would take an extensive amount of time in the laboratory. This type of information has also the potential to be used in blending strategies, as a plant forecasting performance indicator, and as a resource assessment indicator for different production levels e.g. to implement geometrical models of the deposit. To be of use in the quality control and raw material blending of an industrial mineral deposit, the modal mineralogy and concentrate yield prediction models do not need to accurately predict all samples, but they need to be close on average on a blast scale and reflect the real trends in the deposit. In addition, they might reveal other aspects that could be examined by further studies to improve the knowledge of the quality parameters of the deposit. The modelled variation in modal mineralogy of the nepheline deposit with surrounding areas is a function of the mineralogical variation of the nepheline syenite ( In spite of the potential representativity problems associated with the modal mineralogy prediction model due to the sample locations and low number of modal mineralogy analyses, the modal mineralogy predictions in the deposit ( The representativity problem of the modal mineralogy prediction model is especially important in areas with mixed lithologies, as at the rims of the deposit and in the mafic dike swarm area. The nepheline syenite area is in contact with different lithologies such as carbonatite and nepheline-rich gneiss in the northeast, and syenitic fenite in the southwest. Considering the sample location, the modal mineralogy of these rim areas might be influenced by the location and number of samples analysed. For instance in The measured modal mineralogy showed a difference between the nepheline syenite and mafic dike swarm areas, as displayed in In addition to this, the modelled mineralogy of the mafic dike area showed a spatial differentiation. In the south the mafic dike area splits between a western and an eastern part. The samples belonging to the western part show similar values to the ones located in the north of the mafic dike swarm, while samples belonging to the eastern part show values similar to what is expected in the nepheline syenite area. This shows the true nature of the mafic dike area, as an area with varying densities of mafic dykes cutting the nepheline syenite, unlike the more schematic representation of the mafic dike swarm area shown in The concentrate yield distribution in the deposit portrays a general variation of the modal mineralogy and bulk chemical data in the deposit and the different areas within it. The mafic dike swarm area has higher concentrations of CaO, MgO, Fe The estimated concentrate yield is in general in very good agreement with the measured values, suggesting that model NN2 based on bulk chemistry could be used as a proxy for concentrate yield within the investigated area. The variation in the characteristics from both location classes and the whole dataset indicate that the current company quality map could benefit from a better definition of domain boundaries and understanding of the internal quality variations of the quality domains. This applies to both the nepheline syenite and the mafic dike swarms. Further work regarding prediction models and deposit characterization should address the modal mineralogy representativity issue, focusing on deposit domaining, and additional mineralogical studies. Additional modal mineralogy measurements covering a larger area in the deposit should be carried out based on a reconciled geological map using the available bulk chemistry database. Evaluating other neural network architectures to increase the precision of the predictions could be a further task to compare performances with simpler structures as the one from the present study, but simple structures seem to give useful results given sufficient data covering the sampled area. The measurement of extra input features (like LOI and mineral texture) towards a more complete material characterization could be considered by the company in future sampling campaigns and operations. The present research aimed at developing and testing prediction models using a neural network framework for mineral processing performance indicators such as concentrate yield and modal mineralogy based on bulk chemistry. To use bulk chemistry data from existing reverse-circulation samples, was of particular interest because to use this data set would represent the fastest and most cost-efficient way of obtaining information on mineralogy and concentrate for the company. From the present study it is possible to conclude: By using a neural network approach a model was obtained which predicts concentrate yield accurately based on bulk chemistry by achieving a correlation coefficient of 0.9 between estimated and measured values. The relation between concentrate yield, sample bulk chemistry and modal mineralogy is better described in non-linear terms based on the different correlation coefficients tested. From the non-linearity premise, a neural network approach was evaluated to be preferred to predict concentrate yield and modal mineralogy on bulk chemistry. The estimation of modal mineralogy showed biased predictions, though it is expected that the bias is influenced by the location and number of samples used as input. Nonetheless, the modal mineralogy predictions have potential for improvement if more samples are collected and included during model training. From the measured data it was possible to recognize a trend from the southwestern to the northeastern part of the deposit, assumed to be related to the variation in mineralogy and mineral chemistry, as well as to the influence from surrounding lithologies, internal fault zone and mafic dikes. The use of reverse circulation samples has its limitations, but is believed to reveal the true trends of the studied deposit. The distribution of the predicted and measured data in the deposit indicate that the current quality map describing the deposit could benefit from a better definition of domain boundaries and understanding of the internal variations of the quality domains, due to inconsistencies between the current map features and the distribution of the measured and predicted data. The application of a neural network approach showed a successful attempt in the prediction of concentrate yield and modal mineralogy in the Nabbaren nepheline syenite deposit. However, further investigations in terms of deposit internal variation and mineralogical studies are needed for utilising these prediction models, and further improve the modal mineralogy prediction model. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Thanks to Torill Sørløkk and Laurentius Tijhuis for helping with the XRF and XRD data acquisition, and to Maarten Felix and Stephen Lippard for English correction and proof reading. Thanks for all the technical support from the Geoscience and Petroleum department at NTNU and Sibelco Nordic AS at the Island of Stjernøy. This research has been funded by the