Aim of this work was to evaluate the flocculation efficiency of a modified, water soluble chitosan versus various commercial products such as: chitosan, PolyDADMAC and positively charged polyacrylamide. The flocculation properties were investigated in dispersions of the clay type “Blauton” by means of turbidity measurements, colloid titration and measurements of the floc size. It was found that flocculation occurs even before the Blauton surface charge neutralization is achieved. The modified chitosan was more effective than the commercial one in Blauton's settling. Modified chitosan in comparison to the commercial products demonstrated not only a wider flocculation window, but also a higher efficiency since lower amounts of polymer were required for the flocculation of Blauton. Finally, the use of modified chitosan resulted in an increase of the critical polymer concentration above which restabilization of Blauton occurs.Particles suspended in an aqueous medium have usually a net surface charge. The repulsive interactions, in spite of the Van der Waals forces trying to bring the particles together, stabilize the suspension. Aggregation of particles is fundamental for improving the performance of many solid–liquid separation processes. The efficiency of polyelectrolytes in such processes has led to their extensive application in the purification of drinking water, industrial raw and process water, municipal sewage treatment, mineral processing and metallurgy, oil drilling and recovery, paper and board production among others ( The postulated mechanisms by which polyelectrolytes can bring about flocculation are charge neutralization, bridging and/or electrostatic patch ( The importance of coupling polymer adsorption and flocculation of colloidal particles has been addressed in several papers ( New and upcoming legislation on the use of synthetic polyelectrolytes for wastewater treatment has directed the investigations in this field towards the use of natural flocculants ( The main disadvantage of commercial chitosan products is their insolubility in water. These products must be dissolved, for instance, in acetic acid, and can therefore, be applied only within a small range of pH (up to about 7). At higher pH values precipitation occurs. The aim of this work was the comparison of the flocculation performance of a novel water soluble chitosan to commercial flocculants. The special clay type “Blauton” with a very high content of fine particles was used as model substrate. The water used in the present study was filtered via a Milli-Q Advantage A10 (18.2 Blauton HFF-Spezial (Tonwerke Braun Witterschlick/Bonn) was used as received as model substrate for fine particles. Blauton is a mixture of minerals containing 60% Kaolinite, 25% Illite, 2% Montmorillonite and 13% Quartz. In the present study the flocculation efficiency of chemically modified chitosan was compared to commonly used polyelectrolytes such as: commercial chitosan, PolyDADMAC and polyacrylamide ( The commercial chitosan (CH1) with a molecular weight of approximately 400,000 The modified chitosan (CH2) with substitution degree of 0.77 and a DA of 85% was synthesized using a commercial, low viscosity chitosan by Fluka (MW 180,000 PolyDADMAC (polyquat 40 U 50), with a molecular weight of 37,000 Cationic modified polyacrylamide (PA) (Praestol 644BC), with a molecular weight of 10 1% (w/v) of Blauton was dispersed in water using a hand blender (300 A CH1 solution (1 The flocculation was studied via the “jar-test” using 50 The flocculated Blauton that resulted from the jar-tests was dispersed in water and the floc size was measured using a Malvern-Sizer laser diffraction particle size analyzer equipped with impeller mixer (rotation speed Charge density measurements were conducted on polyelectrolyte solutions, Blauton dispersions as well as on flocculated Blauton using a PCD 03 Particle Charge Detector (Mütek GmbH, Germany) connected to a 702 SM Titrino potentiometric titrator (Metrohm, Switzerland). Solutions of sodium polyethylene sulfonate (PES-Na) or PolyDADMAC were used as titrants for cationic and anionic systems, respectively. Charge density (CD) (mequiv./g) was calculated according to the formula: Streaming potential–pH-profiles were measured with the same device. The flocculation efficiency of the used polyelectrolytes is determined by a variety of parameters among which are the pH range within which the flocculant is effective and the charge density of the polymer. The solution of CH1 demonstrates, as shown in Blauton dispersions in water (10 The cationic charge and molecular weight of chitosan imply that it most probably flocculates Blauton via the charge neutralization mechanism. On the other hand, PolyDADMAC is a typical flocculant for both charge neutralization and/or patch flocculation. Even if high molecular weight is often mentioned as a required condition for bridging flocculation, the main factor that determines the mechanism to be followed is the charge density. Thus, polyelectrolytes with moderate or high charge density such as chitosan and PolyDADMAC flocculate mainly via charge neutralization or “charge patch” mechanisms even when the molecular weight is relatively high. In the case of polyacrylamide (PA) not only the molecular weight is extremely high (>10 In The particle size distribution and the SEM image of Blauton show in good agreement an average particle size of 2 In this study, we compared the flocculation efficiency of a modified chitosan (CH2) to commonly used commercial polyelectrolytes (CH1, PA and PolyDADMAC). The main advantage of the modified chitosan that was investigated, is its solubility in water due to its positive charge, regardless the pH value that also enhances its effectiveness as a flocculant. Furthermore, CH2 shows comparable efficiency in particle sedimentation to the other cationic polymers used. In addition, its flocculation window was broader than the one demonstrated by the commercial chitosan. Among the polyelectrolytes used, PA, following the bridging flocculation mechanism, has produced the largest flocs (>550 The research project (AiF-Nr. 15066BR) has been supported with budgetary funds of the The authors are grateful to Mrs. Marina Oelmann for the performance of the electrophoresis experiments.