The paper embodies the solvent extraction behavior of cobalt and lithium from mixed sulphate solution using Na-Cyanex 272 as an extractant. The effect of different parameters such as pH of feed solution, extractant concentration, cobalt and lithium ion concentrations in the feed solution and stripping behavior using different mineral acids such as H2SO4, HCl, HNO3 have been studied. The highest separation factor of 62 was obtained with 0.03 M Na-Cyanex 272 at an equilibrium pH of 6.90 from mixed solution of 0.01 M cobalt and lithium sulphate. About 84% of cobalt was extracted with a minimum of 8% lithium co-extraction at this condition. Cobalt was extracted as [CoA2·3HA]org with 65% Na-Cyanex 272. 2 mol of Na-Cyanex 272 are required for the extraction of 1 mol of cobalt. A complete stripping of cobalt can be achieved from the loaded organic with 0.01 M sulfuric acid solution. Cobalt sulphate solution with >99% purity can be obtained.The tremendous growth in the use of rechargeable lithium ion batteries has stimulated efforts to recycle valuable components from spent batteries. Some of the recent legislation such as the European Union's Waste of Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) and Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) directives force the producers to meet the required recycling rate of spent batteries ( Several studies have been carried out to develop hydrometallurgical processes for recovering cobalt from spent lithium ion batteries ( The demand for higher purity metals and recent trends towards environmental friendly technology have drawn attention to solvent extraction which appears to meet the requirements for performance and economics to replace the conventional separation processes using various precipitation methods. Solvent extraction has been introduced for the separation of cobalt in commercial plants (  The present work examines the possibility of separating cobalt and lithium from mixed solution of cobalt and lithium sulfate by solvent extraction using saponified Cyanex 272 as an extractant for cobalt. The effects of pH of the feed solution, extractant concentration, metal concentrations, and strip acid concentration on the extraction of cobalt and lithium have been investigated to obtain the optimum separation conditions for cobalt and lithium. The separation factors at different parameters and the number of stages required for quantitative extraction and stripping of cobalt in the presence of lithium have been studied by constructing the extraction and stripping isotherms. The extractant Cyanex 272 was saponified by the addition of a stochiometric amount of concentrated sodium hydroxide solution to the Cyanex 272 in kerosene. The saponification reaction can be written as ( The acidic form of the extractant Cyanex 272 exists as a dimer, whereas the saponified form as a monomer ( Taking logarithms of both sides, using the relation pH Distribution coefficient of the more extractable metal ion. Distribution coefficient of the comparatively less extractable metal ion. Stock solutions of 1.0 M cobalt(II) and 1.0 M lithium(I) sulfate were prepared by dissolving analytical grade reagents CoSO The commercial extractant, bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) was supplied by Cytec Korea Inc., and was used in the as-received form without further purification. Cyanex 272 has an average molecular weight of 290 g/mol, a Brookfield viscosity of 142 cp at 25 °C, density of 0.92 g/ml at 24 °C, and a purity of 85%. The active component, C Commercial grade extra-pure kerosene (bp 180–270 °C) and tri- The synthetic aqueous phase (10 ml) containing cobalt(II) and lithium(I) each in 0.1 M Na The cobalt stock solution was standardized by 0.05 M EDTA titration using murexide as an indicator. The concentrations of cobalt and lithium in the aqueous phases were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometery (AAS, Varian Spectra-400) after suitable dilution with 5 vol.% HCl. To minimize the analytical errors associated with concentrations, the determined values were estimated by statistical methods, rejecting some data by applying the The extraction and separation of cobalt and lithium from mixed solution of cobalt and lithium sulphate were studied using 65% Na-Cyanex 272 (0.03 M) in the initial pH range of 1–6 corresponding to equilibrium pH values of 0.95–6.9, respectively. The effect of the equilibrium pH on the extraction and separation of cobalt from mixed sulphate solution is shown in  The competitive extraction of cobalt and lithium was studied with 0.0025–0.3 M Na-Cyanex 272 at an initial pH of 5.00. The plots for the dependency of log Cobalt and lithium were extracted from mixed solutions of cobalt and lithium sulphate containing 0.1 M Na   The effect of temperature on the extraction of cobalt and lithium was investigated using a constant temperature bath (± The extraction isotherm was constructed in Sufficient amount of loaded organic was generated from mixed sulfate solution containing cobalt and lithium of 0.01 M at an equilibrium pH of 5 using 0.3 M Na-Cyanex 272. The resulting organic solution contained 0.46 g/l Co and 0.004 g/l Li. The stripping of cobalt from the cobalt and lithium-loaded organic was performed with different mineral acids such as H  In order to achieve quantitative extraction of cobalt a two-stage counter-current batch simulation study was carried out using 0.03 M Na-Cyanex 272 at an O/A phase ratio of 1. Representative results for loaded organic and raffinate obtained had the compositions shown in In order to utilize the regenerated organic and to achieve quantitative extraction of cobalt a two-stage counter-current batch simulation study has been carried out using a regenerated 0.03 M Na-Cyanex 272 at an O/A phase ratio of 1. In the presence of regenerated 0.03 M Na-Cyanex 272 the extraction was lower than that of the fresh Cyanex 272. The representative results for loaded organic and raffinate obtained had the compositions shown in After optimizing the process to separate cobalt and lithium from mixed sulphate solution the following conclusions can be made. The highest value of 84% of cobalt was extracted with a minimum of 8% lithium co-extraction at an equilibrium pH of 6.90 which corresponds to an initial pH of 5.00, 0.01 M cobalt and lithium sulphate solution each in the aqueous feed solution and 0.03 M Na-Cyanex 272 in the organic solution. At this equilibrium pH the highest separation factor of 62 was also obtained. Cobalt can be extracted as [CoA For the quantitative stripping of cobalt from the loaded organic phase, 2 mol of H When a stochiometrically higher concentration of extractant was employed for extraction, just after the complete extraction of cobalt, the lithium extraction started which led to lower efficiency of separation factor and higher contamination of cobalt with lithium. Cobalt sulphate with > The McCabe–Thiele extraction isotherm for the extraction of cobalt reveals that two stages are required for quantitative extraction of cobalt and one stage is required for the quantitative stripping of cobalt.  Extractant molecule. Metal-extractant complex. Metal. Equilibrium constant for extraction. Distribution coefficient. Separation factor. Enthalpy change for the extraction reaction. Molar Gas Constant. Absolute temperature. Aqueous Organic This work was supported by the basic research programme of Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM). The first author expresses his warmest thanks to KIGAM and Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) for awarding a research fellowship during the course of investigation.