A new hydrometallurgical leaching process, which dissolves lead concentrates with acidic ferric methanesulfonate solution, was proposed and investigated. The leaching kinetics of galena-containing concentrate from Red Dog Mine (Teck) was studied with respect to variables such as stirring speed, temperature, concentrations of free acid and ferric ions as well as particle size. It was found that stirring speed and acid concentration had no influence on the leaching rate, while increasing temperature moderately increased the rate. The leaching data best fitted the product-layer diffusion control mechanism based on the shrinking core model with an apparent activation energy value 36.15kJ/mol. The apparent reaction constant for the mean value of particle size and the reaction order for initial ferric concentration were very close to the theoretical values of 2 and 1, respectively.time required for complete leaching molar density the original particle size the solid–solid transfer coefficient the effective diffusivity of lixiviant the bulk concentrate of lixiviant rate constant in product-layer diffusion control kinetics process The pyrometallurgical smelting process is the primary route to treat galena concentrates. However, it generates both SO Methanesulfonic acid (MSA) medium shows a moderately high solubility for lead and some other heavy metals. The inherent advantages of MSA, such as high conductivity, stability against hydrolysis, low toxicity and weak corrosiveness, make it a very promising alternative for lead production and very safe for workers to handle ( In this study, the leaching kinetics of galena by ferric methanesulfonate is undertaken. Ferric ion, compared to hydrogen peroxide and oxygen, is more economic in use. The chemistry of galena leaching with ferric methanesulfonate is as follows. Elemental sulfur may be further oxidized to sulfate (SO Ferric methanesulfonate may be regenerated by the anodic reaction in the electrowinning of lead in a divided cell. Cathode: Anode: Cell reaction: The galena concentrate used in this study was from Red Dog Mines (Teck Resources Ltd., Canada). All experiments were carried out with ground and sized concentrate. Sized materials were prepared by wet screening into various fractions and drying at room temperature to minimize mineral oxidation. The mineralogy and the chemical composition of the studied concentrate were shown in All chemicals used in the preparation of lixiviants were of analytical grade. The methanesulfonic acid provided by BASF (Germany) was of 100% purity. The preparation of ferric methanesulfonate stock solution consisted of two steps: the first step is the addition of lead oxide to a methanesulfonic acid solution to form the lead methanesulfonate salt; and the second one is the addition of ferric sulfate to interconvert the soluble salt to ferric methanesulfonate and precipitate insoluble lead sulfate. This was shown in the following chemical reactions: After filtration to remove the PbSO The leaching tests were conducted in a covered 1 Leaching experiments were initiated by adding 500 After immediate dilution, the lead content in the samples was tested by a Varian 240 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) instrument with air-acetylene flame. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) tests for galena concentrate and leached residue were obtained using a Bruker D8 Focus Bragg–Brentano diffractometer (CoKα, 35 A number of experimental parameters have been studied. Unless otherwise noted, most experiments were conducted under the base conditions as shown in Stirring speeds varied from 300 to 600 The kinetics of the leaching reaction was examined over the temperature range between 25 It was very interesting to notice that when the filtered and high-temperature leachate cooled down, there were some white solids settling down at the bottom of the glass sampler; while the low-temperature filtered leachate did not have the problem. It was assumed that the white solid was the chemical reaction product, probably lead sulfate and also the product was somewhat soluble in acidic ferric methanesulfonate solution. This assumption was based on the three facts: pH value of the leachate solution was much lower than 3 The white precipitate also formed when the galena concentrate reacted only with H Ferric methanesulfonate was stable over the temperature range (25–85 The first two facts indicated that the white precipitate could not be iron-bearing compounds. The last fact indicated that the solid was from the oxidations, not from the hydrolysis or decomposition of ferric methanesulfonate. The leaching data have been tested for the correlation coefficient (R Comparing The apparent rate constants were obtained from the linear slopes of the galena leaching curves ( One explanation of the high value in this study is the interference of lead sulfate solubility in acidic ferric methanesulfonate solution. Based on the facts discussed above, temperature seemed to have a strong influence on the leaching process through impacting the solubility of product. When the temperature rose, the solubility increased. The barrier layer would become thinner or even could disappear, leading to the possibility that the leaching model shifted from a typical product-layer diffusion to a non-typical diffusion. Diffusion is still the predominant controlling factor since the correlation coefficients (R The effects of particle size on the leaching rate were examined by measuring the leaching kinetics for four particle size fractions (  The two oxidative reactions were thermodynamically more favorable. The non-oxidative dissolution would become the predominant reaction only if the ratio exceeded about 4–5 ( Four experiments were undertaken to determine the dependence of the galena dissolution rate on the ferric ion concentration. The results were plotted in  The results of the present work demonstrated that the extraction of lead from galena concentrates with ferric methanesulfonate solution was feasible on a bench scale. Based on these results, a commercial process based on ferric methanesulfonate solution could be a promising alternative. A simplified flowsheet for lead production from galena concentrate in MSA medium is proposed ( The first step involved an oxidizing leach of the galena concentrate with ferric methanesulfonate solution. At the end of leaching process, the leach slurry was subjected to a solid–liquid separation process (i.e. thickening, filtration) with incorporation of washing in order to give a first solid residue and an impure leachate. Lead sulfate and elemental sulfur might be present in the first leach residue. Lead sulfate could be recovered by desulfurization treatment followed by re-leaching with MSA while elemental sulfur could be collected as a potential saleable by-product. The second step in the process involved the purification of the impure leachate. The leachate might be purified by pH adjustment (with oxidant if required) to eliminate the impurities (i.e. Fe, Al, Cr) and by cementation with metallic lead powder or scrap to remove more noble impurities (such as copper) to produce a suitable solution prior to electrolysis production. Sulfide ion might be added to remove any accumulated zinc ion (after lead depletion). The third step in recovery of lead was electrowinning operated in a divided cell containing anodes and cathodes. The anodes might be made of graphite and the cathode might be from stainless steel. Lead was recovered as metal at the cathode and ferrous ions were oxidized to ferric ions at the anode by electrolysis. The lead-depleted and ferric-enriched electrolyte containing methanesulfonic acid might then be recycled to the leaching process. The leaching of Red Dog Mines lead concentrates by ferric methanesulfonate solution was studied under various experimental conditions. Temperature had a pronounced effect on the dissolution rate of the concentrates. Over the temperature range from 65 The financial support for this project provided by