The processing of byproduct streams is a significant activity at copper concentrators, smelters, and refineries. The treatment of several common byproducts is the subject of this chapter. MoS2 occurs in economic quantities in many porphyry Cu deposits. It is recovered to MoS2 flotation concentrates by: floating MoS2 and Cu–Fe–S minerals together in a bulk Cu–Mo concentrate, then; depressing Cu–Fe–S minerals and floating MoS2 in a Mo–Cu flotation separator plant. Typical Mo recovery to final MoS2 concentrate is ∼70% (80% to the bulk concentrate and 90% of that to the final MoS2 concentrate). Other byproducts from copper production include the slime from electrorefining, dust recovered from bag houses and electrostatic precipitators, and smelting slag. All of these can be treated to recover their copper content, and the remaining material is also valuable. The slime, in particular, contains significant levels of gold, silver, selenium, and tellurium. The recovery of these metals has a significant impact on the profitability of copper production facilities. Many porphyry Cu deposits contain economic concentrations of Mo, virtually all of it as molybdenite, MoS Molybdenite floats with chalcopyrite, chalcocite, and other Cu–S and Cu–Fe–S minerals. It can then be separated from the resulting Cu–Mo bulk concentrate by depressing the Cu minerals with sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS), while re-floating the MoS Typical Cu–Mo bulk concentrates and their equivalent Mo/Cu separator molybdenite and Cu concentrates are given in The principal collector for molybdenite is diesel fuel or similar oil, ~0.01 kg/tonne of ore. It is added to the bulk concentrator ore slurry feed to maximize molybdenite recovery from ore. Its effect carries over to flotation of molybdenite in the Mo/Cu separator flotation plant. Some Mo/Cu separation plants add more in the Mo/Cu separator plant. The most common Cu–Fe–S mineral depressant is NaHS ( Molybdenite flotation frothers are conventional. Two examples are Dowfroth 250 and pine oil. The pH is raised with CaO and lowered with sulfuric acid, occasionally CO Flow through the Mo/Cu separator plant is continuous. Depressant and frother (sometimes oily collector) are continuously added where needed. Product Mo froth and Cu Mo/Cu separator flotation plants often contain regrind mills. Their objective is to liberate molybdenite grains from Cu–Fe–S mineral particles. However these grains have already gone through grinding in the preceding ore concentrator, so the efficacy of grinding in the Mo/Cu separation plant is questionable. The objectives of a Mo/Cu bulk concentrator are to (a) maximize Cu and Mo recovery to the bulk concentrate and (b) maximize rejection of non-Cu, non-Mo minerals to the tailings. The objectives of an Mo/Cu separation flotation plant are to (a) maximize recovery of molybdenite to the Mo concentrate, and (b) minimize recovery of Cu–Fe–S minerals to the Mo concentrate. The bulk concentrator objectives are met by adequate grinding, efficient rougher scavenger flotation, and quiescent concentrate cleaning in column cells. The Mo/Cu separator plant objectives are obtained by Efficient collection of molybdenite and efficient depression of Cu–Fe–S minerals in the rougher scavenger cells with adequate concentrations of oily collector and NaHS depressant Efficient cleaning of molybdenite concentrate in ~5 column flotation cells in series ( Use of N Adequate washing of cleaner froth with fresh water ( Several companies market proprietary reagents for enhancing molybdenite recovery (  The mineralogy of anode slimes varies with content, but is essentially a mixture of oxide and chalcogenide solid solutions (  This process has largely replaced the soda ash roasting previously practiced. It eliminates the generation of elemental Se vapor during roasting, which is difficult to recover. In As a result, a change over recent decades has been the development of hydrometallurgical processes for anode slimes. Several different processes are in use; the best known is the wet chlorination process (   Numerous hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical process have been developed to treat coppermaking dusts. The biggest concern with these processes is recovering the arsenic in a stable form for disposal. An example is the process for treating Teniente furnace dust described by       Other potential uses of copper slag include roofing granules, hot-mix asphalt, and cutting tools ( MoS Other byproducts from copper production include the slime from electrorefining, dust recovered from baghouses and electrostatic precipitators, and smelting slag. All of these can be treated to recover their copper content, and the remaining material is also valuable. The slime in particular contains significant levels of gold, silver, selenium, and tellurium. The recovery of these metals has a significant impact on the profitability of copper production facilities.