In this research, insoluble nanosponge β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) polyurethane was modified with phosphorylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (pMWCNTs) and further decorated with titanium dioxide and silver nanoparticles. This modification of β-CD polyurethane was achieved through subsequent reactions of amidation, cross polymerization, using a functional linker such as diisocyanate, and sol-gel. The new polymeric nanobiosorbent obtained was characterized by Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM); for surface area analysis, the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method was employed. The developed nanobiosorbent, with a high surface area (352.5 m2  g−1), favors the adsorption of trichloroethylene (TCE) and Congo red (CR) dye from wastewater samples using a batch method. The solution pH, adsorbent dosage effects, isotherm, kinetic, thermodynamic as well as regeneration and desorption studies on the adsorption mechanism were also explored. The nanobiosorbent maximum capacities of removal from the Langmuir model were respectively, 27507 mg g−1 (TCE) and 146.96 mg − (CR dye). The adsorption mechanisms of TCE and CR dye were well-established and taking place via an endothermic process.Factors such as color, odor, and taste have been classified as the three significant risks of water quality. Such deterioration of water quality may partly be attributed to the presence of organic pollutants [ Nanosorbents such as carbon nanotubes, zeolites, and metal-based nanosorbents have demonstrated the promising potential for the adsorption of organic pollutants from model pollutant solutions and wastewater. [ Among these methods, a combined method of cross-linking polymerization and sol-gel method is preferred in this study. This is because of the simplicity of these two methods and their lower cost. Furthermore, cross-linking polymerization using the diisocyanate group as the cross-linking agent has been mostly employed for the synthesis of insoluble cyclodextrin polyurethane-based composites [ In this study, insoluble nanosponge β-CD polyurethane was modified with phosphorylated MWCNTs (pMWCNTs) and metal nanoparticles (titanium dioxide (TiO Up to date, reports on the elimination of TCE and CR dye from wastewater samples by functionalized insoluble nanosponge β-CD polyurethane composite are still scarce; only a few studies have been in print. For instance, Salipira et al. [ Hence, the attention in this study is mainly focussed on the use of insoluble nanosponge β-CD polyurethane modified with both phosphorylated MWCNTs (pMWCNTs) and metal nanoparticles (titanium dioxide (TiO β-CDs (97 %), Titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP), MWCNTs (purity > 90 %, diam. x L 110−170 nm x 5−9 μm), 2-propanol, Hexamethylene diisocyanate (HMDI, 98.0 %), trichloroethylene (TCE), Ethanol 70 %, Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and Nitric acid (70 %) were all obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, South Africa. Congo Red (CR) (ACS reagent 98 %, Associated Chemical Entreprises) and silver nitrate (99.8 %, Rochelle Chemicals South Africa). The wastewater was collected in a dam near a mining area in Okney, North West Province (South Africa). pMWCNT/β-CD/TiO The stock solutions of organic pollutants (1000 ppm) were prepared as described in previous literature [ The batch adsorption experiments were performed in triplicate, and the averages of the results were recorded. After the adsorption experiment, the TCE filtrates were analyzed by Leco Pegasus 4D GCxGC TOF MS using the static headspace method [ The regeneration experiments (Data article section 2.7) were conducted consecutively in three adsorption cycles. The desorption process was done as follow: first the adsorbent loaded with pollutant was washed using diluted 70 % ethanol solution, then it was placed in a glass bottle containing respectively 30 ml of deionized water (adjusted to pH 4 (for TCE), pH 11 for (CR dye)); and the bottles were shaken for 24 h at 298 K. Finally, the filtrates were analyzed to determine the concentration of TCE and CR dye in the sample solution after desorption. The real wastewater was spiked respectively with a known concentration of TCE and CR in order to obtain the respective pollutant solution of 10 ppm concentration in the wastewater collected. The bionanosponge polyurethane composite (pMWCNT/β-CD/TiO Detailed results on the synthesis and characterization of pMWCNT/β-CD/TiO The removal percentage of the pollutants and the capacity of removal (q On the other hand, it is essential to note that TCE is a lipophilic chemical compound and non-ionic [   From The adsorbent adsorption capacity has also been demonstrated, in previous studies [ The parameters of thermodynamic were evaluated using Van’t hoff Eq. It was depicted from The data achieved from the studies of contact time effects were fitted using different kinetic models (pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order) as described below. The intraparticle diffusion was utilized to define the type of diffusion model associated with the process of the rate-limiting step and adsorption. The kinetic rate was determined from the best-fit kinetic model that demonstrates a good correlation between the calculated q  The data obtained after the kinetic studies were also fitted as illustrated in previous studies with the nonlinear pseudo-first-order [  Firstly, the analysis of the real wastewater sample (from mine effluent) was performed to quatify the amount of TCE and CR dye present in the wastewater sample. Since the concentration of TCE (0 ppm) and CR dye (0.00737 ppm) was very low, the wastewater was spiked respectively with a known concentration (i.e., 5 ppm) of TCE and CR dye. The spiked wastewater sample was then treated with the developed polymeric nanobiosorbent to test its ability and capacity to eliminate TCE and CR dye. It can be depicted from To confirm the effectiveness of the developed polymeric nanobiosorbent further, the percentage removal of organic carbons present in the spiked mine effluent wastewater samples were determined. This was achieved by first conducting total organic carbon (TOC) analysis of the mine effluent water samples before and after adsorption. Then Eq.  After adsorption, a slight shift toward lower wavelength, and an increase in intensity were observed for all the main IR peaks (C In this study, adsorbent-adsorbate interactions can be described using combined mechanisms. Mechanism 1, which is based on the solution pH effect and zeta potential, proposes that the CR dye adsorption mechanism took place principally via the combined processes of electrostatic attraction and repulsion or ion exchange. While the mechanism of the TCE sorption could mostly involve pore filling and be favor by Van der Waals hydrophobic intermolecular attraction between TCE and the adsorbent synthesized. Mechanism 2, based on the isotherm models studies, suggests that the TCE sorption follows a process of multilayer chemical adsorption while the adsorption of CR dye is a monolayer chemical adsorption process. Mechanism 3, which is based on the thermodynamic, indicates that the sorption mechanism of TCE and CR dye is a spontaneous endothermic chemical adsorption process. Mechanism 4 is based on the regeneration and desorption studies. It suggests that the adsorption of TCE involves: hydrogen bonding, π-π interactions between the π-system of MWCNTs and TCE [  The synthesized bio nanosponge polyurethane composite (pMWCNT/β-CD/TiO None.  The authors gratefully acknowledge the Global Excellence Stature fellowship 4.0 of the University of Johannesburg, the