Experiments were carried out on a pilot scale rotary kiln equipped with lifters at room temperature to investigate the effects of the kiln slope, rotational speed, mass flow rate of materials, and exit dam height on the hold-up and the mean residence time (MRT). The MRT was determined from the residence time distribution measurements as detailed in Part I of this work. Two granular solids having different properties were used: sand and broken rice. Furthermore, two shapes of lifters were compared to determine the influence of lifter geometry: straight lifters (SL) and rectangular lifters (RL). A new model to predict the MRT was established by means of a dimensional analysis. The correlation not only gave good agreement with the experimental data from the present study, but also demonstrated good predictive performances when applied to published experimental data of other kilns; the model is applicable for inclined kilns that process materials in cascading (tumbling) motion, whether or not equipped with lifters or fitted with dams at the outlet end.Rotary kilns are gas–solid reactors widely used in mineral process applications and other processes applied to specific granular materials. Due to their extensive use in industry, there have been several studies aimed at modeling the transport of the solids through the kiln cylinder Most of the substantial earlier body of scientific literature that exists in the field assumed no axial dispersion through the kiln, such that the time of passage One of the earliest equations was developed by Sullivan et al. Chatterjee et al. In the literature, models for the mean residence time or time of passage, developed for kilns both with and without lifters, range from relatively simple empirical equations to fully mechanistic models. However, we will focus here on some of the simple empirical models developed for kilns equipped with lifters, since the so-called mechanistic models are not suitable for control purposes Among the earliest models developed for rotary kilns equipped with lifters is the relation of Prutton et al. Certainly the most commonly used model, is the correlation of Friedman and Marshall Shahhosseini et al. This model attempted to address some of the shortcomings of the Friedman and Marshall Alvarez and Shene Recently Thibault et al. The three functions This paper is concerned with the study of the effects of usual operating parameters, shape of lifters, and type of materials on the mean residence time of solid particles as well as on the kiln hold-up. A semi-empirical model obtained from dimensional consideration of the mean residence time of solid particles is also presented. Compared to the other published correlations, this new one should be applicable to a wide range of kilns and operating conditions, and could also be useful for design purposes. Therefore this paper will compare the predictions obtained with this model when applied to experimental data from the literature to the corresponding experimental MRT, and will also present the predictions of published models using the present experimental data. The apparatus and materials have been described in Part I of this work. Therefore only their main characteristics are given here. The rotary kiln is a 0.101 Quartz sand (average size 0.55 The experimental mean residence time was determined from the residence time distribution (RTD) measurement data. The MRT is defined by The kiln hold-up was obtained after the RTD measurement. The feeding system was disabled, and then the solid materials within the kiln were discharged into the recovery tank and weighed. Thus, it was possible to assess the time of passage of particles in the rotary kiln by dividing the weight of solid materials measured by the mean flow rate at steady state. Part I of this work provides further details on the whole experimental procedure.  As shown in The classical operational parameters also significantly influence the volumetric hold-up. The fractional volumetric hold-up sharply decreased at smaller rotational speed values before slowing down at higher speed values, as if a bottom had been reached (see The time of passage can be calculated from the hold-up measurements, as follows: Most of the previous studies focus on this simple relation to investigate the transport of solid particles through a rotary kiln, sometimes conflating it with the MRT, as previously stated. In the present study, therefore, we compared the time of passage and the MRT results over the whole experimental campaign as shown in The mean residence times of sand particles were found to be higher than those of broken rice particles, mainly due to the effect of gravity and their differing angle of repose. For a given type of material and fixed operating parameters, the MRT obtained while using rectangular lifters was higher than that obtained while using straight lifters, due to the differing loading capacity of the lifters. These trends, as shown in The MRT significantly decreased by about 69% as the rotational speed increased 6 times, as shown in The main purpose of this model is to come up with a prediction of the MRT of solid particles defined as a function of the kiln design, the properties of the bulk materials, and the operating parameters, namely the kiln rotational speed, the kiln slope, the mass flow rate and the exit dam height. For the purpose of application to other kiln design and operating conditions, and thus to meet scaling-up issues, the model for the prediction of the MRT is based on a dimensional analysis as described below. In dimensional analysis, a certain functional form is assumed to relate the varying parameters. All the possible parameters are commonly present with their own exponent. In this study the main operating, geometrical, and physical parameters which can affect the MRT are listed below along with their dimensions: The analysis involves the fundamental dimensions MLT: mass, length and time. It follows from the above that the relation being sought can be summarized as: It is convenient to rewrite Eq. Assuming that Eq. A collection of 9 dimensionless groupings formed from the parameters in Eq. In the literature, some of these dimensionless expressions have been defined, i.e. the Froude number, the length-to-diameter ratio, or the (inverse of the) Hausner ratio. The variables in Eq. It should be noted that the aforementioned correlation for the MRT is applicable in the case of inclined rotary kilns, whether or not they are equipped with lifters or fitted with a dam at the outlet end. Using one of the proposed set of parameters in The performance of the model was assessed using the three sets of optimal parameters separately on the experimental results. For reasons of clarity, a criterion in performance assessments J was defined as follows: This criterion can be defined as the sum of the relative square errors between predicted and experimentally determined values of the MRT divided by the number of experiments. It will be used to determine which one among the three sets of optimal parameters gives the best predictions. The lower the value of this criterion, the better the predictions. The performance of the proposed model was first tested on the experimental data from this study as given in The predictive capacity of the proposed model was then tested on some experimental data from the literature. Kilns of different geometries and processing a range of materials at varying conditions were chosen. Only a few researchers investigating the residence time of particles through rotary kilns have published their experimental data along with sufficient details on properties of the bulk materials. This is even truer for kilns equipped with lifters. The results from the work by Debacq  The correlation was then used to calculate the MRT of beech chips flowing through the kiln used by Colin et al. Other tests were carried out with data from rotary kilns equipped with dams of differing heights at their outlet ends. These rotary kilns were those used by Sai et al. To complete the analysis of the predictive capacity of the proposed model, other models developed for rotary kilns were applied in order to compare the MRT predictions. The correlation proposed by Chatterjee et al. It appears, in accordance with the results of the present study, that the correlation proposed in this work for the MRT is also valid when applied to kilns with materials and operating conditions different from those used in the study. This confirms the excellent predictive capacity of Eq. The effects of operating parameters, namely, the rotational speed, the kiln slope, the mass flow rate, the exit dam height, the type of materials and shape of lifters, on the hold-up and mean residence time have been investigated. As far as these parameters are concerned, in this work it was observed that: Increasing either the rotational speed or the kiln slope increased the kiln hold-up and the MRT of the charge. Increasing the feed rate tended to increase the hold-up while the MRT of particles decreased. With an increase in the exit dam height the latter two increased slightly. The use of rectangular lifters slightly increased the kiln hold-up and the MRT of particulate solids compared with straight or no lifters. Sand and broken rice bulks have similar Hausner ratios though they have different bulk and tapped densities and different particle sizes. Their MRT were relatively close but the sand MRT were always higher whereas the rice hold-ups were usually higher. A semi-empirical model was developed in order to predict the mean residence time of solid materials under steady state conditions in inclined rotating kilns, whether equipped or not with lifters and exit dams, as follows: The correlation consists of dimensionless factors accounting for (i) the basic operational parameters of the kiln, (ii) the properties of the bulk solids, (iii) the geometry of the kiln, (iv) the number, shape and presence of lifters, (v) the height of the exit dam. The parameters, namely   