Present study concerns strengthening of nanocrystalline Cu-matrix by binary and ternary addition of Zr (0.5 at. %) and Nb (1.0 at. %) using ball milling at cryogenic temperature. Zr and Nb having low equilibrium solid solubility in Cu, thus powder blends were subjected non-equilibrium alloying. Mechanically alloyed samples were annealed at different temperatures (600–900 °C) for one hour. Stability of the nanocrystalline Cu-matrix even after annealing at 900 °C is attributed to the stabilization of nanocrystalline grains by segregation of larger solute atoms (Nb and Zr) along grain boundaries and/or Zener pinning by precipitates like Cu5Zr in Cu-Zr intermetallics.Nano-crystalline (nc) materials have shown superior mechanical properties over their coarse grain counterparts In the present study, elemental powders of Copper (Cu) (99.9%), Zr (Cerac, 99.95%, −200, +325 mesh) and Nb (99.96% +350 mesh) (Alfa Aesar) blended in appropriate quantities, were subjected to ball milling under cryogenic condition (−196 °C) in a modified Spex 8000 mixer/mill to achieve the nominal composition of Cu Composition and crystallite size of the nano-crystalline alloys were determined by analysis of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns obtained by using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku DMax) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15405 nm) with scanning angle (2θ) ranging from 20° to 100°. To investigate further, the microstructure of milled and annealed at 600 °C powders was investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM 2000FX) by using beam energy of 200 keV. The compacts were then mechanically thinned to ~ 20 μm and electropolished by 30 vol% nitric acid and methanol at − 20 °C (Tenupol-2 electropolisher). For conducting hardness measurement, a minimum of 15 Vickers hardness measurements were collected for each annealing condition using a Buehler Micromet II with a 25 g load applied for 12 s. X-ray diffraction spectra for the ball milled, CZ, CN and CZN alloys, and after annealing of the ball milled alloys at various temperatures, are shown in Crystallite size and lattice strain of the alloys were estimated from the corrected breadth of the diffraction peaks using Variations in lattice parameter and lattice strain are shown in The effect of Nb on stability of grain size is mostly limited to thermodynamic stabilization. In this regard, pinning of the grain boundaries by solute Nb atoms (solute drag) and precipitated nanoparticles (Zener pinning) could have a major role in stabilizing the nanostructure of Cu.  Distribution of the constituent elements in cryomilled and annealed at 600 °C, Cu  In summary, nano-crystalline Cu-0.5 at. % Zr, Cu-1.0 at. % Nb and Cu-0.5 at. % Zr-1.0 at. % Nb alloys were successfully synthesized by eight hours of cryo-milling followed by annealing at different temperatures. X-ray diffraction analysis of the ball milled samples has demonstrated formation of single phase solid solution for all the alloys. After annealing upto a temperature of 900 °C much improved grain size stabilization in the case of combined addition of Nb (1.0 at%) and Zr (0.5at%) than addition of Nb (1.0at%) and Zr (0.5 at%) separately. The enhanced grain size stabilizations effect has also corroborated by hardness measurement of the samples. Microstructural investigation has indicated preferred segregation of Nb at the nanocrystalline grain boundaries of Cu, which in turn, facilitates segregation of Zr with in the Cu grain. Therefore, combined addition of Nb and Zr has resulted into improved thermal stabilization of grain size of Cu, due to concomitant thermodynamic (Nb-induced) and Zenner pinning (Zr-induced) effect. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The Correspondence author expresses his sincere gratitude to Prof.