Screws are used to fix broken bones either directly or through plates. Surgeons sometimes find that a screw they have used is not quite in the centre of the bone but to one side or maybe even the edge. It has been postulated that screws catching the edge of the bone do not give good fixation and may even predispose to fractures.
                  We conducted the present experiment using porcine femora to see if a screw's transverse plane position in the bone made any difference to its pullout strength. 20 cortical screws were inserted into the cortical segments of 5 pig femora (4 screws per femur) using the standard AO technique. The screws were inserted in one of 5 randomly chosen positions—centre, medial off-centre, lateral off-centre, medial edge and lateral edge. The screws were tested to failure in axial pullout using a Losenhausen universal testing machine.
                  We found that 4 of the 8 ‘edge’ screws failed with fractures developing around the screw track during pullout testing. These 4 screws were noted on cross-section to have 100% bone contact with their threads completely embedded in the cortical bone. They also had significantly lower pullout resistance than the 4 ‘edge’ screws without fractures (p
                     =0.05) and the 12 ‘non-edge’ screws (in the central 75% of the bone) (p
                     =0.03). This was most likely due to the associated fractures. There was a statistically significant association between the ‘edge’ screw position (i.e. within 12.5% of the medial or lateral edge of the bone) and the likelihood of fracture (p
                     =0.000).
                  We conclude that in the transverse plane, cortical screws either on their own or through plates should be inserted in the central three-fourths of the bone. Screws placed outside this zone carry a higher risk of fixation failure due to fractures around the screw track with axial loading.During fixation of tubular bone, the best practice is to insert the bone screws through the centre of the bone since this gives the most secure hold. This is not always possible and some screws end up being off-centre and even at the edge of the bone. While some surgeons believe that such screws offer inadequate fixation, others argue that the holding power of such screws is actually greater since their bone contact area is greater ( Our study questions were: In tubular cortical bone fixation, does an ‘off-centre’ or ‘edge’ positioning of a screw in the transverse plane affect its pullout strength? Does increased bone contact necessarily translate into greater holding power? Is there an increased risk of fracture with an off-centre screw placement? To our knowledge these questions have not been addressed by any study to date. 5 femora from 2- to 3-year-old adult pigs slaughtered the day before were obtained. The bones were immediately frozen at −18 3.5 The machine used to perform the pullout tests was a Losenhausen Universal Testing Machine with an MTS Flex-test GT controller and a 5 Each cortical bone segment was divided into 4 equal zones. Drill holes were made for the screws roughly in the middle of the zones so that there was adequate separation between adjacent screw holes ( The bone was fixed in a clamp to keep it from moving while drilling ( Each screw was inserted into bone using standard AO technique for 3.5 The screws were pulled out at a constant velocity of 20 A total of 20 tests were performed using a fresh screw in a fresh position each time. This precaution was taken so that results would not be invalidated by reusing a screw with unnoticed damage. By the end of the testing each zone in each bone had been tested with a screw in one of the five positions described above. Fractures occurring around the screw holes during pullout testing were documented. Next the bones were cut through the test holes using a battery driven oscillating bone saw. The following measurements were made at each test hole using a Vernier Calliper: Mediolateral width of the bone which was used to calculate the location of the midpoint of the bone in the transverse plane. Distance of the screw hole from the centre of the bone. Anteroposterior width of the bone at the level of the screw hole. Width of bone at the near and far cortex drill holes. (Only the parts of the screw track completely lined by bone were measured.) Using the above measurements the following parameters were calculated: Actual and percentage distance of the screw hole from the centre of the bone. Actual and percentage total bone contact for each screw. A Microsoft Excel spreadsheet was used to calculate the mean, median and standard deviation for the various readings and to generate correlation graphs. Statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS statistical package version 12.0.2 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). The tests used were the unpaired Student's There were 3 right and 2 left femora. The mean cortical segment length was 5.5 Of the 8 ‘edge’ screws, 4 screws – 3 lateral and 1 medial – had 100% bone contact with their threads completely embedded in the cortical bone and these were the screws that failed with fracturing of the surrounding bone. The other 4 ‘edge’ screws though not completely embedded in bone had at least one side throughout in contact with bone. They nevertheless behaved more like ‘non-edge’ (‘centre’ or ‘off-centre’) screws than their fellow ‘edge’ screws. ‘Edge’ screws were noted to be within 12.5% of the edge of the bone while the ‘non-edge’ screws were in the central 75% of the bone. The Chi-Square test was used to determine the association between screw position (‘Edge’ or ‘Non-edge’) and the likelihood of fracture. The ‘null’ hypothesis was that there is no association. This was strongly refuted by a Chi-Square Using the independent Edge screws with associated fractures ( Screws with associated fractures ( Edge screws without fractures ( All Edge screws ( Pearson's Correlation Coefficient was calculated for the following parameters:   A bone screw's pullout strength is the maximum axial force that the screw can withstand before coming loose from the bone. It is directly proportional to the screw diameter, the area of contact between screw and bone and the density of the bone. Trauma surgeons aim for strong and stable per-operative bone fixation so that the risk of post-operative fixation failure is minimal. With reference to plate and screw fixation of long bones, it is widely accepted that the midline of the bone is the best site for fixation since screws have an optimal bi-cortical hold at this level. However it is not always possible to achieve this and surgeons often find that a plate is skewed and the screws lie far from the centre of the bone and closer to the edge. Intra-operative screening can help to avoid such mistakes but this is not always practicable. Also there is an interest in avoiding exposure of patients and medical staff to harmful ionising radiation and avoiding neck and back pain from lead apron use. A screw catching the edge of a cortical bone causes mixed feelings. Some surgeons feel that it does not matter as long as the screw is in the bone while others feel that such a screw does not hold bone as well as a bi-cortical screw in the centre and fixation failure is likely. Screw thread geometry, tapping, cannulation, insertion torque, cutting flute design and depth of insertion are some of the factors whose impact on screw pullout strength have been studied. We chose porcine femur as our experimental model on account of its wide availability, its suitable dimensions (for easy storage, preparation and testing) and comparable mechanical properties to human bone. During pullout testing, fractures developed around the tracks of 4 of the 8 ‘edge’ screws drastically reducing their pullout resistance compared to other ‘edge’ screws that did not fracture ( Cortical bone is a relatively brittle solid with limited elastic and plastic elongation before fracturing. Surface deficiencies such as holes worsen matters further. Regardless of the micro-mechanism of failure, a hole positioned close to the outside surface of the bone causes great stress concentration between the hole and the bone surface. As a screw is pulled out, the shear stresses around the screw cause it to rotate. This rotation generates large circumferential stresses around the screw track, which could easily fracture the thin plate of bone between the hole and the outer surface; there is also a danger of splitting the bone in its weakest radial direction. In our tests the bone was prevented from rotating to standardise the pullout testing. Most studies relating to screw pullout testing have reported that pullout strength is directly proportional to the length of thread engaged in the test material, Drilling through cortical bone is a slow, painstaking process that generates heat. While temperatures above 50 There are a few limitations of our study: We have assumed that our test findings in porcine bone would be applicable to human bone. Porcine bone has only been used before to test interference screw fixation since maximal loads to failure are very similar for porcine and human bone.   The central three quarters (75%) of the width of a tubular cortical bone segment is the safe zone for the insertion of cortical screws. There is no significant difference in the pullout strengths of cortical screws placed in the different parts of the safe zone. Screw insertion in the peripheral quarter, i.e. within 12.5% of either edge must be avoided since the risk of fixation failure from fracture around the screw track is high should the screw be subjected to pullout forces. The authors have no conflicts of interest to report and have received no financial or material support related to this manuscript. The authors would like to thank Mr. Roger Harry for his help with the study.