In Stranski–Krastanov mode, the transition from two-dimensional growth to three-dimensional growth occurs at a certain thickness: a transition thickness. In subsequent growth, misfit dislocations are incorporated at the interface between the substrate and the epitaxially grown layer. This limited thickness for coherent growth is called: the critical thickness. An analytical equation for the transition thickness is derived by the thermodynamical approach in which strain energy and surface energy are taken into account. The three-dimensional island, often called a quantum dot, is stably formed, when the strain energy of the two-dimensional layer exceeds the sum of the relaxed strain energy and the excess surface energy of the three-dimensional island. The equation is applied to obtain the transition thickness of InAs/GaAs, InP/GaP, and Ge/Si which fit fairly well with the experimental results.Quantum dots are used for device applications such as laser diodes and single-electron devices. Quantum dots are expected to reduce the threshold current of laser diodes, since their density of states is delta-function-like. The dots can couple with each other with very small capacitance because of their small size. The surface area /volume ratio increases with decreasing structural dimension: it becomes maximum at quantum dot shape. On the surface of dots fabricated by physical or chemical etching, surface defects cannot be avoided. In the Stranski–Krastanov mode of lattice-mismatched heteroepitaxy, three-dimensional growth forms islands on a wetting layer. A damage-free surface is expected, as the island growth is pseudomorphic. Island formation can be utilized to realize dislocation-free quantum dots In the Stranski–Krastanov mode, at first the growth is two-dimensional which transforms to three-dimensional growth at a certain thickness. It can be referred to as the transition thickness. With continuing growth, dislocations are generated beyond the thickness called as the critical thickness. This transition thickness is important for device fabrication. Sharp flat heterointerfaces can be obtained at thicknesses thinner than the transition thickness. Quantum dots form beyond the transition thickness but below the critical thickness for misfit dislocation formation. To investigate the transition thickness, adhesion (beam flux or gas flow), surface migration (growth temperature), surface morphology, internal stress, and surface energy must be taken into account. Ideally the transition process should be analyzed by the kinetic approach. However, the thermodynamical approach can predict the structure with the lowest free energy. The transition thickness has been derived by the thermodynamical approach, In this study, an analytical equation for the transition thickness is derived by the thermodynamical approach in which strain energy and surface energy are taken into account. This equation is applied to obtain the expected transition thicknesses for InAs/GaAs, InP/GaP, and Ge/Si. The results fit fairly well with experimental results. We consider lattice-mismatched heteroepitaxy where the lattice constant of the epitaxial layer is The surface energy is given by The lattice constant on the pyramid surface is somewhat relaxed toward its own lattice constant. We assume that the strain is relaxed exponentially and the lattice constant reaches its own value at the top of the pyramid. Thus, the lattice constant ‘ The strain energy of the differential volume of the pyramid is calculated by The inclined plane of the pyramid can be considered to consist of the horizontal and the vertical surfaces, and thus the surface energy of the pyramid is The two-dimensional structure is stably grown for Δε>0, and the three-dimensional growth is expected for Δε<0. Thus, the transition thickness is given by Δε=0, which is We may state from The energy ε The results are shown in The sum of the strain energy and the surface energy was derived for the flat and the island-shaped layers. The layer with the smaller energy is considered to be the one that will be stably grown. The transition thickness for InAs/GaAs observed experimentally is 1.5–1.8 ML. Suppose the transition thickness is 1.8 ML as an example. It does not mean that islands are formed on a flat layer of 1.8 ML, thickness, but that they may begin to be formed after the supply of source gases for 1.8 ML, if the growth continues to be two-dimensional. It has been suggested that there is a stagnant layer on a substrate for vapor phase growth. Thus, the flat layer thickness after the island formation would not be considered as 1.8 ML. It has been confirmed that the InAs flat layer remains after the growth mode transition The islands formed during Stranski–Krastanov mode growth vary widely in size and shape. The angle Reference Only a few experimental observations of InP/GaP islands are available, and the results scatter in size and shape. A transition thickness of 1.2 ML and facets of {11 A Ge/Si transition thickness of 2 BL was observed by a scanning tunneling microscope connected with a molecular beam epitaxial furnace In order to derive an analytical equation for the transition thickness, a simple model for island formation and shape have been used. However, the results calculated by An analytical equation for the transition thickness for semiconductor heteroepitaxy has been derived by a thermodynamical approach in which strain energy and surface energy are taken into account. Three-dimensional islands are stably formed, provided the strain energy of a two-dimensional layer with the same volume exceeds the sum of the relaxed strain energy and excess surface energy of the three-dimensional islands. It can be seen from the equation that a greater transition thickness is expected for (1) higher surface energy, (2) larger ridgeline angle of a pyramid, (3) smaller Young's modulus, and (4) smaller degree in lattice-mismatch. The equation has been applied to estimate the transition thickness of InAs/GaAs, InP/GaP, and Ge/Si. They agree fairly well with experimental results. The study was supported in part by Grant-in-Aid nos. 08044139 and nos. 10450128 of The Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan. The LBNL part of work was supported by US Department of Energy under contract no. DE-ACO3-76SF00098.