In this study, the interpretation of float–sink test data by simple equations on coals of different origins with respect to sulfur content has been investigated. Primarily, the cumulative weight and sulfur content of the floating fraction have been determined for each coal in all relative densities tested. For deriving of the equations, the recoveries of both non-sulfur and sulfur compounds in cumulative floating part have been calculated. Then, the relationship between the recoveries and relative densities has been stated as simple equations and the calculated values from equations have been compared with the experimental results. Furthermore, it has been found that these types of equations are suitable for the interpolation of sink–float data. The results reveal that the float–sink test results can be stated by simple equations relating to the sulfur content.In coal preparation, float–sink tests are widely used to estimate the amenability of coal towards gravity concentration and the performance of the coal-washing equipment. These tests are time-consuming and cumbersome, hence the float–sink tests are often carried out only at limited relative density levels. Data obtained from the float–sink tests are used to make a set of washability curves, which are then used to assess the degree of difficulty of gravity separation of raw coal and to provide qualitative or quantitative data for the products of the separation at a selected relative density In the literature, there are a few studies related with the evaluation of float–sink test results in the form of mathematical equations These suggested equations do not involve complicated mathematical equations and require no computational facilities and thus are easy to use in practice. However, all techniques or equations suggested exist only for the ash contents and there is no equation for sulfur contents. For deriving equation, the total sulfur contents of coals were used. Generally, the total sulfur content is determined using two main methods called Eschka (ISO 334) and high-temperature combustion method (ISO 351) In this paper, the equations developed by Govindarajan and Rao The techniques proposed by Govindarajan and Rao (i) The float–sink data have been resolved into two components, i.e., the recovery of non-sulfur ( Where (ii) The values of the relative densities ( Where The relationship between the parameter In these curves, a simple modification made on the float–sink data resulted in a smooth curve, which can be easily fitted to a simple equation. The curves shown in The values of the constants ( for Zonguldak–Catalagzi coal: for Maghara coal: for Providence coal: for Yozgat–Ayridam coal: for Coal A: for Kahramanmaras–Elbistan–Kislakoy B coal: Using Despite small deviations between the actual and predicted values in some relative densities, the equations fit the data well in The objective of interpolation is to reduce the number of relative densities needed in sink–float tests. For this aim, sink–float test results of Providence coal Similarly, the equations of Examination of Interpolation of the float–sink data can be used to reduce the number of relative density levels needed in the float–sink tests. As a result of this, the time needed for tests, the consumption of heavy liquid amounts and number of sulfur analyses are reduced. The cumulative weight and sulfur content of the float material have been used for deriving of the float–sink data in the form of equations. Float–sink data have been resolved into two components, i.e., recoveries of sulfur and non-sulfur material in the float fraction, which are related to the relative density. The values of cumulative weight and sulfur content of float material can easily be estimated by describing the float–sink data, in the form of equations at all relative density levels. The interpolation of the float–sink tests can be carried out with a few number of experiments. In spite of a small deviation in some relative densities, generally, the interpolated values are in accordance with the actual values. It is shown that interpolation of the float–sink test data will reduce the number of relative densities needed in these tests. In this case, heavy liquids, some of which are toxic and expensive, can be used in small quantities in the experiments.