To investigate the influence of towed demersal fishing gears on dinoflagellate cyst resuspension, towing trials with four gear components were carried out at three sites of differing sediment type in the Moray Firth, Scotland. Samples of sediment plumes were collected using plankton nets mounted on a towed sledge. Diversity of resuspended dinoflagellate cysts was similar at all sites and included Protoperidinium and Gonyaulax spp., Proroceratium reticulatum and unidentified ‘round brown’ cysts. Cyst concentrations per gram of resuspended sediment varied by gear component and sediment particle size distribution. Gear components with lower hydrodynamic drag generated wakes with smaller shear stresses, mobilising fewer larger sand particles, giving larger concentrations of cysts. Muddy sediments contained higher cyst concentrations which declined with increasing grain size. This study has shown that fishing gear and sediment type can influence the redistribution of dinoflagellate cysts and highlights the importance this may have in relation to dinoflagellate blooms.Many species of marine phytoplankton have a dormant resting or cyst stage within their life cycle which sinks out of the water column and rests on the sea bed. These cyst stages serve as survival strategies during periods of unfavourable growth conditions such as nutrient depletion and low light and temperature levels ( Historically the majority of research has focussed on dinoflagellates cysts and throughout this paper the term ‘cyst’ will refer to a dinoflagellate resting cyst. It is widely acknowledged that the presence of cysts within the sediment play a fundamental role in bloom dynamics by creating ‘seed banks’. These seed banks can contribute to vegetative phytoplankton communities by providing an inoculum for future blooms ( Resting dinoflagellate cysts go through a mandatory period of dormancy during which time they are incapable of germination, even upon favourable conditions. This dormancy period is highly variable, being species-specific and can range from 12 Previous literature has addressed the importance of cyst resuspension when investigating phytoplankton bloom dynamics and the environmental conditions through which this can occur ( The ocean is a natural resource of major socio-economic importance. It is used for fishing, transportation, recreation, mineral extraction, oil drilling and more recently renewable energies. While many of the activities associated with exploiting the ocean resource do not effect the seabed, it has been shown that some, particularly, fishing with towed demersal gears and dredging to extract sand and gravel can significantly impact the benthic ecosystem ( In Scotland, demersal towed fishing gears are responsible for over 50% (by value) of the fish landed. A recent study by Here, in a related series of observations we investigate how towed demersal fishing gears affect the resuspension of phytoplankton cysts within sediments in the Moray Firth, northeast Scotland. We report on studies to quantify the cyst densities within sediment plumes behind four different fishing gear components in contact with the seabed and examine if the impact is consistent between areas with different sediment types. Experimental trials were carried out by the RV Clupea in three areas within the Moray Firth ( To investigate the benthic impact of towed demersal gears, a benthic sledge ( The chain section was made from long link, grade 80 alloy steel fishing chain, was 1.4 Five or six replicate 10 To illustrate the abundance and composition of phytoplankton cysts that are present in these areas for comparative measures, sediment core samples were collected at Burghead and Nairn. It was not possible to collect core samples at Dornoch as the corer was unable to penetrate the firmer, harder sediment at this site. To investigate depth distribution of cysts in the sediment, the core samples were sectioned at three different depths: 0–2 The same preparation and analysis methods were used for both the gear and core samples. Each plankton net was removed from its bottle and the sediment homogenised by thorough mixing by hand within the net. Two 0.5 The mass of sediment suspended per unit of swept area differed with gear component and with sampling site ( Dinoflagellate cysts were observed in all plume and core samples. A high diversity was observed in all three areas and the variety of genera and species in each area was very similar ( Cyst assemblages in the plumes behind the gear components were dominated by Peridiniales, Gonyaulacales and unidentified ‘round brown’ cyst types which were present in all sediments by all tow types ( Burghead core samples ( No obvious pattern in total cyst numbers was apparent in the depth sections investigated in either sampling area. The total numbers in the Burghead cores increased slightly with depth; 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 Maximum and minimum cyst concentrations in the sediment plumes followed the same pattern in the three study sites. Tows by the chain, suspended the greatest concentrations per gram sediment, while the least concentrated sediments were suspended by the door tows. Both maximum (1.7 The number of cysts per unit swept area resuspended in the plume can be calculated by multiplying the cyst concentration per gram of sediment (  Cyst assemblages from the gear trials samples were similar to those from the sediment core samples. Assemblages recorded from this study reflect the diversity of phytoplankton species in the area. The dinoflagellate composition observed over the last ten years has commonly included genera such as Sediment type also influences the cyst concentrations observed at the sites with greater cysts concentrations observed in the finer and muddier Burghead sediment. Previous studies by The concentration of cysts per gram of suspended sediment was highest in the plume of the chain and lowest in that of the door. And for each gear component, except for the chain section, it was highest on the finer Burghead sediment and lowest on the coarser Dornoch sediment ( The cyst concentration behind the trawl door was also highest on the finer sediment and lowest on the coarser one, however, the values were smaller than the corresponding core sample measurements. Here it seems that the turbulence and shear stresses are such that a greater proportion of the finer sediment is remobilised, which in effect dilutes the concentration (per gram of sediment) of the larger cysts which may not have been remobilised to the same extent. Contrastingly, the concentration of cysts in the wake of the chain is greatest on the coarser sediment and lowest on the finer one. Moreover, they are greater than the concentration found in the core samples. The hydrodynamic drag of the chain is relatively low compared to the other gear elements and, accordingly, so are shear stresses in the corresponding wake. Hence the larger particles are less likely to be mobilised, which will result in the relative concentration of cysts per gram of sediment in the plume being greater than that in the undisturbed sediment. This effect will be more pronounced for coarser sediments and less so for the finer ones that have a large fraction of sediment smaller than the cysts. The variation in cyst concentration combined with the variation in mass of sediment mobilised ( These results demonstrate that to develop fishing gears of reduced environmental impact it is necessary to focus at the scale of the individual gear components and have an understanding of both the strength and nature of the turbulent flow of their wakes. Previous studies have highlighted the importance of resuspension events for the excystment of dinoflagellate resting stages into motile cells. Without disturbance of the sediment, cysts may be unlikely to become sufficiently dislodged to allow hatching to take place ( In addition sediment mobilisation by ground gears may promote favourable hatching conditions for cysts discharged from ships ballast tanks. If trawling activity occurs in areas where there have been ballast discards (e.g. dump sites for deposition of harbour dredge material) resuspension of dinoflagellate cysts may create more favourable conditions that would promote cyst hatching. Analysis of core samples over time and comparisons with phytoplankton time series from the same areas could be used to monitor such a risk. This is the first study to demonstrate that towing demersal fishing gears results in the resuspension of large numbers of dinoflagellate cysts from the bottom sediments of Scottish waters. We have shown that the number of cysts resuspended and their concentration (per gram of remobilised sediment) depends both on the specific gear element in contact with seabed and the sediment over which it is towed. We have discussed the potential implications that towed demersal gear may have on cysts such as providing instant inoculums for future harmful algal blooms, redistribution and formation of new cyst beds and the possibility of introductions of non-native cysts.