Test work was conducted to define the possibilities and limitations of a near-infrared (NIR) sensor to distinguish between Cu grades of 150 porphyry Cu ore samples. NIR spectroscopy allowed determination of NIR active minerals. At porphyry systems, NIR active minerals are usually alteration minerals that are produced by a specific type of hydrothermal alteration.
                  None of the Cu-bearing minerals that were determined from the sample set by petrography produced diagnostic absorptions in the NIR. Because of this, no spectral features were present in the measured NIR spectra of the ore samples that relate directly to the Cu grade.
                  An indirect relation was present between the Cu grade and the NIR active mineralogy that was determined from the NIR response of the samples. This indirect relation was based on sample groups with different NIR active mineral assemblages that represented different zones of hydrothermal alteration and constituted different ranges of Cu grades.
                  From a logistic regression resulted that based on the NIR response, it was possible to reliably estimate a probability that the Cu grade of a sample is below the cut-off grade for economic processing of the ore. The predictors used in this regression were several characteristic spectral features of the NIR active mineralogy.Automated sensor based sorting is an established technology with applications in various processing operations. It is for example widely used within the food, pharmaceutical and recycling industry. Within the mining industry however, sensor based sorting is still an emerging technology with only a limited number of proven applications (e.g., Sensor based sorting represents all applications where singular particles are individually analysed and mechanically separated on certain physical properties after determining these properties by a sensor. The main potential advantage of this technology for the mining industry is that it can be applied on relatively coarse particles. This allows sensor based sorting to be incorporated as a pre-concentration step in ore processing operations in order to eliminate waste or sub-economic material prior to the conventional concentrating methods. The goal is to reduce the amount of mineral liberation processes that are required for the production of ore concentrates. Because mineral liberation processes by milling are generally expensive, pre-concentrating the ore with sensor based sorting has great potential to decrease ore processing costs ( Pre-concentrating porphyry Cu ores with sensor based sorting will be aimed at eliminating ore particles with Cu grades that are below the cut-off grade for profitable ore processing. However, no sensor is currently known that allows direct detection of the Cu content of this ore type. Ore mineralisation at porphyry systems is usually related to certain hydrothermal alteration zones ( Porphyry ore systems can be defined as large volumes of hydrothermally altered rock centred on a porphyry stock intrusion ( From The distribution of hydrothermal alteration zones at porphyry systems can also be affected by superimposed breccia and/or diatreme intrusions ( To assess the capabilities of a NIR sensor to distinguish between Cu grades of porphyry ore material, test work was conducted on 150 porphyry Cu ore samples. These samples are around 5–7 The test work included several NIR reflectance measurements on each ore sample, taken with an ASD Fieldspec3 portable spectroradiometer. The acquired NIR reflectance spectra were analysed for characteristic mineral absorptions by comparison to reference spectra from the USGS spectral library by Prior to the test work, all the samples were cut in halves. This provided a smooth, uncontaminated surface on which the NIR reflectance measurements were performed. Cutting the samples also allowed one half of each sample to be used for X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and/or petrographic analysis. This provided data on the mineralogy and chemical composition of the samples that was used to validate the determined NIR active mineralogy and assess the relations between NIR response and Cu grade. The thin sections used in the petrographic analysis were taken from the cut surface of the samples, so that each thin section represents the surface that is measured by NIR spectroscopy as much as possible. The XRD and XRF analyses were both based on the bulk of half a sample. Unfortunately, these do not necessarily relate to the surface that is measured with NIR spectroscopy. However, the XRD analysis allowed determination of only the minerals that are most dominantly present in a sample (2–5 The fact that the NIR reflectance measurements on a sample do not necessarily relate to the bulk composition determined by XRF was not considered a problem. This is because if sensor based sorting with NIR sensors is applied in practice, it will be required to predict a bulk grade from surface measurements. Relating the bulk grade of ore particles to surface information is therefore one of the challenges that are faced when using NIR spectroscopy for ore sorting purposes. NIR spectroscopy permits characterisation of differences in composition and crystallinity for certain species of white mica (e.g., The main NIR spectral difference between muscovite and illite is the depth of an absorption around 1900 Multivariate logistic regression is a technique that is similar to linear regression, but handles outcome variables that are binary or dichotomous ( The multivariate logistic regression model is described by Eq. Multivariate logistic regression modelling was applied to estimate a probability that the Cu grade of a sample is below or above a certain economic cut-off grade. Only 2/3 of the sample set with XRF information was used for calibration of the logistic regression model, to allow validation of the results. Selection of calibration and validation subsets was random, but based on an optical classification. This was to ensure that the variability of the subsets resembled the variability of the entire sample set. A set of calculated spectral features from the measured NIR reflectance spectra were used as predictor variables in the logistic regression. Selection of these spectral features was based on the characteristic absorptions of the determined NIR active mineralogy. The significance of the predictor variables for logistic regression modelling was tested by calculating two types of Matlab R2011b statistics toolbox was used to perform the logistic regression. The logistic regression function within this toolbox uses the maximum likelihood method for determination of the regression coefficients. Several spectral features of characteristic mineral absorptions were calculated from the measured NIR reflection spectra. The aim was to use these spectral features as predictors in the multivariate logistic regression. Prior to the spectral feature calculations, each spectrum was normalised to average reflection 1. This corrects for albedo differences and allows comparison of absolute absorption depths between different samples. By using the 1st and 2nd order derivatives of the normalised NIR spectra, the minimum location and depth of the most dominant mineral absorptions were calculated. Also the minimum and maximum of the first derivative on respectively an inclining and declining slope of a dominant mineral absorption were calculated. This represents the sharpness of the absorption and/or the impact of superimposed secondary mineral absorptions that result in shoulder shapes or shallow absorption minima. Additionally, the impact of ferrous ion absorption was quantified by calculating the reflection difference between 1450 and 1850 White mica is the dominant NIR active mineral in almost all measured NIR reflectance spectra. The presence of white mica was validated for all samples analysed by XRD or petrography. White mica species determined by NIR spectroscopy range from muscovite to illite. As explained previously, NIR spectroscopy can discriminate between these minerals based on the NIR crystallinity. The spectral analysis showed that the different NIR crystallinities of white mica do not constitute discrete groups, but range from typical muscovite NIR crystallinity to typical illite NIR crystallinity. Muscovite and illite are not officially defined by their crystallinity and a general boundary value on the NIR crystallinity between these minerals is not available. As a result, it was not possible to reliably distinguish between higher NIR crystalline illite and lower NIR crystalline muscovite. It was therefore considered more appropriate to refer to the different white mica species as either high NIR crystalline white mica (hc-mica) or low NIR crystalline white mica (lc-mica).  Petrography showed that the white mica resulted from hydrothermal alteration of pre-existing feldspars. It also showed that a difference is present in the extent of feldspar alteration between samples on which a high and a low NIR crystallinity for white mica was determined. If hc-mica was determined from the NIR spectra on a sample, all feldspars are (almost) completely converted to white mica/sericite. When lc-mica was determined, significant remnants of the feldspars are still present. It was interpreted that this is caused by the fact that the formation of lower crystalline white mica is generally associated with a lower temperature, argillic type of hydrothermal alteration, while the formation of higher crystalline white mica is generally associated with a higher temperature, phyllic type of alteration ( Absorptions by chlorite, tourmaline and/or kaolinite were also determined from the measured NIR reflection spectra. These minerals mainly occur as a secondary NIR active mineral, inflicting absorption features that are superimposed on the white mica spectrum. At several NIR spectra the chlorite or tourmaline absorptions can also be considered dominant. White mica absorptions are still present in this case. Measured NIR reflectance spectra indicating chlorite, tourmaline and kaolinite are presented in The absorption by chlorite that is indicated in Spectrum 3 in The presence of chlorite or tourmaline was validated for all samples analysed by XRD or petrography. The presence of kaolinite however could not be validated for any sample. This was already expected since kaolinite showed only very weak absorptions in the NIR spectra, indicating relatively low proportions in respect to the white mica. Regarding the chlorite, petrography showed that this mineral is a product of biotite alteration and at several samples remnants of biotite are still present. Biotite is also a NIR active mineral that produces absorptions which are very similar to those of chlorite ( The following Cu-bearing minerals were determined from the sample set by petrography: chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite, digenite and bornite. All these minerals are copper sulphides that do not produce any diagnostic absorption feature in the NIR (e.g. A limitation of petrography is that the thin section on which it is performed does not necessarily represent an entire sample. It is therefore not possible to exclude the presence of any other Cu-bearing minerals. However, the used thin sections were taken from the cut surface of the samples and represent the surface measured by NIR spectroscopy. The samples selected for petrography furthermore covered all variability between the determined NIR active mineral assemblages. The absence of any indication of minerals in petrography therefore strongly suggests that any possible occurrence must be in insignificant proportions to have an impact on the measured NIR spectra. It can therefore be assumed that not a single absorption feature is present in the NIR spectra of the samples that relates directly to the Cu grade. This was verified by a partial least squares regression (PLSR) on the NIR responses and Cu grades. The PLSR is further discussed later in this paper. The ore samples were classified based on the NIR active mineralogy. This demonstrated that a relation is present between the NIR active mineralogy and Cu grades of the ore samples. Since the NIR active mineralogy did not include any Cu-bearing minerals, this is an indirect relation. It is based on differences in the Cu grade distribution of sample groups with different NIR active mineral assemblages. A group of 44 samples is distinguished if the sample set is constrained to samples with NIR spectra that represent lc-mica (2200/1900 A logistic regression was applied to estimate a probability that the Cu grade of a sample is below an assumed economic cut-off grade of 0.4% Cu. The aim was to investigate additional possibilities to discriminate on invaluable ore samples, in order to improve the results from classification on the NIR active mineralogy. A set of calculated NIR spectral features was used as predictor variables for the logistic regression. These spectral features are related to the characteristic absorptions of the determined NIR active mineralogy. In the first logistic regression attempt, all samples were classified as waste or ore, based on an economic cut-off grade of 0.4% Cu. The predictors used in this logistic regression with their corresponding The dots in  In order to improve the results of the 1st logistic regression, a second logistic regression was performed where only the Waste 1 samples were defined as waste for calibration of the model. The Waste 2 samples were combined with the Ore 2 group and defined as ore for model calibration. This is because the 1st logistic regression showed that the Waste 2 samples cannot be distinguished from any of the ore samples. This does mean that for calibration of the 2nd logistic regression model, the samples defined as ore include samples with Cu grades below cut-off grade. The predictors used in the 2nd logistic regression with corresponding By comparing It can be observed from During the test work the NIR sensor was tested without sensor based sorting equipment. Evaluation of sensor based sorting solutions is therefore only based on the discrimination capabilities of the NIR sensor. The results of the 2nd logistic regression model ( The costs for processing ore material with sensor based sorting equipment are generally lower than with the conventional methods ( The best sensor based sorting solution results when a significant amount of material can be discarded at the highest possible material loss/valuable metal loss ratio. However, it was not possible to calculate this ratio for the test work results. This is because the highest material loss/Cu loss ratio results for the lowest average Cu grade (0.81–0.94 waste probability) and compared to Petrographic analysis showed that the white mica species that were determined from the NIR spectra of all samples are a product of hydrothermal alteration of feldspars. As described by None of the Cu-bearing minerals that were determined by petrography produce diagnostic absorptions in the NIR (e.g. A relation between the NIR response and Cu grades of the 150 ore samples was found. This is based on the NIR active mineralogy that was determined from the measured NIR reflectance spectra. Since the NIR active mineralogy did not include any Cu-bearing minerals, the found relationship is indirect. It can be explained by the fact that the different NIR active mineral assemblages represent different zones of hydrothermal alteration that likely constitute different ranges of Cu grades throughout the porphyry system. This relation to different ranges of Cu grades was observed in the sample set. All ore samples that show absorptions by low NIR crystalline white mica and chlorite in the NIR spectra, have relatively low Cu grades. The difference between these samples and ore samples with higher Cu grades is that all higher grade samples either lack intense chlorite absorptions or show high NIR crystalline white mica in the NIR spectra. Additionally, absorptions by tourmaline and kaolinite were occasionally determined from the NIR spectra of the higher grade ore samples. A partial least squares regression (PLSR) was performed on the Cu grades and the NIR responses of the ore samples. PLSR is a standard tool in chemometrics and has proven usefulness in sensor evaluation ( Multivariate logistic regression showed that the only sorting possibility with a NIR sensor on the set of 150 ore samples is to exclude low grade samples that contain low NIR crystalline white mica and chlorite as the dominant NIR active mineralogy. A logistic regression that was aimed at discriminating samples with this dominant NIR active mineralogy and Cu grades below an economic cut-off grade of 0.4% Cu, showed satisfying results (2nd logistic regression, Based on the set of 150 ore samples, a relation was found between the hydrothermal alteration mineral assemblages and Cu grade of the ore samples. If this relation persists throughout the entire ore deposit, it means that certain hydrothermal alteration minerals can be used as indirect indicators for ore sorting purposes. However, the test work results are based on only 150 ore samples that are randomly collected from a mine’s processing operations. It is therefore unknown to what extent these results are representative for the entire deposit. It can be expected that the results are not fully representative because the samples originate from the oversize output of a SAG mill that generally represents the harder portion of the ore feeding the processing plant. Furthermore, all samples were collected at one moment in time and it is therefore likely that they mainly represent the portion of the deposit that was being mined at the time. The test work results do show that there is great potential for predicting Cu contents of porphyry ore material with a NIR sensor in combination with statistical analysis of the spectra. Regarding the application of NIR sensors on actual sensor based sorter equipment, there are some limitations to this technology. First of all, NIR spectroscopy is a surface technique. This means that the surfaces of the particles that are sorted need to be free of contaminations such as dust. For the test work, the samples were cut in halves to provide a clean surface. But a comparison of the NIR sensor responses between the cut surface and the outer surfaces of the samples was left out of scope. In practice, surface contaminations on the ore particles can be removed by washing or dedusting prior to sensor based sorting. However, it is unknown if this is needed for the samples used in the test work. Another limitation of NIR spectroscopy is that the presence of free water results in intense water absorptions in the NIR reflectance spectra. And these water absorptions can influence the determinations of the NIR active mineralogy. For example, it resulted from the test work that the NIR crystallinity of white mica is an important parameter for classification of the samples. And determination of the white mica NIR crystallinity is based on the water absorption around 1900 Finally, sensor based sorters operate with a certain sorting efficiency due to possible misclassification of particles. It is unknown what this sorting efficiency will be on the material used in the test work. This will depend on the characteristics of the sorter and is influenced by the distinctiveness between the NIR sensor responses of ore and waste and the variability of the particles that are sorted. Based on the test work the following conclusions can be drawn for the 150 samples: NIR spectroscopy in general is an excellent tool to distinguish between different assemblages of hydrothermal alteration minerals of ore samples collected from a porphyry Cu system. No Cu-bearing minerals could be determined with NIR spectroscopy. An indirect relation is present between the Cu grade and the NIR active mineralogy that can be determined from the NIR response of the samples. This indirect relation is based on sample groups with different NIR active mineral assemblages that represent different zones of hydrothermal alteration and constitute different ranges of Cu grades. Discriminating on Cu grade from the NIR response of samples is possible by distinguishing certain NIR active mineral assemblages that represent relatively low Cu grades. The best Cu grade discrimination based on the NIR response is provided by a logistic regression model that uses calculated spectral features of the NIR active mineralogy as predictors. The white mica NIR crystallinity and relative contents of chlorite, tourmaline and ferrous ions allowed identification of sub-economic ore samples. If sensor based sorting can be applied with the results from the test work, there is potential that such an application can have economic benefits. Uncertainties to this conclusion are: Representation of the test work results for the entire ore deposit. Degree of surface contamination of the ore particles feeding the sorter. Influence of water on the discrimination capabilities of the NIR sensor. Sorting efficiency of sensor based sorting equipment. More research is required with spatially constrained samples that cover the geological and mineralogical variability of the deposit. Additionally, a geological model of the deposit is required that includes information on the overprinting relationships by multiple hydrothermal alteration events to correctly understand the relations between hydrothermal alteration and Cu mineralisation for the entire porphyry system. As explained in Section For future research on the applicability of NIR spectroscopy for characterisation of porphyry Cu ores, it is recommended to use drill core samples. The collection of drill core is usually already aimed at characterising all geological and mineralogical variation of the deposit. Based on the drillhole data, it is then possible to create spatially constrained orebody models that include sensor responses. From such orebody models, it might be possible to develop sensor based sorting solutions, even when no general relation between the hydrothermal alteration mineralogy and Cu grade is present. If a relation is valid for certain sections of the deposit, a combination of selective mining and sensor based sorting can still have economic benefits. The manuscript was significantly improved by the careful reviews of two anonymous reviewers. We thank them for their comments and suggestions.