The size-energy relationships in comminution are useful models that relate the energy requirements of a process to the changes in size of the particles. In the generalized theory, the energy is a function of powers of the initial and of the final size. Because of the form of the generalized size-energy relationship, it is possible to relate it to published results. Consequently, it is demonstrated that existing results can be used to determine a general expression for the exponent. Moreover, agreement with existing models is observed. Finally, a discussion of topics of further investigation is presented.Processing ore requires a significant amount of energy. A large proportion is consumed by comminution—the progressive reduction in size of the ore which encompasses crushing and grinding—as shown in Because of its large energy footprint, the ability to determine how much energy is required to break the particles is of interest as it permits design evaluations, efficiency assessment, etc. ( Subsequent efforts have generalized the theories as ( It is proposed that there is sufficient data in the literature to produce an expression for the exponent as a function of size. Additionally, it is possible to construct a size-energy relationship that is consistent with the existing theories and observations. The generalized size-energy relationship The logarithm of this expression is written as If a larger error can be tolerated or if the size reduction is large, it can be truncated to Therefore, it is possible to glean the exponent from the specific energy and the product size—the signature plot is an example of the type of data required. In addition, there are several published exponents determined using a number of disparate techniques that can be added to the results. Either directly or with the use of Eq. The function that best fits the data is From the expressions of the exponent and by following Hukki’s prescription, it is possible to construct a specific energy Without loss of generality, a scale The first observation is that the size-energy relationship generated by the power model is strictly monotonically decreasing, which is thermodynamically necessary—one cannot break particles and gain energy! The derivative of the specific energy, as given by Eq. Finally, the data collected here has large variations. Much more independent data—several hundred more measurements—would likely improve the goodness of fit. The exponent and the specific energy can be compared to existing models. What is sought is agreement between the existing models and the model proposed here. When comparing the Bond, Rittinger and Kick models to the data and the model, it is observed that these models agree with both the exponent and the specific energy, as shown in When comparing the Finally, Valery ( The specific energy at Since the specific energy is Thus, at a specific feed and product size, the power required to break the ore is The less efficient the process, the greater the power required; the higher the throughput, the greater the power required, etc. It is noted that this expression underlines the fact that the specific energy consumed by a step is the difference between the product and feed values of Eq. If the power draw, the throughput—or alternatively the specific energy consumed, the feed size, and the product size are known, Eq. The goodness of fit of each of the models is found in Below 20 μm, the exponent data spreads significantly, as seen in The model parameter The two regimes described above may be the different facets of the same physical mechanism. It is understood that defects play an important role in defining the properties of a material ( The divergence of the exponent and the specific energy is observed elsewhere. A well-behaved material undergoing a comminutive process is expected to decrease in size as energy is applied to the material. A strong divergence from this behavior is an indication that the standard theory no longer holds. Both behaviors are observed in The grinding limit described above has many causes, some being the limitation of the machine, others being material properties. However, when the particles become mono-crystalline and no longer retain any defects when more energy is applied to the material, a true grinding limit is reached ( The grinding limit appears to be 30 nm for quartz; for silica and carbonate, 50 nm; for tin dioxide, 10 nm; and for zirconia, 5 nm ( The relationship between the exponent and the size of the particle constrains the slope of the signature plots by virtue of Eq. The Hukki relationship is an accepted description of the relationship between the particle size and the specific energy. However, it does not provide any details regarding the exponent, but, by its nature, there are some consequences. First, for thermodynamic reasons, the size-energy relationship must be monotonically decreasing. Second, the exponent must be consistent with other size-energy analyses. For example, the signature plot slopes must be in keeping with the exponent, and the exponent must give accurate results when used in the calculation of the specific energy. Finally, there must be data supporting the model. Unlike the other models, which only partially fulfil these requirements, the model presented here does address them. However, some work remains. There is a need for more data with the objective of further refining the exponent model, assuming that this will help reduce some of the inherent noise. Presently, there is no clear explanation why the exponents take the values described here and why some materials keep close to the Hukki form, while others don’t. Some fundamental research into the nature of breakage and defects may address this. Finally, there is a need to ensure that all aspects of comminution are consistent and coherent—signature plots should agree with a broader well-established theory like Hukki as they are derived from it.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to thank Metso for granting permission to publish this work, the associated data and the results. From the literature, it is possible to obtain size and exponent values from experimental results. The values are collected in From the literature, size and energy data can be found, as seen in