There is increasing demand to optimise yield and increase capacity of crushing plants. Research in this area has resulted in the development of numerous optimisation tools, and recent research has shown that the quality aspects of production have great influence on the optimisation results. The quality and capacity of a product is influenced by several parameters, and in order to control all of these parameters it is necessary to use some sort of optimisation software.
                  In this paper, a novel approach to analyse the parameters product capacity and quality is presented. As an example a cone crusher and a vertical shaft impact crusher (VSI) is simulated in a tertiary stage. The simulation shows how capacity and product quality for a range of products will be affected when a parameter is changed. The paper also shows how wear will affect product capacity and quality.The goal of crushing plants is the optimised production of certain sized rock fractions, and, in some cases, the achievement of a certain level of product quality. In order to control the yield and quality of the product, it is necessary to use a set of several different crushers whose main purpose is to reduce the rock size to the wanted dimensions but have different impact on the quality. The operator must consider both machine and process parameters when controlling the plant. Some parameters influence the outcome to a great extent, while some parameters have a lesser effect on the outcome. The operator of the crushing plant can vary the crusher settings to achieve a certain product quality. The most common change is in the closed side setting (CSS), which enables the production of rock products in the desired size range. Machine parameters, such as stroke or speed, are rarely changed on a daily basis due to the fact that changing them is a time consuming process. These parameters are set when the crusher is initially put into commission in the crushing plant. Material characteristics also influence the quality of the product, and include parameters such as feed size and distribution, which may be controllable. It is therefore suggested that a schematic protocol to be created for the dominant parameters that influence the product quality. This protocol would allow the operator of the plant to tune the process so that a desired product quality can be achieved. The problem with optimisation models that focus on size and shape is that there are few available models that can simulate how the crushing plant should be controlled in order to optimise certain product parameters. In addition, even if there are models available, it is unlikely that process operators or plant managers are using these tools to tune the plant. This paper aims to show how process simulations can be used in a crushing plant in order to optimise yield and product quality for a wide range of aggregate sizes. Simulations and optimisation results are verified with measured data from a crushing plant. In this paper, a novel method of simulating a crushing plants performance will be presented. This optimisation considers both the economic and technical aspects of the crushing plant. However in this paper the simulation will focus on predicting capacity and product quality. This paper describes the benefits of using crusher models for prediction of size and shape of products from a crushing plant which has its origin from the work by The crusher models used have the capability to simulate product size distribution, particle shape and capacity. The cone crusher model used in this simulation is a black box model based on manufacture data from Sandvik. The manufacture data used to calibrate the black box model is particle size and capacity. The particle shape model used is from ( The particle shape model shown in It can however be interesting to know how the stroke will affect the product quality when varied. In The capacity through the VSI is limited by the maximum power of the motor. In the work by The products from the second set of screens have a variable split back to the VSI crusher this type of configuration is used when there is a need to produce products suitable for concrete production. These products have the common denominator that the particle shape is very good, that is particles are round and spherical which is beneficial for e.g. flow ability in wet concrete. There is however often so that fraction sizes below 2 The process is composed of two crushers and three screens. The final production stage in a quarry can have additional configurations of crushers and screens. The presented layout is fed with a 0–60 The particle shapes for the 5–8 The VSI produces a well-shaped product for coarser fractions such as those compared in this example. It is common knowledge that a VSI crusher will have no difficulty in producing FI values less than 10% for fractions in the size range of 4–80 When increasing the separation size to 30 As mentioned before, the cone crusher produced the majority of the 16–32 The forth simulation shows the result when the separation is increased even further. The FI values for all the studied fractions are still affected by the CSS since 50+ The last simulation is when the separation size is 50 Since the majority of the 16–32 The particle shape for each produced fraction represents a combination of the particle shape generated by the crushers. The weighted average particle shape value is calculated with Eq. To fully understand the complexity of the ability of a process to produce a given number of products with a specified quality, it is necessary to isolate one product. In this section, the 16–32 In this section, an example of how wear in screen decks can affect process performance is shown. Screen 1 shown in The general description of the optimisation criteria for the suggest process must of course be so general so that the objective function can handle variants of the suggested process. The first objective is to maximise a desired product and the second objective is to maintain a given product quality. The objective function for a given product can be written as follows in Eq. There is also a need for constraints as well in order to set the boundaries for the objective function. As mentioned before the trade-off situation between capacity and quality need to be addressed. The constraints for The performance model must be setup for all products in the process in order to find a global optimum for the suggested process. The reason for this is to avoid sub optimal solutions, i.e. on product goal will be satisfied while others may not. In order to handle this there will be yet another trade-of between the various products in the process. This problem can be addressed in many ways but one way to solve this is to design a multi objective function that can incorporate all product objective functions by adding a penalty function on each objective function as shown in Eq. The crushing plant is a complex process, thus process control and optimisation is challenging. In order to fully understand how changes of process, machine and design parameters affect the output it is necessary to use simulation software. The change in one parameter will result in process variations that cannot be foreseen by observing the process layout. This work shows that wear will have tremendous affect on both capacity and quality of the product. Furthermore can be concluded that that optimisation of a wide range of products will result in a trade-of regarding yield and quality and therefore a multi object perspective must be defined in order to address this problem. Future work should focus on developing models that can handle transient phenomena’s. This is important when understanding how a crusher/screen behaves when process machine and design parameters vary due to real time optimal control. Furthermore must future work focus on validating the multi objective optimisation criteria’s defined in the paper. The authors thank Bengt-Olof Tjell at Sandvik Mining and Construction in Svedala for all his help with the laboratory tests. The personnel at Angereds Krossen are gratefully acknowledged for their help with conducting full scale tests. Plant manager Risto Corell and District Manager Magnus Niklasson are acknowledged for their dedication to these tests. Skanska Teknik and Sandvik Mining and Construction are also acknowledged for their financial support.