Laboratory bench-scale flotation test is generally used as a standard method to investigate effects of different flotation reagents on flotation performance. A comprehensive test program requires large amount of representative samples, takes long time and could be costly. Hence, developing alternative cost effective, fast and low cost methods have recently been in the subject of many research studies. Microflotation, induction time measurement, electrochemical methods, etc. have been used to measure adsorption of flotation reagents and derive a proxy to correlate with flotation behaviors of sulfide minerals. In this study, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) method was used to measure rate of collector adsorption on two different pyrite rich samples from flotation plants processing Carlin and Yanacocha Verde ores. Eight different types of collectors were selected based on their chemistry and applications in flotation operations. Adsorption of the collectors were also measured by using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) technique and correlated with EIS results. The results showed clearly that Carlin pyrite was more electrochemically reactive than Verde pyrite. Rate of adsorption of the collectors was related to coating resistance (Rc), which was calculated using an equivalent electrical circuit model fitted to the EIS data. Based on Rc values, order of adsorption of the collectors for Carlin and Verde samples were discussed. It is therefore shown that preliminary reagent selection for a specific ore can be done using EIS technique, which is considerably faster and low cost compared to the other techniques.Laboratory bench-scale flotation test methodology is generally used as a standard technique to assess ore flotability, i.e. effects of ore type, flotation reagents, chemical conditions, etc. Approximately 1–2 Alternative methods, such as microflotation, EMDEE Microflot ( Electrochemical techniques have been used to provide valuable information about surface reactivity of sulfide minerals and interaction between various flotation reagents and sulfide minerals. Open circuit potential (OCP) (also referred to as rest potential) measurement, steady-state polarization, voltammetry, galvanostatic polarization, chronoamperometry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy are the common methods used for this purpose ( Pyrite is found in almost all of the sulfide ore deposits as a major sulfide gangue mineral. In most flotation applications, depression of pyrite could be the most challenging part of flotation chemistry. But, in some ore deposits pyrite may contain precious metals, such as Au, Ag and PGE, in the form of association or inclusion, and becomes an economic mineral ( Pyrite is a semiconductor with variable electrochemical properties, which mainly depends on ore genesis, surface defects and also association with other sulfide minerals ( The electrochemical techniques require small amount of materials compared to bench-scale flotation tests. A large number of parameters can be tested in a relatively short time and at relatively low cost. For most of the sulfide minerals, a direct correlation between collector adsorption and electrochemical response could be observed ( In this study, use of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for measurement of collector adsorption was investigated by using two pyrite samples from different sources (Carlin and Yanacocha Verde). The samples were products of flotation plants and in the form of fine particle size material. Therefore, a novel mineral electrode fabrication method was employed to prepare the mineral electrodes ( Two pyrite samples, from Carlin and Yanacocha Verde provided by Newmont, were used in the tests. The samples were not fresh pure samples taken from the ore deposit but products of flotation plants. Carlin sample was taken from final pyrite concentrate and the Verde sample from pyrite scavenger concentrate. Chemical composition of the samples is given in Sulfide mineral content of a mineral sample should be as high as possible for electrode fabrication to obtain a high surface area and thus better electrochemical response. Pyrite content of Verde sample was 70% and suitable for mineral electrode fabrication. However, Carlin sample contained only 27% pyrite and was not adequate to get strong electrochemical response. Thus, it was upgraded to about 70% pyrite using dry electrostatic separation technique. Finally, the ratio of surface area of pyrite in both electrodes was increased to 30%, which is suitable for electrochemical experiments. As it was explained above, the samples used in this study were flotation concentrates. The surface of the particles were, therefore, coated with flotation reagent and most likely oxidized to some extent. In order to remove any oxidation products and organic species from the surface of the pyrite particles, both samples were washed first by diluted HCl and subsequently acetone, and then rinsed with distilled water. The washed samples were dried in a vacuum desiccator to prevent surface oxidation. The mineral electrode is composed of pyrite sample, graphite and a conductive binder (conductive polymer polyaniline) ( The electrochemical experiments were performed using a three electrode electrochemical cell and Gamry Reference 600 potentiostat/galvanostat. Faraday cage was used to eliminate the noise in the system. Specially designed three electrode electrochemical cell was used in the experiments. All electrochemical experiments were performed at pH The collectors were selected according to their chemical composition and use in flotation of gold containing pyrite ores. The list of collectors used in the experiments is given in Raman spectra of the two samples were taken in the presence and absence of collector using a Raman spectrometer (i-Raman 785, BwTek Inc.) with a 785 Electrochemical properties of the pyrite samples were briefly discussed based on the results of open circuit potential measurement and cyclic voltammetry experiments at pH Surface characteristics of Carlin and Verde pyrite samples are compared based on the results of cyclic voltammetry and EIS experiments. The cyclic voltammetry results given in Peak A In general, S In the reverse scan, the cathodic peaks (B The difference between surface characteristics of Carlin and Verde pyrite was also demonstrated by EIS measurements given in The difference between the two samples could be attributed to presence of arsenopyrite and arsenian pyrite in Carlin pyrite sample. Arsenic is known to oxidize faster than Fe and S ( Adsorption of thiol collectors on sulfide minerals occurs through electrochemical, chemical and also electrochemical-chemical (EC) mechanisms ( Results of EIS experiments of Carlin sample are given in the form of Bode-Magnitude and Bode-Phase Angle plots in In order to compare adsorption behaviour of the collectors quantitatively, the EIS spectrum of each collector was fitted to an equivalent electrical circuit model. After several attempts to fit the experimental impedance spectra to various models, the equivalent electrical circuit given in In the electrical circuit model, the charge transfer resistance R Adsorption behaviour of the collectors tested in this study was compared based on R EIS experiments in the presence of different types of collectors were also performed for Verde pyrite. The EIS results for Verde pyrite are illustrated in The results of model fitting exercise are given in Comparison of Carlin and Verde pyrite samples showed clearly that Carlin pyrite was less resistive and more capacitive than Verde pyrite ( Raman spectroscopy was performed to measure adsorption of the collectors on pyrite particles exposed at the mineral electrode surface after conditioning at 100 The Raman spectra clearly showed that collectors have different adsorption behaviour on mineral electrode surface due to the differences in their chemical structure. The significant Raman peaks showed that SIPX, Aero MX-3048, KAX and Aero 407 were the collectors adsorbed at surface of both pyrite samples. OCP and cyclic voltammetry results clearly showed that Carlin pyrite sample was more electrochemically reactive than Verde pyrite sample. This difference affected their rate of surface oxidation in aqueous solution and also interaction with flotation reagents, specifically with collectors ( Adsorption behaviour of different types of collectors selected based on their chemistry and application in flotation operations was investigated by EIS technique for both Carlin and Verde samples. Rate of adsorption of the collectors was related to coating resistance (Rc), which was calculated using an equivalent electrical circuit model fitted to EIS data. Based on Rc values, the order of adsorption of collectors for Carlin and Verde samples is; For both samples the fastest rate of adsorption was obtained with KAX. Some of the collectors showed different adsorption behaviour in different samples. This is due to the difference in chemical structure of the collectors which determines the adsorption mechanism and hence rate of adsorption on the mineral surface ( Comparison of Rc values, in other words rate of collector adsorption for Carlin and Verde pyrite samples is given in  Adsorption of collectors was also investigated by Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) under the same conditions applied in EIS experiments. Raman measurements can be considered qualitative, or at best semi-quantitative. Hence, adsorption of collectors on the mineral samples could be evaluated based on relative intensities of collector peaks given in Raman spectra clearly showed that collectors had different behaviors on mineral electrode surface due to their structure. Significant Raman peaks were observed during adsorption of SIPX, Aero MX-3048, KAX and Aero 407 collectors adsorbed for both mineral electrode surfaces. However, there was no intense peak indicating adsorption of Aero 7249 collector on the two mineral electrode surfaces, which was in conflict with EIS data ( The results of Raman experiments were almost completely in line with EIS results, except Aero7249. Although Aero7249 was shown to adsorb on both samples at moderate level, Raman measurements were unable to detect any collector adsorption. Further work should be done to understand the reason(s) of this difference. The difference between adsorption behaviors of Aero6697 on Carlin and Verde was also observed with Raman spectra. This was in line with EIS results. Aero6697 was considered to adsorb at higher rate on Carlin pyrite. Aero3418A adsorbed strongly on Verde pyrite than Carlin. This work shows that EIS technique can be used as a useful tool for testing adsorption of various types of collectors and derive a proxy which indicating rate of adsorption. The pyrite samples used in this work are obtained from bulk sulfide flotation process to maximize gold recovery. Hence, bulk sulfide flotation was considered both for collector selection and screening tests. Therefore, the same consept should be tested for selective flotation of sulfide minerals, which requires extensive testwork to determine optimum collector type. In this work, a new mineral electrode fabrication technique was used to prepare electrodes from fine particle size materials taken from products of flotation operations. This technique allows use of the same electrode for electrochemical experiments, mineralogical analysis and surface analysis by various techniques. Mineral electrodes were fabricated by using the material from Carlin mill concentrate and Yanacocha Verde mill scavenger concentrate. The results showed that Carlin pyrite sample had higher electrochemical reactivity than Verde sample. This difference in turn affected the rate of collector adsorption, particularly with dithiophosphate and thionocarbamate type of collectors. The rate and amount of collector adsorption was found to be higher for Carlin pyrite sample. Adsorption rate of the collectors was evaluated based on the coating layer resistance (Rc) calculated from the equivalent electrical circuit model of EIS data. The order of collector adsorption was found to be as follows; Raman spectroscopy, a direct surface analytical technique, was also used to measure adsorption of collectors and confirm the findings from EIS technique. The results showed that EIS and Raman results were in line for all of the collectors, except A7249 which is a formulated dithiophosphate/monothiophosphate collector. It was not possible to detect A7249 on pyrite surface by Raman measurements, although EIS results showed a high rate of adsorption for both samples. Further work is required to understand the reason of this unexpected behaviour better. Adsorption behaviour of A6697 (Dialkyl monothiophosphate) was also considered unusual, as it had the second highest adsorption rate for Carlin but the lowest for Verde sample. This was attributed to the difference in electrochemical reactivity between the two pyrite samples and also the adsorption mechanism of A6697. It was considered that adsorption of A6697 was strongly influenced by electrochemical properties of the mineral and high rate of adsorption was observed with minerals with higher electrochemical reactivity. This work showed that EIS with the new mineral electrode fabrication technique can be used as a low cost and fast analytical technique to investigate adsorption behaviour of various types of collectors. Correlation of the EIS data with bench-scale flotation tests should be considered for future test works. This work was supported by Newmont Mining Co.