The Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) is one of the fastest growing residual materials as a result of huge production of the Electrical and Electronic Equipment (EEE), its market expansion and technological progress in its conception. The complex compositions of WEEE (precious, strategic and rare elements, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, plastics, hazardous substances…) and its often miniature design lead to the technical and environmental difficulties to propose an efficient and viable flow-sheet for WEEE treatment and for the recovery process.
                  In this context, this study deals with delivering a predictive simulation tool (simulator) for the WEEE physical treatment (size reduction and sorting) useful for coherent matter balance calculation. Calculated material flows are then available for further environmental assessment.
                  The simulator approach is based on combining the flow-sheets, the phase model, the mathematical models and a set of algorithms to get a representation of a given situation in terms of material flows circulating between processes. Data optimization and assessment of the simulator output led to the establishment of an enhanced and innovative process for the WEEE processing.
                  Further, this study provides a methodology to assess the impact of the implementation of a WEEE recycling technology that takes into account economic, social and environmental consequences. Results linked to the chosen examples for aluminum and ABS plastic recycling from WEEE by the established process and their use instead of virgin products showed an important profit for these recycled materials from economic and environmental points of view. In this paper, a developed REWARD process was simulated by using a tool based on the USIMPAC™ software architecture.The worldwide production of Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) is estimated to about 20–50 WEEE contains a large amount of different engineering plastics that need further separation to produce high added value plastics. WEEE also contains large quantities of recoverable metals such as steel, stainless steel, brass, Al, Zn, precious metals (Au and Ag), platinum group metals (Pt, Pd, Rh, Ir, Os, Ru) and rare earth metals (Sm, Eu, Y, Gd and Dy), which are currently hardly recycled ( The literature review revealed that a good number of investigations are recently devoted to correlating the composition complexity, material design and typology of residual streams with the efficiencies of the physical and metallurgical recyclability based on simulation and modeling developments. The work performed by A dynamic-model-based analysis established by This paper will present some results of simulation of the innovative processing of WEEE taking into account the environmental aspects. In order to develop and implement both environmentally friendly and economically viable recycling processes, in-depth characterization of this specific material stream, oriented towards mechanical separation amenability, is imperative. It has been proved that it is worthwhile to recycle electronic scrap in spite of the fact that the content of precious metals (Au, Ag, Pd) steadily decreases. It is realized, though, that conventional recycling techniques which are oriented towards precious metal recovery is being faced with challenges in terms of the economic reward. Alternatively, a full material recovery involving ferromagnetic, nonferrous metals, precious metals and non-metallic, through mechanical separation, may be applicable both economically and technically. The WEEE sample taken from the Smasher process shown in The results obtained show that more than 60% of the WEEE sample is larger than 20 In the industrial production field, a simulator is basically aimed at helping process engineers and scientists to model plant operation with available experimental data and to determine optimal treatment configurations that meet production targets. The simulator can also assist plant designers with sizing unit operations required to achieve given circuit objectives. The objectives of WEEE management including treatment are: To turn waste into new secondary resources, To minimize cost of WEEE treatment and management, To minimize social and environmental impact/disturbances. A simulator basically allows getting a representation of a given situation in terms of matter and energy “flows” circulating between “processes”. By changing some key parameters of the system (either in input flows or in processes), it calculates the new material and energy balances. The simulator combines the following elements: The flow-sheet describes the system in terms of successive unit operations and material streams. This flow-sheet can reflect various scenarios so they can be compared against given criteria. It takes into account numerous system features to describe the physical and functional elements. The phase model describes the materials handled by the system (raw waste, products, reagents, water, etc.) so that unit operations and plant performance can be evaluated. The phase description is critical for analyzing and optimizing the system. Mathematical models for each unit operation formalize the current scientific knowledge about unit operation, and its level of complexity depends on the data available and the targeted objectives (flow-sheeting, unit operation sizing, optimization). A set of algorithms for data reconciliation, model calibration, unit operation sizing, full material balance calculation, power consumption and costs calculation are also available in the simulation tool. The innovative process (INP) flow-sheet was designed as an optimized mix between processes of IMMARK-France, RECYDEL-Belgium and PHB-Netherlands treatment schemes ( In the IMMARK process (France) SME which was closed a few years ago, the mixture of electric and electronic small equipment is depolluted manually before the shredding process. The depolluted product is shredded in the smasher. The generated product is classified at 50 The plastic recycling process (PHB, Netherlands) is designed to recover the type of plastics and copper. The products generated from the RECYDEL process is treated in the PHB process by water table to recover copper, and by using different densities, the type of plastics (PE/PP, PS and ABS) is recovered. The proposed treatment flow-sheet ( manual dismantling of certain WEEE categories (ROHs), smart size reduction of WEEEs, size classification (40, 20, 10 eddy-current separation of the remaining non-magnetic fraction to recover non-ferrous metals (Cu, Al mainly), metal sensor sorting to separate non-ferrous metals, plastic detection on the non-metal stream to separate plastics from other materials (glass and wood mainly), shredding of plastics followed by color sensor sorting (separation of black plastics from the white/colored plastic stream), sink float separation to separate various types of plastics such as ABS/PC/PS/PVC, X-ray sorting to separate brominated plastics from non-brominated ones. The INP flow-sheet has then been developed under the USIMPAC™ software architecture which is given in To perform numerical simulation of the different unit operations, it is necessary to give a description of matter. This is done through the phase model (see The stream of WEEE to be treated is described in terms of size classes. Note that 4 size classes are defined > Each size class is described in terms of WEEE categories. Among them, 6 categories are considered in the model (ROHS Each WEEE category is also described in terms of chemical element (for metals) or type of plastics (for non-black plastics). The output flows per main stream and category are given in The previous results are simulation results based on simple mathematical models to represent the separation efficiency of each unit operation. More complex models should be used to provide a predictive simulator. However, these complex models need to be calibrated on larger data sets and need redundant data to check the coherence of the matter balance. This work should be carried out in future work. For an input of WEEE of 1000 Based on the amounts of the recovered materials, the associated sales costs in the recycling channels can be calculated and they are given in The technology developed in the REWARD process would replace the existing IMMARK process treating 3500 Fe Al Non-brominated black plastics PS PE/PP ABS ABS Other plastics Only downstream effects are considered in the study. The basic idea of the methodology is to compare the new expenditure to economic, social and environmental consequences and, eventually, to give a monetary value to all these effects. In the proposed methodology, environmental assessment is limited to greenhouse gas emissions consequences. The assessment is based on modeling of the differences between the present and future situations, in real market conditions (effective consumptions and substitutions of products, down-cycling, indirect effects). We consider the downstream processing of WEEE until final elimination. The reference stream considered is the WEEE stream at the input of the IMMARK process. The functional unit is “the elimination of 7000 Without the analysis of raw metals and recycled production channels, without the analysis of plastics and recycled production channel and in the context of the market of new process, only “mean data” can be derived from conventional Life Cycle Assessment databases established for primary production and the recycling industry. A direct allocation of impact is used based on the multi-output process described in For recycling, one has to consider the production of recycled matter (quality/substitution of virgin products), the potential application of recycled matter (identification of the recycling channels) and the transports of the recycled matter (waste to recycle, recycle to application). One has also to take into account the avoided i) production of virgin product, ii) application of the recycled product (manufacture) and iii) transport impacts from primary production to application. The avoided end-of-life has also to be considered in the assessment. It concerns mainly the final sinks (landfill and/or incineration) and transport from production to these final sinks. As shown in Main applications of ABS are computer products (box of central units, keyboard and box of screens). For ABS, the modeling hypothesis regarding the definition of the functional unit is “the recycling of 1 The technical data required to assess the environmental impacts of ABS recycling are: Quality: ABS is often found in mineral–organic alloys (with polycarbonate, often brominated). The rate of substitution of virgin matter is around 0.7 (whereas it is equal to 1 for Al), The recycling process mainly consists in grinding and washing with electricity consumption − The impact of virgin ABS production (The The impact of the production of the final product. The hypothesis of application is to use ABS for TV set (The In the inventory, the following steps are considered: ABS Recycling: Production of recyclable ABS, Application of recycled ABS, Transports: waste to recycler; recycler to application, Avoided production: Production of virgin ABS, Application of ABS, Transports: producer to application, Avoided end-of life, x. Landfill The economical results of this evaluation gives a total environmental costs for ABS recycling equal to − In the framework of the REWARD process a simulation tool has been developed based on the USIMPAC™ software architecture. Depending on the amount and type of data available, it is possible to represent the different unit operations by more or less complex mathematical models. Here, a preliminary simulation tool was developed mainly based on simple transfer functions. The prediction quality will be improved through the carrying out of specific studies dedicated to each of the sorting techniques to characterize their performance versus material characteristics to be treated. In particular, the model under development will allow describing the mechanical behavior of WEEE categories during the comminution step (smart shredding A methodology to assess the environmental impact of the implementation of a new WEEE treatment process is also proposed. It considers only downstream effects of WEEE recycling, a direct approach through multi-output system and the different steps that make up the inventory from recycling to final sinks (landfill and incineration). The study has only been completed for the case of one metal (Al°) and one category of plastics (ABS). The methodology to be followed for other categories is strictly identical. The authors would like to acknowledge the