The objective of this study was to review current data on the contribution of wrist arthroscopy to the management of intra-articular distal radius fractures (IADRFs). The literature published over the last 10 years was reviewed by searching databases with the key indexing terms ‘distal radius fracture’, ‘articular’, and ‘wrist arthroscopy’. The information in the 21 articles thus retrieved was used to answer the following questions: (i) Can arthroscopy improve the reduction of IADRFs? (ii) How does arthroscopy contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of concomitant ligament injuries? and (iii) Does arthroscopy help to improve the functional scores? The contribution of arthroscopy to IADRF reduction remains controversial. Follow-ups were limited (15 months on average) and some of the studies provided only level IV evidence. The data do not consistently suggest that arthroscopically assisted surgery may improve the quality of reduction. In contrast, they highlight the usefulness of arthroscopy in allowing the same-stage management of carpal ligament injuries. In the 12 studies providing data on this point, scapholunate inter-osseous ligament injuries were present in 41% of cases; one-fourth of these injuries were full-thickness tears that were successfully repaired by arthroscopy. The triangular fibrocartilage complex was injured in 48% of cases, and 30% of these injuries were peripheral ulnar detachments that were successfully repaired by arthroscopy. At present, arthroscopy does not allow the repair of all diagnosed ligament injuries. Comparative studies with longer follow-ups will shed light on the ability of arthroscopy to improve functional scores.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV.The publication over the last decade of numerous studies assessing the contribution of arthroscopy to the management of intra-articular distal radius fractures (IADRFs) bears witness to the fast pace of development of wrist arthroscopy. These studies focused on two main points, namely, achieving anatomical reduction to restore the joint surface and managing any concomitant ligament injuries. The objective of this study was to review current data on the contribution of wrist arthroscopy to the management of IADRFs. To this end, the literature published over the last decade was reviewed to seek answers to the following questions: can arthroscopy improve the reduction of IADRFs?; how does arthroscopy contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of concomitant ligament injuries?; does arthroscopy help to improve the functional scores? A systematic literature review was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline The PubMed, Ovid, and Cochrane databases were searched for articles published between 1 January 2006 and 1 November 2017, using the key indexing terms ‘distal radius fracture’, ‘articular’, and ‘wrist arthroscopy’. Articles were potentially eligible if they compared internal IADRF fixation and/or the diagnosis and treatment of acute carpal injuries with versus without arthroscopic assistance or if they were case-series studies of patients managed with arthroscopic assistance. Only studies of adult patients were included. Fracture displacement and inter-fragmentary gap had to be among the criteria used to assess improvements in IADRF reduction. The diagnosis and treatment of carpal injuries had to be described. Finally, outcomes had to be reported based on the functional scores used for wrist surgery (range of motion, grip strength, visual analogue scale [VAS] scores, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand [DASH] score, Mayo Wrist score, and/or Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation [PRWE]). The following article types were excluded: literature reviews, biomechanical and anatomical studies, technical notes, letters to editors, continuing medical education articles, and articles in languages other than French or English. The above-described inclusion criteria were assessed by reading the titles and abstracts or, if these were not available, the full-length article. Each abstract was read by two observers after the elimination of duplicates. Disagreements about eligibility for inclusion in the literature review were resolved by a third person. Selected articles were read in their entirety. For each selected article, the data were categorised as follows: information on the authors; year of publication; study design; level of the evidence supplied by the study; number of patients; diagnostic and therapeutic methods that were used or compared; diagnosis and management of concomitant carpal injuries; assessment criteria, with the results; follow-up duration; and clinical and radiological outcomes at last follow-up. The methodological quality of the selected studies was evaluated by two observers, who used the modified rating scale developed by Downs and Black for randomised and non-randomised studies (1998)  The review sought to answer three questions: can arthroscopy improve the reduction of IADRFs?; how does arthroscopy contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of concomitant ligament injuries?; does arthroscopy help to improve the functional scores at last follow-up? Of the 21 articles, 16 were used to answer this question, with a total of 720 patients, a mean of 45 patients per article, and a mean follow-up of 15 months. Of the 16 studies, 11 were case series, 4 were prospective The system used to classify the fractures varied across studies, with the AO classification Of the 21 studies published over the 10-year period, 12 provided information on this point, with a total of 467 patients and a mean follow-up of 22 months. Two studies report data from the same cohort of patients followed up for at least 13 years Arthroscopy provided the diagnosis of SLIL injuries in 41% of cases with a total of 189 lesions. SLIL injuries were classified according to Geissler Arthroscopy showed TFCC injuries in 48.46% of cases. The 147 lesions were classified according to Palmer In 8 studies, the results supported a positive contribution of arthroscopy to the diagnosis and treatment of carpal injuries concomitant to IADRFs  The 12 studies that assessed functional scores at last follow-up had a total of 552 patients with a mean follow-up of 30.3 months, although follow-up was 12 months or less in half the studies Of the 12 studies, 6 supported a beneficial effect of arthroscopy in improving the functional scores at last follow-up   The objective of this literature review was to clarify the contribution of arthroscopy to the management of IADRFs by obtaining answers to three questions. The available data leave room for controversy regarding the contribution of wrist arthroscopy to the reduction of IADRFs. Many studies used a case-series design and were therefore unable to demonstrate that arthroscopic assistance was superior over internal fixation with fluoroscopic guidance alone. In addition, most studies had small sample sizes, with a mean of 45 patients per study. The data were conflicting even for the subgroup of prospective studies The literature thus seems conflicting, with some studies suggesting better restoration of joint surface congruity with arthroscopy but others, particularly the most recent, producing less convincing results. However, the numbers of patients were small and, most importantly, follow-up was only 15 months on average. Finally, several studies provided only level IV evidence that did not allow for comparisons of the clinical and radiographic outcomes. The results about ligament injuries are contradictory. The available evidence do not provide proof that arthroscopy is an effective treatment. In contrast, arthroscopic assistance is recognised as considerably improving the diagnosis and classification of these same acute ligament injuries. SLIL injuries were found in over 40% of patients, although only about one-fourth were complete tears that sometimes required scapholunate pinning or arthroscopic repair. Arthroscopy is particularly valuable in this situation due to its high diagnostic performance and ability to allow same-stage treatment of complete SLIL tears, thereby potentially preventing the development of osteoarthritis. Nonetheless, studies with longer follow-ups are needed to confirm the benefits of arthroscopy. Partial Geissler grade 1-2 SLIL injuries were left untreated. No studies assessing the potential long-term impact of these partial lesions in patients with IADRFs were identified. TFCC injuries were even more common, as they were found in over 48% of patients. Type 1B, defined as peripheral ulnar TFCC detachment, was the type most often managed by arthroscopic repair. This fact reflects the high rate of healing of type 1B injuries, which is ascribable to the peripheral blood supply to the TFCC via branches of the anterior inter-osseous and ulnar arteries Overall, the use of arthroscopy in patients with IADRFs identified a large number of concomitant carpal injuries and allowed the same-stage treatment of severe SLIL injuries and of peripheral ulnar TFCC detachment. Many of the available studies are case series with short follow-ups. Prospective comparative studies with longer follow-up durations would help to clarify whether arthroscopy benefits the management of carpal lesions in patients with IADRFs. On this point also, divergences exist in the published data. The studies that analysed or compared subjective or objective functional scores had a mean follow-up of only 30 months, with half of them having follow-ups no longer than 12 months. Most of the data come from case-series studies, which showed good outcomes at last follow-up. In 4 of these case-series studies, arthroscopy was felt to produce benefits by decreasing the size of the scar The findings from prospective comparative studies are similarly conflicting. Varitimidis et al. Studies of the contribution of arthroscopic assistance to accurate articular surface restoration in patients with IADRFs have produced conflicting results. Several of these studies used a case-series design and had short follow-up durations. In contrast, the available data constitute convincing evidence that arthroscopy is valuable for diagnosing and classifying concomitant ligament injuries, as well as for providing treatment orientation. Arthroscopic assistance allowed the same-stage treatment of ligament injuries. Arthroscopically diagnosed lesions were common but often partial. Partial SLIL injuries were usually left untreated. Peripheral ulnar TFCC injuries were repaired, whereas other TFCC lesions were managed only by debridement. The follow-up duration in the available studies is too short for an assessment of the outcomes of these lesions diagnosed and/or treated during the management of IADRFs. Finally, the case-series design and short follow-ups of many of the published studies preclude definitive conclusions about whether arthroscopy improves the functional scores at last follow-up. Randomised controlled studies using a single internal fixation method in large and uniform patient populations are needed. The populations in the studies performed to date are heterogeneous in terms of fracture type and, most importantly, patient age. Ligament lesions in older patients may be related to degenerative disease rather than to injury. Longer follow-ups are needed to: evaluate whether radio-carpal osteoarthritis can be prevented by accurate articular surface restoration and/or has adverse effects; evaluate the potential and as yet unknown consequences of partial SLIL and TFCC lesions managed by arthroscopic debridement; clarify the role for early arthroscopic treatment of complete SLIL tears and peripheral TFCC detachment. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. E. Guerre contributed to the literature database search. C. Chantelot contributed to the literature database search and participated in the 2017 SoFCOT symposium on minimally invasive and arthroscopic techniques. M. Ehlinger directed the 2017 SoFCOT symposium on minimally invasive and arthroscopic techniques, wrote the manuscript, and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. Th. Bauer participated in the 2017 SoFCOT symposium on minimally invasive and arthroscopic techniques and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. Ph. Clavert participated in the 2017 SoFCOT symposium on minimally invasive and arthroscopic techniques and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content.