In a previous study, condylar compression bolts and intramedullary nailing with the use of a traditional transpatellar tendon approach were employed for the management of non-impacted complex fractures of the tibia plateau. However, there were intra-operative difficulties, related to the surgical approach that could jeopardise fracture reduction and contribute to sub-optimal outcomes. The purpose of this study is to introduce the retropatellar approach for the management of complex tibial plateau fractures with intramedullary nailing and condylar compression bolts that avoid the pitfalls created by the traditional transpatellar approach.Complex fractures of the tibial plateau (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) 41C types or Schatzker V and VI types) constitute significant bony and soft-tissue injuries within and around the knee joint Both plating (open or minimally invasive) and external fixation (circular or hybrid constructs) have been used for the management of complex fractures of the tibial plateau. However, the variety and diversity regarding the fracture type (severity, extension, comminution and soft-tissue involvement) and patient's characteristics (age, osteoporosis, co-morbidities and accompanying injuries) have contributed to contradictory results regarding the effectiveness of each technique In a previous study, a proposal implementing intramedullary nailing and compression bolts for the management of selected complex fractures of the tibia plateau was presented The purpose of this study is the introduction of an important modification – the retropatellar approach to the proximal tibia for the introduction of the intramedullary nail – that accommodates difficulties related to intra-operative visualisation and fracture reduction that were encountered during the standard nailing technique that was used for the management of bicondylar fractures of the tibial plateau. The procedure requires detailed pre-operative planning with standard antero-posterior and lateral X-rays ( Postoperatively, the knee joint and tibia are covered with soft bandages and knee joint motion is encouraged, without restrictions, from the second postoperative day. Non-weight-bearing mobilisation with crutches can be allowed from the second or third postoperative day.  The operating time ranged from 95 to 140 The patients were followed-up at the outpatient clinic at 4–6 week intervals for clinical and radiological examination until fracture union and full mobilisation. The mean follow-up time was 15.6 months (12–20 months) and the mean knee range of motion (ROM) at the final follow-up was 133° (125–140°). The clinical outcome was estimated with the use of Lysholm and Tegner score The purpose of this study was to introduce the retropatellar approach for the management of complex fractures of the tibial plateau with intramedullary nailing and condylar compression bolts. The retropatellar approach accommodates problems related to intra-operative visualisation and maintenance of fracture reduction that are encountered when the leg is in the free hanging position, as described in a previous article With the retropatellar approach, the knee is positioned in a stable semi-extended position that allows undisturbed and reproducible antero-posterior and lateral views with the image intensifier. The skeletal traction facilitates fracture reduction via ligamentotaxis and fewer reduction manoeuvers or tools (such as reduction forceps or blocking screws) are necessary. Furthermore, nail insertion does not jeopardise fracture reduction at the fractured proximal tibia. Another advantage is that the main incision is located proximal to the patella, well away from the injured proximal tibia that can be oedematus, with abrasions and blisters ( The retropatellar nailing technique for the management of non-articular tibial fractures has been described recently, with cadaveric studies that assessed the feasibility of the technique and the risks from the intra-articular insertion of the tools and the nail A limitation of this study is the small number of patients who were treated with the proposed technique. However, the main purpose was the description of a novel technique for the treatment of complex fractures of the tibial plateau that required a pilot clinical study to support its advantages. The proposed technique will be evaluated with a substantial clinical study which is being organised in our department. Removal of an intramedullary nail that has been introduced via the retropatellar approach has been a concern. However, the first patient in the present pilot study had all the implants removed recently, as he was returning to his country and insisted for an early removal. The intramedullary nail was removed through a traditional transpatellar approach without difficulty. The management of bicondylar fractures of the tibial plateau with condylar compression bolts and intramedullary nailing via the retropatellar approach may be an appealing alternative to fine-wire circular fixation, complex internal fixation and hybrid techniques. However, it requires significant exposure to the intramedullary nailing procedure. While in the hands of experienced trauma surgeons it can be a useful treatment option, it could be foreseen that surgeons with less experience with intramedullary nailing can get into difficulties that might prove difficult to deal with. Undoubtedly, direct comparison with more traditional techniques in larger, perhaps multicentre studies over a longer period are needed. No conflicts of interest are declared. No source of funding is declared.