U-shaped sacral fractures are uncommon and are mostly the consequence of a high-energy kinetic trauma. The sacrum is a crucial element for sagittal alignment in a standing position as it determines the value of the pelvic incidence, which is a fixed and unchanging parameter for a given individual. We report the case of a 21-year-old man who underwent corrective surgery for a type II U-shaped fracture of the sacrum (according to the Roy-Camille classification), associated with a S1–S2 dislocation and sacral kyphosis that modified the patient's pelvic incidence. At one-year follow-up, radiographic examinations revealed solid bony fusion and stable results after removal of the implants. The surgery was managed for neurological decompression, stabilization of the fracture and correction of sacral kyphosis. The restoration of the theoretical pelvic incidence depended on the estimated lumbar lordosis. The aim of this study was to highlight the particularities in the management of a sacral U-shaped fracture and their relationship with the sagittal alignment.Transversal sacral fractures are uncommon lesions with an estimated incidence of between 3 and 5% of all sacral fractures As regards anatomical considerations, the sacrum is a crucial element of pelvic stability and serves as the basis of the vertebral spinal column. It thus represents the keystone of the pelvic ring One of the difficulties in the management of these lesions is related to their pauci-symptomatic presentation mode, responsible for a frequent delay in diagnosis and management. These clinical specificities, associated with the high impact of pelvic parameters, highlight the necessity of rigorous operative planning when surgery is indicated. We report here the case of a patient who underwent surgical correction of a sacral fracture with the objective of restoring his pelvic incidence according to the estimated lumbar lordosis. The aim of this study was to highlight specificities in the management of these fractures and its impact on spino-pelvic alignment. We report here the case of a 21-year-old male involved in a high velocity vehicle accident. He was wearing a seatbelt at the time of the accident and was admitted to a local hospital for initial evaluation. Diagnosis of sacrum fracture was performed on day 7 after the trauma due to the discovery of a sphincter disorder. Clinical examination revealed anal hypotonia and urinary retention that required a bladder catheter. Furthermore, the patient described bilateral sciatica partially treated by opioid painkillers. Based on the diagnosis of a sacral fracture with neurologic deficit, the patient was referred to our institution. On the day of admission, clinical examination revealed perineal hypoesthesia with a bilateral deficit of S2 and S3 nerve roots, with no motor deficit in the lower limbs. A spino-pelvic CT-scan and MRI were performed and a U-type (type II according to Roy-Camille) sacral fracture was diagnosed, associated with a S1–S2 dislocation and a sacral kyphosis ( Surgical management was decided with a double objective: decompress neurologic elements and correct the sacral kyphosis. In other words, the main goal was to change the pelvic incidence of the patient according to the estimated preoperative lumbar lordosis. Surgery was conducted via a posterior only approach, in the prone position on a spine table under fluoroscopic guidance. In the first stage, a S1 to S3 laminectomy was carried out, and then a posterior fixation with pedicular screws was placed in L5 and S1 cranially and in the ileum distally. Reduction of the deformity was achieved via a trans-S2 osteotomy on the level of the fracture in order to correct the S1–S2 kyphosis. Reduction maneuvers included distraction of the rods on the screws and in situ rods contouring. During postoperative course, the patient reported a significant decrease in lumbar pain leading to a quick decrease of painkillers and the possibility of standing on day 1 after surgery. Sphincter rehabilitation was started as soon as possible and led to a progressive resolution of bladder dysfunction and a removal of the indwelling catheter at day 4. A persistent perineal hypoesthesia was reported postoperatively. During immediate follow-up, a delay in wound healing was noted that only required local care. At three months of follow-up, the patient showed complete neurologic recovery without any significant remaining lumbar pain. At final follow-up, one year after surgery, the patient was still neurologically intact and satisfied with surgical results. Removal of the implants was performed without subsequent complications. Postoperative radiologic evaluation included a lumbo-sacral CT-scan ( In order to assess the impact of the surgical strategy on sagittal alignment, pre- and postoperative parameters were compared: PI, pelvic tilt and L1–S1 LL. Furthermore, L5–S1 disc kyphosis (defined as the angle between the L5 inferior endplate and the S1 superior endplate) and the segmental kyphosis ( Analysis of radiographic data ( Postoperative pelvic tilt was measured in physiological range at 21°. Measurement of postoperative LL was at 72°, without significant mismatch with the postoperative PI (79°). L5–S1 disc kyphosis was slightly modified (17° vs. 14° pre and postoperatively), and the segmental sacral kyphosis was significantly restored (125° vs. 150° pre and postoperatively). At one-year follow-up, spino-pelvic parameters were measured after removal of the implants ( U-shaped sacral fractures are characterized by a transversal fracture associated to a bilateral sacral dislocation. As a result, there is a biomechanical failure of the spino-pelvic complex with a split between the spine cranially and the distal sacrum and the pelvis caudally This spino-pelvic dissociation was defined by Bent et al. Exact incidence of these fractures is not well known An anatomical classification was described by Denis et al. zone 1: fracture lateral to the sacral holes, 50% of the cases zone 2: vertical trans-foraminal fracture with no involvement of the spinal canal (36% of the cases, 28% of neurologic deficits involving L5, S1 and S2); zone 3: all the fractures that involve the spinal canal (16% of the cases), 57% of neurologic deficits Roy-Camille et al. type 1: flexion deformity of the sacrum; type 2: kyphotic deformity and translation of the sacrum; type 3: complete sacral translation. Strange and Vognsen Diagnosis of these fractures with a spino-pelvic dissociation is commonly delayed due to the difficulty in properly exploring the sacrum with plain X-rays. Only 30% of sacral fractures are seen on AP X-rays due to the various inclinations of the sacrum and interposition of colic gas. As a result, transverse sacral fractures are hardly seen and are diagnosed on the immediate evaluation. Furthermore, in most cases, presence of potential life-threatening associated injuries leads to a delayed diagnosis of sacral fractures In these lesions, neurologic deficits are commonly related to a total or partial lesions of S2 to S5 nerve roots (bladder dysfunction, sphincter hypotonia, perineal hypoesthesia, etc.). Neurologic symptoms vary from simple sciatica to a section of sacral nerve roots (estimated prevalence 35%) According to these neurological features, a patient can have a normal lower limbs motor examination in association with sphincter dysfunction, leading a frequent delay in the initial diagnosis Optimal management of these lesions remains difficult and controversial. Patients without neurologic impairment are commonly treated conservatively. Conversely, a surgical procedure is required for patients with neurologic deficits and instability in order to decompress neural elements and stabilize the spino-pelvic complex. Various studies have pointed out the interest of a surgical strategy in order to prevent a secondary deformation of the sacrum with an improvement of long-term prognosis and a reduction in morbidity and mortality The ideal timing for surgery is another important question. Based on a series of 60 patients, Routt et al. showed that a surgical procedure after day 5 was associated with a less satisfactory correction of the deformity U-shaped sacral fractures require specific attention as they are the only lesions responsible for a modification of PI, which is normally an anatomical parameter, stable during adulthood In our case, one year after initial surgery, a solid bone healing of the fracture was visible and implants were removed without further modifications of spino-pelvic parameters and satisfactory clinical results. One limitation this strategy is the difficulty to obtain preoperative full-spine X-rays for sagittal spino-pelvic evaluation. Sacral fractures are uncommon lesions with specific features related to their anatomical localization. The clinical examination is frequently insufficient, which can be responsible for a delay in the diagnosis. Precise clinical and radiologic examinations are therefore in essential order to provide an optimal therapeutic strategy. A rapid surgical strategy with decompression of neural elements is indicated in cases of a neurologic deficit. Performing a solid spino-pelvic fixation is recommended in order to avoid secondary instability. Optimal surgical strategy must therefore include various objectives, not only decompression, stabilization but also correction of the estimated ideal PI in order to avoid any PI-LL mismatch. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.