Enhanced coating stability and adhesion are essential for long-term success of orthopedic and dental implants. In this study, the effect of coating composition on mechanical, physico-chemical and biological properties of coated zirconia specimens is investigated. Zirconia discs and dental screw implants are coated using the wet powder spraying (WPS) technique. The coatings are obtained by mixing yttria-stabilized zirconia (TZ) and hydroxyapatite (HA) in various ratios while a pure HA coating served as reference material. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and optical profilometer analysis confirm a similar coating morphology and roughness for all studied coatings, whereas the coating stability can be tailored with composition and is probed by insertion and dissections experiments in bovine bone with coated zirconia screw implants. An increasing content of calcium phosphate (CP) resulted in a decrease of mechanical and chemical stability, while the bioactivity increased in simulated body fluid (SBF). In vitro experiments with human osteoblast cells (HOB) revealed that the cells grew well on all samples but are affected by dissolution behavior of the studied coatings. This work demonstrates the overall good mechanical strength, the excellent interfacial bonding and the bioactivity potential of coatings with higher TZ contents, which provide a highly interesting coating for dental implants.Dental implants undergo several load-bearing conditions, such as chewing pressure, and thus require high mechanical reliability. They must be able to withstand both, peak loads and millions of low level cyclic stresses occurring during lifetime while chewing Ceramics, usually yttria-stabilized zirconia (TZ), receive increased attention as dental materials due to their low toxicity and beneficial mechanical properties like high fracture toughness and bending strength as well as satisfying esthetic requirements. Despite of the biocompatible properties, TZ is known to be bioinert and thereby no stimulation of bone ongrowth is achieved To overcome these drawbacks of pure CP coatings several studies used TZ reinforced HA coatings on titanium to combine enhanced mechanical properties with an increased osseointegration. The addition of TZ to HA and subsequent sintering provides an enhanced coating stability as well as better coating–substrate adhesion caused by improved particle-substrate interactions when applied on zirconia substrates Both, bone-implant bond strength and coating-implant bond strength, are two important factors for successful and strong anchorage of the implant to bone tissue Regarding the significance of coating stability and adhesion the aim of this study was to assess the effect of coating composition on mechanical, physico-chemical and biological properties of coated zirconia specimens. Different mixed coatings consisting of TZ and CP were prepared by wet powder spraying (WPS) and subsequently investigated for microstructure, phase analysis, coating adhesion and mechanical strength. In vitro dissolution behavior, and surface morphology in simulated body fluid (SBF) as well as proliferation and differentiation of human osteoblasts (HOB) were examined to understand and evaluate the mechanical and chemical stability, and bioactivity of different coating compositions. The details of substrate and suspension preparation, as well as the coating process are described in Pardun et al. Briefly, zirconia discs (diameter (Ø) The different mixed suspensions for coating were prepared of HA (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Munich, Germany) and TZ-3YS-E powder (TZ, Tosoh, Tokyo, Japan), coating compositions are shown in The coating of pre-sintered substrates was done with WPS. The substrates were fixed and coated using a double-action airbrush spray gun (BD 183-K, Artistic Life, Boenen, Germany) with a working distance of 200 The surface morphology of the coatings was analyzed using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Camscan Series 2, Obducat CamScan Ltd., Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom) at 20 Measurements of the surface roughness were characterized with an optical profilometer (Plμ2300, Sensofar, Terassa, Spain). Areas of 477 Crystal phase analysis was carried out by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) using an Ultima IV type III diffractometer (Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with Cross Beam Optics (CBO) and Cu Kα radiation. Each run was performed with 2 theta (2θ) values between 20° and 70° carried out in parallel beam mode with a fixed incident angle of 0.5°. Coating adhesion was determined with scratch tests performed by a pencil hardness tester (PH-5800, BYK-Gardner GmbH, Geretsried, Germany) according to ISO 15184. The mechanical adhesion between substrate and coating was qualitatively examined with a pencil (Vickers hardness 90.6 Biaxial flexural strengths of the coated specimens (Ø The surface coated zirconia screws (n After careful dissection of the implants SEM was used to assess coating morphology and stability. To further examine the coating stability at the thread tips, the same samples were embedded in resin (EpoFix, Struers GmbH, Willich, Germany), grounded to the middle of the implant and examined by SEM. To test the dissolution behavior of the various coatings, specimens were placed into sterile polystyrene culturing dishes (24-well multidish, Nunc, Wiesbaden, Germany) and immersed in 1 Conventional simulated body fluid (cSBF) was prepared by dissolving the following salts NaCl, NaHCO In vitro investigations with human osteoblast cells (HOB, Provitro GmbH, Berlin, Germany) were conducted up to 9 HOBs were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's minimal essential medium (D-MEM, Gibco, Life Technologies GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% antibiotic–antimycotic (Gibco) in an incubator (C200, Labotect Labor-Technik-Göttingen GmbH, Göttingen, Germany) at 37 To evaluate the cell morphology and growth immunofluorescence staining was carried out at days 1, 4 and 7 of culture. Samples (n The metabolic activity of cells was determined with a colorimetric water-soluble tetrazolium salt (WST-1, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany), which is enzymatically cleaved to formazan only by living cells. The WST-1 reagent was added to each well after medium change (n The investigation of cell number, alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) and protein concentration was performed with cell lysates (n The cell number on the ceramic samples was assessed by DNA analysis using the Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA Kit (Life Technologies). An aliquot of the cell lysate was diluted with 1× TE buffer (10 For the determination of the ALP activity an aliquot of the cell lysate was incubated with ALP substrate buffer, containing 6 All collected data are expressed as mean values and standard deviation. Statistical analyses were performed using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test (Minitab 16, Minitab Inc., Pennsylvania, USA) for multiple comparisons between the different coated groups. A confidence level of 5% was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference. Surface morphology of all studied coatings was analyzed by SEM to understand the influence of TZ:CP ratio on the resulting microstructure ( GI-XRD analyses performed after sintering at 1500 The biaxial flexural strength of the coated samples was determined via B3B as shown in Investigations of fracture surfaces (  The bovine femur scratch test showed different results although the pencil and bone exhibited the same Vickers hardness of about ~ Zirconia screw implants (  SBF was used to investigate the biological activity of all studied coatings in vitro, reflected in their capability to form a mineral layer onto the surface. Immunofluorescence staining ( WST-1 assay was used to determine HOB metabolic activity on all samples after days 1, 4, 7 and 9 as shown in Cell proliferation analyzed via the quantity of DNA ( To evaluate the cell differentiation on the tested samples intracellular ALP activity of HOB cells was characterized for 4, 7 and 9 Pure HA or CP coatings on metallic dental implants were widely investigated for an improved tissue integration because of their good osteoconductivity, but these coatings are also known to have a poor stability. One of the major challenges in fabrication of coated implants is the maintenance of a suitable adhesion and stability during insertion accompanied with a favorable bioactivity. The present study demonstrates the fabrication of mixed coatings with various ratios of CP and TZ. The coatings were applied with the WPS technique, which suitability was already shown in previous works Mechanical stability and coating adhesion were tested in this study by B3B, scratch test and dissection experiments of inserted zirconia implants. The results of the biaxial flexural strength test showed a major impact of the coating composition on the mechanical strength. While for CP the flexural strength was strongly reduced, TZCP 2:1 nearly had no effect and is comparable with uncoated TZ, which has strength of around 1100 The adhesion depends on the coating–substrate bond strength and plays an important role for the use of coated load-bearing implants. Other studies have demonstrated the application of interfacial layers to overcome the mismatch between coating and substrate due to different thermal expansion coefficients Dissolution experiments showed that the Ca SBF bioactivity results indicated significant mineral layer formation abilities. After 21 Bioactive properties of material surfaces play a crucial role in the evaluation of cell-biomaterial interactions in order to assess the efficacy of their application in human medicine. Therefore, cellular response of HOBs, such as cell growth, proliferation and differentiation was investigated in order to assess the influence of surface chemistry and physical features. Fluorescence microscopic images revealed that cells on coatings with increasing TZ contents showed faster attachment, a more spread-out morphology, taking a polygonal shape with several cytoplasmic extensions and an apparently higher cell density. Higher CP contents, in contrast, seemed to hamper cell flattening and spreading. Metabolic activity, cell number and protein content were significantly greater on TZCP 1:1 and TZCP 2:1 at days 4–9 compared to the other coatings, indicating a good cytocompatibility. ALP activity followed almost the same trend with the exception of an elevated value on CP. These results show that the cells respond differently to the investigated coatings, indicating an influence of the coating properties. The highest cell proliferation, viability and differentiation were found on Thermanox®. The cells were flattened, well spread and reached confluence at day 9, which is due to the sample's physical properties and consistent with the work of others Nevertheless, further work is clearly needed to characterize the in vivo bioactivity of the coating, as well as the long-term stability. Consequently, it is imperative to know the coating stability after insertion and the dissolution rate in a living organism under physiological conditions. Moreover, the suspension composition can be altered, by introducing further additives, in order to get closer to the composition of natural bone. The present study examined the influence of different TZ and CP ratios on the mechanical and biological properties of coatings on zirconia substrates. Coating adhesion and mechanical stability were considerably increased with increasing addition of TZ. SBF test results, however, revealed a higher bioactivity potential of coatings with enhanced CP content due to different dissolution behaviors. Despite similar surface morphology and average roughness in vitro investigations showed that the cells respond differently with regard to proliferation and differentiation, most likely affected by dissolution of the studied coatings. Considering the overall good mechanical strength, the excellent interfacial bonding and the bioactivity potential, TZCP 1:1 and TZCP 2:1 provide a highly interesting coating for dental implants. Authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the