This study investigates the rhetorical organisation of English and Chinese research article introductions in the field of educational psychology using Swales’s (1990, 2004) framework of move analysis. A corpus of 40 research articles (20 Chinese and 20 English) was selected. The English research articles, written by first-language English speakers, were selected from The Journal of Educational Psychology while the Chinese research articles, written by first-language Chinese speakers, were selected from 心理發展與教育 (Psychological Development and Education). The findings reveal that English and Chinese research article introductions generally employ the three moves (i.e., Move 1, Move 2 and Move 3) as outlined by Swales (1990, 2004). Swales’s Create a Research Space (CARS) model however, could not account for certain rhetorical strategies found in the two sets of introductions. English and Chinese research article introductions differ in the extent to which the moves and steps are used in the introductions. That is, generally speaking, the rhetorical moves and steps were employed in fewer Chinese introductions compared to the English. It is proposed that an analytic-synthetic approach can be used to teach academic writing to Chinese ESL students, encouraging them to engage in genre-analysis tasks before doing their own writing.A substantial body of research has been undertaken on contrastive rhetorical studies in different domains, and this has contributed much to an understanding of cross-cultural aspects of writing. In contrastive rhetorical studies, including those of Chinese, there is now an extensive body of English–Chinese contrastive studies, many of them involving the following non-academic genre types: expository essays (e.g., The above contrastive studies in Chinese generally traced the preferred Chinese rhetorical patterns in the English texts written by Chinese speakers, in particular the four-part model of writing which includes According to Kaplan also posited the idea that the indirectness in Chinese writing is influenced by the classical text format known as the eight-legged essay ( This view however has been challenged by There has been less research on Chinese academic texts. The only study involving Chinese RAs, to the best knowledge of the researcher, has been undertaken by In addition, Taylor and Chen found some differences between the three groups in terms of move structure, length of the RA introductions, and the use of citations. Firstly, the major difference involves the application of Move 2 (summarizing previous research). The Chinese scientists – particularly those writing in Chinese – were less likely to summarise the literature from their fields of study; and Taylor and Chen claimed this has resulted in writing shorter RA introductions. The Chinese scientists also tended to cite fewer references and did not identify the researchers with whom they disagreed. Secondly, the two groups of Chinese scientists did not use elaborated structure compared to the Anglo-American-English writers. Thirdly, some variations were identified in the employment of the move structures across disciplines. That is, geologists were less consistent in their choice of move structure while scientists in both metallurgy and mineral processing and in materials science were much more dedicated to the 1-2-3-4 structure. Their findings in general show evidence of the influence of English rhetoric in Chinese RA introductions and, in spite of some differences identified between the RA introductions written by the Chinese authors and their native English-speaking counterparts, Taylor and Chen concluded that there is no ‘Chinese way’ ( The present study adopts The major research questions addressed in the present study are as follows: What is the rhetorical organisation of the selected English and Chinese RA introductions? What are the similarities and differences between RA introductions written by first-language speakers from the two languages (English and Chinese) chosen for this study? This study combines qualitative and quantitative research methods. It includes a description of the rhetorical structures employed in the sampled RA introductions (in terms of moves and steps) in the field of educational psychology. In addition, quantitative data are tabulated to illustrate the breakdown of moves and steps as well as citations in these introductions. Observations are restricted only to the corpus of the present study to come up with suggestions for the teaching of academic writing to ESL Chinese undergraduates. It is therefore not the aim of the present study to generalise about the characteristic patterns of RA introductions in an entire discipline (educational psychology). Past studies which compared rhetorical organisation across two different cultures have been criticised for not considering the comparability of genres, authorships and journals under investigation. For instance, These sampling difficulties prevented previous authors from presenting valid findings within a more representative corpus. Consequently, it is necessary to use comparable or “equivalent” corpora ( Taking the above concern into consideration, the corpus of the present study was selected according to the following guidelines: L1 authentic texts (English RA introductions written by English speakers and Chinese RA introductions by Chinese speakers) were employed to ensure validity of results, because the use of second language texts to investigate first-language rhetorical patterns has been considered as insufficient data for valid analysis ( Taking into account the fact that different disciplines have their own writing conventions ( The data was limited to empirical RAs. Previous studies have shown that the schematic structure of an empirical RA follows the IMRD (introduction-method-results-discussion) format ( The corpus was selected within a span of five years before the commencement of this study (i.e., RAs published in 2003–2007). This decision was based on the possibility that RA genre might evolve: the structure of a genre may possibly change depending on rhetorical needs during various time periods and situations, as observed in The data for this study consist of 40 RA introductions – 20 Chinese and 20 English – in the field of educational psychology. The English RAs, written by first-language speakers, were selected from The decision to select RAs from one source in each language was motivated by considerations of analytical comparability and, in particular, to facilitate identification and comparison of distinctive rhetorical patterns. This is because the conventional form and content of scholarly publications in the same discipline are likely to differ from one journal to another. As The present study adopts In comparison to The four options in Move 2 (establishing a niche) of Move 3 (occupying the niche) of In general, The coding shows that Some steps that emerged in the corpus could be identified with those labelled in Move 1 Step 2 is a rhetorical strategy used to realise Move 1 (establishing a territory). Move 1 Step 2 precisely articulates the function of defining the terms/concepts related to the research topic. This step occurs in both English and Chinese introductions (55% and 50% respectively). Move 1 Step 2 is exemplified below: Move 1 Step 3 is a rhetorical strategy used to realise Move 1 (establishing a territory). This step occurs in 15% of the selected English introductions. In contrast, it is totally absent from the selected Chinese introductions. Move 1 Step 3 presents the theoretical basis of the study being reported as exemplified below: Move 3 Step 2 is a rhetorical strategy used to realise Move 3 (presenting the present work). It occurs in almost half of the selected English introductions (55%). In contrast, it occurs in only one Chinese introduction (5%). This step specifies the focus of the study as shown in the following examples: Move 3 Step 7 is a rhetorical strategy used to realise Move 3 (present the present work). This step is found in only one English introduction while it is totally absent from Chinese introductions. Move 3 Step 7 introduces the implications of the findings as exemplified below: The discussion of the above four steps will be taken up again in the following Although the general rhetorical organisation of English and Chinese introductions contain certain rhetorical strategies (steps) (see Chinese introductions have features similar to those of English introductions. That is, Chinese introductions share the three similar moves and 11 similar steps (emphasis added in bold) found in English introductions as shown in The use of the three similar moves and 11 similar steps by Chinese and English-language writers points to their adoption of a similar macrostructure for RA introductions. The present findings are in line with In the present study, although the global organisation of Chinese introductions resembles that of English introductions in general terms, a degree of culture specific variation was found at the micro level. That is, Chinese introductions generally use the moves (Move 2 in particular) and their constituent steps less than and differently to English introductions. This aspect will be discussed in the following section ( As noted above, the English and Chinese RA introductions examined in this study employed the three similar moves: Move 1 (establishing a research territory), Move 2 (establishing a niche), and Move 3 (presenting the present work). Although two similar moves (Move 2 and Move 3) are used in the two sets of introductions, the weight given to these two moves varies. All 20 (100%) English introductions use Move 3 compared to 18 (90%) Chinese introductions. There is a greater disparity with the second move (establishing a niche) as 80% of English introductions use Move 2 compared to 65% of Chinese introductions ( The majority of the English and Chinese writers begin their introductions with Move 1 (establishing a territory). That is, except for two English RA introductions [3-1-2-1-3 (E-10) and 2-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3 (E-12)] which start with Move 3 (presenting the present work) and Move 2 (establishing a niche) respectively, the rest of the English introductions (18 introductions/90%) start with Move 1. As for Chinese RA introductions, all 20 introductions (100%) open with Move 1. The above result is consistent with previous studies which show that all the introductions under investigation start off with Move 1 (e.g., Both English and Chinese RA introductions generally end with Move 3 (presenting the present work) as predicted in the CARS model. In the English data, except for one introduction [1-2-1-2-1-2-3-1-3-1 (E-9)] that ends with Move 1 (establishing a territory), the rest of the introductions end with Move 3. In the Chinese data, except for two introductions that end with Move 2 (establishing a niche) [i.e., 1-2 (C-5 and C-10)], the remaining introductions also close with Move 3 [e.g., 1-2-1-3 (C-1); 1-2-3 (C-8)]. The two sets of introductions also exhibit some similarities and differences in the employment of steps in the three moves. The following focuses on some major observations. In Move 1 (establishing a territory), Move 1 Step 1 (claiming centrality) was found to be prevalent in both English and Chinese introductions (80% and 75% respectively). This result is congruent with English and Chinese writers explicitly signal their intention to claim the centrality of their own research by using positive connotations associated with Move 1 Step 2 (defining terms/concepts) shares much in common between the two sets of introductions in terms of its use. This step was found in almost the same percentage of English and Chinese introductions (55% and 50% respectively). Move 1 Step 3 (presenting the theoretical basis) differs between the two sets of introductions in that it is found in 15% of English introductions while it is totally absent from Chinese introductions. The last step in Move 1, Move 1 Step 4 (reviewing literature/findings of previous research), exhibits some noteworthy similarities and differences. Both English and Chinese introductions always have the review of literature/past findings (Move 1 Step 4). English and Chinese RA introductions present past literature and findings along with stating the objectives of the study, outlining the research questions, and delineating the gap in the literature. This demonstrates that the literature reviews in both sets of introductions serve more rhetorical functions than merely supplying information on the domain within which the paper’s topic is situated. In fact, according to English and Chinese RA introductions, however, differ in the extent to which Move 1 Step 4 (reviewing literature/findings of previous research) is used. Although Move 1 Step 4 is used in the same proportionate rates within each group, Chinese RA introductions have a less elaborate discussion of the literature review by using Move 1 Step 4 to achieve fewer rhetorical goals. As well as providing information on the research domain being reported, Chinese introductions also use Move 1 Step 4 to support the gap indications, the objective of the study and the research questions. In contrast, English introductions use the step (Move 1 Step 4) to support the hypothesis of the study and the adoption of approaches, as well as the above four similar rhetorical goals employed in the Chinese introductions. The lower number of citations in the Chinese RA introductions also demonstrates the lesser extent of discussion of past studies. In general, Chinese RA introductions yield about five times lower the total occurrence of citations than do English RA introductions (average density 8.9 vs. 43.8). This shows a disparity between the occurrences of citations in English and Chinese introductions. That Chinese writers employ citations less than their native English-speaking counterparts was also found in some past studies (e.g., The above findings indicate Chinese RA introductions are less explicit than English RA introductions because of the lesser use of Move 1 Step 4 (reviewing literature/findings of previous research) and citations to establish a clear context for the study being reported. The relative lack of explicitness in Chinese RA introductions can be interpreted as reflecting Chinese high-context communication. In high-context communication, utterances are broadly less explicit and less elaborate as interlocutors rely heavily on shared background information to present the needed context ( In Move 2 (establishing a niche), the most frequently-observed step in both English and Chinese introductions is Move 2 Step 1 (indicating a gap). Even though the two sets of data favour Move 2 Step 1, English introductions employ Move 2 Step 1 proportionately more than Chinese introductions, with the occurrences of the step in 80% and 50% of the introductions respectively. This result is in line with past studies which show that gap indications are not predominant in RAs written in languages other than English, such as Chinese ( The lesser employment of gap indications (Move 2 Step 1) in Chinese RA introductions suggests that Chinese writers do not place as much emphasis on indicating the gaps of past studies as do their native English-speaking counterparts. Furthermore, fewer Chinese writers account for gaps in various aspects of a single study than English writers do, as is shown in the contrasting cyclic nature of gap indication in the two sets of introductions. That is, out of 10 Chinese RA introductions employing Move 2 Step 1 (indicating a gap), this step occurs in a cyclic order in only one Chinese introduction [i.e., C-12 (1-2-1-2-3)], whereas Move 2 Step 1 occurs in a cyclic order in almost 50% of the English RA introductions that employ this step (7 out of 16 introductions). Gap indications in the English and Chinese corpora refer to prior research – whenever gaps in past studies are mentioned in research, both the English and Chinese writers note a lack of, or non-existence of, a research topic. Unlike Chinese writers, English writers take this further by indicating specific shortcomings in previous research and in so doing to criticise the work of specific researchers and to mention these researchers by name. The following example shows an English writer offering evaluations of past studies by using evaluative expressions (emphasis added) such as Unlike their native English-speaking counterparts, Chinese writers do not usually discuss the limitations of specific past research or mention the names of the researchers with whom they disagree. The above phenomenon is exemplified below: The above indicates that creating a niche is not as straightforward in Chinese as it is in English. The two sets of introductions also differ in the employment of Move 2 Step 3 (counter-claiming). English writers employ Move 2 Step 3 to make counter-claims to established knowledge or past research (10% of the English RA introductions). On the other hand, Move 2 Step 3 is not found in Chinese RA introductions. The total absence of Move 2 Step 3 in Chinese introductions strongly suggests that Chinese writers avoid making strong research claims. This could be the result of the greater availability of research space in the Chinese discourse community compared to their native English-speaking counterparts. Chinese writers do not have to compete for research space as much as their native English-speaking counterparts do (cf. In the United States and Western Europe where the research context is dense, researchers face huge pressure in competing for research funding, and in getting their work published ( The use of another rhetorical strategy [Move 2 Step 2 (raising a question)] instead of Move 2 Step 3 (counter-claiming) in Chinese introductions, confirms that Chinese writers are more at ease at establishing the niche of their study by making weaker research claims. Question-raising is employed to make weaker research claims and thus reflects a milder form of gap indication ( In Move 3 (presenting the present work), Move 3 Step 1 was found to have been employed in a high number of English and Chinese introductions (100% and 80% respectively). This step often concludes both English and Chinese introductions and is used as a lead-in to the methodology section. The other steps in Move 3 are usually employed more in English than in Chinese introductions. Some noteworthy differences are observed between the two sets of introductions in the employment of Move 3 Step 3 (foreshadowing the methodology), Move 3 Step 4 (introducing the research hypothesis), Move 3 Step 7 (introducing the implications of the findings), and Move 3 Step 8 (claiming the significance of the study). Move 3 Step 3 (foreshadowing the methodology) is found in 11 (55%) English RA introductions while it is found in only one (5%) Chinese introduction. In the 11 English RA introductions, Move 3 Step 3 provides an elaborate description, while the similar step in the one Chinese introduction which employs this step (C-16) supplies only a brief description of the methodology used in the reported study: The Chinese writer (C-16) kept the description of the methodology to minimum – just two sentences in the Chinese example above. Perhaps this is designed to encourage readers to uncover the details for themselves in the subsequent methodology section. In the case of English writers, it may be that they think the study will make more sense to the reader if the methodology is first contextualised in an elaborate description, making the study more explicit from the introductory section onwards. As Move 3 Step 3 (foreshadowing the methodology) provides information on issues closely related to the reported study before they are dealt with in detail in the subsequent method section of an article, fewer Chinese RA introductions use Move 3 Step 3 suggesting that they are less explicit than the English introductions. Move 3 Step 4 (introducing the research hypothesis) occurs in 75% of English RA introductions. In contrast, this step is totally absent in the Chinese introductions. English writers introduce a long list of research hypotheses that will be later be explored in the discussion section. In this way, Move 3 Step 4 helps to orientate readers by stating the expected findings and revealing the contents of the rest of the article to a varying degree in the introduction section. The excerpt below is a good example of an English introduction that provides a long list of hypotheses: The absence of Move 3 Step 4 (introducing the research hypothesis) in Chinese RA introductions suggests that they are less explicit than English introductions. Move 3 Step 8 (claiming the significance of the study) occurs in three (15%) English RA introductions while it occurs in only one (5%) Chinese introduction. The description regarding the significance of the study in the only Chinese introduction (C-14) which employs this step is brief compared to the description in the three English introductions. The lower percentage of introductions using Move 3 Step 8 suggests that Chinese writers place less emphasis on highlighting the value of their own research in the introductions compared to their native English-speaking counterparts. This suggestion is supported by the absence of a step that indicates the practical value of the study [i.e., Move 3 Step 7 (introducing the implications of the findings)] from Chinese introductions, and also by less use of self-citations in Chinese introductions (i.e., self-citations occurred in 35% - 7 out of 20 - of the Chinese compared to 80% - 16 out of 20 - of the English introductions). According to This lesser emphasis on highlighting the value of the writers’ own work (i.e., the study being reported as well as their past studies) in their articles could be related to a desire to avoid being seen as “ English and Chinese RA introductions share similarities regarding move sequence. Moves higher up in the list usually occur first (before those lower down the list) except in two cases in the English corpus. That is, one began with a Move 3 [i.e., 3-1-2-1-3 (E-10)] and another with a Move 2 [i.e., 2-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3 (E-12)]. The two sets of introductions show a linear move structure and a cyclic pattern. Both sets of introductions however exhibit some differences in the move sequence. A higher percentage of English than Chinese introductions closely resemble the CARS model by displaying the three moves in the order of 1-2-3 as stipulated by Swales (55% vs. 40%) (see Concerning the cyclic pattern, the findings of the present study reveal that only five of the 20 Chinese RA introductions (25%) exhibit a cyclic order of moves. That is, discussion proceeds from one move to another with recurrence of one or more moves [e.g., 1-2-1-3 (C-1); 1-2-1-3-1-3 (C-15); 1-3-1-3-1-3-2-3 (C-16)]. In contrast, all the 20 (100%) English RA introductions have a cyclic structure [e.g., 1-2-3-1-3-1-3 (E-5); 1-2-3-1-2-3 (E-18); 1-3-1-3-1-3 (E-14); 1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3-1-3 (E-19)]. The higher degree of cyclicity in English RA introductions suggests that cyclicity of moves is a distinctive feature in English, but not in Chinese RA introductions. In the present corpus, English RA introductions are 4.2 times longer than the Chinese introductions (72.4 sentences per English introduction vs. 17.3 sentences per Chinese introduction). The higher cyclicity of moves in the English introductions is perhaps explained by the great differences in length between the two sets of introductions. As This study shows that the two sets of RA introductions (English and Chinese) support the general framework presented by Swales. All the introductions employ the three moves (i.e., Move 1, Move 2 and Move 3) as outlined by Swales and no examples of moves beyond the parameters of his model were found in the corpus. However, the fit between the CARS model and the present corpus is only partial since the introductions contain certain rhetorical strategies (steps) which cannot be accounted for in terms of Swales’s CARS model. This study also demonstrates that English and Chinese RA introductions share some similarities and differences. The findings of the present study are useful for teaching English academic writing to Chinese ESL students with relatively advanced levels of competence in English. The present study proposes an analytic-synthetic approach to be applied in teaching English academic writing. In an analytic-synthetic approach, teachers provide students with the task of analysing rhetorical variables in academic prose before instructing the students to produce their own drafts. In other words, knowledge gained from the tasks becomes a resource for the students to help them write appropriate English academic prose (cf. I would like to express my gratitude to the New Zealand Government, specifically the New Zealand Ministry of Education for granting me a New Zealand Doctoral Research Scholarship, which enabled me to undertake this research at the University of Otago. In addition, my deep appreciation goes to the University Malaysia Sabah for granting me study leave to pursue my PhD study. My deep gratitude also goes to my primary supervisor, Dr. Moyra Sweetnam Evans for her perceptive and constructive comments on this paper (a portion of my PhD work). I also wish to thank Editor Paul Thompson for his editorial advice and the reviewers for their helpful comments.