Thin films of solid electrolyte La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.8Mg0.2O3−δ
                      (LSGM) were deposited by RF magnetron sputtering onto porous La0.7Sr0.3Cr0.5Mn0.5O3−δ
                      (LSCM) anode substrates. The effects of substrate temperature, sputtering power density and sputtering Ar gas pressure on the LSGM thin film density, flatness and morphology were systematically investigated. RF sputtering power density of 7.8Wcm−2, substrate temperature of 300°C and sputtering Ar gas pressure of 5Pa are identified as the best technical parameters. In addition, a three-electrode half cell configuration was selected to investigate the electrochemical performance of the thin film. The LSGM film deposited at optimum conditions exhibited a lower area specific ohmic resistance of 0.68Ωcm−2 at 800°C, showing that the practicability of RF magnetron sputtering method to fabricate LSGM electrolyte thin film on porous LSCM anode substrates.Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) has attracted more and more attention attributing to its various advantages such as high efficiency, low pollution and good fuel flexibility Conventional SOFC requires to be operated at high temperature above 1000 Recently various attempts have been made to prepare electrolyte thin film on porous anode substrates to construct anode-supported design In this paper, we systematically investigated effects of some technical parameters of RF magnetron sputtering on LSGM electrolyte film. LSGM powders were synthesized by solid-state reaction The porous LSCM substrates were prepared by conventional powder pressing and sintering process. The LSCM powers and proper quantities of starch acting as pore former were mixed and ground in an agate mortar and then pressed into pellets of 20 The dense and crack-free electrolyte thin films were sequentially deposited on LSCM anode substrates by RF magnetron sputtering technique with different operation parameters. The LSGM ceramic sheet with a diameter of 60 The process parameters of LSGM films fabricated by RF magnetron sputtering were listed in The phase structure and microstructure of the resulting LSGM layers were observed with X-ray diffraction analyzer (XRD) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). A three-electrode configuration was adopted to characterize properties of the electrolyte film which was prepared at the determined optimum conditions as shown in X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) was performed to identify phase formation using Cu Kα radiation at a scanning step of 0.02°.   The deposition rate as a function of sputtering power density is presented in    The performance of the half cell with magnetron sputtering electrolyte was also measured. In general, the lower the temperature, the smaller the conductivity of LSGM material. And the output performance of the cell may be worse. According to the literatures Therefore, more study works concerning LSGM electrolyte thin film deposited by RF magnetron sputtering need to be further performed to improve the property of LSGM film and its cell performance in an intermediate temperature SOFC. Impervious and highly dense LSGM electrolyte thin films have been successfully fabricated on porous LSCM anode supports by RF magnetron sputtering after post annealing 1000 The authors would like to thank Ph.D. Jianjun Yang for helpful discussion. The financial support from the