This work assesses the effectiveness of an artificial intelligence (AI) model based on an artificial neural networks (ANN) – genetic algorithm (GA) in the prediction of the behavior and optimization of the treatment of sulfate wastewaters with Bromophenol blue dye using an electro-oxidation (EO) process. Trials were made with a filter press-type reactor with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode. The ANN model was trained with 51 electrolytic experiments by using the electrolysis time, flow, current density, pH and dye concentration as input variables and the discoloration efficiency as the output one. The performance of ANN was measured with RMSE and MAPE values of 10.73 % and 8.81 %, respectively, calculated from real and predicted values. Optimum conditions determined by GA were reached for the inputs of 10min, 11.9L min−1, 31.25mA cm−2, 2.8 and 41.25mgL−1, giving a discoloration efficiency of 88.8±0.3 %, close to 95.5 % predicted by the model. To validate the AI model, the same experimental conditions were applied to treat wastewaters with Bromothymol blue and Thymol blue, with analogous structures to Bromophenol blue, and a mixture of the three dyes by EO. In all cases, the loss of color decayed following a pseudo-first-order kinetics, with similar apparent rate constants. For the dye mixture, 69 % COD was reduced at 60min, with 13 % average current efficiency and 0.26kWh (g COD)-1 energy consumption. The AI model is a strong tool to design, control and operate the EO process with a BDD anode to treat wastewaters with similar dyes.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are widely used for the depollution of wastewater with recalcitrant pollutants such as synthetic dyes, pharmaceuticals, herbicides and pesticides. These technologies have several advantages against conventional wastewater treatments methods. While biological treatment technologies have good removal efficiencies against wastewaters with high biodegradable organic load, they are very inefficient for treating wastewaters with high content of refractory pollutants ( Among the pollutants of interest, synthetic dyes have been received recently great attention because they are hardly treatable by conventional methods. When these pollutants enter the water bodies can cause several environmental implications like aesthetic problems and reduce the penetration of sunlight to the water. Moreover, some of these compounds are considered as endocrine disruptors and it is well-know that can originate some types of cancers ( To avoid all the environmental implications caused by the discharge of synthetic dyes, powerful advance oxidation methods are required for the effective degradation of these pollutants prior to their disposal into the natural water streams ( In EO the pollutants are oxidized by a direct electrode at the surface of the anode (M) or, more effectively, by mediated reaction with physisorbed hydroxyl radicals M( As is well-known, the electrode surface that best favors this process is the so-called boron-doped diamond (BDD), which offers a higher mineralization performance of organic compounds, compared to other electrode materials such as Pt or dimensionally stable anodes. This is due to the larger amount of physisorbed hydroxyl radicals BDD( The performance of the EO process relies on several factors including pH adjustment, a proper selection of the material, surface area and structure of the electrode ( The improvement in computer speed, the capacity of developed complex tasks and the reduction of costs have led to an increase in the use of computational models for the prediction or optimization of several processes including those related to wastewater treatment. Artificial intelligence (AI) is being used since its first appearance in 1950. AI gives to computers the ability of take real information, analyze the given data and decide a response by itself for a specific task. Among the AI models, artificial neural networks (ANN) are the most used ( ANN consist in artificial neurons grouped in layers: (i) an input layer (the studied variables, e.g., pH, flow, pollutant concentration, etc.), (ii) an output layer (response variable, e.g., removal efficiency) and (iii) one or more hidden layers between these two layers ( ANN have been used for predicting the biological oxygen demand (BOD) in rivers streams ( GA are AI models that are based in the natural selection process, where the most adapted organisms can procreate. Normally, these computational tools are satisfactory coupled with ANN ( AI models consisting in ANN and GA algorithms are tools that have been used in the conventional wastewater treatment field for the optimization of the reverse osmosis process for the desalination of water ( Although most of the proposed AI models have been applied to the design, control, optimization or modelling of conventional wastewater treatment methods, few studies have been focused on AOPs that recently have gained interest in this field. This work presents an AI model based on ANN and GA for an EO process of a synthetic wastewater containing the dye Bromophenol Blue, which is well-known by its mutagenic and carcinogenic effects to living being ( Commercial Bromophenol blue (C The experimental data were collected using a filter-press-type FM01 reactor, schematized in A total of 51 electrolytic experiments were made during a time ranging from 10 to 60 Oxidizable organics were evaluated by chemical oxygen demand (COD) tests, according to the 5220D method from Standard Methods ( The first step of the ANN-GA model was to train an ANN to predict the performance of the EO treatment of synthetic Bromophenol blue wastewaters. Since there is not any methodology to develop these types of tools, right input and output variables must be properly chosen in order to train correctly the ANN model. The operating variables taken as inputs for the ANN model were the following: the experimental time (ET), flow (Q), current density (CD or The hidden layers and neurons of the ANN model were determined by proof and error in order to reach the minimum goal (settled in 0.005, for this particular case) ( The GA model is based on the Darwin evolution theory, where a population of individuals can evolve through generations until a new organism. For this tool, the population was represented by a set of possible solutions that are codified to generate a chain of values that represent the input vector into the ANN model (ET, Q, CD, pH and DC). An initial population was created, each one of the individuals from this population represents a possible solution. As in natural selection, some of the individuals can pass their genetic code to the next generation to create a new generation and the algorithm applies three rules: selection, crossover probability and mutation rules. The experimental data had boundaries that are defined by the maximum and minimum of the input variables; as happen with the ANN, although no methodology has been established to find the initial parameters of the GA ( Synthetic solutions of Bromophenol blue with CD from 2 to 135 There are few papers dealing with the degradation of Bromophenol blue, including the EO treatment with PbO Since the universe of data tested are limited, other experimental conditions should be evaluated in order to find the optimum experimental conditions in which the EO process possessed the higher efficiency in the discoloration of bromophenol blue from a sulfate wastewater. The impossibility to check all the universe of possible experimental conditions makes necessary an AI model that can predict how the process worked under certain conditions. The methodology established was then achieved by trial and error ( When using ANN models, it is hard to see the interactive effect between two or more variables because it is a black box model. Also, the models are only applied to a specific problem since the bias and weights are given randomly by the network. Finally, these models are unable to be used for a global optimum search ( There is scarce information about the degradation of Bromophenol blue by AOPs with the establishment of optimum experimental conditions, as stated above. Our results make in evidence that the EO process of the sulfate wastewaters of this dye is effective for their discoloration. The aim of the present study is to find the optimum operating variables and then, GA was utilized. The ANN-GA model constructed provided 2 groups of possible solutions, which were classified into ranges of operating conditions from minimum to maximum values. The application of an AI model based on ANN and GA was necessary in order to modeling the complex nonlinear processes that take place during the EO treatment of wastewaters with hardly degradable pollutants. The aim of these models was to reduce reactive, energy cost or maximizing discoloration efficiency by avoiding long experimental times. The GA provided a population of possible solutions by avoiding a premature convergence and thus, local optimum. The operator can test this group of solutions or select one of them for checking the efficacy of the group of experimental conditions. From According to the ANN-GA model, the best experimental conditions to test were an electrolysis time of 10 After the experimental validation of the ANN-GA model, the EO treatment was extended to solutions containing Bromothymol blue and Thymol blue, with similar structure to Bromophenol blue. All the trials were performed with 41.25 The absorbance decay of  The oxidizable organics during 60 From the above COD decays, the average current efficiency (ACE, in %) and specific energy consumption per unit COD mass (EC, in kWh (g(COD)  From previous studies reported by us and other authors ( The degradation of Bromophenol blue wastewaters by an EO process using a filter-press type reactor with a BDD anode was studied. Since this treatment requires the supply of electrical energy to achieve higher removal efficiencies, an AI model was applied to reduce the energy requirements and maximize the concentration of the pollutant to be degraded. The AI model was based on an ANN-GA, which proposed a combination of experimental variable in which the electrolysis time was minimized with acceptable discoloration efficiency. The best architecture for the ANN model was performed with RMSE and MAPE values of 10.73 % and 8.81 %, respectively. The optimum conditions determined by GA for an electrolysis time of 10 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Alain R. Picos-Benítez and Blanca L. Martínez-Vargas gratefully acknowledges financial support from the