An innovative process for the production of spices was developed on pilot-plant scale. Immediately after harvest, fresh chili and green pepper (fruits), ginger (rhizomes), and coriander (whole plant) were blanched and subjected to coarse and fine grinding prior to lyophilization. Alternatively, thermal treatment was applied after processing the fresh plant material into a paste. Microbiological assays revealed low counts of aerobic germs, aerobic spore forming bacteria, Escherichia coli, coliforms, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, yeasts and moulds, and sulfite reducing clostridia. Salmonella as well as aflatoxins were not detected in any of the products. Because the spice powders obtained were generally characterized by improved color, in contrast to conventional spice processing, early inactivation of endogenous enzymes may have prevented degradation of plant pigments and browning.
               
                  Industrial relevance
                  Spices are common sources for microbial contaminations with special concern in minimally processed products. Sterilization of spices has been shown to adversely affect product quality criteria and ionizing or UV radiation have been met with consumer resistance. Pasteurization/sterilization or blanching as thermal processes effective in reducing microbial loads and inactivating enzymes. However, loss of volatiles could not be prevented in the process presented and needs to be tackled prior to industrial scale use.Antiquity spices and herbs not only have been used for seasoning since, but also for cosmetical and medical purposes. Spice products are usually prepared by drying of the raw material as a whole or in coarsely cut form. The plant material is commonly spread on the ground and sun-dried, whereas artificial drying and the use of solar-dryers is scarce. Finally, the dried product is ground; however, care must be taken to minimize the loss of volatile compounds. Most spices are produced in tropical and subtropical regions. The hot and humid climate, the simple, unpretentious production conditions, extended drying times, and often inadequate instructions of the farmers may cause considerable hygienic and quality problems ( During conventional spice production the slow decrease of water activity enhances browning and chlorophyll degradation. Furthermore, deteriorating enzymes (e.g. lipoxygenase, peroxidase, and polyphenoloxidase) may also regain their activity, especially during storage of spices under humid conditions and after rehydration of dry foods. Since endogenous as well as microbial enzymes may adversely affect color, texture, taste, and aroma of spices and foods, their immediate inactivation is also a prerequisite for high quality spices. Therefore, the objective of the present study was to develop an alternative process for the production of spices and herbs with low contamination rates and of high quality with respect to color and volatile compounds. In contrast to conventional spice production, inactivation of enzymes and microorganisms should be achieved. Due to their economic importance, chili pods and green pepper (fruits), ginger (rhizomes), and coriander (whole plants) were exemplarily chosen. Green pepper and fresh ginger rhizomes were obtained from organic production in Thailand, where sulfite has not been used. Chilis were purchased from a local market. Coriander was cultivated at the Hohenheim University Experimental Station for Horticulture, and immediately processed after harvest in July (during blossoming) and August (green mature seeds). 3 kg of panicles were heated in a boiler at 90 °C for 10 min or at 100 °C for 5 and 10 min using water and steam, respectively. After blanching and subsequent cooling in ice-water for 1 min the fruits were picked. Alternatively, 200 g of panicles were filled in cans containing 800 mL of water. The cans were autoclaved at 110 °C for 1 and 5 min, respectively, and at 120 °C for 1 min in a rotary retort (Rotopilot 5, Stock, Neumünster, Germany) at 0.7 bar. The blanched as well as autoclaved berries were minced to a pasty mash in a corundum mill (type MK 95, Fryma, Rheinfelden, Germany) with a gap of 0.4 mm. Due to frictional forces the temperature of all spice pastes increased up to 60 °C. Finally, the paste was lyophilized ( 3 kg of fresh, unpeeled rhizomes were minced in a cutter (type K20, Seydelmann, Aalen, Germany) for 1.5 min and then ground in a corundum mill with a gap of 0.4 mm. The ginger paste was heated in a hermetically sealed 3 L pilot-plant scale reaction vessel (type EL 3, ESCO-Labor AG, Riehen, Switzerland) at 80 °C for 10 min, at 90 °C for 5 and 10 min, and at 100 °C for 1 and 10 min ( 2.5 kg of fresh red chili pods were coarsely ground in a cutter for 1.5 min, prior to comminution in a corundum mill with a gap of 1 mm. The chili paste was heated in the reaction vessel at 80 °C for 10 min, at 90 °C for 5 and 10 min, and at 100 °C for 5 min, respectively ( After removing the roots and about one third of the stem, the washed plant material was blanched at 90 °C for 5 and 10 min, at 100 °C for 1, 5, 7, and 10 min with steam, or at 100 °C for 7 min in water, respectively, and finally cooled in ice-water for 1 min. The plant material comprising stems, leaves, blossoms, and seeds was minced for 2.5 min using a cutter ( The water content of dried powders and raw material was determined according to the Karl–Fischer (KF) method. The analyses were carried out by automatic titration using a Titrino KF 701 (Mettler Toledo, Weilheim, Germany). 50 mg of the spice powders and 150 mg of homogenized raw material were analyzed at 50 °C using Hydranal® Composite 5 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) as the reagent and dried methanol (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany) as the solvent. 10 mL of formamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MI, USA) was added in order to avoid agglomeration. After each analysis the solvent was changed. One to five replications were performed for each analysis. Microbiological investigations of spice powders were carried out immediately after processing. Each sample was analyzed for aerobic plate count (TPC), aerobic spore forming bacteria, An aliquot of 20 g of spice material was diluted with 180 mL of sterile NaCl-peptone solution in a Stomacher 400 Circulator (Seward, London, UK). Serial dilutions (1:10) of each homogenized sample were made in the same diluent and surface spread. TPCs were determined using Plate Count-Agar (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany). Plates were incubated aerobically at 30 °C for 72 h before colony counting. Dilutions of aerobic spore forming bacteria were heated at 70–80 °C and determined after incubating at 30 °C for 72 h using Plate Count-Agar. Aflatoxin contents were determined according to a modified DIN EN 12955 method. 50 g of spice powder was extracted with 250 mL of a methanol–water mixture (60/40; v/v) and filtered. An aliquot of the filtrate was loaded onto an immunoaffinity column (Rhône-Poulenc Diagnostics, Glasgow, UK). After washing with water, aflatoxins were eluted with methanol. Identification and quantification of aflatoxins were performed using a Shimadzu HPLC system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a CRB-6A Chemical Reaction Box, a LC-6A Liquid Chromatograph, a SCL-6B System Controller, a SIL-6B Auto Injector, a Class LC-10 Software, and a RF 10A XL fluorescence detector. The separation was carried out under isocratic conditions using a Nucleosil 100-5 C18 (125 mm×3 mm, i.d.; Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany), with a Nucleosil 120-5 C18 guard column (11 mm×3 mm, i.d.; Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany), operated at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min and a temperature of 40 °C. The mobile phase consisted of methanol/acetonitrile/water (13.75/11.25/75; v/v/v), 1 mol/L KBr and 0.01% HNO A CR-300 chroma meter (Minolta, Osaka, Japan) was used for color measurements. The instrument was calibrated with a white standard tile ( The determination was carried out according to a modified ASTA 20.1 method (American Spice and Trade Association). 1 g of the sample was transferred into a volumetric flask. The volume was made up to 100 mL with acetone (VWR, Darmstadt, Germany) and the flask was shaken. The suspension was kept in the dark for 4–5 h. 10 mL of this solution was transferred to another flask and made up to 100 mL with acetone. An aliquot of this solution was used for the spectrophotometric measurement at 460 nm. ASTA units were calculated as follows Capsaicinoid content of chili powder was determined according to ASTA method 21.3 (Pungency of capsicums and their oleoresins). After weighing 25 g of chili powder into a volumetric boiling flask, 200 mL of ethanol was added and the samples were boiled for 5 h. After cooling an aliquot of 3–4 mL was filtered through a 0.45 μm syringe filter. Identification and quantification of capsaicinoids were performed using a Consta Metric 3000 HPLC system (Miltron Roy, Riviera Beach, FL, USA) equipped with an SM 4000 diode array detector (Milton Roy, Riviera Beach, FL, USA). The separation was carried out under isocratic conditions using a LiChrosorb RP-18 (250 mm×4.0 mm i.d., 5 μm particle size; VWR, Darmstadt, Germany) operated at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min and a temperature of 20 °C. The mobile phase consisted of methanol/water/dioxane/acetonitrile/perchloric acid (48.4/30.2/13.3/7.9/0.2; v/v/v/v/v). The injection volume was 20 μL. Capsaicinoid monitoring was performed at 280 nm. 10 g of dried and 25–30 g of fresh material, respectively, were transferred into a 1 L round-bottomed flask containing 400–500 mL of deionized water. The apparatus was closed with a clavenger-type oil trap and the samples were distilled for 2 h. During distillation volatile oils were collected in a volumetric tube. Each measurement was performed in triplicate. Methods described so far for the reduction of microbial loads of spices are associated with several disadvantages. Since fumigation with ethylene oxide causes undesirable residues, its application has generally been banned. Sterilization under dry and wet conditions adversely affects the quality of the products ( Besides microbial contamination, the deterioration of color, flavor, texture, and taste poses another problem during production and storage of spices ( The objective of this work was to obtain green pepper powder with a low microbial load, a bright green color, and retention of volatile oils. However, in contrast to conventional spice production, heat treatment could not be omitted, because after mincing green pepper is prone to rapid black discoloration, due to high polyphenoloxidase activity. Usually green pepper products are processed from unripe fruits. In order to avoid browning caused by fermentation, the fruits are generally preserved by lyophilization or by bottling in vinegar, brine, or water ( The time–temperature regime was also crucial with respect to color retention, which is mainly affected by residual enzyme activities of the product. Application of elevated temperatures resulted in increased chroma ( When spices are sold for domestic culinary purposes, aroma and flavor, which are mainly determined by volatile constituents, are of greater importance than the absolute pungency level ( The raw material used in the present study contained 3.23% essential oil ( Traditionally, ginger is prepared in three different ways. Coated ginger is dried either unpeeled or after partial removal of the peel. Uncoated ginger is completely peeled and dried to obtain a light-colored product. Bleached ginger, which is coated with lime, is dried with or without skins. Due to their contact with soil, the multiply branched ginger rhizomes are prone to heavy microbial contamination with yeasts, moulds, aerobic thermophiles, spore formers, and mesophilic putrefactives ( When the rhizomes were only minced, ground, and finally dried (GI 0), the TPCs as well as the number of yeasts in the ginger powder were diminished. This may be ascribed to the temperature rise during comminution in the colloid mill where the ginger paste reached approximately 60 °C. Heating the rhizomes at 80 °C for 10 min prior to mincing (GI 1) reduced TPCs by 10 Fresh ginger rhizomes usually contain 1–3% volatile oils, depending on cultivar, quality, and stage of maturation ( Because color is one of the most important quality attributes affecting consumers' acceptance, minimization of pigment loss and browning during processing were the primary objectives of the present study. The color characteristics of the raw material and the ginger powder are given in Because the genus As can be seen from As observed for green pepper and ginger, mincing in a corundum mill without further heat treatment reduced TPCs by ∼10 Besides pungency, color is the predominant quality parameter for paprika and chili products. Color is caused by carotenoid pigments, essentially capsanthin and capsorubin ( Because surface color does not necessarily depend on the total amounts of pigments in chilies, color was additionally expressed in ASTA units, which are related to the total coloring capacity. Although the ASTA method is frequently used, correlations with other color measurements could not be established ( Because volatile oil levels were low in all Water and capsaicinoid contents are listed in From coriander two primary products used for flavoring purposes, namely the fresh green herb and the spice are derived. The latter is the dried form of the whole, mature seed capsule. In this study the entire plants except for their roots were processed into a coriander powder. Coriander is often associated with high microbial loads exceeding 10 During thermal processing of coriander plants, conversion of chlorophyll to pheophytins with undesirable color change from bright green to olive-brown was observed. Blanching and hot air exposure prior to drying were shown to enhance chlorophyll retention of dried vegetables ( The CIE color values of fresh coriander ( As reported by The plant material used in this work yielded 1.1% and 1.2% essential oil ( In this study an improved process for preparing spices was established. After harvest the fresh plant material was immediately converted into a paste and subsequently heated for microbial and enzyme inactivation. Alternatively, blanching prior to crushing of the plant material was applied ( The present work was supported by Gewürzmüller (Stuttgart, Germany). The authors would like to thank Mr. Michael Rendlen for supplying the raw material and for valuable discussions. Mrs. Sabine Vogt's support in the determination of volatile oils is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Labor Dr. Merten (Freiburg, Germany) for the microbiological testings and for the determination of aflatoxins, and W.E.J. (Hamburg, Germany) for the capsaicinoid analyses.