The present paper quantifies the separate and combined effects of pyrite (FeS2) inclusions, dissolved oxygen (0.001mol/L) and ferric ion (0.01–0.05mol/L) on the electrochemical behavior of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) electrodes by means of potentiometry and linear sweep voltammetry. The experiments were carried out in 0.1mol/L H2SO4 solutions at room temperature (26±1°C). Naturally associated pyrite–chalcopyrite electrodes were selected with the aims to better represent the sulfide association in the ore, thus minimizing the voltage losses across the mineral–mineral contact. The presence of ferric ion and oxygen was shown to increase in approximately 53% the mixed potential of CuFeS2 electrodes; the dissolution current density increased up to 55 times. In the presence of these oxidants and pyrite (42% FeS2 of the electrode surface), the mixed potential was further increased in 14%. For these mixed electrodes, the dissolution current density increased by a factor of approximately 2.6 and 2.2, respectively, in solutions containing 0.001mol O2/L and 0.05molFe3+/L, and by 1.6 times in presence of both oxidants (0.001molO2/L with 0.05molFe3+/L). Therefore, more pronounced effect of pyrite inclusions on chalcopyrite oxidation rate was observed under the lower oxidizing conditions. The effects of the oxidants were described by electrochemical models. The galvanic effect of pyrite on the dissolution of this important sulfide was discussed by the kinetics of the half-cell reactions occurring in the pyrite–chalcopyrite coupling.The aqueous processing of copper sulfide ores has been extensively investigated aimed at treating chalcopyrite (CuFeS The effect of catalysts on the mineral dissolution rate has also been investigated. It is well-established that the galvanic interactions increase the dissolution rate of one of the minerals that constitute a galvanic couple. The enhancement of copper extraction from chalcopyrite when in contact with metallic copper ( Since pyrite is a mineral phase typically found in copper sulfide ores ( With the aid of leaching experiments and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS),  In the Galvanox™ process, copper extraction from chalcopyrite is conducted in the presence of pyrite particles in ferric sulfate solutions, at approximately 440–480 Results by In contrast to the classical electrochemical mechanism, it has been proposed that chalcopyrite dissolution involves an electron-independent formation of hydrogen sulfide (H It is evident from the above review that unresolved controversies exist concerning the mechanisms by which pyrite affects chalcopyrite dissolution. The role of pyrite on the dissolution rate of this commercially and technologically important copper sulfide may go beyond the recognized galvanic interaction, and such effect is expected to be magnified by the occurrence of a permanent contact between the two mineral phases. In this context, the aim of this investigation is to evaluate the magnitude of the galvanic effect of pyrite on the electrochemical behavior of chalcopyrite, with a method that better represents the mineral association in the ore. By investigating FeS The mineral samples used in this investigation were obtained from Ward's Natural Science, N.Y. Chalcopyrite and pyrite samples consisted of massive pieces from Durango (Mexico) and Huanzala (Peru), respectively. The preparation of the pyrite-free chalcopyrite (CE) electrode, chalcopyrite-free pyrite (PE) electrode, and mixed (chalcopyrite–pyrite) (ME) electrodes involved the following procedures. Firstly, a massive sample was cut using a diamond wafering blade (Buehler®, n.11-4246), thus obtaining regular specimens (1.0 The quantitative chemical analysis of the mineral (chalcopyrite and pyrite) samples used to prepare the electrodes was obtained by the following procedure. Firstly, samples were digested in a hot plate at 150 Before the electrochemical experiments, diverse mineral electrodes were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), using a JEOL (JSM 6360 LV) Microscope and a Thermo Noran (Quest) Spectrometer; optical microscopy, using a Leica (Metallux DFC 290) Microscope, equipped with lenses of 10, 50, and 100 Particularly for the mixed electrodes (MEs), the Standard Test Method The electrochemical measurements were conducted at room temperature (26 The quantitative chemical analysis indicated that the chalcopyrite sample used to prepare the CE and ME electrodes contained 92.1% CuFeS Raman spectroscopy and EDS analyses were employed to assess the features of the surface of the mineral electrodes.  The potentials on freshly polished CE, PE, and ME electrodes immersed in 0.1 The potentials of freshly polished CE, PE and ME electrodes immersed in the 0.1 In an attempt to better simulate practical leaching conditions, the magnitude of the combined effects of pyrite inclusions, oxygen, and ferric ion on the mixed potential of chalcopyrite was also investigated. The mixed potentials measured in the presence of both the oxidants (0.001 The current density at the mixed potential was measured at low anodic and low cathodic overpotentials (η   Many authors have claimed that metal-deficient sulfides, generally iron-deficient phases, are intermediate products formed on chalcopyrite during its dissolution in acidic media at low redox potentials (0.35–0.75 Writing the anodic current density (i In the absence of measured data, the values of α  For i By similar assumptions to those made for the effects of oxidants on the mixed potential of pure chalcopyrite (CE) electrodes, which are (i) steady-state condition (Eqs. Thus, when the acidity of the electrolyte solution increases, the current density at the mixed potential of chalcopyrite becomes larger, as verified experimentally by According to the results obtained in this investigation, the effects of ferric ion addition on the electrochemistry of chalcopyrite appeared to be more pronounced than the effects of oxygen bubbling. These results may be related to the relatively higher ferric ion concentration (0.01–0.05 Regarding the galvanic effect of pyrite on chalcopyrite electrochemistry, it has been assumed that pyrite, when galvanically-coupled to chalcopyrite, provides a more favorable site for the reduction reactions (   Regarding the increase of the mixed potential and dissolution current density of chalcopyrite when the pyrite content on the electrode surface increases, it was assumed that the pyrite inclusions acts only as a cathodic site in the galvanic coupling ( The larger effect of pyrite inclusions on the dissolution current density of chalcopyrite after nitrogen bubbling (increases of up to 40 times), comparatively to the effects observed under oxidizing conditions (increases of up to 2.6 times) may be related to the amount (or thickness) of a product layer that forms on chalcopyrite surface during the electrochemical measurements. As assumed, chalcopyrite acts as the anode, but also as cathodic site, when in contact with pyrite. After nitrogen bubbling, the product layer that grows up on chalcopyrite would not be thick enough to affect significantly the rate of the cathodic reduction of the residual dissolved oxygen. In contrast, the amount of product layer that forms on this mineral when oxygen is bubbled in the solution would be large enough to affect the kinetics of oxygen reduction. Therefore, the total discharge area available on chalcopyrite surface and, as a result, the proportion of oxygen that is reduced on this mineral, would be both reduced, which may explain the decrease in the magnitude of its dissolution current density from 40 to 2.6 times. In the presence of ferric ion or ferric ion and bubbled oxygen, a still thicker product layer possibly develops on chalcopyrite during the measurements, affecting to a larger extent the reduction rates of both the oxidants. Quantitative assessments of the galvanic effect of pyrite on the electrochemistry of chalcopyrite in acidic sulfate media under atmospheric conditions are provided. Electrodes were prepared with chalcopyrite samples containing different proportions of pyrite inclusions. The positive effect of combining ferric (Fe The presence of pyrite inclusions on chalcopyrite increased the mixed potential value of this copper sulfide. The mixed potentials of the ME1 (14% FeS The presence of pyrite inclusions on chalcopyrite caused a significant increase in the dissolution current density of chalcopyrite. The current densities of the ME1, ME2, and ME3 electrodes were 15, 24, and 40 times, respectively, higher than the current measured on the CE electrode. More pronounced effects of pyrite inclusions on the chalcopyrite oxidation rate was observed after nitrogen bubbling (increases of up to 40 times in the dissolution current density) and under the lower oxidizing conditions (increase of up to 2.6 times). For the investigated conditions, it was demonstrated that only the ferric ion reduction reaction occurs with lower overpotential on pyrite than on chalcopyrite. The results obtained in this investigation show that under conditions where there is a permanent contact between pyrite and chalcopyrite, the galvanic effect established between these sulfides is magnified under less oxidizing conditions. Hence, it is probable that this phenomenon will help to enhance copper extraction from chalcopyrite ores under practical heap leaching conditions, especially in the heap sections where there is a reduction of the oxidants concentration. The authors are grateful to the Brazilian government agencies: