Tibial eminence avulsion fractures are rare injuries occurring mainly in adolescents and young adults. When necessary, regardless of patient age, anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation are mandatory for fracture healing and accurate restoration of normal knee biomechanics. Various arthroscopically assisted fixation methods with sutures, anchors, wires, or screws have been described but can be technically demanding, thus elongating operative times. The purpose of this article is to present a technical variation of arthroscopic suture fixation of anterior cruciate ligament avulsion fractures. Using thoracic drain needles over 2.4-mm anterior cruciate ligament tibial guidewires, we recommend the safe and easy creation of four 2.9-mm tibial tunnels at different angles and at specific points. This technique uses thoracic drain needles as suture passage cannulas and offers 4-point fixation stability, avoiding potential complications of bony bridge fracture and tunnel connection.Avulsion fractures of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) from the tibial eminence are rare injuries occurring mainly in children and adolescents. Regardless of patient age, anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation are mandatory for fracture healing and accurate restoration of normal knee biomechanics, especially for type III and IV fractures or when concomitant chondral, meniscal, or other ligamentous injuries are present. Various fixation methods using screws, wires, anchors, or even “buttons” have been extensively described in the English-language literature with very promising results. The patient is positioned supine with a thigh tourniquet and the affected limb placed on a standard leg holder allowing full knee range of motion. By use of a 30°, 4.0-mm arthroscope, standard anteromedial (AM) and anterolateral portals are used. The knee joint is evaluated, hematoma is evacuated, and fracture debris or other interposed tissues are removed. Concomitant meniscal tears or other lesions are assessed and addressed before fracture treatment. In most cases the transverse intermeniscal ligament is interposed between the superior displaced fragment and the tibia, obstructing accurate reduction. By use of a probe from the AM portal, the ligament is pulled anteriorly and over the tibial eminence fragment, facilitating the achievement and maintenance of reduction. A 2-cm anterior oblique incision is made over the AM aspect of the tibia about 4 cm distal to the joint line. Through the AM portal, the ACL tibial drill guide (Linvatec, Largo, FL) is set initially at 55°, and two 2.4-mm guidewires are placed medially and laterally at the posterior aspect of the fragment (posteromedial and posterolateral [PL] holes), 1 to 2 mm outside the perimeter of the fracture crater ( Subsequently, the ACL tibial drill guide (Linvatec) is set at 45° to avoid connection with the previously made bone tunnels. In a similar fashion, two 2.4-mm guidewires are placed medially and laterally at the anterior aspect of the ACL avulsion fragment (AM and anterolateral holes), 1 to 2 mm outside the perimeter of the fracture crater ( In cases with isolated ACL avulsion fractures, a standard postoperative rehabilitation protocol is followed. The knee is placed in a functional brace in extension while isometric strengthening exercises are initiated immediately. In addition, partial weight bearing is permitted. The brace is held in extension for 4 weeks, and then gradually increasing range-of-motion exercises are allowed. This protocol is modified when other concomitant injuries are present. Avulsion fractures of the ACL are uncommon injuries that occur mainly in adolescents or young adults during sporting activities or even bicycle or car accidents. Arthroscopic suture fixation of tibial eminence fractures has been well documented as a technique leading to promising outcomes. Going through the literature, we found that little has been reported regarding the intraoperative difficulties of arthroscopic suture fixation of ACL avulsion fractures. We acknowledge that our technique has only been used in a clinical setting. Further biomechanical studies to confirm the superiority of the 4-point fixation method are required, and inevitably, conclusions should be reviewed in light of the aforementioned limitations. We conclude that using the proposed technical modifications, 4-point anatomic and accurate reduction and superior fixation can be safely and reproducibly achieved, minimizing potential complications, as well as reducing operative times. The authors thank Christina Eleftheriadou, graphic designer, for designing the professional-quality drawings. 