The abrasive wear behaviour of different hardfacing electrodes deposited on grey cast iron used for the top bearing plate of a coal crushing unit was studied using the dry sand rubber wheel abrasion test. The results show that different hardfacing electrodes as well as the weld procedure variation using similar electrodes have large effects on low stress abrasion resistance of the deposit. Such effects on the abrasion resistance are mainly attributed to the variation in deposit chemistry and microstructures. Carbon content is an important factor determining microstructure of such hardfacing electrodes and therefore wear resistance. Furthermore, the wear behaviour also indicated that the abrasive wear resistance is not simply related to the hardness of the deposit but is determined by the carbides and matrix structure of the deposits.The weld deposition of hardfacing alloys is commonly employed in industry to increase the service life of components subject to abrasive wear Preparation of hardfacing deposits requires the choice of the welding consumables and a welding procedure In view of this situation, the present investigation has been initiated to identify the most suitable hardfacing deposits from among four commercial electrodes and weld procedural effect on the wear behaviour of hardfacing deposits. In parallel, four other electrodes formulated for this study were also investigated. Finally, field trial is performed in order to confirm the validity of laboratory test results. The substrate material was grey cast iron plate (ASTM grade 2500) with dimensions of Out of four different combinations of commercial hardfacing and buffer electrodes, two combinations of electrodes were selected for weld procedure variation. Four formulated hardfacing tubular electrodes were developed by adding carbide forming constituents and matrix hardening element. Hardfacing electrodes were deposited on the plate (with and without preheat) in the flat position using manual metal arc welding method. Before welding, the electrodes were dried at 100 Single layer of buffer deposits consisted of 15 beads with approximately 25% overlap between each and single layer of hardfacing deposits consisted of nine beads with approximately 25% overlap between each bead ( Chemical compositions of the grey cast iron base plate, buffer and hardfacing electrodes deposited on water-cooled copper plate were determined by wet chemical analysis ( Metallography test samples were then ground successively using belt grinder and emery papers and finally polished with Al Bulk hardness values of different hardfacing deposits were taken in a Vicker’s hardness testing machine using a 30 Before the abrasive wear test, all the specimens were cleaned with acetone and then weighed on an electronic balance with an accuracy of ±0.1 Samples for wear test were subjected to field operation test in the coal crushing mill of the thermal power plant for a period of 2000 The wear specimens were washed with care by acetone to avoid destruction of the worn surface. Then the worn surfaces were observed under the SEM to characterize the surface morphology and to establish possible mechanism for material removal. The chemical composition of each hardfacing deposit as given in Microstructures of different samples deposited with different combinations of commercially available hardfacing and buffer electrodes as well as formulated electrodes are shown in Other observations can be made as well. For example, sample G for which the hardness is no better in the second layer than in the first layer, the wear resistance is better in the second layer than in the first layer. Furthermore, sample G is as hard as sample H in the first layer, but its abrasion resistance is inferior to that of sample H ( Another observation that can be made is that electrodes with high nickel (25.1%), chromium (20.1%) and low C (2.69%) such as sample D As can be seen from above, that different hardfacing electrodes as well as weld procedural variation such as single layer and double layer using similar electrode have wide variation in low stress abrasion resistance and such variation is mainly attributed to variation in deposit chemistry, particularly the carbon content and microstructure, e.g. types and volume fraction of carbides and matrix structure of deposits. Although hardfacing consumables are often promoted on the basis of deposit hardness as an indicator of abrasion resistance, correlation between hardness and weight loss (in the form of wear ratio) shown in Thus, it is assumed that wear due to abrasive particles progresses by preferentially abrading the matrix due to its abrasion and gradually pick and dig up the matrix. This action gradually raises the primary carbides and therefore the carbides are now to support the load of abrasive particles. By increasing the volume fraction of carbides, the proportion of matrix regions decreases and improves the abrasion resistance. However, if the preferential wear of matrix regions is excessive the carbides become unsupported and susceptible to spalling and fracture. In view of the foregoing, the developed hardfacing deposits of the C–Cr–Nb–Mo–Fe system can be said to have improved wear resistance in that the number of chromium carbides increases due to the NbC, which promotes the nucleation of the chromium carbide and prevents coarsening and spalling of the chromium carbide Examination of the wear scars indicated that the damage morphologies for all the samples were similar, consisting of three zones, a short entrance and exit area and the main wear zone in middle. At the entrance and exit zones, where the pressure applied to the abrasive is lowest the damage morphologies were consistent with particle rolling. In the centre of wear scar, parallel grooves were formed, typical of particle sliding, a result of the higher pressures forcing abrasives into rubber wheel. The worn surfaces are characterized by shallow continuous grooves and micro-cuttings in sample H It is, however, interesting to note that the field trial test results of the different hardfacing deposits performed for a period of 2000 The following conclusions may be drawn from the above study: A new hardfacing electrodes was developed by adding niobium as a carbide forming element and molybdenum as a matrix hardening agent and its wear rate could be reduced to about half of that of commercial hardfacing electrode. However, without the addition of niobium and molybdenum, it requires higher chromium and carbon in order to obtain similar abrasion resistance. Different hardfacing electrodes as well as weld procedural variation using similar electrode have wide variation in low stress abrasion resistance and such variation is mainly attributed to variation in deposit chemistry, particularly the carbon content and microstructure, e.g. carbides and matrix structure of deposits. ASTM G-65 is a reliable low stress abrasion test to assess the performance of the hardfacing deposits used in actual service conditions. The authors would like to thank DST, New Delhi, India, for the financial support of the work, which is a part of the research project.