The evolution of microstructure and texture during thermo-mechanical processing of two phase (FCC+BCC) Al0.5CoCrFeMnNi was investigated. For this purpose, the fully recrystallized starting material having 17% of the BCC phase was warm-rolled to 75% reduction in thickness and annealed at temperatures ranging from 1000°C to 1250°C. The volume fractions of the two phases remained unaltered during warm-rolling. Development of a lamellar deformation structure was observed for the FCC phase which also showed presence of typical deformation components. In contrast, the BCC phase showed mechanical fragmentation indicating limited ductility and a deformation texture characterized by RD (//〈110〉) and ND (//〈111〉) fibers. Development of a finer recrystallized microstructure was observed after annealing at 1000°C due to the grain boundary pinning exerted by the BCC phase, thus inhibiting grain growth. The BCC phase fraction decreased consistently with increasing annealing temperature. Considerable grain growth happened after annealing at 1250°C due to the decrease in the BCC fraction, which greatly diminished the grain boundary pinning. The BCC phase also showed stronger ND-fiber in the primary recrystallization texture, which weakened with increasing annealing temperature due to the dissolution of this phase. Retention of the deformation texture components in the recrystallization texture of the FCC phase indicated absence of strong preferential nucleation or growth.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are originally introduced as novel multicomponent alloys developed by mixing of five or more constituent elements in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportions A major thrust area of research in HEAs is to understand the thermo-mechanical processing (TMP) response The present research attempts to investigate the microstructure and texture development of individual phases in a two-phase HEA. It may be noted that the stable FCC structured HEAs can be gradually converted to FCC The two-phase Al The fully annealed sheets were used as the starting materials for subsequent processing. The annealed sheets were subjected to multi-pass warm-rolling in steps of 20%, 40%, 60% up to 75% reduction in thickness. For achieving the thickness reduction without failure, the temperature of warm-rolling was increased systematically with increasing thickness reduction. Warm-rolling up to 40% reduction was carried out at 500 The microstructure and texture of the deformed and annealed materials were characterized using an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system (Oxford Instruments, UK) attached to a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Model: SUPRA 40, Make: Carl-Zeiss, Germany) equipped with field emission gun electron source (FEG). The samples for EBSD measurements were prepared using a combination of careful mechanical polishing followed by electropolishing at The EBSD scans were acquired using the AztecHKL software (Oxford Instruments, UK). For deformed samples a step size (i.e. the equidistant interval for acquiring the Kikuchi patterns) of 0.02 The coarse microstructure of the as-cast material is shown in The texture of the BCC and FCC phases are shown in  The evolution of key microstructural parameters phase fraction during warm-rolling is shown in The development of texture after 75% warm-rolling is shown in The microstructural changes after annealing of the 75% warm-rolled material at different temperatures is shown in The evolution of key microstructural parameters after annealing at different temperatures is shown in The evolution of texture in the BCC phase during annealing is shown in  The spatial distribution of different texture components in the FCC phase is shown in It might be noted that the BCC second phase is mostly located at the grain boundaries of the major FCC phase in the starting material ( The gradual evolution of a lamellar deformation structure after heavy warm-rolling ( In contrast to duplex alloys, the present HEA contains the second phase in the dispersed form. The development of lamellar structure in the FCC phase and concomitant decrease in the grain size with increasing thickness reduction is quite consistent with the behavior of ductile single phase FCC alloys. Although, few of BCC grains show elongated appearance but undergo fragmentation after 75% warm-rolling ( The deformation texture of the two phases after 75% warm-rolling is also quite consistent with the individual deformation behavior. The BCC phase shows diffuse and poorly developed RD and ND fiber components ( On the other hand, the FCC phase develops a texture dominated mainly by the B Annealing results in important microstructural changes. It is noteworthy that a fine completely recrystallized microstructure is obtained at after annealing at 1000 The texture of the BCC phase after annealing at 1000 The recrystallization texture of the FCC phase is characterized by the development of the α fiber (  The Al The volume fraction of the BCC phase at the start of the warm-rolling (~ The FCC phase develops a fine lamellar structure after warm-rolling due to deformation induced grain subdivision. This indicates the ductile nature of the phase. The brass type deformation texture of the FCC phase indicates the low SFE of this alloy. The BCC phase undergoes deformation induced mechanical fragmentation indicating that this phase is much more difficult to undergo plastic deformation. The weak deformation texture of the BCC phase as characterized by RD and ND fibers could be attributed to limited deformation of the BCC phase. The volume fraction of the BCC phase decreases with increasing annealing temperature. The BCC phase located at the grain boundaries exerts a strong pinning effect on the grain boundary migration and inhibits grain growth. The grain coarsening observed after annealing at 1250 The BCC phase shows stronger ND-fiber after annealing at 1000 The recrystallization texture of the FCC phase is weak characterized by the retention of the deformation texture components. The absence of preferential nucleation and growth appears to be the mechanisms responsible for the development of the texture. The authors gratefully acknowledge Professor J.W. Yeh, NTHU, Taiwan for kindly providing the starting materials. The financial support of