In Italy, olive tree groves may offer up to a million tonnes of dry biomass per year as pruning residue. Searching for a cost-effective way to tap this potential, the authors tested a new machine, capable of recovering pruning residue at the same time as pruning. The pre-commercial prototype was tested on four different plots and compared to a simpler tractor-base mechanical pruning unit. The authors conducted detailed time-studies in order to determine machine productivity and residue recovery cost. The integrated machine can treat between 0.2 and 0.6 ha h−1, producing between 0.33 and 1.03 tonnes of fresh residue hour−1. Its integrated residue recovery function does not slow the pruning, which actually proceeds faster than with the tractor-base unit, due to the more efficient multiple-disc cutting bar. The marginal cost of residue recovery hovers around 40–45 € fresh tonne−1. However, the new machine must not be considered just as a biomass harvester, but rather as a mechanical pruning unit with an integrated biomass recovery function. Its main benefit derives from the capacity of performing a very effective mechanical pruning, and the residue recovery function is a secondary benefit yet unavailable on standard pruning machines. Its deployment must be seen in the context of a general effort to modernize olive grove management and to develop an integrated biomass production system, rather than as a further attempt to build a specialised biomass supply chain.Energy biomass can be sourced from existing agricultural residue, which offers a strategic benefit wherever it is impractical to convert cropland to energy crop cultivation Besides, agricultural residue does not accrue any growing costs and could be tapped at a relatively low price, if effective collection systems were deployed. In particular, olive tree pruning residue has already been targeted as a main source of lignocellulosic biomass, especially in the Mediterranean Sea basin, where olive groves cover almost 9 million hectares Since a few years, a number of machine manufacturers have been offering dedicated implements for collecting pruning residue. These machines generally derive from conventional mulchers, equipped with a storage bin or with a blower, the latter designed to direct the flow of comminuted residue to an accompanying trailer. Such implements are relatively cheap, and are designed for being towed or carried by farm tractors in the 50–70 kW class. For this very reason they cannot achieve industrial performance, and their productivity is commonly in the range of 1 green tonnes per hour Recently, the Italian manufacturer Favaretto has developed an integrated harvester (Speedy-cut) capable of performing both pruning and pruning residue harvesting in a single pass. This machine may offer a cost-effective solution to pruning and pruning residue recovery, and has attracted much attention. Therefore, the goal of this study was to determine the performance of this machine with scientific methods, offering reliable estimates for its productivity and cost. Furthermore, the study aimed at determining whether pruning residue collection and processing does slow down the main pruning operation, so that a realistic marginal cost of pruning residue recovery can be calculated. In its present version, the machine consists of a four-wheel-drive self-propelled carrier, powered by a 150 kW diesel engine. A multiple-disc cutting bar is mounted on a hydraulic boom hinged on the right side of the carrier. The bar is divided in two segments by an articulation, so that its shape can be adjusted to fit the trees and the job. A collection tub is placed under the bar and in front of the machine, to receive the prunings as they are cut. A belt conveyor at the bottom of the tub feeds the prunings to a swinging-hammer grinder placed just under the driver’s cab. Removable screens can be placed between the grinder and the bottom of the grinding chamber in order to produce even-sized fragments. Ground residue is then moved to a 5 m Tests with the Favaretto Speedy-cut were conducted at 3 different sites in Central Italy, representative of the main working conditions found in the Italian olive tree groves ( Machine costs were estimated with the method described by Miyata Data were statistically analyzed with regression techniques to calculate any significant relationships between pruning-collecting speed and pruning intensity. ANOVA testing was also used to detect statistically significant differences between treatments, and especially between the dedicated pruning harvester and the farm tractor equipped with the multiple-disc cutting bar All trees presented one single main stem and were pruned on two sides only. Due to the rectangular design of the plantations, the sides being pruned were those facing the widest of the two inter-rows, so as to offer more space for machine access. Each side was pruned in a separate pass, since the machine had just one pruning bar and could only work the tree row to its right side. However, the bar was articulated, so that topping could be performed at the same time as lateral pruning, and did not require a further pass. The amount of pruning residue showed significant variation, caused by differences in tree age, density and pruning intensity ( Time consumption, machine productivity and harvesting cost are reported in Pruning and collecting proceeded at a rather high speed, ranging between 1.2 and 2.8 km h The tests on plot n. 4 showed that the integrated processing and collection of pruning residue does not determine any significant reduction of pruning speed compared to pruning only, as t-testing for the treatments 4a and 4b returned a The study did not determine the amount of product losses, which were visually estimated and considered too limited to deserve specific attention. However, there is a certain amount of losses and the technical recovery yields reported in the study may be increased, although slightly. What is most important, is that the little residue left on the field does not hinder soil cultivation and machine traffic, which is the primary goal of pruning residue management operations. The machine developed by Favaretto is new and original, and carries some interesting potential. Its performance as a residue harvester is inferior to that of industrial pruning residue harvesters, and not much superior to that of small-scale pick-up and process units. Like these, the new machine is sensitive to the density of residue, but it does not allow for its manipulation through concentration on alternate inter-rows, since the biomass is still attached to the tree when the machine starts to work. The minimum threshold for cost-effective deployment is between 1.5 and 2 fresh tonnes of residue per hectare: below this level it may be cheaper to prune the trees and recover the pruning residue in two separate passes. However, the new machine must not be considered just as a biomass harvester, but rather as a mechanical pruning unit with an integrated biomass recovery function. Its main benefit derives from the capacity of performing a very effective mechanical pruning, and the residue recovery function is just a secondary benefit offered by Favaretto and yet unavailable on standard pruning machines. Under the conditions of mechanical pruning, separate residue recovery may entail a significantly higher cost than incurred when recovering pruning residue obtained from manual operations, because the branches lay scattered at the tree base and need to be windrowed before collection. The unit built by Favaretto allows the recovery operation to be performed at a relatively small marginal cost, while preventing any contamination of the biomass. Its deployment must be seen within the context of a general effort to modernize olive grove management and to develop an integrated biomass production system In any case, it must be stressed that the machine observed in this study is just a pre-commercial prototype susceptible of considerable improvement, and that a fully commercial version may eventually offer a better performance than reported here. That is very likely, especially if the grinder will be replaced by a chipper, and if the in-feed conveyor is further developed. Work technique could also be refined, in order to boost productivity and reduce downtime. Once a new commercial version is ready, further studies should be organized in order to develop improved estimates for productivity, and especially for delays. At this stage, one should also address the organization and the logistics of the integrated pruning and residue harvesting operation. In principle, integrated pruning and biomass collection might be extended to a significant portion of the olive orchards grown in the Mediterranean basin, and especially to the new plantations designed for industrial management. Of course, further work should address such important topics as the quality of pruning, fuel consumption, the risk for a erosion and compaction resulting from the use of a relatively heavy machine, and the specific site characteristics allowing for successful deployment. This study was funded by The authors thank Favaretto who made available their machine for the tests.