In-depth understanding of skin elastic and rupture behavior is fundamental to enable next-generation biomedical devices to directly access areas rich in cells and biomolecules. However, the paucity of skin mechanical characterization and lack of established fracture models limits their rational design. We present an experimental and numerical study of skin mechanics during dynamic interaction with individual and arrays of micro-penetrators. Initially, micro-indentation of individual skin strata revealed hyperelastic moduli were dramatically rate-dependent, enabling extrapolation of stiffness properties at high velocity regimes (>1ms−1). A layered finite-element model satisfactorily predicted the penetration of micro-penetrators using characteristic fracture energies (∼10pJμm−2) significantly lower than previously reported (≫100pJμm−2). Interestingly, with our standard application conditions (∼2ms−1, 35gpistonmass), ∼95% of the application kinetic energy was transferred to the backing support rather than the skin ∼5% (murine ear model). At higher velocities (∼10ms−1) strain energy accumulated in the top skin layers, initiating fracture before stress waves transmitted deformation to the backing material, increasing energy transfer efficiency to 55%. Thus, the tools developed provide guidelines to rationally engineer skin penetrators to increase depth targeting consistency and payload delivery across patients whilst minimizing penetration energy to control skin inflammation, tolerability and acceptability.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  The mechanics of skin penetration by dynamically-applied microscopic tips is investigated using a combined experimental-computational approach. A FE model of skin is parameterized using indentation tests and a ductile-failure implementation validated against penetration assays. The simulations shed light on skin elastic and fracture properties, and elucidate the interaction with microprojection arrays for vaccine delivery allowing rational design of next-generation devices.Next-generation healthcare increasingly relies on minimally-invasive biomedical devices capable of negotiating skin mechanical properties to mediate intracutaneous and transcutaneous tasks like administering therapeutics Precise penetration to the desired depth for vaccine uptake by sitespecific cells has led to potent immune responses On the other hand, while underlying linearelastic and hyperelastic descriptions are corroborated by empirical data In summary, the limited understanding of skin elastic response to high strain rates, mechanisms of failure and fracture, and interaction with multiple penetrators have limited the scope of devices for achieving precise epidermal and dermal drug/vaccine targeting. Our case study is the Nanopatch™, a densely-arranged array (≫1000 In this paper, we investigate both experimentally and theoretically the skin mechanical properties relative to the dynamic penetration of individual and arrays of microscopic penetrators. Starting from micro-indentation experiments on mouse skin ( The main experimental and computational methods are reported in this section. Further details can be found in the Using atomic force microscopy (AFM) indentation tests, Crichton et al. Microprojection arrays were fabricated using a deep-reactive ion etching approach and diced from silicon wafers by the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) at The University of Queensland as previously described Similarly to recent works The microprojection geometry was drawn according to the SEM measurements ( The motion of the rigid analytical surface that modeled the projection was characterized by an initial velocity (i.e. the velocity generated by the applicator) and a bound mass (determined by the piston mass). The movement was restricted to translation along the vertical axis x Abaqus/Explicit solver (Abaqus 6.11; Dassault Systemes Simulia Corp., Providence, RI, USA) was used for the FE analyses. Single penetrators and sparse microprojection arrays (i.e. ∼0 projection density) were simulated using a 230 Ultimate and yield strength, and plastic strain at damage were taken from previous works To account for the effect of neighboring projections we developed a 3D symmetric FE geometry of skin. This consisted of a 230 The 2D axisymmetric FE geometry and mesh was adapted such that the right vertical boundary was at a distance of Mass densities were ρ To characterize the impact response of the backing alone, the applicator was fired (n The backing was modeled as a viscoelastic material using the lumped-parameter Kelvin-Voigt-like element consisting of a mass connected to ground through a spring-damper parallel, and implemented in Abaqus using a connector element. The non-linear stiffness We investigated the strain-rate dependence of skin elasticity after indenting individual strata of freshly excised mouse ear (SC, VE and dermis) with spherical tips (1.9 Finally, the SC stretch exponent did not show significant scale or rate dependence ( We investigated the skin response to the impact of a penetrator by using a finite-element (FE) approach introduced in a previous work Simulations of penetrator impact on purely elastic skin (i.e. no failure implementations) were performed using the mesh shown in We approached the characterization of skin penetration following impact by numerically modeling microprojection application to skin and comparing against experimental observations. The initial values for the failure properties were determined starting from previous skin mechanical tests and then refined to validate the fracture model against the penetration experiments. In particular,  If we assume that the interaction of neighboring microprojections do not significantly affect penetration (like for a very sparse array), Figs. We modeled the backing using the mass-spring-damper lumped element represented at the bottom of We used the complete model schematized in  The sensitivity of the numerically-derived penetration depth to the variation of the model parameters was assessed with a set of limit analyses. In brief, the standard treatment simulation was repeated assigning upper and lower boundary values to each individual parameter, one at a time. The input-parameter intervals are summarized in The penetration resulting from different array application conditions ( For all the above numerical and experimental datasets, we found extremely significant Spearman correlation ( We further applied the computational model to investigate alternative designs and application conditions and challenge the trend of This work has developed a validated skin model that is broadly predictive for micro-scale tissue interactions. We anticipate that the mechanical properties of skin layers of other species (and humans in particular) will be similar, with the key difference being the layer thickness differences. We therefore expect that this model will be broadly applicable if modified for new species. The results of The skin dynamic behavior is the main cause of such a diverse mechanical response. Firstly, the heterogeneous layered composition favored fracture propagation in the early impact stages for large application velocities. Specifically, the stress was effectively retained at the surface due to the slow stress-wave propagation of the deep strata (cartilage, PDMS, fat or muscle) that are comparatively lower in stiffness. Secondly, the equivalent strain required to initiate failure (i.e. meet the yield criterion) decreased with increasing velocity because skin elasticity (i.e. the stress response to a specific strain) had a stronger rate dependence compared to the yield strength. As a consequence, penetration is more difficult in quasi-static conditions, as the Young’s modulus-to-yield strength ratio decreases below 1, due to the resulting strata compliance. The resulting penetration model satisfactorily reproduced the experimental behavior for a wide range of application conditions, array designs and across the whole treated area, and further proved robust to variations in parameterization. However, the utilized elastic moduli were derived from indentations using constant probe velocity, and are rather relative to peak strain rates only. Future work should address the implementation of a transient description of skin properties that allows elastic and inelastic properties to decay from the instantaneous to the long-term magnitude during the simulation as the penetrators slow down. This can be achieved specifying viscoelastic properties in terms of stress-relaxation Prony coefficients and strain-rate-dependent yield strengths. The resulting skin stress relaxation should then result in lower penetration depths that match the experimental measurements more closely. While significant differences in skin behavior are expected if the application dynamic regime is changed (e.g. from dynamic impact to quasi-static or vibratory application), we believe that the penetration of other microneedle array designs (typically characterized by sparser, larger penetrators) will likely follow the trends showed in This paper has shed light on skin’s mechanical response to the application of individual and arrays of penetrators – a key aspect of next-generation minimally-invasive cutaneous devices. We employed mathematical modeling jointly with experimental testing to: 1) estimate the rate-dependent out-of-plane hyperelastic properties of the SC, VE and dermis; these were not previously known and are relevant to rationally design devices involving dynamic interactions with skin, like applicators of microneedles for vaccine/drug delivery or robotic/haptic surgery tools; 2) develop and validate a functional skin fracture model, and successfully apply it to accurately simulate the dynamic application of individual and arrays of microprojections; this represents the first published study showing successful prediction of penetration depth into skin depth starting uniquely from the penetrator design and kinetic parameters (and skin characteristics); 3) understand skin impact response and rationally drive the design (e.g. area) and application conditions (e.g. mass and velocity) of microprojection arrays to precisely target skin strata of interest (e.g. immunologically); most importantly, we showed that the kinetic parameters can be ‘tuned’ without affecting penetration depth to improve the depth consistency across different patients, and control the impact energy for optimal tolerability/acceptability and customized inflammation (e.g. for immune enhancement). In conclusion, the knowledge and modeling toolbox presented are fundamentally important to time- and cost-effectively converge on functional prototypes of intracutaneous and transcutaneous devices especially during the resource-demanding preclinical and clinical trial phases. Sally Yukiko, Chelsea Stewart and all D Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 