Mining rock salt results in subsurface damage, which may affect the strength because of applied stress, anisotropy, and deformation rate. In this study, we used a Kolsky compression bar to measure the high strain rate response of bedded and domal salt at strain rates up to approximately 50 s−1 in parallel and perpendicular directions to bedding or foliation direction depending on rock salt type. Both types of salt exhibited a negative strain rate effect wherein a decrease in strength was observed with increasing strain rate compared to strength measured in the quasi-static regime. Both materials exhibited strength anisotropy. Fracturing and microfracturing were the dominant deformation mechanisms. High pore pressures and frictional heating due to the high loading rate may have contributed to reduction in strength.Salt caverns are used to store a variety of materials ranging from gas to liquefied hydrocarbons from the oil and gas industry to solid nuclear waste. Rock salt formations are well-suited to house such hazardous materials because the rock salt creeps over geologic time scales to seal the space surrounding these materials. For safety assessments of structural integrity of storage locations or facilities, knowledge of the mechanical properties of the salt rock material is critical. Factors that may influence design of facilities are rock salt stress-strain response, stress-state (confined compared to unconfined strength), moisture, temperature, mechanical anisotropy, and deformation rate. Understanding the high strain rate mechanical behavior of rock salt is pertinent to rapid loading events such as fracture in an earthquake, underground explosions, and can even be applied to estimation of energy consumption requirements for drilling, mining, and comminution for product processing. Furthermore, once the dynamic mechanical properties are known, improved constitutive models can be developed which can lead to improved facility design as well as enhanced drilling or mining practices. Like other rocks, the quasi-static compressive strength of rock salt depends on temperature, strain rate, confining pressure, and for rock salt, impurities play a role. Available studies on the effect of strain rate on the strength of rock salt have been mainly limited to quasi-static strain rates, which ranged from 10 While strain rate effects within quasi-static regime have been studied, the response of rock salt at higher dynamic strain rates is sparse in the literature. The only study that the authors found was that of Fang et al. Rocksalt is also anisotropic In this study, the quasi-static and dynamic compressive properties of rock salt were investigated. Quai-static unconfined compression of domal salt was measured using a hydraulic load frame. High strain rate compressive response of unconfined domal and bedded salts was examined at a strain rate of approximately 50 s The domal and bedded rock salts under investigation were prepared from cores from two separate locations. The bedded salt originated in the salt horizon of the Permian Salado formation taken from the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) in southeastern New Mexico. The formation and brines occurred approximately 200 Ma. The domal salt was taken from a vertical core originating at depths ranging 1.2–1.6 km from a salt dome in southern Louisiana; the salt is exceptionally pure, with a halite content greater than 99% determined by X-ray diffraction. Quasi-static specimens for domal salt were tested only in the parallel to foliation direction in this study. Specimens had nominal dimensions of 10 cm diameter and were 20 cm in length. Six specimens were compressed to generate an average strength for comparison to the high rate response. High-rate samples from both rock salts were prepared parallel and perpendicular to foliation (for domal salt) or bedding (for bedded salt) directions. As-received cores are shown in Unconfined quasi-static compression experiments were conducted using a servo-hydraulic load frame. Calibrated linear variable differential transformers (LVDTs) were used to measure specimen displacement and a calibrated load cell was used to measure the force at a strain rate of 1 × 10 Dynamic compression experiments were conducted with a 7.62-cm-diameter Kolsky compression bar as shown in A pair of strain gages was installed axial-symmetrically on the surface of the incident bar while another pair of strain gages was installed on the transmission bar to measure the stress wave propagation during dynamic loading. According to one-dimensional stress wave theory, the strain rate, strain, and stress in the specimen are calculated as The stress-strain curve is obtained by eliminating the time term in Eqs. To satisfy Eq. When a larger-diameter Kolsky bar is used, the size of the pulse shaper usually needs to be correspondingly larger. However, when the pulse shaper is too large, lateral inertia during deformation of the pulse shaper may overshadow the mechanical response of the pulse shaper during high-speed impact. Because of the relatively large mass of the samples and extremely low friction on the bars due to the air bearing system, the specimen was held in position using a combination of high pressure vacuum grease and four rubber bands attached to the incident and transmission bars as shown in  After the incident, reflected, and transmitted signals are recorded, the specimen stress at both ends are calculated using Eqs. This results in a wave speeds of 3480 m/s for the domal salt and 3940 m/s for bedded salt. The propagation time for the stress wave across the 3.81 cm-long specimen is approximately 10 µs. Therefore, the equilibration time for the specimen is approximately could range from 60 to 100 µs (at least three round trips Dynamic compressive stress-strain curves of the bedded salt tested parallel and perpendicular to bedding are shown in   Specimen deformation during high rate deformation was imaged using a Phantom high-speed camera. To understand the observed strength reduction at high strain rate, deformed samples were examined using SEM. Microstructure analysis revealed a variety of mechanisms which may explain the reduction in strength seen in the high rate experiments. In general, the fracture mechanisms were the same for both bedded and domal salt. The final microfracture mechanism that was observed was comminution of salt along fractured surfaces, as shown in In this study, we used a 7.62-cm-diameter Kolsky compression bar to characterize domal and bedded rock salts in dynamic compression at strain rates of approximately 50 s The primary deformation mechanism observed was fracturing over a wide range of length scales. Microfracturing sites included grain boundaries, cleavage planes and microfractures of apparent non-crystallographically controlled, or discordant origin. Intracrystalline cracks also originated in fluid-filled pores due to local over pressurization. In addition, comminution of the rock salts was observed along fracture surfaces which implies the potential for local frictional heating. The combination of cleavage plane fractures, discordant fractures, fluid-filled pore fracture, and comminution at shear zones most likely caused crystal plasticity which lead to the observed decrease in strength at high strain rates. The authors acknowledge the support of the United States