Although mineral carbon sequestration (MCS) has several advantages over other carbon storage techniques, an economic process for MCS has not yet been developed. To reduce costs, it is suggested that MCS be combined with other processes and that waste products be used as feedstock. A process is proposed where ultramafic nickel ores are treated with microwave radiation to convert serpentine, the primary gangue mineral, to olivine. It is hypothesized the conversion of serpentine to olivine in ultramafic nickel ores may improve the mineral processing of these ores, and increase the carbon storage capacity of the flotation tailings. The microwave heating characteristics of ultramafic nickel ores, and the mineralogical changes that occur as a result of microwave treatment, are described in this paper. Ultramafic nickel ores were found to heat well in response to microwave radiation and the temperatures achieved were sufficient to convert serpentine to olivine. Microwave treatment was also found to convert pentlandite, the valuable nickel mineral, to other Fe–Ni–S minerals.Mineral carbon sequestration (MCS) is a type of permanent and portable CO While useful as MCS feedstock, serpentine is undesirable in mineral processing operations. Serpentine has a negative effect on grinding and flotation, two techniques used in the upgrading of ultramafic nickel ores. Serpentine increases the viscosity of ore slurries due to its anisotropic nature and morphology (which can be fibrous) ( A process is proposed where ultramafic nickel ores are treated with microwave radiation prior to grinding. Microwaves can be transmitted, reflected, or absorbed, and can efficiently and instantaneously generate heat in materials ( Olivine is not fibrous or anisotropic, has an isoelectric point close to that of pentlandite ( Two low-grade ultramafic nickel ores were used in this study: the “OK ore” (containing 0.26 Ore samples were treated in a quartz reactor inside a 1000 Quantitative X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using the Reitveld refinement technique on powdered samples by PMET Inc. of New Brighton, Pennsylvania, USA The composition of different mineral grains was determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-2700 Scanning Electron Microscope) using an energy dispersive X-ray detector (EDX, PGT PRISM). Temperature versus microwave heating time and heating rate versus temperature for the Pipe and OK ores are shown in The OK ore heating curve was logarithmic in shape, with a high initial heating rate that declined with increasing microwave exposure time. The OK ore heating rate decreased with increasing temperature and was governed largely by the properties of serpentine (a plot of serpentine loss factor over heat capacity generates a curve nearly the same shape as the OK ore heating rate curve). The OK ore attained a maximum bulk temperature of 730 The Pipe ore heating and heating rate curves were somewhat different from those for the OK ore. Up until 8 Microwave heating curves for comparable ores have not been found in the literature; however there is data on the microwave heating behaviour of the individual minerals ( The results of quantitative XRD analysis of untreated and microwave pre-treated OK and Pipe ore are shown in Analysis of the OK and Pipe ores by SEM–EDX indicated that nickel remained in a Fe–Ni–S phase after microwave pre-treatment. The Fe–Ni–S minerals observed in the microwave pre-treated ores had metal-to-sulphur (M:S) ratios representative of pyrrhotite (high-sulphur) and pentlandite (low sulphur); however, the high-sulphur material was mostly nickel-rich (up to 23 Ultramafic nickel ores responded well to microwave radiation, and the heating characteristics of these ores was dependent on their mineralogy. Ores that contained more magnetite heated better than ores with less. The temperatures achieved during microwave treatment were sufficient to dehydroxylate serpentine in the ores studied. The conversion of serpentine to olivine by microwave pre-treatment should be beneficial for both mineral processing and MCS. Microwave pre-treatment of ultramafic nickel ores was also found to convert pentlandite to high-temperature Fe–Ni–S phases, from which pentlandite did not re-exsolve upon natural cooling. The transition of pentlandite to other nickel phases may have implications for the upgrading of ultramafic nickel ores by flotation. This research was supported by Vale and a Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) Grant from NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada). Acknowledgement is due also to Shiraz Merali, Jim Skwarok, Gayle Hatchard, Joshua Neumann and Erin Furnell for technical and laboratory assistance.