This study evaluated the effect of sodium hydroxide mercerized bagasse fiber (BF) on the mechanical and thermal properties of polypropylene composites reinforced with hybrid BF/calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Samples were fabricated with a compression molding machine and characterized for tensile, flexural, and thermal properties. Hybrid composites with mercerized BF (HMC) exhibited improved mechanical properties than the unmercerized hybrid composite (UHC), single-component composite (SC) and control sample. Additionally, TGA/DTG analysis revealed that the HMC were more thermally stable in comparison with other samples. Crystallinity index of HMC was about 24% higher than UHC, as indicated by XRD analysis. SEM images showed good interfacial adhesion in the morphology of HMC compared to UHC, which contributed to the improved thermal and mechanical properties exhibited by HMC. These results indicated that mercerization treatment and reinforcement hybridization could be utilized for improving the thermal and mechanical responses of natural fiber reinforced polypropylene composites.Polymer matrix composites are characterized by moderate stiffness, low cost, and simple manufacturing principles. They can be reinforced with particles and fibers in either synthetic or natural form. Commonly used particulate fillers include calcium carbonate [ Despite the advantages offered by natural fiber composites, incompatibility between the polymer matrix and fiber surface has been identified as major challenge in the processing of polymer composites containing natural fibers [ Coupling agents such as coconut oil [ Mercerization is an alkali treatment process that is used to reduce lignin, hemicellulose, wax and oils that are present on the surface of fibers [ Several types of natural fibers and their derivatives, such as jute [ In a report, the effect of pulverized bagasse fibers on the tensile and hardness properties of polyester composites was investigated. The authors concluded that these properties were greatly enhanced at 10 wt% bagasse reinforcement [ Other than the aforementioned treatment protocols, hybridization of reinforcements is another alternative that is actively being investigated. It involves the incorporation of more than two types of reinforcement materials into a polymer matrix. Thus, the composite possesses a synergy of the individual advantages of each reinforcement, enhanced performance and reduction in production cost [ Based on these earlier studies, the present research was carried out to develop hybrid polypropylene composites using synthetic CaCO The materials that were used for this research are as shown in The as-received bagasse fibers (BF) were washed thoroughly with distilled water and dried in a KX350A KENXIN drying oven for 24 h at 60 °C to condition the fibers and reduce the moisture content. Mercerization treatment was carried out on a part of fibers by treating them with 1M NaOH at 50 °C for 4 h in an ultrasonic water bath followed by washing with distilled water to attain a neutral status as confirmed by a litmus paper test. The mercerized (treated) fibers after washing were later oven-dried at 60 °C for a further 24 h. The remaining fibers were used in the unmercerized (untreated) form. Images of the as-received bagasse and mercerized BFs are shown in Composites were developed with a compression molding machine after compounding the CaCO Three-point bend test was performed on the test samples in compliance with ASTM D790-15 standard. The length, width and thickness of the specimen were 120, 12.7 and 3.2 mm, respectively. The test was performed on INSTRON 5980-series Floor Model Universal Tester at a crosshead speed of 0.3 mm/mm and strain rate of 10 Tensile test was performed in compliance with ASTM D638-14 test standard. The specimen's overall length, gauge length, width and thickness were 115, 33, 10 and 5 ± 1 mm, respectively. The test was performed using INSTRON 5980-series Floor Model Universal Tester at a fixed crosshead speed of 10 mm/min. The experiment was carried out at room temperature of 22 ± 2 ͦ C. Six repeatability tests were conducted for each sample and their mean values were used in this study to ensure accuracy and reliability of test results. The fractured surfaces of the samples were examined by means of Phenom ProX scanning electron microscope (SEM) with operated at 15 kV. The samples were washed, cleaned thoroughly, air-dried and gold coated to make them conductive before SEM observation using Quorum coating machine (Q150RES). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and derivative thermogravimetric analysis (DTGA) were done using a TGA6 thermogravimetric analyzer (Perkin Elmer) under nitrogen atmosphere with a flow rate of 20 mL/min and 10 °C/min heating rate over a temperature range of 50 °C–850 °C. A test sample of 5 mg was used for each run. Shimadzu X-ray diffraction equipment (LabX XRD-7000) under CuKα radiation [λ = 1.5418 Å] was used to identify the phases in the developed composites. Scanning was done between 2θ = 10–50° at a scanning speed of 4 deg/min.  For the hybrid composites, the flexural strength increased as the proportion of the CaCO  An initial increase in moduli was observed for Samples A to C, for both mercerized and unmercerized BF hybrids. However, the flexural moduli of Samples D and E showed a decline. For the hybrid samples, those with mercerized fibers had higher moduli compared with their counterparts containing unmercerized fibers. This observation is similar to the results presented in Considering the samples with single reinforcement, it was observed that low wt.% of either BF or CaCO  Also, mercerized Sample E possessed the highest tensile strength of about 75 MPa. This similar trend was observed for the single-component composites, where the tensile strength of Sample HB (48.84 MPa) was higher than the other samples in this group. This was due to good interfacial adhesion that existed at this higher fiber loading. The unreinforced polypropylene possessed the least value of about 30 MPa and the percentage enhancement of the tensile strength at peak between the best sample and the control was 150%. This suggested that hybridization in composite development is a good approach to strengthening composite materials.  It was observed that the tensile moduli of mercerized BF/CaCO It could be seen from the trend of the results that both flexural and tensile strengths ( Hybrid composite Sample D (with 12 wt.% CaCO To compare the effect of mercerization, representative X-ray diffraction patterns of mercerized and unmercerized Sample E are presented in It was also observed that characteristic biomass peaks, usually seen at 2θ = 16.80° and 22.30° [ To support this observation, the crystallinity indices of Sample E with both mercerized and unmercerized fibers were evaluated by deconvoluting the diffractograms presented in  Between the two variants of Sample E (treated hybrid and untreated hybrid), unmercerized Sample E degraded at a lower temperature compared to the mercerized variant. This could be ascribed to the higher hydrophilicity and higher amorphous content of the BF in the unmercerized state. The highest thermal stability was seen in mercerized Sample E due to its higher crystallinity. The single-component composites (Samples HB and HF) had higher thermal resistance than the control sample. Of all the samples, mercerized Sample E, with hybrid reinforcement, possessed better thermal stability than the single-component composites due to hybridization.   The investigation into the influence of mercerization of BF and hybridization of reinforcements on the mechanical and thermal responses of polypropylene composites revealed that: Samples from mercerized BF/CaCO Mercerization treatment was an effective approach for enhancing the crystallinity of BF due to the reduction in lignin and hemicellulose contents, as well as retention of the cellulose constituents of BF. The treatment also aided the development of good interfacial adhesion at the fiber/matrix interface, as observed in the mechanical test results and SEM images. TGA/DTG thermograms and XRD diffractograms confirmed an increase in thermal stability, degradation temperature and crystallinity of the mercerized BF/CaCO SEM images revealed good interfacial adhesion in the morphology of the mercerized hybrid composite compared to the unmercerized hybrid composite sample. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.