Mixed cationic/anionic surfactants are generating increasing attention as effective collectors during the flotation of muscovite, feldspar and spodumene ores. Many papers have been published focusing on the flotation mechanisms of these valuable minerals. However, the depression mechanisms on gangue minerals such as quartz have rarely been reported. In this study, mixed dodecylamine (DDA)/sodium oleate (NaOL) surfactants were used in the flotation separation of muscovite and quartz, and their depression mechanisms on quartz were investigated. Compared to DDA alone, the use of mixed surfactants resulted in a significantly higher adsorption amount of surfactants on the quartz but a lower flotation recovery and contact angle with the quartz. This is attributed to the different molecular self-assembly mechanisms between solely DDA and mixed surfactants at the quartz/water interface, as revealed by molecular dynamics simulations. A hydrophobic monolayer coating forms for solely DDA, with the head groups adsorbing on the quartz via electrostatic interactions. In the case of mixed surfactants, DDA preferentially interacts with NaOL via electrostatic interaction through the oppositely charged head groups and hydrophobic interactions between their carbon chains. As a result, most DDA and NaOL molecules form hydrophilic spherical-like micelles near quartz, whereas only a few DDA molecules adsorb directly on the quartz via hydrogen bonding. These act as a bridge linking the rest of the surfactants, leading to a relatively lower flotation recovery and contact angle for the quartz. This study is beneficial for complementing the flotation theories and mechanisms of mixed cationic/anionic surfactants on minerals.Mixed cationic and anionic surfactants are interesting to many researchers because of their superior physicochemical properties and extensive applications in many areas, such as dispersion/flocculation, flotation, detergents, cosmetics, paints and nanolithography Froth flotation is an effective method of separating mineral particles on the basis of their surface chemistries, specifically their hydrophobicity In practice, mixed cationic/anionic surfactants are frequently used as collectors in the flotation of muscovite, feldspar, spodumene and fluorite minerals Extensive investigations have been performed with the goal of understanding the interactions and adsorption mechanisms of mixed cationic/anionic surfactants at the solid/liquid interface and their effect on flotation performance, including the depression mechanism Our previous study introduced the use of mixed sodium oleate/dodecylamine surfactants as collectors in the flotation separation of muscovite from quartz In past decades, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation has proven to be a great tool to provide detailed structural information of surfactant complexes at the microscopic level, which is not easy to derive from experimental results The purpose of this work is to investigate the adsorption behavior of mixed cationic dodecylamine bromide (DDA)/anionic sodium oleate (NaOL) surfactants on the quartz/water interface. The contact angle and adsorption amount of quartz in the presence of mixed surfactants were first assessed as a function of pH, surfactant concentration and molar ratio of the components. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were then carried out to investigate the adsorption structure of pure DDA, pure NaOL and their mixtures at the quartz/water interface. Hand-picked quartz samples were obtained from Shanxi province in China. The samples were crushed and ground in an agate mortar to yield − The cationic surfactant DDA and anionic surfactant NaOL with an analytical purity of 99.9% were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The dodecyl amine-hydrochloride (DDA) solution was prepared by mixing equimolar mixtures of dodecylamine and hydrochloric acid (HCl). The mixed DDA/NaOL collectors were freshly prepared at the time of use to avoid precipitation. Reagent grade sulfuric acid (H The micro-flotation experiments on pure minerals were carried out as a function of pH, collector concentration and molar ratio of cationic/anionic surfactants in an XFG5-35 flotation machine with a 40-mL effective cell volume. Quartz powder (2 Experiments on the contact angles of quartz before and after treatment with surfactants were carried out using the sessile drop method with the MiniLab ILMS (GBX, France). In brief, a hand-picked pure quartz crystal was cut and polished carefully to a proper size of 2 Adsorbed amounts of surfactants on quartz were determined using solution depletion. The amount of surfactants in the supernatant solution was determined using an automated total organic (TOC) analyzer (TOC-VCPH, Shimadzu, Japan) in this work. Using DDA alone, it was found that DDA concentrate calculated from N using the TOC analyzer is slightly larger than the actual concentrate. However, there are good linear correlations between the N concentrate and the real DDA concentrate ( Surfactant mixture solutions (40 where Quartz (SiO A simple cubic cell (27.02 The flotation recoveries for given initial DDA concentrations and increasing NaOL concentrations at pH values of 2, 5 and 10 are presented in The effect of the concentration of pure DDA, pure NaOL and the mixed DDA/NaOL surfactants at a ratio of 1/3 as collectors on the quartz flotation for a pH value of 10 is presented in Contact angles have been extensively used to assess the degree of hydrophobicity or wettability of minerals. To investigate the wetting behaviors of the cationic surfactant and DDA/NaOL surfactants on quartz, the contact angles for quartz were examined at a pH of 10, with the results presented in In the case of the mixed surfactants, the same characteristic plots are shown, but the increase in contact angle is much less pronounced, and the contact angle of quartz in a mixed surfactant solution is much lower than that for pure DDA solution. The strength of the wetting inhibition decreases in the following order: DDA/NaOL (1/3), DDA/NaOL (1/2) and DDA/NaOL (2/1). The smaller the contact angle of quartz is, the better wetting of the mineral and the higher the hydrophilic efficiency. Therefore, the mixed solution of DDA/NaOL (1/3) was used to make the quartz surface hydrophilic and to yield the poorest collecting capacity. The adsorption mechanism of mixed cationic/anionic collectors on quartz in an acid pulp solution was investigated by A. Vidyadhar   The analysis of the concentration profile between the surfactant molecules and the mineral surface as a function of the position along one axis of the periodic repeating unit can provide a quantitative evaluation of the effect of the surfactants on the structure of the adsorbed layers. The concentration profiles along the z axis were calculated, as shown in The electronic and hydrogen bonding interactions play an important role in the adsorption of DDA on the quartz surface, resulting in a strong affinity of pure DDA at the quartz surface. According to Xu's research using fluorescence spectroscopy and surface tension The adsorption behavior of pure DDA and the mixed DDA/NaOL surfactants on the quartz/water interface was determined, which is the reason that the flotation recovery of quartz is very low in the presence of mixed DDA/NaOL surfactants with a molar ratio of 1/3. The results from the contact angle and adsorption amount examinations show that the mixed surfactants cause a low quartz contact angle but high amounts of surfactants adsorbed onto the quartz. The contact angle of quartz in a mixed surfactant solution is much lower than that for a pure DDA solution. The strength of the wetting inhibition decreases in the following order: DDA/NaOL (1/3), DDA/NaOL (1/2) and DDA/NaOL (2/1). The smaller the contact angle of quartz is, the better the wetting of the mineral and the higher the hydrophilic efficiency. Therefore, the mixture of DDA/NaOL (1/3) was used to make the quartz surface hydrophilic and resulted in the poorest collecting capacity. In the absence of DDA, the adsorption amount of NaOL on quartz is very small due to the electrical repulsion between them. Both adsorption amounts of DDA and NaOL on quartz increase sharply in the presence of mixed DDA/NaOL surfactants. Molecular dynamics simulations show the microscopic adsorption structure and aggregation behavior of the DDA, NaOL and their mixture with a molar ratio of 1/3 at the quartz/water interface. For mixed DDA/NaOL surfactants, only a few DDA molecules adsorb on the quartz directly via hydrogen bonding, and the remainder of the DDA and NaOL molecules exist near the quartz surface and form a hydrophilic spherical-like micelle via the hydrophobic interactions between surfactant tails. This work was supported by Innovation Driven Plan of