The choice of surgical or non-surgical treatment of mandibular condylar fractures remains controversial. Earlier trials documented multiple complications of surgical treatment and recommended a non-surgical approach, while more recent trials have shown superior outcomes of surgical compared with non-surgical treatment in some cases. In this paper we systematically review the systematic reviews on the topic that were published before January 2019 and which followed the PRISMA statement, and propose an algorithm for the management of these fractures. Two systematic reviews met the inclusion criteria of the current review, both of which showed better outcome from surgical than non-surgical treatment. We propose an algorithm based on the feasibility of fixation, ability to restore joint and occlusal function, and ensure adequate healing, and consider patient-associated factors that facilitate decision-making.Before the era of internal rigid fixation and computed tomographic (CT) scanning, predicting the outcome of surgically-treated mandibular condylar fractures was extremely difficult. Many indications for surgical treatment have been proposed that depend on many factors such as; age, level of the fracture, degree of dislocation or displacement, malocclusion, other associated fractures, loss of height of the ramus, and facial asymmetry. A systematic review was conducted according to the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic review and Meta-Analysis) statement. All systematic reviews and meta-analyses published before January 2019 (the time the study was begun) that compared the outcome of surgical compared with non-surgical treatment of mandibular condylar fractures in adults were considered. Only reviews of human studies and that were published in English were considered. The quality of the systematic reviews and meta-analyses was evaluated with AMSTAR-2 (A MeaSurement Tool to Assess Systematic Reviews - 2) A pilot search was made on PubMed (National Library of Medicine, NCBI) about the management of mandibular condylar fractures to identify relevant keywords. The terms were analysed with medical subject headings (MeSH) and a list of keywords developed ( Using a standardised collection form, the following variables were recorded: date of conducting the review search, the focused question, type of included studies, the primary measured outcome, collected variables, review, conclusion and recommendations. In case of meta-analyses the outcome comparison and pooled complication rates were also included. Two independent reviewers (AY and AB) were involved in searching, screening, reviewing, and collecting data. There were no disagreements between the two reviewers except for the inclusion of one systematic review (Sherif 2010) The database search yielded 186 studies. After screening titles and removing duplicates, 22 papers were considered, and their full texts were obtained and read. Only 10 reviews were systematic and restricted to surgical compared with non-surgical treatment of mandibular condylar fractures in adults ( The two reviews included Although treating other mandibular fractures with non-surgical treatment is possible, no one doubts the superiority of surgical treatment over non-surgical treatment for an angle fracture, for example. Open reduction and internal fixation offers fast recovery with predictable occlusion and eliminates the need for intermaxillary fixation, which allows quick return to normal diet and better oral hygiene. The risk of facial nerve injury could be the main reason that many surgeons choose non-surgical treatment for condylar fractures. To answer the question whether surgical treatment gives better outcomes than non-surgical treatment, the correct reply is: for which case? This question has no correct answer if it is assumed that condylar fractures are a single entity. Intracapsular comminuted fractures cannot be mixed with subcondylar fractures in one group and the outcome of surgical and non-surgical treatment compared. Randomisation is correct only for similar injuries, and this may be the cause of variable outcomes among patients who were incorrectly randomised with no clear indications for each treatment. There are a lot of classifications for condylar fractures, but none of them helps the clinician to decide which cases need to be treated surgically and which can be treated non-surgically. Other studies have discussed factors such as the age of the patient, the degree of dislocation and displacement of the fracture, the dental status of the patient, unilateral compared with bilateral fractures, the size of the fractured segment, and the presence of other facial fractures which must be considered when deciding the treatment options. We propose an algorithm based on the best available evidence, the common clinical practice and the experience of a group of surgeons working in a trauma centre ( The first logical step is to check the feasibility of fixing the fractured condyle. Surgical treatment without the ability to fix the fracture is just extra trauma for the patient. The ability to fix a condylar fracture is dependent on comminution of the fracture, available resources and training, and experience of the surgeon. The second step is to check the dislocation of the condyle. To guarantee a functioning joint, the condylar head should be reduced to the glenoid fossa. In the case of a unilateral condylar fracture, the patient might be guided into good occlusion with closed treatment, but the long-term consequences of the overloaded contralateral joint are not known. In a non-dislocated condylar fracture, the next step is to check the displacement of the fracture. One must ensure good union of the fractured condyle because in case of non-union, the goal of restoring the TMJ as a functional unit is not achieved, and the same possible compromised outcome of a dislocated condyle could happen. Malunion of one of the fracture ends could also result in restricted mandibular movement. In one of the systematic reviews included, the MIO was significantly better in the surgical treatment group than in the non-surgical treatment group. When the articulation of the condyle and union of the fracture are predictable, checking the occlusion of the patient should be the next step. If the occlusion cannot be guided because of interference by the fracture, or if there is "dropping back" as a result of lack of a posterior stop, then surgical intervention is recommended. In cases where occlusal discrepancy is minor and the patient could benefit from orthognathic surgery because of pretraumatic malocclusion, the surgeon may suggest non-surgical treatment with an orthognathic plan. This could also be applicable for a growing patient with mixed dentition. If the occlusion is good or can easily be guided, non-surgical treatment should be considered. In edentulous patients, occlusion can be checked on existing dentures. In a non-dislocated and non-displaced condylar fracture in an edentulous patient, surgical treatment is hardly justified, particularly when their medical status is considered. Predictable healing of the fracture will take place with conservative treatment and then their dentures can be adjusted or replaced. The last step is to check whether the patient is a good candidate for non-surgical treatment or not. This treatment algorithm is based on four main factors: the feasibility of fixation, restoring joint and occlusal function, ensuring adequate healing of the fracture, and considering patient-centred factors. The indications for surgical treatment should not include the presence of a foreign body or the displacement of the condyle to the middle cranial fossa, because this will be the treatment of the complication, not the fracture. We think that the factors discussed in our algorithm are already used by many surgeons and supported by the best available evidence. The formulation of such an algorithm aims to help surgeons with different circumstances in the decision-making process. Although the algorithm needs to be validated by randomised controlled trials, preliminary retrospective analysis of the patients who underwent treatment of condylar fractures in our centre showed promising results. We invite research workers to analyse their data and compare the outcome and rate of complications in patients who were treated by following this algorithm with those in patients who were treated otherwise. Obviously, patients who were not treated properly (either with surgical or non-surgical treatment) should be excluded. We have no conflicts of interest. Not applicable.