The number of individuals with periprosthetic fractures of the proximal part of the femur is increasing. Multiple treatment methods have been described but none that correlate to fracture type and few with mostly good-to-excellent results. This article describes an algorithmic reconstruction tactic for treating patients with periprosthetic fractures associated with a loose femoral component. The stem is approached through the fracture fragments. Reconstructing the tube of the proximal part of the femur with 18G cerclage wires allows for canal preparation and implantation of the new stem. Application of the allograft struts and cables maximizes the biomechanical integrity of the proximal part of the femur to promote fracture repair and implant fixation. No treatment failures have occurred as of this date. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.Periprosthetic fractures of the femur are becoming more prevalent. Although the rate of periprosthetic fracture in total hip arthroplasty (THA) has remained constant at 1.5% for primary procedures and 4% for revisions, the number of patients who undergo THA and the number of patients who undergo revisions are increasing Duncan and Masri Treatment options described in the literature have yielded variable success. Nonoperative management, such as the use of traction to approximate the fracture, usually results in long-term failure secondary to loosening From January 1, 1996, through July 1, 1998, 7 patients (5 men and 2 women) with B2 periprosthetic fractures were treated using a stepwise treatment algorithm. The average age of patients was 63 years old (range, 54–71 years). Five fractures were located around a primary hip procedure (3 cemented, 2 uncemented), and 2 fractures were located around a revision hip procedure (both uncemented). A fall was the mechanism of injury in all cases except 1 case that was due to a car accident. All of the patients had anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, which revealed fractures that were located around a loose stem and which were classified as B2 fractures based on the criteria established by Duncan and Masri The first half of the algorithm covers the preoperative planning and the surgery until the stem is removed (Fig. 2). The second half of the algorithm covers the reduction of the fracture through completion of implantation. The fracture fragments were reduced to reconstitute the proximal tube of the femur. This construct was held together with doubled 18G cerclage wires that were twist-tightened enough to add stability, but not so much as to collapse the tube. The fracture pattern in all cases was an oblique fracture (a transverse fracture would be unusual for a B2 fracture), although the fractures did vary in overall length and in the degree of comminution. Two of the 3 fractures around cemented stems were short enough and proximal enough that additional work was required before the tip of the stem was free for extraction. In cases in which an uncemented stem was still adherent to the femoral shaft, a Gigli saw was used to loosen the stem. All 7 fractures were amenable to cerclage wiring. The femur was reamed and broached in standard fashion for implantation of a long-stem uncemented femoral component. Varus remodeling was seen to some degree in many cases. Because of its location, the fracture allows for realignment during preparation of the stem. The cerclage wires hold the fracture lines together, but there is still enough flexibility to allow passing of the straight reamers and femoral broaches. When the real stem is in position, it is stabilized by the addition of the allograft struts. In B2 fractures, the fracture lines do not extend far beyond the tip of the previous implant. In all 7 cases, there was enough diaphyseal bone to allow diaphyseal fixation of the revision stem. In several cases, we were able to reconstruct the proximal part of the femur to allow partial proximal load transfer. The size of the component and the depth of insertion were determined by the preoperative plan. The size of the reamer and integrity of the proximal part of the femur were checked with intraoperative radiography with the final reamer in place. When required, the acetabular component was revised at this time because the combination of the cerclage wires on the outside and the reamer on the inside gave the proximal part of the femur enough structural integrity to be retracted for acetabular exposure. The reamer was removed from the femur, and the femoral component was inserted. In 3 cases, we determined that there was enough proximal stability to allow partial proximal load transfer, and we used an S-ROM stem (Johnson & Johnson, Randolph, MA). In 4 cases, because of proximal bone loss, a fully porous-coated curved Restoration stem (Stryker Howmedica Osteonics, Allendale, NJ) was used. This choice of stems was made intraoperatively after the cerclage wiring and was not based on quantifiable data. Two femoral cortical allograft struts were fashioned to span the entire fracture to the intact distal femur, with the struts placed at 90° angles to each other. A proximal plate would have been another option instead of allograft struts and has been used successfully Postoperative radiographs were obtained and showed good approximation of the fractures in all cases (Figs. 3 and 4). No failures have been reported as of this writing. No refractures and no signs of stem loosening have occurred, although 2 stems have subsided (one 2 mm and the other 5 mm). All stems show good bone apposition, and spot welding has occurred in all of the allografts. Several of the allografts have undergone significant remodeling, but none has fractured or resorbed completely. Many studies have proposed techniques to treat periprosthetic fractures. Although these fractures are uncommon, the prevalence is increasing. These fractures can be divided into validated groups based on the Duncan and Masri classification Using a traditional technique, the 18G cerclage wires are used to reconstruct the proximal part of the femur. With the femoral canal reconstructed, it is possible to instrument the proximal part of the femur with a cementless long-stem femoral component. By using a cementless stem, the surgeon eliminates the possibility of cement penetrating between the fracture fragments and allows for grafting to fill cavitary defects in the proximal femur where required. Other authors have noted that cerclage wires alone do not always provide adequate fixation of the femur and that additional internal fixation may be required A long-stem femoral component was used in all cases. Depending on the quality of the proximal bone and its ability to tolerate axial load, either a long-stem component with proximal fixation or a fully coated component was used. If the proximal bone was in question, diaphyseal fixation was chosen. With both stems, impaction grafting was used where required to fill bone defects and to increase the stability of the component. As a result of the question of stability, the reconstructed femoral canal was stabilized further with allograft struts placed at 90° to each other and secured using cables. The allografts provided stabilization in a similar manner to a plate, but with significant advantages. The use of the cables eliminated the need for screws, which increase the risk of new fractures. In addition, in contrast to a metal plate, which causes bone degradation, the allograft struts incorporate and strengthen the femur. All allograft struts at follow-up have shown at least partial incorporation, suggesting that the interposition of the cerclage wires between the allograft strut and the host femoral cortex is not a significant deterrent to incorporation. This stepwise algorithmic approach has been clinically successful. By approaching the loose stem through the fracture fragments, the blood supply to the fragments is preserved. Reconstructing the tube of the proximal part of the femur with 18G cerclage wires allows for canal preparation and implantation of the new stem. Application of the allograft struts and cables maximizes the biomechanical integrity of the proximal part of the femur to promote fracture repair and implant fixation. We believe that this technique should be considered as a treatment option for patients with B2 periprosthetic fractures.