The kinetics of silver cementation with copper from sulphuric acid solution has been studied with a rotating cylinder. Two independent methods have been used to monitor the concentration of Ag+ ions in the solution: atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) method and a continuous method with the use of an ion-selective electrode. The reaction has been found to follow first-order kinetics with respect to silver ion concentration. The initial rate of the reaction is limited by diffusion through the mass transfer boundary layer. The rate constant for initial period of cementation is independent of the absence or the presence of oxygen in the solutions and is independent of the presence of Cu2+ ions up to the concentration of 2×10−4 M. After the initial period of cementation a rate enhancement has been observed. In solutions containing 20 mg/L of Ag+ ions, the rate enhancement is associated with changes in the structure of the deposit which involve an increase in the effective surface area during the process. However, the rate enhancement phenomenon in the absence of oxygen at 100 mg/L of Ag+ is attributed not only to an increase in the effective surface area but also to a chemical reaction between Cu+ and Ag+ ions.Cementation reactions have attracted considerable interest in the past century due to their possible application in industry for solutions concentration and purification. The silver cementation with copper is commonly applied to recovery of silver from industrial baths used for electrowinning or electrorefining of copper. Generally, a mass transfer process limits the reaction kinetics for many cementation systems. On the other hand, there are also systems in which the kinetics is controlled by chemical reaction, e.g. Cu A number of cementation rate studies have been reported in which reaction kinetics was studied with a rotating disc. Notice, importantly, that a rotating disc system is particularly sensitive to the formation of a surface deposit and, as a consequence of that, to the change of the flow regime from linear to turbulent. For the case of a rotating cylinder system, the flow regime is already turbulent and, of course, independent of roughness of growing cement. It appears from an examination of the literature that kinetics of silver cementation with copper, especially in acidic sulphate solutions, has not been extensively studied. Some pieces of information about solutions used, techniques, kinetics parameters and other conclusions obtained during these studies are collected in In our recent article The present paper aims to establish the kinetics of silver cementation with copper in sulphuric acid solution, which at the start of the experiment does not contain the Cu Before use the laboratory glassware was purified from any possible traces of silver by immersing it in ammonia solution of EDTA with the concentration of 13 mM and pH 10 for 24 h, then washed and dried. All chemicals and materials used in this study were of analytical grade. All solutions were prepared using four times distilled water. The volume of solution used in the cell was 200–220 mL. The temperature of electrolyte was maintained with an ultra-thermostat MLW U 15 The equipment set-up for the cementation kinetic study using a rotating cylinder was described previously in detail General measuring procedure consisted of two stages: pretreatment of the steel cylinder before cementation and measurement of the cementation kinetics. Before each experiment the rotating steel cylinder was immersed in HNO The conditions of electrodeposition of copper on the rotating cylinder were strictly maintained in order to obtain a thickness of copper layer of about 24 μm. The electrodeposition of copper was conducted from 0.5 M CuSO After electrodeposition the copper layer was electropolished and chemically polished. The deposited copper layer was electropolished in phosphoric acid solution (3:1 in volume) before each experiment. Then chemical polishing of copper was conducted in 0.5 M H During cementation experiments two independent methods were used to monitor the concentration of the Ag Immediately before each experiment the potential of the ion-selective electrode was measured in the investigated system where the rotating copper cylinder was replaced by a rotating Teflon cylinder. This potential, called the potential of the ion-selective electrode with a Teflon cylinder ( During cementation experiments the potential of the ion-selective electrode in the system with the rotating copper cylinder was recorded for 60 min and the electrolyte was also sampled for silver removal. After each run the copper cylinder with deposited silver was rinsed thoroughly and dried. Then the copper layer with silver was cut and removed from the cylinder. Two samples of the copper sheet with cemented silver were taken, dissolved in hot HNO The typical kinetic plots of silver ion concentration against time at various temperatures are presented in It can be seen from these graphs that for all temperatures AAS and EMF curves converge when the initial concentration of Ag It should be pointed out that in the AAS method the determined amount of silver is a sum of silver ions from the solution and solid silver particles or colloidal silver. The solid silver particles can appear in the studied solution as a result of the deposited silver dropping off from the rotating cylinder during the cementation experiment, while the appearance of silver colloid in deoxygenated solutions can be a result of chemical reaction between Ag The particular experiments, which proved the possibility of this reaction occurring in the deoxygenated solutions used for silver cementation with copper, were performed and the results will be presented in another paper The duration of the initial period of cementation was usually about 10 min for the lower initial concentration of silver ions and below 35 °C. For higher temperatures and higher initial concentration of Ag For the initial period of cementation (usually a first few minutes) the rate constants of the process were calculated on the basis of the first-order kinetics equations for both analytical methods. These data are collected in It was shown in our recent paper The data from The differences between the experimental values of the rate constants obtained by means of various methods of analysis (AAS and EMF) and, moreover, in the absence or presence of oxygen in the solutions are not significant. It has been proven by verification of statistical hypotheses about equality of average values of the rate constants for the confidence level of 0.95. From the data collected in After the initial period of cementation the enhancement of the reaction was observed. To illustrate the rate enhancement occurring during the cementation of silver on copper, the factor of enhancement was defined as follows: The analysis of the rate enhancement by calculating the As can be seen from the data presented in The investigated range of the copper sulphate concentration was 0–0.5 M. The acid sulphate concentration during these experiments was constant at 0.5 M. The kinetic plots of Ag As can be seen from The influence of CuSO These data indicate that copper ions in the range of concentration up to 20 mM do not change the rate of reaction at the initial stage of cementation in both oxygenated and deoxygenated solutions. The higher concentration of Cu In order to get a better understanding of the influence of added copper sulphate in concentration of 0.5 M on the kinematic viscosity of 0.5 M H The increase in the viscosity of solution, the decrease in the diffusion coefficient of silver ions and the decrease in the rate constant calculated from the Pang–Ritchie equation The obtained data were collected in The following conclusions may be drawn from the experimental results of this study: Cementation of silver onto copper from acidic sulphate solutions follows a first-order process with respect to concentration of silver ions. The initial rate is followed by the second stage with the enhanced rate. Both methods determine the concentration of silver ions in the solutions: AAS method and the continuous method with use of an ion-selective electrode give the same value of the rate constant for the initial period of cementation. For the initial period of cementation the rate constant of the process is: independent of initial silver ions concentration in deoxygenated solutions, independent of the presence or absence of oxygen in solutions, independent of the presence of Cu The rate enhancement of the reaction after the initial period of cementation in oxygenated solutions is connected with about 20% increase in an effective surface area when the reaction takes place at 20 mg/L of silver ions in the solution. The rate enhancement of cementation in the absence of oxygen in solutions after the initial period of the process is associated with: the 20% increase in the effective surface area due to morphology of the deposited silver when cementation takes place in solution containing 20 mg/L Ag an increase in the effective surface area due to morphology of the deposited silver and also with the