The recovery of lead from zinc leach residues (as PbSO4) by flotation is of interest in the zinc plants. Therefore, at the first stage of the present study, anglesite flotation behavior and its surface characteristics have been investigated. The interaction of natural and sulfidized anglesite with potassium amyl xanthate (KAX), Aerofloat and Aerophine have been investigated as a function of concentrations of amyl xanthate, Aerofloat, Aerophine, and sodium sulphide as well as pH through micro-flotation studies. Flotation recovery is affected by pH, collector concentration, and sulfidization degree. Sulfidization reduced the collector consumption roughly 8 times for the collectors studied. At the second stage, the recovery of lead from a zinc leach residue of an oxidic ore was investigated through batch flotation studies. The residue was leached with water before sulfidization to eliminate its soluble compounds. The highest zinc elimination occurred at low pH. At the sulfidization-flotation stage, the effect of different parameters such as sodium sulfide, KAX, and sodium silicate concentration as well as pH were studied. The lead recovery was significantly affected by the sodium sulfide concentration. The sulfide consumption for the leach residue was 3 times more than that for the pure anglesite. De-sliming and cleaning increased the grade of lead in the concentrate.Angouran is a large oxidized lead–zinc deposit in north-western Iran. The main lead minerals include cerussite, mimetite and beudantite ( It is generally known that oxidized minerals of lead, zinc and copper are more difficult to float than their sulfide counterparts. This fact is due to the higher solubilities of oxide minerals as well as the extensive hydration of oxide surfaces (  The solubility behavior of lead oxide minerals depends on pH, reaction time and method of conditioning. Lead ions in solution can re-adsorb on the surface as hydroxy complexes, activating or depressing the ores, depending on pH ( In the treatment of zinc concentrates by conventional roast-leach-electrowinning processes the leach residues produced may contain significant quantities of zinc, as well as interfering elements such as iron or undesirable impurities such as arsenic, germanium or fluoride. The zinc plant residue may also contain metal values other than zinc, such as lead, copper, precious metals that either interfere with the recovery of zinc or must be recovered in addition to zinc for the total economy of the zinc plant. During hydrometallurgical processing of zinc calcine by conventional roast-leaching-electrowinning processes lead reports to the leach residue as sulphate. Since there is an iron elimination step in these processes, the residues contain mainly iron hydroxide (III), jarosite, goethite or hematite ( The zinc leach residues are stockpiled until the recovery of valuable metals in the residues become economic and/or the grade of zinc ores decreases. The stockpiled residues cause serious waste and environmental problems due to the increasing masses of iron residues and the presence of toxic elements such as germanium, arsenic, antimony, and cadmium. In addition, significant loss of economic value occurs including lead, silver and gold. Consequently, by decreasing the grade of these valuable metals in the mines, metal recovery from residues has been developed in the zinc industry to reduce the environmental problems as well as creating a new source.     To produce zinc from zinc bearing material, one way is to start from an oxidic zinc ore and eliminating the roasting stage. At present, at the first stage of the processing of oxidic zinc ores in some plants as well as the ones in Iran, lead is separated as the lead flotation concentrate. The flotation tails which form the zinc concentrate goes to zinc electrowinning. Another possibility is to apply solvent extraction process, eliminating the lead flotation stage at the beginning, recovering lead minerals from the residues at the end, producing saleable lead concentrate, thus, reducing the size of the flotation unit. In this study, at the first stage, flotation behavior of anglesite has been investigated fundamentally to find the optimum parameters for the second stage of our research, on the zinc plant leach residue. The parameters studied were additions of potassium amyl xanthate, Aerofloat 242, Aerophine 3418A, sodium sulfide as well as pH. The second stage of the current research focuses on the recovery of lead from an oxidic zinc residue with low lead concentration due to the presence of a lead flotation circuit at the beginning of the plant, i.e., a worse case scenario. Therefore, the objectives of this stage were, to explore the feasibility of the lead recovery from Angouran zinc leach residue by using a sulfidization-flotaion method; to study different flotation parameters such as the concentration of sodium sulfide and collector as well as the pH. The effect of potassium amyl xanthate or Aerophione as collector was also compared. Anglesite sample from Tsumeb, Namibia was obtained from Trinity Mineral Company. The sample was initially crushed in a jaw crusher and hand picked specimens were ground in a ceramic pulverizer for 15 The zinc leach residue was exposed to air to be dried. It was crushed in a jaw crusher and passed through a 1/4 Potassium amyl xanthate was used as collector and was purified by dissolving in acetone and precipitating by petroleum ether following a standard technique ( The sodium sulfide used in the sulfidization experiments is a product of Tianjin Gangia Chemical Company. To restrict oxidation, it was stored in a desicator. The pine oil and Aerofroth 65 used as frothers and sodium silicate as dispersant were produced by American Cyanamid and Carlo Eraba, Milan, respectively. Sulfuric acid or sodium hydroxide solutions obtained from Merck Company were used for pH adjustments. Di-ethyl ether and acetone were used for purification of xanthate. They were obtained from Pars Chimie and Merck Company respectively. Sodium bicarbonate from Merck was used to prepare a stock solution of 10 The micro-flotation cell was a version of the one devised by The batch flotation experiments were carried out in a Denver D-12 machine. The volume of the cell used was 2.6 Conditioning for both sulfidization and flotation experiments was carried out at a constant volume of 100 Wet sieve analysis was performed using two 250 De-sliming of the feed samples was carried out using a laboratory hydrocyclone with the following characteristics: vortex diameter Sample preparation was the same as for the micro-flotation experiments. The suspension was filtered and the solids washed once with distilled water and left to dry in air. The XRD instrument used was a Philip PW1730.  The effect of collector concentration on the flotation behavior of anglesite is presented in To assist the flotation response of anglesite, sulfidization of the surface was accomplished prior to flotation. Sodium sulfide was added over the range of 5   Comparing the maximum recoveries reached in The solubility products of lead and zinc sulfides The results of the de-sliming of the residue are shown in   In both micro-flotation and batch flotation experiments KAX and Aerophine 3418A have been used as collectors for the anglesite and the leach residue. The collectors can be compared in terms of the pH of flotation, collector and sodium sulfide concentration. The sodium sulfide required for the batch tests can be estimated based on the concentration of sulfide required for the micro-flotation experiments. Since the volume of the micro-flotation cell was 42 Based on the xanthate concentration required for the micro-flotation experiments (4.35 Based on the micro-flotation results, the concentration of Aerophine 3418A required is almost the same as the concentration of xanthate ( Increasing the sodium sulfide concentration above the optimum value increases the collector consumption, i.e., equation  Flotation recovery of anglesite was affected by pH; with a bell-shaped trend. At pH 10, 8, and 7.3 the highest recovery was obtained for xanthate, Aerofloat 242 and Aerophine 3418A, respectively. Flotation recovery of anglesite was affected by the KAX concentration. However, sulfidization reduced the collector consumption ca. 8 times. Increasing the sodium sulfide concentration above the optimum level, depressed the mineral and the recovery reduced. In the single mineral system, the highest lead recovery was obtained at 7000 g/t sodium sulfide concentration. Above that, lead sulfate was depressed. The sulfide consumption for the leach residue was 3 times more than that for the pure anglesite. Washing the residue reduced the zinc concentration especially at lower pH. The highest lead recovery from the leach residue occurred at pH To increase lead recovery and lead grade, the residue should be de-slimed. After cleaning, the lead grade increased to 41.32%. The Aerophine consumption depends on the sulfidization degree of the system. The authors wish to thank University of Tehran for the financial support under the Grant no. 615/3/862.