This study presents a new theoretical model for design against fracture of zirconia-toughened functionally graded thermal barrier coatings (FG TBCs). A micromechanics-based model, which investigates the effect of the mismatch in material properties of the constituent phases on the transformation toughening mechanism in zirconia-enriched multi-phase composites, has been incorporated with the lamination theory. The developed model enables to engineer ZrO2-toughened multi-phase FG TBCs with required or pre-determined fracture properties by utilizing the synergetic characteristics of their constituent phases. A simulation for ZrO2/Ni FG TBC plates subjected to thermal shock loadings has been conducted. The results demonstrated that within the compositional gradation investigated, the substrate metal (Ni)-rich compositional gradation contributed to high fracture-resistant properties based on fracture-mechanics considerations. This tendency was theoretically and experimentally confirmed with results available in the open literature.Functionally graded thermal barrier coatings (FG TBCs) are promising candidates to protect the materials and structures working under super high temperatures and temperature gradients. FG TBCs consist of multi-phase composites that are engineered to have a smooth spatial variation of material constituents. The advantages in using an FG TBC as an alternative to joining directly together two dissimilar materials, such as ceramics and metals, include smoothing of thermal stress distributions across the layers, minimization or elimination of stress concentrations and singularities at the interface, and an increase in bonding strength The ceramic-rich side in FG TBCs is so brittle that cracks usually initiate and propagate from the ceramic surface into the FG layers, in particular, under unsteady heat-flow conditions such as thermal shock loadings Stress-induced transformation toughening in zirconia-enriched ceramics is one of the strongest toughening mechanisms found in experimental studies on ceramics, which was firstly reported by Garvie et al. Continuum models for this phenomenon were developed by Lange This study present a new theoretical model for design against fracture of FG TBCs using transformation toughening by zirconia, which is based on a micromechanics-based model of transformation toughening in multi-phase composites The micromechanics-based model for transformation toughening used in the present study was described in previous work by Tsukamoto and Kotousov The stress intensity factor at the crack tip, A similar procedure can be adapted to the growing crack case as well. Details can be found in Stump and Budiansky The toughening effect increases with the increase of the strength of the transformation, The effective elastic properties (bulk modulus In the above equations Further, in order to take into account the stress concentration effect on the stress transformation criterion, let us consider the mean stress in the particles. The mean stress in each phase, Here, This micromechanical theory can be incorporated into the continuum theory described above by replacing the corresponding material constants, dilatation and critical stress in Eq.  A FG TBC plate considered here is built up with macroscopically homogeneous composite layers with spherical particles as illustrated in Consider a FG plate consisting of thin layers with thickness All the other macro-stress rate components are zero. The corresponding in-plane strain rate is expressed as The out-of-plane strain rate component is not zero. The in-plane strain rate component The in-plane force rate Here, the thickness of FGM plate is set at 2 The micromechanics-based model of transformation toughening in multi-phase composites described in Section Here, We consider the FG TBCs with a step-wised gradation of the volume fraction as shown in We examine the effect of compositional gradation pattern parameter, Here, the overall heat-transfer coefficient, The average density of FG TBCs is given as The methodology of design against fracture of FG TBCs in the current study is shown in ZrO The temperature profile of the thermal shock loading is described as follows: The initial temperature over the FG TBC plates is uniform at 300 For the mechanical boundary conditions, three cases are considered: for Case 1, any deformation in the TBC is unconstrained, i.e.    In the following, an attention will be paid to these two peaks in the transformation-toughening equivalent stress,       From the simulation results on transformation-toughening equivalent stresses in ZrO Now, let us consider the procedure for design against fracture of the FG TBCs. According to the experimental data obtained by Zhu et al. First, the maximum Second, the maximum Next we examine the validity of the simulation results. Several theoretical and experimental studies have been conducted investigating thermo-mechanical behaviour of FG TBCs subjected to a thermal shock loading. It has been reported by some researchers Consequently, even though no theoretical research has been made intensively applying the transformation toughening to design of such FG TBCs, the theoretical and numerical studies not considering the transformation toughening and experimental studies in existing work showed that the FG TBCs with metal-rich gradations exhibit better fracture-resistant performance than those with ceramic-rich gradations. To confirm the effectiveness of the developed model for design of such a new type of high fracture-resistant FG TBCs, systematic experiments will be necessary. A micromechanics-based model of transformation toughening in multi-phase composites was incorporated with the lamination theory for investigating the fracture-resistant property with transformation toughening of FG TBCs. A new parameter relevant to the stress intensity factor was introduced to assess the toughening effect such as a transformation-toughening equivalent stress, and using this parameter a methodology of design against fracture of zirconia-toughened FG TBCs was developed based on fracture-mechanics considerations. According to this method, ZrO The author thanks Dr. A. Kotousov and Dr. S.Y. Ho of The University of Adelaide for useful discussions and suggestions. Based on the micromechanical consideration