Slurry in wet grinding mills is critical for transporting fine progenies out of the system to downstream floatation process. It is commonly modelled as Newtonian fluids when simulating grinding mills with numerical tools. However, rheology of the slurry exhibits shear thinning non-Newtonian behaviours. This study aims to investigate the non-Newtonian characteristics of mineral slurries both experimentally and numerically. Non-Newtonian smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) and its coupling to discrete element modelling (DEM) framework was initially described. Non-Newtonian rheology of a copper slurry with various solids concentrations was determined experimentally by a rotary viscometer. SPH-DEM modelling of the viscometry test was conducted with both Newtonian and Power-law non-Newtonian settings in fluid phase, and comparisons were performed. Results suggested that the non-Newtonian SPH based method better reflects actual rheological behaviours of the slurry. In addition, DEM parameters exhibited limited impacts on rheology of the solids-liquid mixture, particularly at low solids concertation and high shear rate states. The findings suggested that the non-Newtonian based SPH-DEM method should be used to more accurately model the slurry flows within grinding mills.Flow Consistency Index - Flow Behaviour Index - Mineral processing is the most important stage of copper and gold production, during which grinding mills are utilised to reduce size of the ore materials for further mineral enrichment processing. Grinding mills often account for 30%~50% of the total production cost [ Mineral slurry is produced during grinding mill operation. It is well known that the slurry phase plays several important roles, such as the transportation of finer particles after particle breakage and in the modification of the coarse particle dynamics. This is particularly important for predicting flow through discharge grates and pebble ports and in the pulp chamber. Presence of the water in the grinding chamber also alters the overall rock and ball charge behaviour which leads to varied grinding performance ( Smoothed particle hydrodynamic (SPH) [ Nevertheless, rheological properties of the mineral slurry may not be accurately reflected in current DEM-SPH numerical framework. As shown in Based on the forgoing comments, the purpose of this paper is to utilise a non-Newtonian fluid-based SPH-DEM numerical framework for modelling mineral slurries. A suite of mineral slurries is selected to experimentally characterise the rheological characteristics using a rotary viscometer device. Numerical modelling of the viscometry tests is to be performed with both Newtonian fluid-based method and the modified Non-Newtonian fluid-based DEM-SPH framework, and results are to be compared. The Hertz-Mindlin model [    δ       Static friction is obtained by tracking the elastic shear displacement throughout the period of the contact. The tangential overlap The normal force has two terms, a spring force and a damping force. The tangential force also has two terms: a shear force and a damping force. The shear force is a “history” effect that accounts for the tangential displacement (tangential overlap) between the particles for the duration of the time they are in contact. Considering that the shear modulus ( Coefficient of restitution, Young's modulus, Poisson ratio, Coefficient of static friction, Coefficient of rolling friction, The contact model coefficients in Eq. Additionally, when the rolling resistance is selected for the contacts, the elastic-plastic spring-dashpot (EPSD) model [   The EPSD rolling friction model also has a viscous damping component [ Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) is a powerful particle-based method for modelling complex, splashing, free surface fluid flows. This method is particularly well suited for modelling industrial fluid flows, such as the fine slurry component of the multiphase flow. Once coupled to DEM, it may be applied to various industrial applications which involve solids and liquid flows. The continuity equation in SPH is defined as: The relative position vector from particle b to particle a by    Non-Newtonian SPH modelling development has been discussed in previously studies which include the -Bingham model as well as the Herschel-Bulkley model [ The pressure scale Solid surfaces in simulations are modelled using particles by enforcing a normal repulsive force. The equations of motion are utilised if the boundary objects are in motion, in which their rigid body motion is resolved based on the summation of the stress terms. Both resolved and unresolved methods can be used to compute the interactions between the solids phase and the liquid phase. For the resolved method, the full pressure-continuity equation solution is calculated around each solid particle. This requires the resolution of the fluid phase that is much finer than the particle size. It is a preferred method when it is allowed by the computational resources, in which the phase averaging process is eliminated [ The one-way SPH-DEM coupling methodology is defined in [ The experimental apparatus used to conduct the viscometry test is shown schematically in A copper slurry sample collected from commercial operation in Australia was selected in this study. The particle size distribution and material properties of the specimen are shown in At the beginning of a test, the ambient temperature is maintained at around 20 °C. Once the temperature is stabilised, the slurry sample is continuously poured into the cup until the bob is fully submerged. The rotary viscometer is then switched on and the rotational speed was continuously incremented from step 1 to 30. The corresponding torque reading from the gauge at each rotational step was then logged into the computer. Each test is repeated three times and the averaged results were reported. To perform the coupled SPH-DEM modelling of the viscometry test, the aforementioned Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid based numerical framework were both used. The code used in the modelling suite is LAMMPS [ In terms of the numerical modelling program, similar to the experimental scheme, four different solids concentrations are modelled under both the Newtonian and non-Newtonian SPH modes, which leads to a total of 8 modelling cases. In each case, the slurry material of a pre-defined solids concentration is initialled loaded into the cup to a fixed volume which enables the bob to be fully immersed. Then, rotational speed of the bob is slowly ramped up from zero to pre-defined levels. 8 rotational speeds from 3.5 rpm to 350 rpm were selected in the numerical program. The stress response on surface of the bob is collected under each testing condition. During the rotation, once the shear stress response measured from the bob reached a relatively steady state, the shear stress was recorded and rotation of the bob was then stopped. It is critical to select appropriate fluid particle and solids particle size and distribution in the modelling. The actual particle size and distribution of the slurry sample is too small to achieve realistic computational turnaround time. Thus, scale up of the particles is required in the numerical modelling. However, the followings should be considered during the scale up process: Gap between bob and cup is at least five folds of the maximum diameter of the fluid particle/solids particle To fulfil the requirements above as well as achieving realistic computational time, a mono-sized fluid and solids particle size of 400 μm were selected in the modelling. Solids and fluid particles were inserted into the viscometer device to a fixed volume. The corresponding total particle count in each solids concentration is: 30% solids concentration: 396,329 solids particles; 2,589,339 fluid particles. 50% solids concentration: 785,702 solids particles; 2,199,966 fluid particles. 65% solids concentration: 1,190,605 solids particles; 1,795,064 fluid particles. 80% solids concentration: 1,756,276 solids particles; 1,229,393 fluid particles. This essentially led to an unresolved method utilised in all modelling cases. Detailed parameters used in SPH and DEM phases are discussed below. Following the experimental and numerical programs above, the rheology of the slurry samples is obtained and shown below. Comparisons between the two different SPH-DEM modelling modes are made. Following the experimental procedure outlined above, shear stress-shear rate correlations of the slurry samples are obtained and shown in Power-law rheology function fitting results for each solids concentration are shown in SPH-DEM modelling of the viscometry testing was conducted with parameters shown below in Results are shown in Effect of the contact parameters in the DEM phase on the rheology of the slurry was also investigated. This was achieved by varying the particle-particle frictional coefficient (μ Minimum and maximum shear stresses at a specific shear rate were recorded when varying DEM contact parameters. Results for each solids concentration are shown in In addition, considering the increase of shear stress due to DEM contact parameters in a specific solids concentration, the elevation of the shear stress is more evident at lower shear rates. This is due to that comparatively more contacts between the solids particles and the measurement bob occurred during modelling at lower shear rates. When increasing the shear rates, the centrifugal force induced particle segregation, which effectively reduced the contacts between the DEM particles and the measurement bob. The distribution of the solids particles suspended in the SPH phase for the 80% solids concentration under various shear rates was shown in Non-Newtonian smoothed particle hydrodynamics and its coupling to the discrete element modelling was studied in this paper. A numerical framework of the SPH-DEM coupling was initially described. A suite of experimental study on the non-Newtonian slurry samples was conducted using a rotary viscometer. Numerical modelling of the viscometry testing was perform to compare rheological performance from experiments and simulation. Results yielded the following major conclusions: Selected copper slurry sample exhibited shear thinning behaviours which can be described using a Power-law correlation. The shear shinning characteristics became more evident when increasing the solids concentration. The rheology of the solid-liquid mixture predominantly depends on the rheology settings of the liquid phase in the DEM-SPH modelling. DEM parameters exhibited more significant impacts on the rheology at lower shear rates and/or higher solids concentration. At higher shear rates, segregation behaviour of the DEM particles was observed due to the relatively high centrifugal force. Consequently, it is suggested that non-Newtonian based rheology setting should be used when modelling slurries in industrial flows to accurately represent its shearing characteristics. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Funder name: