Vanadium extraction from titano-magnetite by using hydrofluoric acid was put forward. The process of low intensity magnetic separation, hydrofluoric acid leaching, co-precipitation with NaOH, roasting with Na2CO3, circulating water leaching and precipitation of vanadium has been investigated. The results show that over 85% vanadium could be directly leached under the condition of sulfuric acid concentration of 5mol/L, CaF2 dosage of 5%, leaching temperature of 95°C, leaching time of 3h and liquid to solid ratio of 3mL/g. With the pH value of 4.5, temperature of 40°C and time of 30min, the co-precipitation rate of vanadium in the acid leaching solution was over 99%. The water leaching rate of vanadium of the co-precipitation reached 95% under the condition of roasting temperature of 800°C, Na2CO3 dosage of 6%, roasting time of 1h, leaching temperature of 90°C, leaching time of 40min, liquid to solid ratio of 2mL/g and leaching stage of 4. Finally, the total recovery of vanadium could reach 81% and the purity of the product V2O5 was 99.65% meeting the standard specification with precipitation of vanadium and calcination.Vanadium is an important transition metal, which is widely used in high-quality ferrous, non-ferrous alloys and chemical industry due to its unique characteristic ( The extraction of vanadium from vanadium titano-magnetite basically includes two methods, namely direct extraction and indirect extraction from vanadium slag after the ironmaking and steelmaking ( Therefore, the aim of this paper is to research a novel technology of vanadium extraction from titano-magnetite. The acid consumption was decreased without environmental pollution in the process. Furthermore, the high total recovery of vanadium and high purity of the product V The sample of vanadium titano-magnetite ore was collected from Shanxi province, China. After crushing and grinding, the particle size of the sample was − The analytical purity chemical reagents including sulfuric acid, calcium fluoride, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate and ammonium chloride from Dengke Chemical Reagent Technology Co., Ltd. were used. The water used in this study was distilled water. The raw vanadium titano-magnetite was crushed and grinded to − The contents of chemical composition were analyzed by using a Plasma1000 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (Light Ace HK Ltd., China). X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained by using a Rigaku D/MAX-III X-ray diffraction meter with Cu Kα radiation (Panalytical B.V., Netherlands). The leaching rate of vanadium was calculated by the following equation. Where: α is the leaching rate of vanadium (%), m is the vanadium quantity of leaching sample (g) and n is the vanadium quantity of leaching residue (g). The vanadium is mainly fettered in crystal structure of magnetite in the form of V(III) in the vanadium concentrate. The V(III) is not easily leached by low concentrated sulfuric acid. The hydrofluoric acid is a strong corrosive acid, so the agent of CaF It can be seen from It is indicated from The leaching process is more effective to improve recovery of vanadium due to the generation of [SiF During the acid leaching process, other metallic oxides were also leached besides vanadium. According to the research ( The process of roasting with using Na It can be observed that the recovery of vanadium increased with increasing Na It can be seen that the vanadium, iron and silicon has been precipitated into the co-precipitation at the pH value of 4.5 in the solution. Therefore, it is also indicated that the vanadium in the co-precipitation could not be leached with water. The content of main chemical composition has not significant change in the roasted sample after roasting with Na The precipitation method of vanadium in acid ammonium salt has been operated ( Based on the results obtained from the investigation, the acid consumption was decreased and the recovery of vanadium was increased with hydrofluoric acid leaching. The vanadium in the acid leaching solution was easy to crystallize, precipitate and leach after co-precipitation, roasting and circulating water leaching. The vanadium could be extracted from vanadium titano-magnetite with total recovery of 81.46% in the process. The purity of the product V The authors are thankful for financial support from the