The use of the Synthes LCP We present two such cases. In one of these the diagnosis was delayed long enough to allow the protruding screws to extensively erode the glenoid surface. This necessitated changing the salvage procedure from the usual hemiarthroplasty to total shoulder arthroplasty, which was made more difficult by the bone stock loss from the glenoid. To our knowledge, this complication has not yet been reported. An 81-year-old lady slipped and fell directly onto her left shoulder, sustaining a three-part proximal humeral fracture with involvement of the greater tuberosity ( It was internally fixed with the LCP A deltopectoral approach was utilised. Both tuberosities were noted to be fractured and these were secured with non-absorbable suture prior to fixation with a five-hole 3.5 Her post-operative course was uneventful and she was discharged 6 days later. At 3 weeks follow-up, all was noted to be well and she was making good progress with her physiotherapist, being allowed passive motion only at this point. At 6 weeks post-operatively, she was noted to be experiencing more pain than previously, but radiographs showed no abnormality. At 12 weeks post-operatively, her discomfort had increased markedly and radiographs showed collapse of the humeral head fragment with penetration of the glenohumeral joint by three of the four proximal locking screws. A defect in the glenoid, presumably caused by these penetrating screws, was also noted ( One week later a Total Shoulder Replacement was performed. The surgeon voiced his concern about the quality of fixation achieved of the glenoid component due to bone stock loss corresponding to the defect noted on radiographs. Fortunately, at her last follow-up 5 months post-surgery all was well with no evidence of component failure ( A 60-year-old lady in good health fell in the shower and sustained a closed, neurovascularly intact three-part fracture of her right proximal humerus ( At 2 weeks post-op she was comfortable. At 7 weeks post-op she mentioned recent onset of a new discomfort in her shoulder and she had a diminished range of comfortable movement compared to her previous visit. Radiographs revealed slight collapse of the humeral head and protrusion of the locking screws into the glenohumeral joint ( These were removed in theatre. At her last follow-up visit she was noted to be in daily pain, but she felt this was manageable. Internal and external rotation were limited compared to the other side and radiographs showed a healed fracture, but with evidence of a glenoid erosion. Fractures of the proximal humerus are common, and the incidence is likely to be increasing due to an ageing population. Fortunately, the majority of these fractures are not sufficiently displaced to warrant operative intervention. To help address this issue, the AO-ASIF has, in conjunction with Synthes-Stratec, developed the Proximal Humeral Internal Locking system (PHILOS). In this system, locking of the threaded heads of the screws in the plate itself provides for a construct with angular and axial stability, eliminating the possibility of screw toggling (windscreen wiper effect), or sliding of the screws in the plate holes. Coupled with a divergent or convergent screw orientation, this makes for much improved resistance to pull out and failure of fixation. Also, whereas conventional plating systems depend on compression between the plate undersurface and bone for stability, this is not the case for the PHILOS. This lessens the chance of stripping the thread in osteoporotic bone, as the plate/bone interface is not loaded along the screw axis (especially important in situations where unicortical purchase only can be achieved, e.g. the humeral head). This also allows for a more biological fixation as the underlying periosteum and blood supply to the fractured regions are much less compressed. Good results with the use of this system have been reported in two-, three-, and four-part fractures (corresponding to AO type A, B, and C fractures). Avascular necrosis, with subsequent humeral head collapse, remains a relatively common complication of proximal humeral fractures. The incidence rises as comminution increases, with rates of between 21% This can lead to extensive glenoid erosion if not recognised very rapidly, and make hemiarthroplasty no longer a feasible salvage option. Indeed, as in Patient One, it can cause some difficulty with total shoulder joint replacement due to loss of glenoid bone stock affecting the quality of glenoid component fixation. In conclusion, we advise that this potential complication be considered whenever the risk of humeral head collapse exists. As the improved hold of this construct is more a function of the divergence or convergence of its holding screws than it is of the length of these screws, it may be prudent to select screws of such a length as to allow some degree of collapse without resultant breaching of the articular surface. We also advise consideration of radiographic evaluation in any patient who reports an increase in pain post-operatively, or when progress is not occurring as expected. These patients should also be monitored until the risk of AVN is minimal, which may take up to 3.5 years.