The electrification of remote locations that lack grid-connectivity is a global challenge. In Australia, off-grid communities and mining sites that are not connected to the electrical grid meet their electricity demand primarily through diesel generator systems. The economic and environmental ramifications associated with diesel generators can be minimised using hybrid renewable energy technologies. This study aims to identify the optimal combination of technologies in a hybrid system consisting of concentrating solar thermal (CST), solar photovoltaic (PV), battery storage and diesel generators. Optimisation is carried out through an economic analysis based on minimisation of the levelised cost of energy (LCOE). The CST system considered here utilises a supercritical CO2 power cycle, which presents increased suitability for small scales (<10 MW). The efficiencies and costs of the CST system are closely related to the turbine inlet temperature. In this work, three temperatures are explored to identify the optimal case. The results indicate that the optimal system consists of CST (650 °C) as the primary source of baseload power, with PV and diesel generation serving as supplementary sources. These systems present significant reductions in LCOE and emissions compared to the diesel base case, and therefore offer a promising solution for remote electricity.The electrification of geographically isolated remote communities is a global challenge [ Australia has some of the best solar resources in the world and possesses excellent potential for solar based renewables [ The rapidly declining costs of solar photovoltaic (PV) technology has spurred significant growth in PV usage globally [ Concentrating solar thermal (CST) systems, when coupled with thermal energy storage (TES) can provide baseload power [ Hybrid renewable energy systems, which integrate renewables with existing diesel systems are gaining traction, as they provide a route to decrease reliance on fossil fuels in off-grid locations. A major advantage of these systems is the fact that supplementary diesel power allows for maintaining system reliability without needing to overdesign the renewables, since the diesel generators can be used to cover electricity deficits. Various researchers have contributed to the area of remote location electrification in Australia. Studies such as those by Karutz and Haque [ The combination of CST and PV with battery storage has been studied by a number of authors, who have demonstrated that combined implementations are superior to singular implementations of either technology [ This purpose of this study is to identify the optimal combination of CST, PV, battery storage and diesel generators for three off-grid remote locations in Australia, while considering both communities and mining site consumers. The optimal system will be selected based on the combination that yields the lowest energy cost. It is expected that the optimal hybrid renewable energy system can provide a cost effective and environmentally friendly electricity supply for these areas. Three turbine inlet temperature cases (650 °C, 800 °C and 1000 °C) are considered for the sCO The remote locations selected in this study are Port Augusta, Halls Creek and Newman. From the map of Australia's solar resources in To assess opportunities for off-grid applications, community and mining site consumer groups are explored. For the community case, a common synthetic load profile was assumed as per The common load profile and the seasonal load variation are assumed to be as in Each of the locations selected is near a mining site. These are the Carrapateena mine near Port Augusta, the Nicholson mine near Halls Creek and the Mount Whaleback mine near Newman. Mining sites typically present a uniform load profile due to full day operation and so a flat load of 10 MW is assumed for the mining case. Solar irradiation data for each location was obtained online from Ref. [ The modelling parameters and costs used to simulate each of the hybrid system's components are outlined in this section. Note that all costs are presented in USD. A central receiver CST plant has four key elements, viz. the heliostat field, the central receiver, the TES and the power block. The net efficiency of the CST plant is the product of the efficiencies of each of these systems. The field loss consists of atmospheric attenuation loss, cosine loss, heliostat reflectivity and shading/blocking loss. In this analysis, the attenuation loss is approximated using the relationship outlined by Vittitoe and Biggs [ The supercritical CO The efficiency of the sCO Higher temperatures necessitate high performance materials in the power cycle and receiver to prevent degradation, thereby increasing component costs [ The solar PV system is modelled as a fixed system tilted at an angle equal to the latitude and oriented towards due north [ The PV array is used in conjunction with lithium-ion (li-ion) battery storage, assumed to be the Tesla Powerpack. The battery bank is expected to store energy during periods of surplus generation by the PV plant. The technical specifications assumed for this battery are shown in The generator system is used to supplement the power produced by the renewables when the electrical load is not met by these systems. The fuel consumption is approximated using the following expression, which was validated with manufacturer fuel consumption data by Ref. [ The costs and parameters associated with the diesel generators are assumed to be as in The principal economic indicator considered in this analysis is the levelized cost of energy (LCOE), which is the cost per kWh of energy produced, while considering the time value of money. This term is determined by converting the capital cost of each component into an equivalent annual cost (EAC) by amortizing it over its lifetime using the discount rate. The total annual cost is obtained by adding the annual operation and maintenance (O&M) and fuel costs to the EAC, and the LCOE is calculated by dividing the total annual cost by the useful annual energy production. A discount rate of 7% is assumed here based on the ten year average in the solar energy sector [ The reduction in emissions is calculated here based on the reduction in diesel use, while also considering embodied emissions. The average equivalent total life-cycle CO The expected annual performance of the hybrid plant is assessed through a simulation model developed in Python. Specific classes are implemented to model the functioning of the four components (CST plant, PV array, battery storage and diesel generators) based on the design parameters and assumptions mentioned previously. Optimisation is then carried out on this system based on an objective function representing minimising the LCOE. A range of sizes of the CST and PV plants, along with a range of thermal storage and battery storage capacities are simulated in the Python program. For each combination, the program simulates one year of operation of the hybrid system and calculates the contribution to total power generation from CST and PV, along with the necessary supplementary power from the diesel generators. Note that it is assumed that the hybrid will cover the entire load requirement, and hence the diesel generator system is automatically sized based on energy deficit. The cost of energy associated with each combination is then calculated. This process is carried out for each of three CST temperatures considered in this analysis. A four variable optimisation utilising an exhaustive search is to identify the hybrid configuration yielding the minimum LCOE. The variables and the search ranges considered are as follows: PV array installed capacity: 0 MW–20 MW Battery storage capacity - defined as the number of storage hours that can provide the installed capacity of the PV plant: 0–15 h CST thermal storage hours - defined as the number of hours of CST baseload power that can be supplied using the thermal storage: 0–15 h 4. Storage fill time - defined as the time taken to fill the thermal storage, and determines the ratio between storage capacity and field capacity (note that storage hours divided by fill time is equivalent to the solar multiple): 1–15 h. The LCOE (in $/kWh) corresponding to the optimal system designs obtained from the simulation (configuration yielding the minimum LCOE) for each location, consumer group and turbine inlet temperature case is presented in From these results, it is evident that the 650 °C case consistently presents the lowest LCOE of the three temperatures explored. Furthermore, the best location based on the LCOE for both the community and mining scenarios is Halls Creek, with LCOE of $0.158/kWh and $0.136/kWh respectively. Therefore, the results from this location are explored in greater detail. The optimal system designs and technology breakdown (energy fractions) obtained from the simulations for Halls Creek are presented in The uncertainty in the input modelling variables is addressed through a sensitivity analysis, by systematically altering the values of the parameters to understand their effects on system performance. Since the sCO The equivalent CO The contribution of each technology to the total annual emissions is presented in From the optimisation results for Halls Creek, it is evident that both the community and mining scenarios present a relatively high renewable fraction, and provide significant cost reductions over the diesel base case. The CST plant serves as the primary source of baseload power, and accounts for most of the energy generation in both cases. While PV is shown to be necessary, the relative contribution of PV is much lower than CST. The notable absence is battery storage, which does not feature in any optima. This is important, as it indicates that CST with thermal storage provides a more cost-effective route to baseload power than PV with battery storage. It is important to note that the li-ion battery cost used here was the lower end of the range outlined by Ref. [ The maximum renewable fraction seen in this analysis 92.7%. This result indicates that there are diminishing returns on increasing the renewable fraction beyond this point, as the remaining load is more easily met using diesel generators. This is because even with excellent solar resources, there are inevitably times during the year with poor sunlight. Incorporating diesel generators allows for preventing shortages during these time without overdesigning the renewables. This is a key result as it shows that there are strong merits to hybridisation of CST-PV with diesel generators even with sound solar resources. Similarly, the diesel generation capacity is sized equal to or close to the peak load in both cases. Since this was auto sized in the simulation based on demand, this indicates that there are times during the year where the diesel generators cover the entire load. This aligns with previous studies which have shown that when 24 h baseload power is necessary, diesel generation capacity must be sized equal to the peak load to ensure uninterrupted output [ The LCOE values obtained in each of the cases present significant reductions over the diesel base case. This is most notable at Halls Creek, where the 650 °C hybrid systems present 34% and 43% reductions in the community and mining cases respectively. In reality, it is possible that the cost reductions could be even greater, since the cost benchmark for the diesel base case was the lower end of the estimate by AECOM [ Based on the sun to heat and overall efficiencies reported for each of the CST systems, it is apparent that the thermodynamics of the CST system are as expected. With an increase in turbine inlet temperature, the sun to heat efficiency decreases due to the increased receiver losses. However, these losses are smaller than the efficiency gains in the power cycle, and hence net efficiency increases. This means that the same performance can be achieved with smaller subsystems, offsetting some costs in these areas. However, despite the efficiency gain, an increase in the LCOE is seen, indicating that the increase in power cycle and receiver costs at higher temperatures outweighs the efficiency gain and any reduction in component sizes. As such, the 650 °C case consistently presents the lowest LCOE. This result aligns with the work of Meybodi, Beath [ It is seen that as temperature increases, the contribution of CST increases, and the contribution of PV decreases. The number of thermal storage hours and the fill time both also increase. While this seems counterintuitive due to the increasing cost of CST at higher temperatures, the optimisation results reveal that CST is still the least expensive source of baseload power (as compared to diesel or PV-battery), and hence CST remains the favoured source of energy. The excess energy production (spilled energy), which comes almost entirely from the CST system (with PV producing little or no excess due to its small size) is found to decrease with increasing temperature. This is desirable, given the higher cost penalty for the higher temperature cases. As such, it appears that the changes in the optimum seen at higher temperatures represent an effort to minimise excess energy. This is achieved by reducing the PV capacity, increasing the amount of thermal storage, and increasing the fill time, which causes a decrease in the solar field capacity relative to the storage capacity, so that the storage is filled more gradually. The sensitivity analysis reveals that the LCOE is most sensitive to the CST capex. This makes sense, since CST is the primary component of the systems and is a capital intensive technology. Given this sensitivity, it is important that the CST costs assumed present minimal uncertainty. While there is confidence in the costs used in this analysis due to the reputable sources used, it is expected that future analyses will be able to use more definite costs, particularly as the sCO From the emissions analysis, the proposed hybrid systems at Halls Creek present reductions in total life cycle emissions of 89% and 88% in the mining and community cases respectively over the diesel base case. It is evident that despite only providing a small portion of the energy production, diesel generators contribute to 65% of the total emissions. Interestingly, although CST is the biggest contributor to the energy production, its emission contribution is only slightly higher than PV, since CST presents the lowest embodied emissions of the technologies considered. With emission reduction becoming an increasingly important consideration, these hybrid systems clearly present strong environmental benefits. This paper has investigated the optimum combination of CST, PV, battery storage and diesel generators for off-grid power generation in Australia. The analysis considered two consumer groups, viz. mining sites and communities, at Newman, Port Augusta and Halls Creek. A dynamic model of the hybrid plant was developed in Python, which made use of a synthetic load profile and weather data over one year to simulate the functioning of the plant. An exhaustive parametric search was then used to identify the optimum technology combination based on the minimum LCOE. Three turbine inlet temperatures (650 °C, 800 °C and 1000 °C) were considered for the CST system, to explore the effect of turbine inlet temperature on efficiency and costs. Based on the results, the Halls Creek site presented the lowest LCOE for both consumer groups, and offered significant cost and emission reductions over the diesel base case. The optimum systems rely on CST as the primary source of baseload power, with PV and diesel serving as supplementary sources. Notably, none of the optima included battery storage, highlighting its high costs as compared to CST vis-a-vis providing baseload power. Of the three turbine inlet temperatures considered, 650 °C was found to be optimal, with the higher temperature cases resulting in significant increases in LCOE. This implies that the capital cost increases outweigh any efficiency gains achieved in the higher temperature cases. These results were congruent with previous studies and expectations based on theory, and hence there is confidence in their veracity. The results of this analysis demonstrate that off-grid locations in Australia present excellent potential for the deployment of CST-PV-diesel hybrid renewable energy systems. The proposed systems are capable of uninterrupted power supply and provide significant economic and environmental benefits over the conventional systems based on diesel generators. These hybrid systems therefore present a viable solution for increasing off-grid renewable penetration, and achieving lower cost, environmentally friendly electricity for remote users. None. The mathematical models used to simulate the components of the hybrid energy system are presented in this section. The power output from the PV system is determined based on the solar radiation falling on the titled panel, and the manufacturer's specifications for the PV panels as follows: The net incident radiation on the tilted surface is calculated based on the method outlined by Ref. [ The state of charge (SOC) of the battery at a point in time is calculated as: Here, Here, In addition, Finally, the net capacity at a given time due to capacity fade is modelled as: The overall efficiency of the CST system is approximated as the product of the efficiency in each process as follows. Based on [ Cosine loss is approximated by interpolating the average efficiency values outlined by Ref. [ The receiver efficiency calculations are as follows. The concentration ratio (C) required to achieve each operating temperature is given by Ref. [ Here, The receiver efficiency is then approximated as follows [ The net thermal energy generated by the solar field is given by: The storage (electrical equivalent) available in the TES at a point in time is given by: The TES capacity is set based on the number of storage hours, and the design load as: In the simulation, the mirror field area is then approximated based on the design load and the relevant efficiencies.