Changes in the chemical and chemical–structural composition of the organic matter of two different sewage sludges (aerobic and anaerobic) mixed with sawdust (1:1 and 1:3, v/v) during composting were determined by monitoring chemical and microbiological parameters as well as by pyrolysis-gas chromatography. Composting was carried out in periodically turned outdoor piles, which were sampled for analysis 1, 30, 60 and 90 days after the beginning of the composting process. Both volatile organic matter and the water soluble C fraction decreased during composting, indicating that the more labile C fractions are mineralized during the process. Microbial activity as measured by microbial respiration (CO2 evolved from compost samples during incubation) also decreased with composting, reflecting the more stable character of the resulting compost. No major differences were observed between the four composts studied as regards their chemical–structural characteristics. The acetonitrile, acetic acid and phenol pyrolytic fragment tended to increase with composting. Although the final composts were more aromatic in nature than the starting materials, a low degree of humification was observed in all four composts studied, as determined by their high proportion of polysaccharides and alkyl compounds. For this reason, the relationship between pyrolytic fragments, such as benzene/toluene or benzene+toluene/pyrrol+phenols, which are used as indices of humification for soil organic matter, are not of use for such poorly evolved sludge composts; instead, ratios that involve carbohydrate derivatives and aromatic compounds, such as furfural+acetic/benzene+toluene or acetic/toluene, are more sensitive indices for reflecting the transformations of these materials during composting. Both the chemical and microbiological parameters and pyrolytic analysis provided valuable information concerning the nature of the compost’s organic matter and its changes during the composting process.The growing scarcity of organic matter in the agricultural soils of Mediterranean regions, as a result of adverse climatic conditions and inadequate soil management practices, has led to the search for new sources of organic matter to increase its level in these soils and to replace the losses caused by mineralization ( In another context, the problem of environmental pollution due to the increasing accumulation of huge amounts of urban wastes has encouraged investigation into the recycling of such materials ( During composting, organic compounds are transformed through the successive activities of different microbes to a more stable and complex organic matter ( The composting process has usually been characterized by reference to chemical and physical–chemical parameters ( Microbial respiration is considered as a reliable index of microbial activity ( Pyrolysis-gas chromatography is a technique widely used for the characterization of organic matter and its humic fraction ( In this work, the nature of the organic matter and its changes during the composting process of two sewage sludges (aerobic and anaerobic), mixed with sawdust as bulking agent, was monitored by chemical and microbiological parameters and pyrolysis analysis. Two sewage sludges (aerobic, AES, and anaerobic, ANS) mixed with sawdust (S) as bulking agent at two different ratios (1:1 and 1:3 sludge:sawdust, v:v) were submitted to a process of aerobic composting with periodic turning. Piles of each mixture of about 3 Volatile organic matter (VOM) was measured by calcination at 750 Microbial respiration was determined in 2 A small quantity of organic material was introduced into pyrolysis microtubes in a CDS Pyroprobe 190. A heated-filament pyrolyser, with a platinum coil probe and a quartz sample holder was used. Pyrolysis was carried out at 800 The pyrograms (seven peaks) were quantified using a Mega Carlo Erba integrator. The areas were normalized, so that the area under each peak referred to the percentage of the total of the 7 peaks. To facilitate the comparison and study of the pyrograms, several ratios between different Py-GC fragments were calculated. Fragments in the samples were identified from the relative retention times (compared with standard spectra). The alphabetic code used was conventional and has already been employed in previous papers on natural soils ( The LSD test for means was performed with the Statgraph program on data obtained in the composts at the different composting times.  Differences were observed between the two sludges with regards to the intensity of the mineralization process as influenced by the proportion of bulking agent in the composting mass ( Water soluble carbon is one of the most labile fractions of the organic matter; it is easily decomposed by microorganisms and contributes to maintaining a high level of microbial activity. This fraction is composed of compounds such as carbohydrates, polyphenols and amino acids, besides the soluble fraction of fulvic acids. As shown in The proportion of bulking agent in the composting mixture seems to influence the evolution of this fraction during composting; for example, the 1:3 mixtures showed a steady decrease during composting whereas in the 1:1 mixtures the values of this carbon fraction fluctuated along the process ( The decrease of this carbon fraction during composting indicates that microorganisms use these water soluble compounds as a carbon source to build their own structures and to alter other more resistant carbon fractions, reflecting the greater stability of the organic matter of the final product (compost). Microbial activity during composting was measured by microbial respiration. Respiratory assays have been widely used for monitoring the composting process and evaluating the stability of the resulting product ( The measure of soil respiration revealed the degradation of the more labile carbon fractions during the composting of the different sludge/bulking agent mixtures, and the more stable character of the organic matter of the resulting compost. The measurement of microbial respiration is a good indicator of the processes of organic matter mineralization, but does not provide information about the chemical–structural composition of this organic matter. To obtain such information, other techniques, such as Py-GC, are necessary.  Pyrolysis analyses showed that there were no major differences, as regards chemical–structural characteristics, between the composts studied. The main feature of the compost pyrograms was the predominance of hydrocarbon (B Acetonitrile (E A decrease in the percentage of furfural (N) was observed for the two anaerobic mixtures and the AES Acetic acid (K) showed, in general, high values throughout the composting process, indicating that both aerobic and anaerobic sewage sludges are rich in lipidic compounds ( Benzene (B) was, in general, the major fragment in all the composts throughout the composting process, and phenol (Y) the least abundant (of those considered aromatic). A mature compost should possess a more humified organic matter than the initial product. However, the AES In general, the high relative abundance of toluene (E Phenols (Y) increased with composting in those mixtures with a high proportion of bulking agent (sludge/sawdust 1:3), suggesting that a relative increase in lignin concentration takes place with composting in these composts, thus, enhancing yields of pyrolytic fragmentation (  The most sensitive pyrolysis ratios reflecting the transformation of these materials were those which involved carbohydrate derivatives and aromatic compounds, such as the N The K/E It can be concluded that both chemical and microbiological parameters and pyrolytic analysis provide valuable information on the nature of compost organic matter and its changes during the composting process. Microbial respiration assay has been shown to be a useful tool for monitoring the organic matter mineralization kinetic during composting and for evaluating compost maturity. In general, the composting process increased the polypeptide content, probably due to an increase in the microbial population. Although composting yielded a more stable and humified organic matter richer in aromatic structures, pyrolysis-GC/MS showed that the organic matter of sewage sludge:sawdust composts was not completely aromatic in nature but that also polysaccharides and alkyl compounds were present in large quantities (N For poorly evolved materials, such as sewage sludge In summary, the sludge composts showed a lower labile organic matter fraction than the starting sludges, and consequently lower microbial activity. This more stable character of the organic matter in the compost will determine that its degradation, when added to the soil, will be slower than that of a fresh sludge; it will therefore remain longer in the soil thus exerting a more durable positive effect on the physical characteristics of the soil and acting as gradual effect fertilizers. Due to the more humified character of compost, it will make a better contribution than fresh sludge to the humic substances pool of a soil. This work was funded by the Foundation Seneca of the Council of Education and Science of the Autonomic Region of Murcia, Spain. Project PB/36/FS/02.