This paper reports on photocatalytic and adsorptive treatment of a hazardous xanthene dye, Rohdamine B, in wastewater. The photocatalytic degradation was carried out in the presence of the catalyst TiO2 and the effects of pH, concentration of the dye, amount of TiO2, temperature and electron acceptor H2O2 on the degradation process were observed. It was found that photocatalytic degradation by TiO2 is an effective, economical and faster mode of removing Rohdamine B from aqueous solutions. Attempts were also made to utilize activated carbon and rice husk as potential adsorbents to remove Rhodamine B from wastewater. The adsorption studies were carried out at 40, 50 and 60°C, and the effects of pH, temperature, amount of adsorbents, concentration of adsorbate, etc., on the adsorption were measured. On the basis of adsorption data the Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm models were also confirmed. The adsorption isotherm constants thus obtained were employed to calculate thermodynamic parameters like Gibb's free energy, change in enthalpy and entropy. In order to observe the quality of wastewater COD measurements were also carried out before and after the treatments. A significant decrease in the COD values was observed, which clearly indicates that both photocatalytic and adsorption methods offer good potential to remove Rhodamine B from industrial effluents.The treatment of highly colored wastewater containing hazardous industrial chemical effluents is one of the growing needs of the present time ( The dye under consideration is Rhodamine B (C Photocatalytic oxidation using a semiconductor such as TiO Adsorption techniques have potential for removing organics from water due to their high efficiency and ability to separate a wide range of chemical compounds ( The photo-catalyst anatase titanium dioxide (44 Measurements of pH of the solutions were carried out on a digital pH meter DB 1011 fitted with a glass electrode. A COD digestion apparatus (Spectra Lab 2015-S) was used for determining COD. A Spectronic (make 20D+ Thermospectronic) spectrophotometer was used to measure the absorbance of the liquid samples at appropriate wavelengths. All experiments of photo-catalytic degradation were conducted in a photo-catalytic reactor. Irradiation was carried out using a 6 In a 250 The adsorbent material, activated carbon, was used as received. The other material, rice husk, was cleaned and thoroughly washed with distilled water, and then dried. The material was ground and sieved to desired particle sizes. These were then treated with acetic acid and again washed with distilled water. Thereafter, the rice husk was treated with hydrogen peroxide (100 volumes) to remove all adhering organic particulates and other impurities, and further dried in a vacuum oven for 1 All adsorption experiments were carried out at different temperatures (40, 50 and 60 The photo-catalytic degradation of solutions with different concentrations of the dye Rhodamine-B was carried out for about an hour in the presence of TiO The influence of photo-catalyst amount on the rate of degradation of the dye at pH 6.7 indicates that the degradation rate increased slowly by adding TiO At all three temperatures, the kinetics of the photo-catalytic degradation of Rhodamine-B were studied at different pH values and concentrations of the dye solution, and it was observed that in each case the reaction followed first-order rate kinetics. The effect of pH was recorded by studying the kinetics of photo-catalytic degradation of Rhodamine B in the presence of TiO The photo-catalytic degradation was also investigated at different concentrations of Rhodamine-B as a function of irradiation time and the rate of degradation of Rhodamine-B was plotted against its concentration. The electron–hole recombination process is a problem that is usually associated with using TiO The variation in adsorption of Rhodamine-B was studied in the pH range from 2.1 to 12.1 using rice husk and activated carbon adsorbents at the temperatures of 40, 50 and 60 The doses of the adsorbents were varied from 1 to 10 For observing the effect of concentration of adsorbate on removal of Rhodamine-B, the concentration range of 1.0×10 The adsorption studies were also carried out at different particle sizes (<47, 47–58, 58–69, 69–84, 84–120, 120–142, >142 The increase in contact time had a significant effect on adsorption of the dye Rhodamine-B. At all the temperatures, the rate of adsorption increased with an increase in time. It is clear from the To determine whether the on-going adsorption process was endothermic or exothermic in nature, adsorption studies over activated carbon and rice husk were carried out at 40, 50 and 60 The results obtained from the adsorption of Rhodamine-B over rice husk and activated carbon have also been correlated with the following well known forms of the Langmuir (Eq. It was observed that the adsorption of Rhodamine-B over both the adsorbents fully satisfied the Langmuir ( The feasibility of the on-going adsorption processes was also evaluated by the method suggested by The Langmuir isotherm data were used for calculating the thermodynamic parameters of each adsorption system using the following equations: The obtained values of the thermodynamic parameters Gibbs free energy (Δ In order to measure the pollution strength of the dye, chemical oxygen demand (COD) of the dye solutions was assessed before and after its removal during photo-catalytic degradation and adsorption over both the adsorbents. A significant decrease in the COD values of the Rhodamine B solution (from 1608 to 232 A detailed feasibility study has been carried out on photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B using TiO Adsorption of the dye Rhodamine B on the surfaces of two adsorbents—activated carbon and rice husk was also found to be an efficient and economically cheap process. For both the adsorbents, maximum adsorption of the dye was achieved at pH 2.1. The results presented in this paper clearly reveal that both the adsorbents are feasible for use in adsorption processes. The rate of adsorption for activated carbon was found to be faster than that for rice husk. Thus, it can be safely concluded that both the methods can be employed for textile waste-water treatment.