Nineteen patients who had hip arthroplasties for complications of internal fixation of intertrochanteric fractures were reviewed. There were 6 males and 13 females. The mean age was 64.1 years (range, 21–87 years) at the time of the fracture. The average interval from fracture to arthroplasty was 40.3 months (range, 2–288 months). The prosthesis types included 16 total hip arthroplasties and 3 bipolar hip arthroplasties. A standard femoral stem was used in every patient, and although the stem length did not extend well beyond the most distal screw holes, there was no stress fracture. Complications such as intraoperative fracture of the greater trochanter and postoperative dislocation were common. The Harris Hip Score significantly improved from 38.4 points before the conversion to 79.8 points after an average follow-up of 7.4 years (range, 2–18 years). There was no revision for mechanical failure.Intertrochanteric fractures usually are treated with internal fixation, using devices such as the compression hip screw From June 1984 to August 2001, we treated 24 patients who suffered from complications after compression hip screw fixation of the intertrochanteric fractures with hip arthroplasties. One patient died of disease that was not related to the hip arthroplasty, and the documentation was incomplete in 4 other patients. These patients were excluded from the study. Nineteen patients remained for the present study. Each patient was reviewed retrospectively for age, gender, complications necessitating hip arthroplasty, time to conversion, type of hip prosthesis used, technical problems encountered at surgery, surgical time, total blood loss, and postsurgical complications. The clinical and radiologic results were assessed. There were 6 male and 13 female patients. The mean age was 64.1 (SD, 18.9; range, 21–87) years at the time of fracture. If the 4 patients younger than 50 years old at the time of fracture were excluded, the average age of the remaining patients was 72.2 (SD, 10.1; range, 57–87) years old. The interval from the fracture to the arthroplasty was a mean of 40.3 months (SD, 57.0; range, 2–288 months). The failure modes were nonunion with penetration of the lag screw in 8 patients, avascular necrosis of the femoral head with or without a displaced subchondral fracture in 10 patients A standard femoral component was used in every patient Four surgeons were involved in the procedures, and each of them performed from 3 to 7 of the 19 hip arthroplasties. The posterior approach was used in every patient. The incision was extended distally and the vastus lateralis was elevated and retracted anteriorly to expose the side plate of the compression hip screw. After removal of the distal screws, the side plate was disengaged from the lag screw and removed. The lag screw was removed through the hole over the base of the greater trochanter before the hip joint was dislocated. Prophylactic antibiotic was routinely used, but no patient received medications to prevent thromboembolism or heterotopic ossification. The surgical time averaged 176 minutes (SD, 46; range, 105–250 minutes). The mean blood loss of the hip arthroplasties was 1,378 mm (SD, 654; range, 500–2,800 mm). The clinical results were evaluated using the Harris Hip Score All data were entered into the computer and analyzed using statistical software (SPSS for Windows, version 10.0). The differences in the various parameters were tested using the chi-square test and independent sample There were 2 major failure modes after compression hip screw fixation of intertrochanteric fractures. They had different time intervals between the fracture and the arthroplasty. All 8 patients who had nonunion and penetration of the lag screw were revised within 1 year; the average interval was 6.0 (SD, 2.8; range, 2–9) months. The average interval was 70.0 (SD, 60.4; range, 15–288) months for the 10 patients who had avascular necrosis of the femoral head with or without a displaced subchondral fracture. The difference was significant ( Complications were common and affected 9 of the 19 hips (47%). Intraoperative fracture of the greater trochanter affected 7 hips (32%). Most fractures occurred during reaming and broaching of the medullary canal. The fracture usually was fixed with a cable-grip device. Three patients suffered from postoperative dislocation, all occurred in patients with total hip arthroplasty, and all were treated successfully with 1 closed reduction. In 1 of them, the fractured greater trochanter did not unite after internal fixation of the intertrochanteric fracture; the greater trochanter was further fragmented intraoperatively, and this could have resulted in a weak abductor muscle. There were no revisions for aseptic loosening. Fifteen of the 19 patients were followed for a minimum of 2 years after the hip arthroplasty. The mean follow-up period was 7.4 (SD, 4.7; range, 2–18) years. For these 15 patients, the average preoperative Harris Hip Score was 38.4 (SD, 15.2; range, 14–74); it was 79.8 (SD, 12.3; range, 49–100) at the latest follow-up. There was no pain in 9 hips, mild pain in 3 hips, and occasional slight pain in 3 hips. No patient was limited to bed or chair, 3 patients were limited to indoor walking, 8 patients could walk 2 to 3 blocks, and 4 patients could walk 6 or more blocks. Two patients did not need any assistive device, 6 patients used a cane for long walks, 5 patients used a cane most of the time, and 3 patients used a walking frame. None of the cemented femoral components were rated as “definite loosening,” and none of the cementless femoral components were rated as “unstable.” Thirteen of 16 cemented femoral components had cementation rated as grade C. This could be secondary to the difficulties in pressurizing the cement with the presence of multiple cortical holes. In the postoperative radiographs, the tip of the cementless femoral component, or the lowest part of the cement, did not extend beyond the most distal screw hole by more than 2 times the bone diameter in all of the hips. There were no stress fractures. Many specific problems may occur during the conversion of failed internal fixation of intertrochanteric fractures to hip arthroplasty. The surgery takes longer because the internal fixation device first must be removed. The blood loss is increased because the surgeon must dissect through the old scar to expose the internal fixation device. The anatomy of the proximal femur usually is distorted, especially if the reduction of the intertrochanteric fracture is imperfect, or if there is comminution of the medial bony buttress. The bone quality usually is poor as a result of pre-existing osteoporosis, which further decreases as a result of disuse after the failure of internal fixation. The greater trochanter either is not solidly healed or can be fragmented again during the hip arthroplasty, thus affecting the abduction function, which leads to an increased dislocation rate and can adversely affect the ambulatory function after the hip arthroplasty. If a cemented femoral stem is used, good cement pressurization is difficult, because the cement might come out through the big hole in the lateral cortex (from the previous barrel of the side plate that permitted the lag screw to slide into it) and several small holes in either the lateral or medial cortices (for the cortical screws that fixed the side plate to the upper femur). Because of all these issues, hip arthroplasties after failed internal fixation of intertrochanteric fractures are technically more demanding, and the results could be compromised. The most common complication in the present series was fracture of the greater trochanter. It could be attributed to the combination of severe osteoporosis, the stress riser effect of the big hole over the proximal part of the lateral cortex, further weakening of the bone when the compression hip screw was removed, and incomplete healing of the previous fracture line. The method used to remove the lag screw could have further weakened the greater trochanter, because the base of it has to be cleared for the attachment of the extraction tool. Perhaps a better way to remove the lag screw would be to dislocate the hip after the removal of the side plate, and then cut the femoral neck so that the lag screw could be removed from the femoral head side. This method could shorten the surgical time as well as reduce the risk of fracturing the greater trochanter. When hip arthroplasty has been used to treat failed internal fixation of intertrochanteric fractures, most surgeons used a long-stem femoral component so as to bypass the stress riser effect of the most distal screw hole One difficulty encountered is the containment of cement when it was being pressurized into the femoral medullary canal. The surgeon and assistants could prevent the cement from coming out from the screw holes using several methods. The lag screw hole can be closed by the assistant’s thumb, by firmly packed gauze, by a surgical glove inflated with saline, or by fashioning a bone plug from the femoral head Hip arthroplasty for failed internal fixation of intertrochanteric fracture was technically more difficult. The early complication rate was high, and the blood loss was increased. However, clinically, the patients were functional, although mostly at low levels, and they did have pain relief. Earlier intervention should be recommended so that prolonged disability can be avoided.