The aim of the present study is to develop a Fe-based metal matrix composite (MMC) coating using high velocity oxy-fuel spraying (HVOF) process. A ledeburitic high alloyed cold work tool steel (X220CrVMo13-4) and NbC with an average size of 2µm at different volume fractions have been considered as metal matrix and hard particles respectively. MMC coatings were deposited on austenitic stainless substrates and the coatings were subsequently densified by hot isostatic pressing (HIP) with and without encapsulation. Microstructural analysis of the as-sprayed and HIPed coatings were characterized by SEM and XRD methods. Results showed that the feedstock preparation involving fine NbC was an influencing factor on the coating deposition. A relatively homogeneous dispersion of fine NbC up to 30vol.% in cold work tool steel matrix was possible using optimized HVOF spraying. Besides, HVOF spraying and its subsequent HIP treatment induced significant microstructural and phase changes in the MMC coatings. The study showed the potential of HVOF spraying for the development of steel based MMC coatings and its subsequent densification can be achieved by HIP process with and without encapsulation.Cold work tool steels have been used as hardfacing materials in roller presses for the mineral processing industry and extruders for transportation of polymer due to their high hardness and wear resistance. A further improvement of the wear resistance of cold work tools for high performance application can be realized when producing them as MMC with the incorporation of hard particles like NbC, TiC and Cr In this context, thermal spray processing could be an alternative to HIP cladding as it exhibits a flexible and cost effective possibility of coating on large components with complex contours Knotek et al. The present study is aimed to develop a cold work tool steel based metal matrix composite (MMC) coating using HVOF. A ledeburitic type high alloyed cold work tool steel (X220CrVMo13-4) and NbC were used as metal matrix and hard particles, respectively. The effect of subsequent HIP densification with and without encapsulation was studied. The present study used a high alloyed ledeburitic type cold work tool steel as a metal matrix with two different size fractions: 25 to 45 Properties of metal matrix and hard particles used in the present study are given in To study the influence of the feedstock characteristics, the coating process was carried out using constant process parameters and a constant number of passes. Obviously, the thickness of the MMC coating produced with the agglomerated feedstock is significantly lower than that of the coating produced with non-agglomerated feedstock. A decrease in coating thickness while using agglomerated feedstock is attributed to the non-uniform powder feeding that was noticed during the spraying. Fine-agglomerated NbC particles show the tendency of grouping at the boundaries of melted and partially melted inter-splats while non-agglomerated particles are relatively homogenously dispersed. Feedstock with a content of 30 The influence of the HIP treatment is clearly visible while comparing the microstructure of coatings in the as-sprayed and the HIPed condition ( It is of significance to investigate the phase formation of the as-sprayed and HIPed MMC coatings as the cold work tool steel matrix used in the present study is martensitically hardenable. Significant phase changes in the consecutive heat-treatments of the MMC coating can be noticed from the diffraction patterns as shown in A better understanding of the microstructure and the equilibrium phases present in the MMC coating can be theoretically supported by a pressure dependent pseudo binary phase diagram of X220CrVMo13-4 cold work tool steel calculated by thermo-calc simulations This preliminary study shows the potential of HVOF spraying on the development of Fe-based MMC coating. It demonstrates that cold work tool steel (X220CrVMo13-4) based MMC involving fine NbC hard particles up to 30 The financial support for this project work from the