The concepts of ‘green chemistry’ and sustainability have been discussed from various angles in many manufacturing and processing industries. Raw materials based on fossil fuels needed for textile operations are in limited supply in a long-term perspective. In the textile industry a fair quantity of chemicals are used and, with the exception of the chemical industry, probably the largest quantities of effluent loaded with waste constituents are generated from dyeing and finishing processes. These effluents are usually composed of significant amounts of dissolved solids and show high alkalinity and resistant color. Therefore, several strategies are being discussed to provide solutions to pressing environmental pollution problems caused by the textile industry, including: waste minimization, waste reduction at the source, zero waste concepts evaluation, redesign and optimization of current practices and operations reclamation and re-use of chemicals and water, closed-loop systems. Pollution reduction or prevention by closed-loop technologies and reclaiming/re-use of chemicals has gained increasing interest from state and private sector as well as from independent environmental groups. Cost aspects, legal pressure and increasing public awareness have forced companies to reevaluate their procedures. Batch processes deserve special consideration since, after each run, the entire treatment bath containing all auxiliaries and residual finishing compounds (e.g. dyes, finishes) is discharged to the sewer. Conventional exhaust processes thus Little research has been published in the area of recycling of specialty chemicals used for finishing of fabric (e.g. waterproof, crease resistant, flame retardant, soil-release). These chemicals are normally applied together with hand-builders, softeners, stabilizers, etc., or in combination with other finishing agents for multifunctional property enhancements. Reactive compounds often bond with the fiber or polymerize in the presence of a catalyst ( The focus of this chapter is to review reported research on possibilities and challenges for reclamation and re-use of the chemical waste commonly generated by textile processes. Waste water purification and decolorization is discussed in Initial preparation processes are essential steps in textile operations because all further dyeing and finishing for high-quality products depend on the condition of the textile material. Desizing, scouring and bleaching are the basic treatments that are performed, in sequence or in combination, to yield clean, absorbent material with a sufficient level of whiteness. The purpose of singeing, a non-chemical preparation process, carried out in the dry state of the textile material, is to remove small projecting fibers from the fabric surface by rapidly passing the textile material over gas burners. Singeing reduces the amount of lint accumulated in (spent) treatment baths and gives the fabric a smoother surface appearance. Depending on the type of fiber, more or less harsh conditions for scouring are applied. For cotton goods, for example, scouring and bleaching are commonly performed at alkaline pH to ensure the removal of fats, waxes, natural pigments, and other noncellulosic compounds, while for synthetics, mild detergent solutions are often adequate to eliminate any impurities originating from fabric formation, and bleaching might not be essential. In the case of bleaching of cellulosic goods, hydrogen peroxide is the preferred agent over chlorine-containing compounds for obvious reasons ( In many commercial textile operations, conditions for wet processing have been selected in a way to guarantee good results for fabric preparation, although depending on type, weight and origin of the fabric, less harsh and less chemical-intensive treatments may have sufficed. This practice might not only prove harmful for the fiber material but is also wasteful and expensive. A number of recycling efforts to recover and re-use not only the processing water but also some of the chemicals applied during preparation have been reported in the literature. The implementation of control systems that more accurately monitor the true requirements of the process, and/or the integration of units that allow the recycling of process components, entail initial investment costs but are normally paid off within a few years. Potential recycling options will be introduced in the ensuing section. Sizes are applied to warp yarns to aid fabric formation by temporarily enveloping the yarn with a lubricating and strengthening coating to prevent abrasion and breakage. Common compounds for sizes are starch and starch derivatives, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), polyacrylate-based compounds, and mixtures thereof ( By far, the oldest sizing compounds are starch and starch derivatives, which are inexpensive and easily and most commonly removed by enzymatic means ( Extensive research in respect to recycling of water-soluble, heat-stable and mechanically resistant sizing compounds has been performed by Trauter Little has been published on recovery of fully-synthetic, acrylic-based compounds besides the use of ultrafiltration technology. A process was developed by BASF on a possible procedure for recovery of acrylic size ( Waxes, oils and fats, sometimes added in small amounts (0.2–0.5%) to sizing compounds, tend to accumulate in the reclaimed size. Silicones or paraffin-based compounds are commonly applied as water-soluble products or emulsions. The natural wax tallow functions as a defoaming and as an anti-static agent, or to increase the elasticity of the formed film ( Commercial scouring of raw cotton to remove non-cellulosic impurities is performed with aqueous caustic solutions of 3–6% strength. For mercerization, a process to improve the luster, dyeability and strength of cotton goods, caustic solutions of concentrations up to 25% ( Reconcentration of the caustic rinse water can be achieved via evaporators ( For prolonged re-use cycles, it appears that an advanced filtration system, such as ultrafiltration or nanofiltration ( Surfactants play an important role in the textile, paper, food and other industries. Their applications range from detergent formulations and dispersing agents to softeners and agricultural products. Most products are readily biodegradable (  Besides the multitude of chemicals that enter the waste stream from an industrial textile operation, colorants are a special type of pollutant. Dyes and pigments are generally made to resist degradation and to last for a long time of usage. They are much more difficult to break down in a conventional treatment plant and usually specific pretreatments are essential to remove the bulk of the spent colorants. Adding to the difficulty of degradation is the fact that dyes enter the waste stream in the form of mixtures of different dye classes and concentrations, with daily variation depending on the textile production at each point of the week. A large number of such pretreatments have been investigated, including adsorption on activated carbon or alternative adsorbents ( Very small concentrations of residual dye can lead to the coloration of the discharged treated water. In addition to creating a disturbing aesthetic problem, the Depending on the dye class and the fiber type, dye concentrations in the range of 0.5% to 5% are customary. Molecular weights of dyes reach roughly from 500 to 1500 Numerous studies focus on the removal of colorants from industrial waste water with the goal of re-using the water. In some cases it might be possible to return a colorant premix, a solution of relatively few compounds, back into the dyeing process. All other discharged dyes and chemicals are usually subjected to the regular waste treatment. For example,   A technique to produce highly concentrated solutions of recovered basic dyes has been developed and a patent issued ( Solvent extraction has been described by Industrial recovery of indigo using ultrafiltration has been in operation since 1982 ( The focus of a US EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) sponsored project was to separate anionic and cationic dyes from process water and chemicals by reverse osmosis and to re-use the concentrated dyes for coloration of automotive fabrics, with addition of some fresh dye if necessary ( Concentration and separation of dyes in nonionic surfactant employing a cloud point technique has been explored by It is known from the pulp and paper industry that certain oxidoreductases from white rot fungi such as laccases, and lignin and manganese peroxidases have delignification and decolorization capabilities ( A fair amount of neutral salts, such as sodium sulfate or sodium chloride, are used to assist the dyeing process. Their function varies depending on the dye class. For example, in direct dyeing, neutral salts increase the aggregation of the dyes inside the fiber pores and render the dye less hydrophilic ( In principle, for separation of salt from concentrated brine solutions, desalination techniques common for seawater are suitable.  Coloration of textile material via printing can be performed with dyes or pigments ( It has been generally agreed in literature on reclamation of printing pastes that only the thickener is worth the recycling effort since the separation of auxiliaries and dyes is difficult. Various types of water-soluble thickeners are commonly used to regulate the rheological properties of the printing paste, including gums, alginate, modified starch and cellulose derivatives. All components are commercially available in various molecular weight and viscosity ranges. Alginate is the only natural compound of importance, being a polysaccharide composed of blocks of β-D-mannurates and α-L-guluronates ( Polyacrylates are the most common synthetic compounds. To separate the thickener from the rest of the paste, a solvent that is partially miscible with water has to be selected (  A different approach was taken by Ciba-Geigy ( Finishing chemicals for all kinds of performance aspects of textile goods exist in great variety, and recycling options of these chemicals are largely unexplored. As mentioned previously, chemicals used for finishes such as easy-care, hydrophobic, flame-retardant and soil-release, are usually applied in combination with hand-builders, softeners and other auxiliaries. Their separation and subsequent re-use is problematic and very little has been published in this area. Their impact on the effluent treatment and quality, monitored as BOD and COD is, however, significant.  In a later study Fluorochemicals are widespread compounds which are used in soil-release and Increasingly stringent environmental laws and rising cost of pollution have forced the textile industry to reconsider current practices and potential process optimization if reclamation and re-use of chemicals and by-products cannot be integrated. Opportunities for waste minimization at source are numerous and possible in practically all areas of textile processing ( Great attention has been given to reactive dyes and their environmental impact. Reactive dyes form covalent bonds with the functional groups of cellulosic fibers under alkaline conditions. In the first phase of the batch process, at neutral pH, they are adsorbed at fiber accessible surfaces. Large amounts of salt are added to increase their affinity for the fiber. The chemical reaction with the fiber occurs upon pH change at the second stage. All dye left in the bath is simultaneously hydrolyzed at this point of the dyeing process and is ineffective for further dyeing (see Research has focused on both the salt requirements of these dyes and the dyeing process itself. Low-salt reactive dyes with enhanced application characteristics ( The use of solvents in preparation as well in dyeing has been discussed as a closed-loop process without waste water generation, which generally pays off after the initial investment in specialized equipment. Solvents suitable for scouring include chloroform, isopropyl alcohol (  By altering the dye characteristics, such as increased dye affinity, or by modifying the dyeing process, the exhaust rate can be changed. Vat dyes are usually reduced with sodium dithionite and solubilized under alkaline conditions, applied to the textile material and reoxidized ( Several research groups investigated dyeing in supercritical fluids. A good review of this technique and its applicability can be found in ( Instead of changing the dyeing process, chemical fiber modifications have been suggested to considerably improve both dyeing properties and ecological aspects of the dyeing process ( Closed-loop systems that make use of glucose generated by enzymatic degradation of starch size for bleaching with glucose oxidase are an alternative approach to waste reduction ( For the textile industry, as a major contributor to environmental problems, it is of paramount importance to find solutions to waste minimization and prevention, reclamation and recycling. Due to increasing legal pressure and public awareness in recent years, efforts have been made in all areas of wet processing to recycle and re-use both water and chemicals. However, for many processes and the involved chemicals, reclamation options still remain relatively unexplored. Researchers face the difficulty of adequate separation and purification of chemicals and of recovering chemicals in sufficient amounts. Membrane technology has proven to be a very useful tool for separation, although other methods have also successfully been employed. Novel concepts, such as water-free dyeing or enzymatic processes, require open-mindedness to be accepted in an industrial setting, but have great potential to solve environmental challenges. For complex mixed waste that cannot be separated, minimization concepts could lead to substantial reductions in waste, and savings in both energy and raw materials.