The settling curve is commonly used for studying the sedimentation process of a suspension. This paper introduces a mathematical equation (S-model) to simulate the settling curve of a suspension and offers new approaches to calculate the settling velocity, solid volume fraction, and flocs size of suspended particles in dilute range during sedimentation. The proposed S-model was evaluated by both experimental data and literature test data which is shown to accurately represent different types of settling behaviors and provide closer simulation than the previous published models. The proposed S-model also enhanced the representation of the hindered settling and consolidation portions of a settling curve through the introduction of two model parameters that controlling the deflection points of the sedimentation and consolidation. In addition, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation was conducted which indicated that the proposed S-model is a robust tool in modeling and characterizing the sedimentation behaviors of batch sedimentation. The findings from this research may provide new approach in modeling the sedimentation behavior of clay suspensions and bring broad impacts to engineering applications, such as biological secondary treatment process, mineral processing, water purification, sedimentation, soil modification, and ground improvement.Sedimentation is the process of particles settling in a suspension. The sedimentation characteristics of a suspension by nature, however, is complex and influenced by the properties of both the suspensions and emulsions which includes: rheology, particle size and shape, particle-particle interaction, surface characteristics, yield stress, concentration, viscosity, pH and ionic strength, polymers, surfactants, permeability, porosity and compressibility [ In applied clay sciences and coastal geotechnical engineering, the different types of settling are characterized by the particle-particle interactions and associations, namely the dispersed free settling, the flocculated free settling, the flocculated zone settling, and the consolidation settling [ Based on the continuum approach and sedimentation theory, numerous sedimentation models (flux density function) have been developed to analyze the sedimentation process of different types of settling, for example, the diluted dispersed free settling, flocculated settling, and zone settling [ The sedimentation theory has been developed based on a series of modern partial differential equations whose solutions could approximately explain the observed sedimentation behaviors [ For the flocculated zone settling, a good representation of the settling curve should capture all the typical characteristics of the sedimentation process. It is found that most suspensions have middle to long period of hindered sedimentation, which will lead to a large initial flat portion of the settling curve ( Eq. ( In order to study the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed model, the batch settling test data of the Wilklay kaolin RP2 in different NaCl solutions at a pH of 3 from Palomino and Santamarina [ In Palomino and Santamarina’s [ By using the S-model, all the sedimentation test data are fitted, it can be seen that the predicted lines lie pretty close to the test data as shown in  A parameter study of the proposed S-model is performed to investigate the model sensitivity. The parameter The use of the mathematic equation to fit the settling curve has many advantages in engineering practice. First, the proposed “five-parameter” S-model in this paper provides an “new” approach for modeling the batch settling curve. Second, the fitted settling curve could be used to derive the settling velocity, solid volume fraction, floc size, and other important features during the sedimentation. This paper presents three applications of the proposed S-model, which includes the derivation of the settling velocity, the solid volume fraction during sedimentation, and floc sizes estimation, the details are shown below. Based on the settling data, the settling velocity of the interface could be achieved by differentiating the proposed “five-parameter” S-model. The differentiated form of the S-model is given in Eq. The highest point in the settling velocity curve corresponds to the highest settling velocity that during the sedimentation. Eq. Based on the Kynch’s [ Put the settling velocity function (Eq. 5) into the mass conservation equation (Eq. 6), the local concentration could then be solved numerically together with boundary conditions and additional criterions. It is well known that the solutions of Eq. In order to improve the solution to Eq. Bentonite clay (data from Fam and Dusseault [ fluid, which is called the terminal settling velocity, which is called the terminal settling velocity, From material balance on the bentonite, the The Eq. Rearrange Eq. 11, by knowing the settling velocity An example is shown in Computational fluid dynamics software ANSYS fluent has been employed to model the particles settling in a graduated cylinder. The Euler-Lagrange approach was adopted where the fluid is treated as a continuum by solving the Navier-Stokes equations and the kaolinite is treated as the dispersed phase by particle motion theory (Eq. 13). An average particle size of 10 μm was modeled in perfect sphere shape settling in ideal water. The simulation results were compared with the experimental test data. Local solid concentrations of kaolinite from different heights of the cylinder were also measured at different time periods during the sedimentation. The S-model predicted value, the CFD modelled results and experimental results are all shown in the In this study, we presented a straightforward approach to model the batch settling tests and offered new methods to calculate the settling velocity, solid content, and flocs size of a suspension. The new approach could provide greater flexibility for fitting a wide variety of sedimentation processes. The proposed S-model improved the representation of the hindered settling and consolidation portions of a settling curve due to the introduction of two new model parameters. The proposed model was evaluated by both experimental data and literature test data which directly showed the model robustness in representing different types of settling behaviors and provided closer fitting than the previous published models. In addition, CFD simulation was conducted which supported that the proposed model is a versatile tool in modeling and characterizing the sedimentation behaviors of a suspension. Finally, the application of the proposed model in calculating the settling velocity, solid volume fraction, and floc size of suspended particles in dilute range have also been introduced and discussed, which would largely simplify the prediction of the sedimentation behaviors of different soil suspensions in coastal geotechnical engineering and bring broad impact in biological secondary treatment process, mineral processing, solid-liquid separation, and waste water purification. This work was supported by the