Gold plants are operated with process control, and optimization strategies that are inadequate and poorly supported. In recent times, however, plants are increasingly gaining substantial benefits by the installation and operation of good control systems that increase recovery, save costs, and streamline operation. Process control should fulfill several direct technical aims. Intrinsically, unstable process variables like sump levels and thickener underflow densities need to be stabilized and regulated at set points. Compensation might be required for measured disturbances, such as varying feeds to flotation plants. Quality-indicating measurements of final or intermediate products, such as particle size after milling, should be controlled when possible. Operating conditions should be regulated at optimum conditions, which themselves often need to be determined in a slower-acting strategy.Gold plants are often operated with process control and optimization strategies that are inadequate and poorly supported. In recent times, however, plants are increasingly gaining substantial benefits by the installation and operation of good control systems that increase recovery, save costs and streamline operation. Typical benefits could be regarded as one or more of the following: a 15% reduction in the gold reporting to tailings; a 10% reduction in mill power; a 20% reduction in reagent consumption; a 10% increase in plant throughput; very few spillages and unscheduled shutdowns; and improved productivity and working conditions for plant personnel. Process control should fulfil several direct technical aims. Intrinsically unstable process variables like sump levels and thickener underflow densities need to be stabilized and regulated at setpoints. Compensation might be required for measured disturbances, such as varying feeds to flotation plants. Quality-indicating measurements of final or intermediate products, such as particle size after milling, should be controlled when possible. Operating conditions should be regulated at optimum conditions, which themselves often need to be determined in a slower-acting strategy. In the sections below, some important aspects are discussed in relation to the application of process control on gold plants. The ‘weakest link’ of these contributory aspects can constrain the degree of success possible. Online measurements are key to a process control system. They warn the system of coming input disturbances and they provide feedback on variables that should be stabilized, regulated and optimized. Some of the most important variables measured on gold plants are as follows. Nuclear meters and weightometers are standard and in common use for measuring solids flows on conveyor belts. Weightometers are often more accurate and give less ‘noisy’ signals. Nuclear meters are non-mechanical and can be more reliable and less costly. The calibration of these meters is typically done or checked by Magnetic-induction flow meters are the most common and reliable means of measuring the flow of plant water. Most of the meters are suitable only for cleaner waters, because of the problems of scale build-ups. Magnetic-induction flow meters are the most common and reliable means of measuring the flow of slurries. Calibration of these meters is often done by the physical measurement of water flows where this is possible. Sometimes this calibration is done off-site. If just trends of flow and not absolute values are important, measurements of pressure – Slurry density is generally measured by a nuclear meter. It is important for it to be installed on a vertical pipe, and that the normal slurry flow through the pipe should be above 2 Mill power is a good indication of the rate of grinding in a mill. Measurements of mill power generally contain unusually large components of noise. Their use is therefore often unnecessarily constrained to quite long-term control strategies. Actually, advanced electrical and digital processing of the signals from mill power meters can eliminate unwanted noise, leaving a fast-responding signal with good process information for control. Where there is little or no froth present, direct ultrasonic meters are often used reliably for level measurements. Problems can arise beyond extremes of measurement ranges if the meter gives unexpected outputs. Ultrasonic meters are also used quite commonly for flotation cells, but with floats and connected platforms located above the froth to reflect the ultrasound. A hydrocyclone fulfils two important functions: separating fine from coarse particles and producing an underflow slurry of a consistency that induces efficient grinding in the mill to which the slurry is recycled. Generally, the most efficient operation of a standard closed milling circuit requires the underflow of the hydrocyclone to have a narrow-angle underflow spray nearly at the point of roping, but not actually roping. An ultrasonic meter for measuring this angle has been used successfully in industry for control and optimization. Industrial online size measuring devices operate on principles such as ultrasound attenuation, laser diffraction or imaging and physical probing. These systems can give good results if installed, calibrated and maintained well. Their accuracy and reliability are very dependent on having representative and well-maintained sampling systems. Soft sensors that use flows, densities and other measurements can sometimes give accurate and more reliable derived measurements of size, but they do require regular calibrations. These soft sensors also eliminate the time lag between real and measured size changes that result with the physical meters. This time lag can be a severe limitation to fast and effective control. The best system uses a combination of both a soft sensor and a physical meter, with the use of the best features of both. Online measurements of gold concentrations in various process streams would be good to have for control, but are generally not practicably possible for gold. This is especially true in respect of solids in tailings streams, where the measurement of grade would be most useful. Titration and electrochemical methods have been applied with success to measure cyanide concentrations in absorption and leaching vessels. They can give good indications of the This section addresses some of the important common tasks and widely available tools needed for basic process control of gold plants. A control system influences the operation of a process by sending signals to actuators. The number and types of actuators determine how many and which variables on the plant can be controlled. For example, a variable-speed pump is invariably necessary in the control of closed milling circuits because of the need to regulate circulating loads as well as sump levels. Although actuators are usually designed to act linearly, they often have some undesirable characteristics or there might be some unfavourable dynamics in the way the plant reacts to them. Where possible, good control strategies therefore have a local fast-acting control loop for each actuator that regulates a measurement of the associated plant input. In fact, inexpensive actuators with poor characteristics can often be made to give very good results when a fast-acting local loop can overcome its faults. This is particularly true of valves where there are associated measurements of flow rates. Process signals from measuring devices invariably have noise or other undesirable variations. Particular culprits on gold plants are nuclear-based measurements, mill power and variables derived from image processing. A common shortcoming on many plants is the lack of appropriate analogue filtering of electrical signals before they are sampled periodically by an analogue to digital converter. This introduces aliasing that transforms short-term signals and noise into what looks like long-term drift or low-frequency noise. Too much filtering of a signal can cause unwanted sluggishness in control loops and can sometimes obscure symptoms of a problematic measuring device. Proportional-integral (PI) feedback control loops are commonly used on gold plants. Because of the noisy measurements generally present on these plants, derivative action tends to cause too much actuator action and is rarely used. Many PI controllers are poorly tuned and few people know or remember how to tune them properly. A ‘fiddle and test’ method of tuning often results in too low a gain and relatively too much integral action. This occurs because when a control loop appears to be too active, the operator's natural inclination is to turn things down. This is effective in respect of the gain setting, but not the PI control is not always very successful. Problems can occur when there are adverse dynamic characteristics. A more advanced controller can handle the dynamics of long time lags introduced by solids-feed belts more appropriately. Multivariable interactions between plant inputs and outputs are often more appropriately dealt with by advanced control. Process control is best applied in a hierarchical structure that can be regarded as having several layers. The lower layers operate the fastest and are nearer to the plant itself, physically or conceptually. Higher layers depend on the lower layers and should only be operated when all the lower layers beneath them are properly functional. The bottom layer comprises measurements, actuators and other hardware and software up to the provision of the lowest level of control loops. Typically, this includes functionality of either a programmable logic controller (PLC) or a distributed control system (DCS). The control here is mostly done with single-variable PI or ratio loops that have response times of not more than a few seconds. The bottom layer is where most faults in a control system commonly occur – inappropriate signal conditioning, electrical noise, earth loops, incorrectly chosen or installed measuring devices or actuators, faulty or inaccurately calibrated converters, incorrectly tuned PI controllers, etc. The next layer up provides for fast stabilizing control, generally with response times of several seconds to a few minutes. The control loops here are generally more advanced in nature than those in the lowest layer and they typically drive the setpoints of the lower loops instead of the actuators directly. The dynamics of a gold plant's operation leads to a complexity that should have appropriate stabilizing technology implemented in this layer to deal with it. Higher up is the layer containing optimizing control, where optimum setpoints for the layers below are determined. This optimization generally has response times of minutes to hours, and it is commonly a combination of automated optimization and operator-assisted optimization. The modern trend is for a complementary combination of both of these to be used, with the operator being assisted to understand and not ignore the automated functionality ( The highest layer is where control and optimization is elevated to a plant-wide level and where it merges with management functions. Long-term interactions between plant sections are optimized in terms of profits and operational requirements. An enterprise-level management information system can be used to make managers the overall optimizing drivers of the plant. Advanced mechanistic dynamic simulators can give very good insight into what is required for the development of effective control strategies ( It is increasingly being recognized that the use of just PI controllers and other simple control elements is inadequate for good stabilization and optimization. For example, it has been shown by experimental tests on a number of flotation plants, including a gold plant, that advanced stabilizing control can yield about 1% more recovery than conventional PI control. This is because conventional PI control of flotation tends to transmit and amplify disturbances between flotation banks instead of eliminating them. The non-linear response of tailings grades then causes increases in its average values, and hence reduced recoveries. A modern trend in advanced control is the use of artificial intelligence (AI). Common AI methods include neural networks, expert systems, fuzzy logic and genetic systems. There is no widely accepted answer to the best choice of these for gold plants. Whereas some people have the view that AI systems mimicking human intelligence will ultimately give the best control, humans and AI systems are sometimes much less inefficient at dealing with complex problems than known technical solutions that have been customized to solve them. The simple answer is to use good technical solutions where they are known and can be implemented, maintained and accepted by operators; and otherwise to use good AI techniques appropriately for unsolved technical problems, the implementation of non-technical solutions and for softer operational and psychological issues. By its nature, advanced control and optimization on gold plants generally requires people or organizations with specialized expertise and experience in such applications. This is true whether the advanced techniques involve general AI, or process-specific technical solutions, or both. Individual plants seldom have specialists in these advanced technologies, so a partnership with a technology provider is commonplace. Such a partnership should involve a concentrated effort for the initial implementation and decades of less intense maintenance and upgrading subsequently. Most gold plants have some potential problems with the control of solids feeds. These can include the adverse effects of ore segregation, non-linear or erratic actuator dynamics (especially vibratory feeders), moisture content, conveyor-belt dynamics and blockages. All of these issues are readily solved by appropriate advanced technologies ( Crushers have relatively fast dynamics. Screens, too, have quite fast dynamics. As a result, these two processes can be essentially regarded as instantaneously responding units, connected by conveyor belts to other units or solids storage bins. Control can be applied in a strategy that allows particularly for the dynamics of conveyor belts and for constrained control and optimization. Attention should also be given to start-up and shutdown sequences and their control. In the early 1980s, successful multivariable control of industrial milling ( Because the optimum operation of milling circuits is almost invariably near process limits, optimum control requires a multivariable controller that has switching control strategies, for use when various combinations of process inputs and outputs change between being constrained and unconstrained. Model predictive control (MPC) is a good general technology for this, but it is complex, cumbersome and less reliable in its general form, so specialist adaptation should be applied to exploit specific characteristics of milling circuits ( Besides handling the process limits properly, the controller should optimize the operation of a milling circuit while controlling product size to a setpoint. The setpoint used for product size itself might need to be adjusted to give a required long-term solids throughput. In autogenous milling, conditions inside the mill might need to be made such that preferential grinding of either the fine material or the coarse ore takes place. The most common process controllers used in thickening are those for thickener underflow density and flocculant addition. The thickener underflow density is controlled to a setpoint by a variable-speed pump. The setpoint can be manipulated in a plant-wide optimization scheme that minimizes gold losses and prevents any undesirable bottlenecks. The flocculent is usually added in ratio to the flow of solids to the thickener. If unknown, this flow of solids can sometimes be estimated from a Carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) are widely used for the extraction of gold by the use of cyanide. Pulp levels are easily controlled, usually mechanically, by means of overflow weirs. Carbon transfer is done in batches or, in some cases, continuously. The long time constants in CIP and CIL plants make it possible for carbon-related measurements from hand samples to be used. However, cyanide concentrations are best determined and controlled automatically and with minimum measurement delays, as they reflect faster process variations and disturbances, and these need to be reacted to quickly. The carbon and cyanide inventories should be optimized to give the optimum financial performance of the plant as a whole. The associated index of performance should include the income from gold recovered minus the costs of cyanide, carbon and any other reagents (such as lime and oxygen) used. A flotation plant should have advanced stabilizing control of its pulp levels ( The advanced stabilization of levels, alone, can produce measurable improvements in recovery of around 1%, as is illustrated by some industrial results in Where there are cleaner flotation stages, flow rates and residence times should also be optimized dynamically, while the levels are being controlled (