The use of different types of seeding material to cause the layer deposition of desired iron phases is an attractive technique for the treatment of industrial waste waters, synthesis of iron products and the study of adsorption and dissolution reactions involving iron oxides. In this study, artificial solids (consisting of mainly ferrihydrite and lepidocrocite), natural goethite and natural haematite seeds were used during batch oxidation and precipitation of iron from a ferrous sulphate suspension. A 4 L standard stirred tank reactor was used. Air was used as the oxidising agent. High ferrous ion concentrations typical of acid mine drainage associated with South African coal and gold mining were used. All the three oxides of iron catalysed the oxidation reaction rate to almost the same extent. The products formed were mainly lepidocrocite for systems seeded with artificial solids and goethite for systems seeded with either goethite or haematite. The less stable ferrihydrite was not formed in the systems seeded with either goethite or haematite. Seeding resulted in reduced BET surface areas, improved settling rates and the formation of particles of bigger sizes.Mining operations, especially of gold and coal in South Africa, are associated with the disturbance and aeration of previously oxygen deficient pyritic strata. When these aerated pyritic ores come into contact with water, the sulphide is oxidised resulting in the release of ferrous iron and hydrogen ion acidity into solution. As a result, iron has been found to be the most abundant metal in Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) in South Africa. The acid mine drainage is mainly treated by air oxidation and the addition of lime to neutralise the acidity and cause the precipitation of the metals ( The voluminous sludge produced needs large land area for final disposal The precipitation of metastable phases means there is need for post precipitation stabilisation before final solids disposal. Again, the long term stability of these precipitates has also been questioned, especially with respect to their amphoteric solubility. The low solids density (15%) means a considerably high amount of water which could otherwise be recovered is being wasted; The fine precipitates formed have poor dewaterability characteristics The sludge is formed as a complex mixture of iron phases which diminishes opportunities for recycle or reuse. Since iron is the major component of AMD, the removal of other pollutants and the undesirable characteristics of the sludge cited above have been found to depend on the oxidation and precipitation of iron ( The surface area provided by the seeds depends on the mass of seed added and the size of such seed. The crystal size of the seed material is usually determined by the stirrer speed that would be used in the experiments based on considerations of secondary nucleation or collision breeding ( The artificial solids seed material was obtained by oxidising Fe The natural haematite and goethite specimens used for seeds preparation were supplied by the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Cape Town. The haematite and goethite rock specimens had purities of 80% and 100% respectively. The minerals were crushed, pulverised and then micronised for 10–15 min in an ethanol medium. The resultant material was then wet screened in an ultrasonic bath to between 1 μm and 5 μm using nylon mesh filter cloth supplied by Merco Industries, South Africa. The ultrasonification was stopped when the discard was clear. The retained solids were then dried for 48 h at 30 °C before being used as seed material. All the experiments were carried out in a 4 L batch reactor shown in The reactor was first filled with 4 L of deionised water which was then deoxygenated using nitrogen. Dissolved oxygen concentration was monitored by an YSI 5739 electrode coupled to a Hitech Micro Systems controller. Iron at a concentration of 200 mg/L was then added as FeSO During the course of the experiment samples were collected from the bottom of the reactor and quickly quenched with H Phases in the precipitate were identified using X-ray powder diffraction techniques using a front loading preparation method and then analysed using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and variable divergence and receiving slits with Fe filtered Co-Kα radiation. The wavelength of the radiation was 1.78897 A. The phases were identified using X'Pert Highscore plus software. The relative phase quantities (wt.%) were estimated using the Autoquan programme which is based on the Rietveld refinement method. The amorphous content of the samples was determined by standard addition of 15% silica. The BET specific surface area was measured with a Tristar instrument supplied by Micromeretics. Degassing was performed at 90 °C for 24 h before measurement could be performed using N The evolution of the ferrous iron concentration during oxidation in the presence of different seeding material is shown in The X-ray powder diffraction spectra for the artificial solids seeded, goethite seeded and haematite seeded systems and the respective seeds spectra are shown in In the case of the goethite seeded system, the X-ray powder diffraction analysis ( These results show that there are potential benefits to using seeded systems, especially haematite seeding in the treatment of acid mine drainage. Such potential benefits include the formation of a more stable precipitate, improved metal removals due to increased insolubility of the precipitate and better solid–liquid separation due to the higher density of goethite compared to ferrihydrite and lepidocrocite. Seeding the oxidation and precipitation of ferrous iron induces the formation of more stable iron precipitates at the expense of the kinetically favoured less stable phases. Seeding improves the settling characteristics of the precipitated iron compounds. The formation of mainly goethite from the haematite seeded system is very significant since goethite is the least soluble of iron oxides ( The authors would like to thank Ronel August of the Department of Geological Sciences (University of Cape Town) for providing the haematite and goethite specimens used as seed material, Sabine Verryn of the Department of Geology (University of Pretoria) for X-ray powder diffraction analyses and interpretation.