Magnetite nanoparticles were prepared in a weakly basic solution at the low reaction temperature by the co-precipitation method. As a comparison, the oxidative precipitation method was also applied in this study. The structure, morphology, and other properties of the obtained samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron microscope (TEM), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The above characterization data indicate that small size and narrow size distribution are found for magnetite nanoparticles prepared by the co-precipitation method. Further magnetic property and Zeta potential results illuminate that magnetite nanoparticles prepared by this method display a quasi-superparamagnetic property and a good dispersion in the aqueous solution. Based on the investigation results, the magnetite nanoparticles with a quasi-superparamagnetic property and a fine dispersion can be facilely prepared in a weakly basic solution at the low reaction temperature by the co-precipitation method.In recent few decades, magnetite (Fe In view of potential applications of magnetite nanoparticles, the optimum magnetic property, morphology, and other physical properties were related to the synthesis methods. In the preparation process of magnetite nanoparticles, a few methods have been employed and recently developed, mainly consisting of co-precipitation method, sol-gel method, hydrothermal method, and electrochemical method [ In order to solve the above problems, various techniques such as ultrasonic, mechanochemical method and microwave have been applied in the co-precipitation process [ In our present work, magnetite nanoparticles were successfully prepared in a weakly basic solution at low reaction temperature by the co-precipitation. As a comparison, the results of magnetite nanoparticles prepared by the oxidative precipitation were given in this study. The effects of preparation methods on structure, morphology and physical properties were discussed. In this study, ferrous chloride tetrahydrate (FeCl FeCl Oxidative precipitation method was also used in this study. FeCl Crystalline structures of magnetite nanoparticles were detected on an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D XRD patterns of magnetite nanoparticles are shown in The FT-IR spectra of magnetite nanoparticles are shown in The morphologies of magnetite nanoparticles are shown in The size distributions were recorded by measuring the particle sizes of the obtained samples and the histograms have been shown in The magnetic properties of magnetite nanoparticles were investigated and the magnetization curves were shown in Two weight changes of magnetite nanoparticles with the increase of the heating temperature were investigated by thermogravimetric analysis as shown in The zeta potential was measured as a function of pH for magnetite particles prepared by the co-precipitation method as shown in Magnetite nanoparticles were prepared by the co-precipitation method and the oxidative precipitation method in a weakly basic solution at the low reaction temperature. XRD results indicate that magnetite nanoparticles have been prepared by two methods. Thermogravimetric analysis indicates both samples display a favorable thermal stability. According to FT-IR spectra, the amount of OH groups on the surface area of magnetite nanoparticles by the co-precipitation method was more than that of OH groups on the surface area of magnetite nanoparticles by the oxidative precipitation method. TEM and size distribution results illuminate that a fairly narrow size of magnetite nanoparticles was obtained by the co-precipitation method. Magnetization measurement confirms a quasi-superparamagnetic property and zeta potential measurement shows a good dispersion of magnetite nanoparticles in the aqueous solution. Therefore, the water-dispersible and quasi-superparamagnetic magnetite nanoparticles can be prepared by the co-precipitation method. The author thanks for the financial support of the