Objectives
                  Evaluate the influence of composite resin CAD–CAM restoration thickness on the in vitro fatigue resistance and failure mode of overlay-type restoration in endodontically treated premolars.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty extracted premolars received root canal treatment followed by a standardized tooth preparation (1.5-, 2.5- or 3.5-mm cusp reduction, proximal gingival margins located 1.5mm below the CEJ, glass-ionomer base and immediately sealed dentin with Optibond FL). Restorations were milled using Cerec3 and FiltekMZ100 composite blocks. The intaglio surfaces of the overlays were sandblasted and silanated. Tooth preparations were sandblasted and etched before insertion of the restoration. All restorations were luted with Optibond FL and preheated FiltekZ100. A closed-loop servohydraulic unit was used for simulating cyclic isometric chewing at 5Hz, starting with a load of 200N (5000 cycles), followed by stages of 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1200 and 1400N at a maximum of 30,000 cycles each. All samples were loaded until fracture or to a maximum of 185,000 cycles. Groups were compared using the Kaplan–Meier survival curves.
               
                  Results
                  None of the restored premolars with the 1.5-mm cusp overlap restoration withstood all 185,000 loading cycles. With 2.5- and 3.5-mm cusp overlap, the survival rate was 30% and 40%, respectively. The rate of fracture below the CEJ was 60%, 60% and 30% for 1.5, 2.5 and 3.5mm of cusp overlap, respectively. Survival of restored premolars with 2.5- and 3.5-mm cusp coverage was not significantly different (p
                     =.23).
               
                  Significance
                  Thick FiltekMZ100 composite resin onlays showed higher fatigue resistance than thin ones and may be associated with fractures that are less subgingival.Endodontically treated posterior teeth present with specific challenges for the restorative dentist and the prosthodontist because of their more brittle behavior when compared to vital teeth. This difference is not explained by their moisture content but rather the structural defect generated during tooth preparation Therefore, the aim of this study is to determine the influence of material thickness on the in vitro fatigue resistance and failure mode of overlay-type restoration of endodontically treated premolars. The null hypothesis is that there is no difference between thin and thick CAD/CAM composite resin overlays. Upon approval from the University of Southern California Institutional Review Board, 30 freshly extracted, sound human maxillary premolars were collected and stored in a solution saturated with thymol. Each tooth was mounted in a special positioning device using acrylic resin (Palapress, Haereus Kulzer, Armonk, NY, USA) embedding the root up to 3.0 First, all specimens were prepared in a standardized way ( Standardized overlays were generated with the Cerec3 CAD/CAM system (Cerec software v. 3.03, Sirona Dental Systems GmbH, Bensheim, Germany). All specimens were fitted with the anatomy of a first maxillary premolar (Lee Culp Youth database, Crown Master Mode) with cusp tips parallel to the preparation surface and the central groove aligned with the mesio-occluso-distal slot. All restorations were milled using the composite resin Paradigm MZ100 blocks (3M-ESPE, St. Paul, MN, USA) using the Endo mode with the sprue located at the distal surface, then polished mechanically using a commercial polishing kit (Dialite, Ultra Polishers; Brasseler, Savannah, GA, USA). Surface conditioning of milled restorations included airborne-particle abrasion with 50-μm aluminum oxide at 30 Tooth preparations were treated by airborne-particle abrasion with 50-μm aluminum oxide at 30 Prepared specimens were stored in distilled water at ambient temperature for at least 24 The fatigue resistance of the three groups was compared using the Kaplan–Meier survival curves. At each time interval (defined by each load step), the number of specimens starting the interval intact and the number of specimens fracturing during that interval were counted, allowing the calculation of survival probability at each interval. The influence of the restorative material thickness on the fracture strength (load step at which failure occurred) was analyzed using the Logrank test at a significance level of .05. Differences were localized using pairwise post hoc comparisons with the same test at a significance level of .016 (Bonferroni correction for three comparisons). The restored premolars with 1.5-mm overlays fractured at an average load of 1060 The null hypothesis which states that there would be no difference between thin and thick CAD/CAM composite resin overlays can be rejected. Within the limitations of this simulated-fatigue study, 2.5- and 3.5-mm thick restorations increased the fatigue resistance of endodontically treated premolars when compared to 1.5-mm overlays. The present experimental set-up does not allow multiple sample testing and each specimen is loaded over the course of 1 day. This testing method is relatively time-consuming but has the advantage of minimizing confounding variables. Closed-loop servohydraulics is extremely accurate and versatile and can allow a physiologic representation of mastication In recent times, CAD/CAM systems have invaded the market. The Cerec system The results of this study require careful interpretation. The earliest failures in this set-up occurred at a minimum load of 800 The absence of adhesive failure in the present study also confirms that a preheated light-polymerized composite resin restorative material can be used as a luting agent Within the limitations of this in vitro fatigue study, it can be concluded that thick CAD–CAM composite resin overlays increased the fatigue resistance of endodontically treated premolars when compared to thin ones. None of the restored premolars with the thin 1.5-mm cusp overlap restoration withstood all 185,000 loading cycles and 60% of the fractures ended below the CEJ. With the thicker overlays, survival rates were 30% and 40%, respectively, and only 30% of all specimens fractured below the CEJ when using a 3.5-mm cusp overlap. Both thick and thin overlays withstood the normal range of bite forces simulated in the first part of the fatigue test. The authors wish to express their gratitude to 3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN for MZ100 blocks and Z100 composite resin, Kerr, Orange, CA for Optibond FL, Patterson, El Segundo, CA for Cerec3, Ultradent, South Jordan, UT for Silane and Heraeus Kulzer, Armonk, NY for Palapress. Special thanks to Don Wiggins and Ramon Delgadillo (USC machine shop) for the fabrication of the load chamber, Reyes Enciso (Assistant Professor, Craniofacial Sciences and Therapeutics, School of Dentistry, University of Southern California) for guidance with the statistical analysis presented in this study and Dr. Mamaly Reshad (Assistant Professor of Clinical, Dentistry, Department of Advanced Graduate Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, University of Southern California) for help in revising the English draft.