Semiconducting microbelts are key components of the thermoelectric micro-devices, and their electrical transport properties play significant roles in determining the thermoelectric performance. Here, we report heavily Cu-doped single-crystal SnSe microbelts as potential candidates used in thermoelectric microdevices, fabricated by a facile solvothermal route. The considerable Cu-doping concentration of ~11.8% up to the solubility contributes to a high electrical conductivity of ~416.6 S m−1 at room temperature, improved by one order of magnitude compared with pure SnSe (38.0 S m−1). Meanwhile, after loading ~1% compressive strain and laser radiation, the electrical conductivity can be further improved to ~601.9 S m−1 and ~589.2 S m−1, respectively, indicating great potentials for applying to thermoelectric microdevices. Comprehensive structural and compositional characterizations indicate that the Cu+ doping state provides more hole carriers into the system, contributing to the outstanding electrical conductivity. Calculations based on first-principle density functional theory reveal that the heavily doped Cu lowers the Fermi level down into the valence bands, generating holes, and the 1% strain can further reduce the bandgap, strengthening the ability to release holes, and, in turn, leading to such an excellent electrical transport performance. This study fills the gaps of finding novel materials as potential candidates used in the thermoelectric microdevices and provides new ideas for micro/nanoscale thermoelectric material design.With the aggravation of energy and environmental crises, achieving higher energy utilization efficiency has become one of the most effective ways to solve the problems. Thermoelectric materials can realize the direct conversion between thermal and electric energies, which are expected to be widely applied in the field of waste heat recovery and power generation [ As a key member in the thermoelectric family, microscale thermoelectric devices (or thermoelectric microdevices) have been paid considerable attention in recent years owing to their full potentials for using in continuous power generation and refrigeration for various applications [ In this study, we fabricated heavily Cu-doped single-crystal SnSe microbelts as potential candidates targeting thermoelectric microdevices through a facile solvothermal route. The Cu-doped SnSe can induce morphologies transferring from rectangular microplates to microbelts, which is suitable for direct use in the microdevices, avoiding any further processing. A considerable Cu solubility of ~11.8% in SnSe contributed to a high  To understand the morphological characteristics of our synthesized products, SEM investigation was performed. To clarify the Cu-doping behavior in SnSe, comprehensive TEM, EDS, and Cs-STEM investigations were performed. To understand the electrical transport performance of our synthesized SnSe single crystals with different Cu-doping concentrations, we used an electrical test sample rod manufactured by Nanofactory, as schematically shown in  To evaluate the thermoelectric potential of the as-fabricated microbelts for applying to microscale thermoelectric devices, we evaluate their power factor To understand the impact of strain on the electrical transport performance of our synthesized SnSe microbelts with different Cu-doping concentrations, we applied ~1% stress on these microbelts during electrical testing, and To understand the fundamental mechanism of improvement on the electrical transport performance of SnSe microbelts by heavy Cu-doping and stress loading, we performed detailed first-principle DFT calculations. Furthermore, we applied laser radiation during the deformation testing. In this study, we fabricated heavily Cu-doped single-crystal SnSe microbelts as potential candidates for thermoelectric devices by a facile solvothermal route. Compared with pure SnSe microplates with a low electrical conductivity of ~38.0 S m Experimental details can be found in Yunzhi Zheng: Methodology; Validation; Formal analysis; Investigation; Data Curation. Xiao-Lei Shi: Methodology; Software; Formal analysis; Investigation; Resources; Data Curation; Writing - Original Draft; Visualization. Hualei Yuan: Validation; Formal analysis; Investigation. Siyu Lu: Software; Resources. Xianlin Qu: Investigation; Formal analysis. Wei-Di Liu: Formal analysis. Lihua Wang: Resources; Funding acquisition. Kun Zheng: Conceptualization; Validation; Resources; Data Curation; Supervision; Project administration; Funding acquisition. Jin Zou: Formal analysis; Writing - Review & Editing. Zhi-Gang Chen: Conceptualization; Resources; Writing - Review & Editing; Supervision; Project administration; Funding acquisition. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at