This paper describes a study of the interpretation of controlled-source electromagnetic (CSEM) data obtained from iron ores under rough topography. For the accurate interpretation of the data, we considered two characteristics that affect the CSEM data; one is rough topography and the other is an iron ore. We have developed the 2.5D inverse modeling algorithm, which rigorously incorporates topography, based on the finite element method (FEM) for excluding erroneous interpretations from rough topography. Before applying the developed algorithm to the field data, we demonstrated that rough topography distorts the resistivity value or distribution of anomalies through numerical experiments. In addition, we investigated the effect of magnetic susceptibility by an iron ore on the data under the field conditions through numerical simulation. Because a magnetic anomaly exerted less influence on the quadrature component of the data in a numerical test, we confirmed that the inversion of the quadrature component of the field data, by considering only conductivity, is reasonable. Based on these results from the consideration of two characteristics of the field, we successfully carried out inversion of the field data. A comparison of the result of the CSEM inversion with a priori information of the field, verified the reliability of our inversion result.Controlled-source electromagnetic (CSEM) methods have been widely used in many fields, such as hydrocarbon exploration ( In this paper, we interpret the EM data measured for the exploration of iron ores under rough topography. First, to deal successfully with rough topography, we developed the 2.5D inverse modeling algorithm, which rigorously incorporates topography based on the finite element method (FEM), which can handle topography more flexibly than FDM. Then, we analyze the effect of topography on the inversion results for a model that simulates field conditions. In addition, before we conduct the inversion of the field data using the developed algorithm, we check the validity of the inversion, which considers only the conductivity through numerical experiment for simulation models with and without magnetic susceptibility. Finally, we present the inversion result of the field data and compare it to a priori information for the validation of reliability of the result. In the 2.5D EM induction problem, we calculate electromagnetic fields for the 2D earth model excited by a 3D source. Because the amplitude of these fields vary dramatically near the source location, the secondary field formulation that divides the total electric and magnetic fields into the primary and secondary fields ( and where After applying the Fourier transform to Eqs. and where permeability Based on the above equations from (3) to (8), we focused on two points to incorporate rough topography into our modeling algorithm. First, we set the full free-space as the background medium for calculating the primary field. Conventionally, the half-space or the layered earth has been set as the background medium, because the secondary field can be calculated more accurately through an accurate primary field solved by the analytic or semi-analytic method. However, if the surface's interface is not flat, as shown in Secondly, to calculate auxiliary secondary fields ( where After all of the calculations to obtain the secondary field in the Based on the forward modeling algorithm developed in this study, we developed the inverse modeling algorithm, which can handle the data obtained over rough topography. The objective function to find smooth models can be denoted using the regularized Gauss–Newton method as follows: where For the purpose of the successful inversion of the data measured in an area of rough topography, we applied three inversion strategies. First, we used the data-weighting matrix ( where Second, we used general measures through an iteratively reweighted least-squares (IRLS) algorithm to find a solution that is less influenced by outliers and other non-Gaussian noise, that is, to be more robust ( where where Lastly, we applied active constraint balancing (ACB) to our algorithm to enhance the resolution as well as the stability of the inversion process ( where Accordingly, the update vector of the model parameters at each iteration step was determined as: where where Because negative conductivity does not exist in nature, we set the model parameter as the logarithmic value of the conductivity of each block to exclude negative values. Therefore, the model parameter vector where In addition, we applied lower and upper bounds on the model vector to restrict model updates during the inversion process such that unrealistic results are suppressed ( where By using the reciprocal relationship between source and receiver, the partial derivative of where At where the sign changes according to both electric fields. When both electric fields are even functions in Based on the adjoint equation approach as shown above, the efficiency of computation for inversion is greatly increased. To verify the accuracy of the modeling algorithm developed, secondary magnetic fields computed using the algorithm developed, TopoFEM2.5D, were compared with the semi-analytic stratified solutions calculated using EM1D code ( where To verify the validity of TopoFEM2.5D for more complex topography, we also compared the absolute values of the in-phase and quadrature components of the secondary vertical magnetic field from a 100 Three simple models were constructed to analyze the effect of topography ( An EM survey was conducted by the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources in Gangwon-do, South Korea to explore iron ores using a frequency EM system, PROMIS manufactured by IRIS Instruments Co.; this instrument is a multi-frequency and multi-spacing system ( Two characteristics were observed in this field through a priori information collected during the field survey, such as geologic survey results, a reduction to the pole map by the airborne magnetic survey, and an inversion result of the direct current (DC) resistivity data. One was rough topography, and the other was iron ores. Topography was rough because this field was located in mountainous terrain. The difference between maximum and minimum elevations was about 90 To confirm the necessity of incorporating topography accurately in the inversion, inversion experiments using synthetic data were conducted. Through a priori information, such as elevation variations in the surface and DC resistivity inversion results, the simulation model was constructed as shown in Total vertical magnetic fields were used, and no noise was added to the data while conducting inversion experiments. The model was divided into 120 (15 × 8) blocks of unknown resistivity. The initial model was set to a gradually increasing resistivity model that varied from 100 to 1000 First, the inversion of the data set from the simulation model ( Next, accurate topography was incorporated into the inversion of the data set from the simulation model shown in Because the target of our field survey is an iron ore the effect of an iron ore as a magnetic anomaly must be determined before we carry out the conductivity inversion of our field data. The forward modeling was conducted using the 3D edge-based finite element CSEM modeling algorithm, which deals with not only conductivity variation but also that of susceptibility of the subsurface, developed by Numerical experiments were conducted for two cases. The first is the susceptibility of the ore body set to 0.1 SI units and the second is set to 0.0 SI units, which is the same as the background value.  A 2.5D inversion was performed using the developed inversion algorithm. The model was divided into 153 (17 The EM inversion result was compared with the DC resistivity inversion result shown in For reasonable interpretation of EM data acquired for the exploration of iron ores in rough topography, two points were considered. One is rough topography, and the other is iron ore as a magnetic anomaly. Because the effect of the topography is sufficient to distort the data, accurate inversion results cannot be obtained without incorporation of the topography into the inversion algorithm. Thus, we have developed a 2.5D inversion algorithm based on the modeling algorithm that rigorously considers topography. In the developed algorithm, the induction due to topography was successfully handled through the secondary field formulation that deals with topography as an anomaly similar to the subsurface anomalies existing in the free-space background. Our algorithm also enhanced the accuracy through the replacement of numerical differentiation of auxiliary secondary fields ( The magnetic effect of an iron ore in our field conditions was investigated by using a 3D forward modeling algorithm that handles both conductivity and susceptibility. In the quadrature component, there was almost no effect of magnetic susceptibility, whereas some influence was detected in the in-phase component, especially in the low-frequency range. Based on our investigation of the field conditions through numerical tests, we carried out 2.5D inversion of our field data using only the quadrature component. The inverted result clearly showed the outcrop and conductive anomalies corresponding to buried iron ores. In a comparison with the result of the DC resistivity inversion, the resistivity section obtained from the EM inversion showed a similar range of resistivity values and distribution of conductive anomalies, so that we could verify the reliability of our EM inversion result. This work was supported by the