Measurements of ore particle composition distribution, commonly termed mineral liberation distribution, are used in assessing process performance in mineral processing. In many applications, comparisons are made between particle composition distributions (for example comparing the products of fine and coarse grinds) and in such comparisons it is useful to understand the errors in the measurements in order to decide whether any differences are significant. A statistical approach based on bootstrap resampling has been applied to estimate the confidence intervals for ore particle composition distribution measurements obtained using the MLA automated mineralogy system.
                  In this approach confidence intervals for each individual composition class are estimated as compared to a previous analytical solution which provides this information for particle composition data in cumulative form (Leigh et al., 1993). The effects on the magnitude of the error associated with measured values of particle composition distribution of the number of ore particles measured in the analysis and the complexity of the particle texture are investigated. Examples from a gold-bearing pyrite ore and an iron oxide copper gold ore are presented to demonstrate the practical application of this approach.Information on ore particle composition distribution, also referred to as mineral liberation distribution, is an important parameter used in processing plant design and optimisation. One example application is the determination of grinding targets for separation processes. A common approach used to collect this information and other textural features of the ores is through measurements on polished sections of particles. With the increased use of automated mineralogy systems, rapid and large amounts of measurements of mineralogical data can be conducted. The availability of these systems means that statistically reliable estimates of mineralogical data should be achievable ( In practice, comparisons are often made between particle composition distributions, a common example being the comparison between the particle composition distributions of the products of fine and coarse grinds when seeking to identify the optimum grind size for an ore. When comparisons are being made it is useful to quantify the errors in the measurements in order to determine whether any differences are significant. A statistical method to estimate the automated mineralogy systems measurement errors associated with the liberation data proposed by      Note that this analytical method described by     This paper details the application of a statistical approach based on bootstrap resampling to estimate the confidence intervals for ore particle composition distribution measurements obtained using data generated by the MLA automated mineralogy system. The advantages of using bootstrap resampling approach include requiring minimal assumptions for validity and not depending on an analytical solution to investigate complex systems ( The two ore samples used in the development of this method were a gold-bearing pyrite ore and an iron oxide copper gold (IOCG) ore. The gold-bearing pyrite ore samples used in this work consisted of size fractions of broken ore specifically the −1.18 The MLA XBSE measurement mode was used to measure the polished blocks. This mode uses backscatter electron images to delineate particles and mineral grains followed by acquisition of characteristic X-rays to identify the mineral present in each grain ( The bootstrap resampling methodology for estimating the confidence intervals for ore particle composition distribution measurements follows a standard approach to bootstrap resampling with replacement ( The inputs for the bootstrap resampling approach developed in this work are particle data from the Particle Properties table of each size fraction measured, as described in the previous section. For each subset of For each particle composition class within each particle size, the mean value of the mineral proportion in that class and its standard deviation are calculated across the 1000 subsets. The coefficient of variation (COV) is calculated to enable comparison of particle composition distribution results for samples which have different mean values of the characteristic of interest. The user is not restricted to performing the calculation for the measured number of particles but can also run the bootstrap resampling with any chosen value of the number of particles The bootstrap resampling methodology has been applied to particle composition distribution results for size fractions of a gold-bearing pyrite ore to estimate confidence intervals for this distribution. The example provided here focuses on the pyrite grains as the mineral of interest. In this case, the particle composition distribution results were obtained using the Mineral Liberation by Particle Composition generated in MLA Dataview software. Note that the method is equally applicable to equivalent data from other measurement techniques such as optical microscopy and QEMSCAN analyses. The amount of pyrite in each particle composition class (ranging from 0% to 100% in 10% intervals) was calculated for each of these particle size fractions: −1.18  The bootstrap method was applied to the measured particles of each size fraction by randomly sampling all the population of particles in each size fraction. In each case 1000 ( This work was undertaken to allow calculation of confidence intervals for each individual particle composition class through the application of a statistical approach based on bootstrap resampling. The bootstrap resampling method can also be used to calculate the standard deviation in grade within each composition class to estimate the confidence interval of that grade. However these extra analyses require a large amount of data to be carried in the program and increases the computation time considerably. The consequence of large coefficient of variation values for −1.18  As would be expected, it can be observed that as the number of particles measured increases, the coefficient of variation decreases. The coefficient of variation values of the original number of particles measured as indicated where the vertical line passes in the graph in An alternative approach to reduce confidence interval in the measurement values which is often used in practice is to widen the intervals of the particle composition class in the distribution. The objective in doing this is that more measured particles would be contained in each composition class and this approach can also be used to overcome the problems caused when individual narrow intervals contain zero particles. The results of confidence limits for individual composition classes as a result of using the bootstrap method and the approach of As discussed previously, The bootstrap resampling approach also provides a possible path to obtain confidence limits for overall liberation distribution data obtained by combining individual size fraction data according to their mass proportions. This would be useful information when comparisons are being made in terms of overall liberation distribution and this topic is the subject of ongoing research. The bootstrap resampling methodology has also been applied to particle composition distribution results for samples from rougher flotation of an IOCG ore to estimate confidence intervals for this distribution. As before, the particle composition distribution results were obtained using the Mineral Liberation by Particle Composition generated in MLA Dataview software. In this case, the analysis focused on the distribution of copper minerals in the ore specifically bornite, chalcocite, chalcopyrite and tenorite. The amount of these copper minerals and their total amount in each particle composition class (ranging from 0% to 100% in 10% intervals) were calculated for each sample of flotation feed (FF), rougher concentrate (RC) and rougher tail (RT) with the following particle size fractions: −300 The effect of the amount of mineral (i.e. mineral grade) in the sample on the resulting confidence interval in the measured particle composition distribution is further demonstrated in As described previously, a plot of the coefficient of variation versus the number of particles measured can be used to determine how many more particles need to be measured to reduce the confidence intervals for this low grade rougher tail sample. The plot of the coefficient of variation versus the number of particles measured as represented by the bootstrap resampled population for all Cu-bearing minerals composition classes of FF, RC and RT in the −75 A statistical approach based on bootstrap resampling has been applied to estimate the confidence intervals for ore particle composition distribution measurements for each individual particle composition class. This is in contrast to the analytical solution of The bootstrap resampling statistics from the number of particles measured can be used to determine whether additional particle measurements are needed to achieve an acceptable value for the coefficient of variation in the particle composition distribution results. The capability to estimate the error and the resulting confidence interval in individual particle composition distribution measurements provides greater certainty when comparisons are made between particle composition distributions as it assists in determining whether any differences are statistically significant. The work was conducted with funding from The authors also thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on the paper.