Introduction
                  Mallet finger, well-known also as drop finger or baseball finger, is a frequent deformity after extensor tendons injury in the fingers. Although numerous nonoperative or operative techniques have been used in managing this deformity, the treatment still remains a debated subject.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Starting from 1996, 121 fingers in 118 patients with neglected deformity or unsuccessful splinting older than 10 days underwent surgical treatment. In 101 patients a tendinous mallet finger was present, and in 20 patients a bony mallet finger. After immobilising the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint at 0° extension with a Kirschner wire, the extensor tendon was repaired by using a dorsal deepithelialised skin flap reinserted transosseous. The DIP joint was immobilised for 6 weeks in a thermoplastic splint, and after that it was gradually weaned from the immobilisation. An overnight splint was used for 4–6 weeks after starting the mobilisation.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 10 months (range: 3–120 months). An excellent result in 89 fingers and a good result in 32 fingers were obtained, according to Crawford's evaluation criteria.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This method seems to be a new reliable alternative in the treatment of chronic mallet finger.Mallet finger results usually from a forced flexion to an extended distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint, which produces a disruption of the extensor mechanism close to its insertion on the base of the distal phalanx. Independent to the type and aetiology of the deformity, it is mandatory to try to repair it, either conservative or surgical, in the attempt to prevent the possible complications, as the instability of the DIP joint and its persistent extension lag. Moreover, knowing that a deformity in one interphalangeal joint induces an opposite deformity in the adjacent interphalangeal joint, Splinting the DIP joint in hyperextension is unanimously the preferred method for acute tendinous mallet finger and for fractures involving less than one-third of the articular surface. The surgical treatment is advocated by several surgeons in bony mallet finger with fractures involving more than one-third of the articular surface, for cases older than 3 months after injury, and for patients who do not accept the splinting regimen or have an unsuccessful splinting therapy. Since 1996, 118 patients with mallet finger in 121 fingers (one patient with all four long fingers involved) underwent surgical treatment. There were 81 male (68%) and 37 female (32%), aged between 14 and 63 years (mean: 41 years). The index finger was affected in 24 cases (20%), the middle finger in 29 cases (24%), the ring finger in 49 cases (40%), and the small finger in 19 cases (16%). The deformity was older than 10 days in all the cases, i.e. between 10 and 97 days (mean, 38 days). In 69 cases (58%) the deformity was neglected by the patients for more than 30 days, in 41 cases (35%) the splinting was unsuccessful, and in 8 cases (7%) the patients did not comply with the splinting regimen. The mallet deformity was of tendinous origin in 87 fingers (72%), and of bony origin in 34 fingers (28%). In all the cases with fracture, that involved no more than one third of the articular surface. In 17 fingers (14%), a secondary swan-neck deformity was present. The extensor lag at admission was between 15° and 45° (mean, 30°). According to Doyle classification, 65 lesions were of type I, 22 of type II, 2 of type IVa, 29 of type IVb, and 3 of type IVc ( The procedure is performed under regional anaesthesia. The DIP joint is fixed in neutral position or slight extension by using a 1 In case of mallet fracture, the fragment is reduced and can be easy maintained by the flap. If a swan-neck deformity is present, the spiral oblique retinacular ligament (SORL) is also reinforced. In this attempt, the design of the flap is changed by transforming it to a “cross-flap” ( Postoperatively, only the DIP joint is immobilised in a thermoplastic splint, and the patients are encouraged to actively move the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and metacarpophalangeal (MP) joints. The steel thread is removed after 4 weeks, the Kirschner wire after 5 weeks, and the immobilisation after 6 weeks. After that, the DIP joint is gradually weaned from the immobilisation, and a night splinting is recommended for two additional weeks. The follow-up was between 3 and 120 months (mean: 10 months). None of the patients demonstrated postoperative pain, pin-track or steel tread infection, or flap necrosis. A minimal dehiscence of the wound was observed in 5 fingers (4%), but it was managed with secondary reepithelialisation. All patients returned to their daily activity after a mean of 21 days (range: 3–42 days). The mean extensor lag of the DIP joint was 2.5° (range: 0–10°), and the mean flexion of the DIP joint was 84.5° (range: 45–90°) ( According to Crawford's The failure of the treatment of mallet finger deformity, as well as the untreated cases, can remain with a persistent extensor lag and can develop a swan-neck deformity because of the imbalance in the extensor mechanism. The numerous conservative and operative methods described for the treatment of mallet finger deformity indicate that none of these approaches results in only good or very good functional outcomes. It is generally accepted by most surgeons, that if the avulsed fragment is less than one third of the articular surface in bony mallet finger deformities, the best method is continuous splinting for 6–8 weeks in neutral extension or slight hyperextension of the DIP joint. Several surgeons consider that for the acute tendinous mallet finger, it is possible to obtain a very good outcome by continuous splinting of the DIP in neutral extension or slight hyperextension for 6–8 weeks. Complications after surgical repair are more common and serious than after the conservative treatment, and are represented by infection, nail deformity, joint incongruity, skin necrosis, flexion deficit of the DIP joint. In the first 6 fingers operated by this method, a nail bed deformity was observed, due to the fact that the incision was longitudinal and to distal. That is why in the following cases the technique was modified by performing the incision over the dorsal aspect of the distal phalanx in a slightly oblique fashion. With this modification, no further case of nail deformity was observed. The use of the tie-over on the volar aspect of the distal phalanx is associated with some possible drawbacks, i.e. skin ulcerations, infection, and patient discomfort. Generally, if internal splinting using Kirschner wires is used, the external splinting is no longer necessary. In addition, several possible complications have been described that are related to the use of Kirschner wires, i.e. infection, breakage, arthritis. The main advantages of the surgical method described in this article, resulting from the use of a very well vascularised flap, include the lower rate of complications, and the high degree of functional outcome. These findings suggest that a deepithelialised proximally pedicled skin flap described in this paper is a powerful and reliable alternative in the treatment of chronic mallet finger deformity. We state that there is any conflict of interest.