The objective of this paper is to study the behavior of a low thick and low depth coal seam and the overburden rock mass. The mining method is room and pillar in retreat and partial pillar recovery. The excavation method is conventional drill and blast because of the small production. The partial pillar recovery is about 30% of the previous pillar size, 7 m × 7 m. The roof displacement was monitored during retreat operation; the surface movement was also monitored. The effect of the blasting vibration on the final pillar strength had been considered. Due to blasting, the pillar reduced about 20%. The consequence is more pillar deformation and roof vertical displacement. The pillar retreat and ground movement were simulated in a three-dimensional numerical model. This model was created to predict the surface subsidence and compare to the subsidence measured. This study showed that the remaining pillar and low seam reduce the subsidence that was predicted with conventional methods.Mining low coal seams (less than 1 m) with the room-and-pillar mining method implies the excavation of part of the roof or floor to maintain adequate entry height for equipment and compliance with labor regulations with respect to ergonomic issues. The direct consequence of this is an increase in coal contamination and the increased cost of transportation and preparation at the plant. Traditional room-and-pillar mining only uses a development operation, even with a continuous miner or drill-and-blasting. Therefore, all the run of mine (ROM) coal is carried out with part of the roof or floor. However, if the retreat mining method was to be considered, the quality of the coal could increase because only the coal seam is excavated from the pillar recovery. The quality of ROM coal will increase, and the cost will decrease proportionally to the amount of coal produced from the retreat operation. However, the retreat mining with partial or total pillar recovery implies greater subsidence. This is particularly true if the coal seam depth is shallow, under 100 m depth. Subsidence prediction in room-and-pillar retreat mining is complex; it depends upon the remaining pillar (stump pillar) size, as well as the pillar height, and the behavior of the pillar after retreat. This is related to the strength of the remaining pillar, which is related to the excavated method (drill-and-blast or mechanical). The objective of this paper is to study the behavior of low thickness, shallow coal seams and the behavior of the overburden rock mass where the mining method is room and pillar in retreat to partial pillar recovery. The excavation method at the study site is conventional drill and blast, which is common in smaller mines with lower production. Standard pillar size at the study mine is 7 m × 7 m. Partial pillar recovery is about 30% of the previous pillar volume. Roof displacement was monitored during retreat mining. Surface subsidence was also monitored. The effect of the blasting vibration on the final pillar strength is considered during this investigation. It is estimated that the pillar strength is reduced about 20% due to blasting.  The consequence of the higher rate of pillar retreat is more pillar deformation and roof displacement. The pillar retreat and ground movement were simulated in a three-dimensional numerical model. This model was created to predict the surface subsidence and compare to the subsidence measured. The total production of this mine is only about 9000 tons per month. For this reason, investment in modern equipment is difficult, and the time required for return on investment is prohibitively long. Recognizing the shortcomings in this approach, in 2013, the company began researching the application of retreat mining with conventional mining equipment. Retreat mining offers the benefits of increasing coal recovery, while increasing the quality of the ROM coal since only the coal seam is mined during the proposed retreat mining. In fact, since implementing the use of retreat mining at the mine, productivity increased by 1015%, and quality increased by 5%, on average. Several iterations of retreat mining practices were implemented during tests and the application of this method to the study mine. Initially, only one side of the pillars retreated with a slice of 2 m depth. In other words, prior to retreat mining the pillar dimensions were 7 m × 7 m; afterward, pillar dimensions were 7 m × 5 m. The final global recovery for the panel was about 65%. At panel CD (  Another consequence of the imprecise blasting techniques is that the area of the stump pillars is irregular (red colors on Another effect of blasting practices on pillar integrity stems from the fact that, during blasting, part of the shock wave remains in the pillar, reverberating internally against on the pillar ribs. The immediate consequence is a reduction in pillar strength; this kind of vibration tends to weaken the remaining pillar. When the face was at room T36, the pillars 5 to 6 rows behind the face started to squeeze with a high convergence rate, as illustrated in The squeeze occurred very quickly, and, afterwards, the convergence rate reduced and ultimately stabilized in two months ( There are many alternatives for monitoring and predict subsidence, since simple monument on the surface above the production section till radar and satellite control on surface movement Development pillar dimensions in the study panel were 7 m × 7 m ( In the study panel that is the focus of this paper, development pillars are 7 m × 7 m, and remnant pillars are 5 m × 5 m. One difference between the panel test conducted by Zingano et al., and the tests on panel CD is that the 5 m × 5 m pillars in panel CD were the result of two series of blasts on two sides of the pillars ( Using the same back-analysis approach employed by ARMPS, the strength of the pillar must be reduced for pillar failure to occur. Since the pillar size did change, the reduction in pillar strength must be due to a reduction in the strength of the coal. For a pillar to fail, it is assumed for this study that the SF must be a maximum of 0.8. In order to obtain SFs of 0.8 or less, the strength of the coal must be reduced to less than 5.0 MPa. That is 20% less than the initial coal seam strength estimated from the first back-analysis in 2015. It is reasonable then to assume that the blasting damage on the pillar was the main cause of pillar failure.  Maximum subsidence was observed right above the center area of the panel ( Based on the empirical method described by Peng the maximum subsidence should be 80% of the entry height (about 130 cm), if the roof and floor converge floor completely, which would be expected where there is complete removal of pillars during the retreat operation phase Once the convergence is 400 mm, the pillar height is also reduced to 900 mm (1300 mm minus 400 mm). Subsidence is estimated again, and the maximum subsidence is 32 cm, which is 12 cm greater than the value that was read from the surface survey. To build a numerical model to try to simulate the complete movement above the panel, all the overlying rock layers and the coal seam were considered. The object of the numerical model is to simulate the pillar squeeze and rock movement above the failed area of the panel. Plaxis 3D was used to simulate the failure, using the real, measured shape of the development and remnant pillars ( Two models were built to simulate the development and retreat processes using the pillar geometries that were measured in the field. It was not possible to model all retreat mining using real geometries. In those cases, a regular pillar geometry had to be substituted in some pillars rows.   In  The back analysis and numerical simulation follow the monitored subsidence and the pillar SF. The numerical model that was calibrated based on the field monitoring followed the same behavior of the remaining pillar observed in the mine. Therefore, it is possible to simulate different pillar geometries and retreat sequence. The blasting effect on the stump affects the pillar strength. This is because the shock wave from the blasting greatly damages the pillar. This means that the shock wave breaks the remaining pillar, and the consequence of this damage is a fast squeeze of the stump pillars. Since the blasting excavation is a unique possibility, and blasting causes a lot of damage on the stump pillar, it is necessary to study a new alternative for retreat operation and blasting plans. There are a lot of concern about mining subsidence. Guo et al. talked about the effect of the fracture zone on the aquafiers above the longwall panel