Surfactants have been used for many industrial processes such as flotation, enhanced oil recovery, soil remediation and cleansing. Flotation technology itself has been used in industry since the end of 19th century, and even today it is an important method for mineral processing and its application range is expanding to other areas. Thus it has been used in the treatment of wastewater, waste materials from industries, separation and recycling of municipal wastes and some unit processes of chemical engineering. The efficiency of all these operations depends primarily on the interactions among surfactants, solids and media. In addition, various chemical additives such as polymers and dispersants also introduce another dimension to the solution chemistry of the system. These interactions in turn determine the wettability and dispersion behavior of solids as well as stability of foams and emulsions in the system. The basic interfacial process in flotation is selective hydrophobization (or lepophilization) and hydrophilization of particulate matter. The role of the solution chemistry is very important in flotation as it is determined by the dissolution behavior of mineral particles in the aqueous solution (pulp) and subsequent dissociation, hydrolysis and precipitation of the soluble species; the dissolution, association, dispersion and emulsion behavior of various flotation reagents in the pulp and interactions among reagents with both soluble and surface species of minerals. The efficiency of flotation and separation of mineral particles and consumption of reagents are thus controlled by the solution chemistry of the pulp. As other processes such as oil displacement are also governed by such interactions and in turn by the wettability of the solid surface, the study of solution chemistry of surfactant/mineral/additive systems become very important for the development of many technologies. In this book, the fundamentals of solution chemistry of mineral/surfactant systems and important calculations involved are systematically introduced and the influence of relevant physico-chemical conditions are discussed. Importantly, because solution chemistry is closely related to the molecular structure of the flotation reagents, the characteristics of such structure is also discussed in detail. Professor Dianzuo Wang of Central-south University (Changsha, China) and Professor P. Somasundaran of Columbia University (New York City, U.S.) would like to acknowledge the help of many students and associates in the mineral processing and applied surface chemistry laboratories of the two universities: Professor Hu Yuehua (Changsha, China) who revised some chapters of this book, Dr. Liping Xiao who organized materials for some chapters, Dr. S. Kumar, Dr. A. Lou, Dr. Dong Qinghai, Dr. L. Zhang and Ms. Jing Wang who helped in sorting out and editing many versions of the book.