The use of ultrasound (US) has proven to be an effective tool in the preparation of emulsions. However, the cavitation phenomenon leads to an increase in temperature, which can affect the emulsion stability and the texture. Thus, different US operating modes (degas, normal, and sweep) were applied in meat emulsions for 5.5 min, at 25 kHz frequency and 60% amplitude, and the temperature behavior, yield, emulsion stability, texture, and lipid and protein oxidation were evaluated. The results showed that the wave propagation mode in the US bath exerts a great influence on the increase of temperature of meat emulsions. The distribution of cavitation in normal operating mode significantly favored (P < .001) a higher yield (88.7%) and emulsion stability, with good values of cohesiveness (0.76), hardness (26.9 N), and chewiness (26.1 N), not increasing lipid and protein oxidation. Therefore, this study has proven that that the use of normal US operating mode improved the technological quality of meat emulsions.Ultrasound (US) is considered an emerging technology that has been stood out for improving important biochemical and functional attributes of meat and meat products ( The use of the US at 20 kHz in soy protein isolate promoted structural protein modifications, leading to increased solubility and higher amount of sulfhydryl groups ( The US can affect the lipid oxidation as it can lead to the formation of free radicals and other reactive species, which react with the compounds present in foods ( All modifications promoted by the US are related to the sonochemical conditions employed (type of apparatus, operation mode, amplitude, intensity, time of exposure, frequency, among others), once they modify the temperature of the medium and can lead to positive or negative effects on food composition and quality ( Some US bath sets enable different operation modes, with different ways of distributing waves, including the normal operating mode, characterized by providing a frequency stabilization, and promoting a continuous flow and better wave distribution in the bath. The sweep operating mode that provides greater homogeneous wave distribution with a continuous displacement of the sound pressure levels, creating a uniform field that provides faster heating in the medium. Finally, the degas operating mode optimizes the efficiency of the US bath, once it accelerates the degassing process of the medium ( Thus, ascertaining the emulsion temperature becomes an important task, as it leads to large structural changes in proteins, which may influence the stability, yield, and texture of the emulsion. Infrared cameras allow accurate monitoring of temperature changes in real time, without being considered an invasive method, providing a detailed mapping of the medium ( Most of the studies on the application of US in foods have focused on their action against microorganisms ( The formulation of meat emulsions was as follows: pork ( The process was carried out in an ultrasonic bath (Elma Schmidbauer GmbH, TI-H-10 MF2, Singen, Germany) operating at a nominal power of 1000 W and acoustic power of 154 W ( The emulsion stability was determined in five replicates, according to the methodology of The emulsion yield was determined after cooking, in five replicates, according to the methodology described by The pH and the redox potential (Eh) were determined in triplicate by the potentiometric method (Digimed® - DM 23), according to the methodology of A FLIR® camera (FLIR E60, USA) was used to monitor the temperature during 5.5 min of application of different US operating modes. The camera was positioned 30 cm away from the ultrasonic bath and provided images with 320 × 240 pixels and frame rate of 30 Hz, which was interpreted with Research IR software (FLIR). In total, 60 superficial points were analyzed for each sonication time. The lipid oxidation was evaluated in triplicate by the thiobarbituric acid reactive species (TBARS) assay, according to The protein oxidation was evaluated in triplicate by the determination of the carbonyl groups, according to For the determination of carbonyls, 1 g of sample was mixed with 0.04 M phosphate buffer pH 6.9. After centrifugation, the pellets were dissolved in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and 2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was added. The absorbance of the samples was measured at 370 nm. A set of BSA standard dilutions was made to calculate the carbonyl groups, and the results were compared with the absorbance of the samples and expressed as nanomol of DNPH/mg protein. For the determination of thiol groups, 1 g of sample was homogenized with a hydroxymethyl aminomethane (TRIS) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solutions, heated at 80 °C/30 min, centrifuged at low temperature, and allowed to react with dithionitrobenzoic acid (DTNB). Absorbance readings were performed at 412 nm, and a set of cysteine standard dilutions was made, and the absorbances were compared with the absorbance of the samples and expressed as nanomol SH/mg protein. The texture profile analysis was performed according to The entire experiment was repeated six times on different days ( The different US operating modes provided a significant increase (P < .001) in emulsion yield when compared to the control (Tc: 84.8%). The emulsions sonicated in the normal operating mode (Tn: 88.7%) had the highest yield (P < .001) when compared to those subjected to the degas (Td) and sweep (Ts) operating modes, with values of 86.9% and 87.1%, respectively ( A lower fat and water release was observed in Tn, with values of 0.59% and 7.3%, respectively, with no significant differences from Td (0.66% and 8.9% respectively), while differences (P < .001) were observed from the treatments Ts (0.76% and 10.1%) and Tc (0.85% and 10.5%), as shown in The higher yield and emulsion stability were observed in Tn at pH 5.79 ( Before exposure to the US, the emulsions presented average temperatures around 2 °C (Tc: 2.48 °C; Td: 2.13 °C; Tn: 2.19 °C; and Ts: 2.16 °C). The use of different US operating modes significantly increased the temperature of the meat emulsions when compared to the non-sonicated emulsions (Tc). After 1 min of US application, the sonicated samples subjected to the sweep (Ts), normal (Tn), and degas (Td) operating modes exhibited a temperature rise of 3.89 °C, 3.23 °C, and 2.34 °C, respectively. In contrast, the treatment Tc, which only remained immersed in water at 10 °C without application of US, showed a temperature increase of 1.29 °C ( A significant decrease (P < .001) in Eh ( Cysteine and methionine are amino acids considered more susceptible to oxidative changes due to the susceptibility of sulfur (SH) groups to the attack of free radicals ( The presence of carbonyl compounds in the emulsion indicates a protein fragmentation or protein interactions, and the higher the carbonyl level, the greater the changes in protein structure, solubility, and physicochemical properties ( The different US operating modes (Td, Tn, and Ts) did not increase the lipid oxidation, once the TBARS values did not differ from the control ( The parameter cohesiveness characterizes the molecular forces that determine the extent to which the sample can be deformed prior to rupture. This parameter was higher in Tn (0.76), differing (P < .001) from Ts (0.71), Td (0.69), and Tc (0.65). This result affected hardness ( Gel formation is a thermodynamic process that occurs in several stages and involves the denaturation, aggregation, and formation of a three-dimensional network of the myofibrillar proteins ( This study demonstrated for the first time that the different US operating modes could exert significant impacts on the quality of meat emulsions. The different modes can modify the protein structure favoring the protein-protein interactions, and protein-water and protein-lipid interactions, thus improving the technological quality of the emulsions. Among the three US operating modes evaluated, the normal mode was the most effective for improving the technological quality of the meat emulsions. Moreover, it did not provide an increase in lipidic and protein oxidation, probably due to the lower increase in temperature when compared to both sweep and degas operating modes. Thus, the use of the normal US mode at 25 kHz and 60% amplitude can be considered a promising strategy to improve the quality of meat emulsions. In addition, these results could serve as a basis for further studies about the application of US as a strategy to reduce chemical additives in meat emulsions. This study was financed in part by the