Introduction
                  Fall-related occupational injuries and fatalities are serious problems in the U.S. construction industry, especially incidents related to unguarded holes. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Division of Safety Research, Morgantown, WV conducted a project to evaluate the effectiveness of guardrail systems to prevent falls through roof and floor holes.
               
                  Methods
                  Two commercial edge-protection products were evaluated when used as perimeter guarding around a roof hole. Installations of the commercial products were compared to job-built guardrails constructed of 2″
                     ×4″ construction-grade lumber. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations require that “a force of at least 200pounds” must be supported by the top rail of a guardrail system “in any outward or downward direction at any point along the top edge.” A laboratory testing system was developed to evaluate this requirement. A dynamic 200-lb force was generated against the top rail using a weighted manikin mounted on a hinged steel frame. Nine construction workers, who served as test subjects, each built five different guardrail configurations.
               
                  Results
                  All 45 configurations met the 200-lb OSHA requirement. Installation time for one commercial product was 32% quicker than the job-built configuration (25.6min vs. 37.9min).
               
                  Impact on Industry
                  This study: (a) indicates that the two edge-protection products can be used as perimeter guarding; (b) highlights the importance of using proper materials and fasteners to construct guardrails to protect workers from falling into unguarded roof and floor holes; and (c) discusses an overall-strength-testing methodology that can be used by fall-protection researchers.Occupational injuries and fatalities caused by falls-from-elevation are serious problems in U.S. workplaces. Previous research ( A previous analysis of CFOI data indicated that a total of 432 deaths occurred when workers fell through roof holes, floor holes, and skylights during the nine-year period of 1992-2000 (yearly average of 48 deaths; Thousands of serious non-fatal injuries also result from fall-through events. Serious injuries are defined by BLS as those that cause a worker to miss at least one day away from work (DAFW) beyond the day the incident occurred. The previous analysis of injuries used the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses (the Annual Survey from each year) for 1992-2000 ( Despite this small percentage, fall-through injuries are among the most severe cases when ranked by median number of DAFW. The previous analysis indicated that for the period 1992-2000, the median number of DAFW was 35, 11, and 36 for injuries caused by falls through roof holes, floor holes, and skylights, respectively, compared to 10 DAFW for all types of fall-to-lower-level cases in U.S. industries during the same period ( An analysis of all BLS Annual Surveys for the nine-year period 1992-2000 indicated that the median number (50 Similarly, across the nine-year period 1992-2000, analysis of the BLS Annual Surveys indicated that the median number of days-away-from-work for falls through skylights was 36. During those nine years, there were individual median values as high as 70 (1994) and 72 (2000) ( A similar analysis of the BLS Annual Surveys has been conducted for the five-year period 2003-2007. For incidents involving workers falling through roof holes, the worst two years were 2003 (51 median days missed) and 2006 when the median value of days-away-from-work for the estimated 200 incidents that occurred that year was 147. Thus, half of the fall-through-roof-hole incidents in 2006 caused the injured worker to be away from work for periods of time that exceeded 147 “The estimated direct U.S. workers For 2006, the fall-to-lower-level category is the third most costly (after overexertion and falls-on-same-level) with an estimate of $5.3 If a fall-through incident does occur, the excessive cost associated with these potential tragedies ($71,000 per disabling fall-through incident) could be economically disastrous to small- or medium-sized construction companies. The potential for a fall-through incident to occur is present on every job site and should be eliminated. The use of covers and guardrail systems are well established as effective measures to protect workers from falling through roof and floor holes. Guardrail systems, both commercially available and job-built configurations, can be used to provide protection for unguarded openings. Good safety practice specifies that falls should be prevented as the primary measure to protect workers, instead of trying to protect the worker after a fall has occurred. The primary means of preventing falls is to use covers or guardrails to prevent workers from falling into the holes. The current study was focused on evaluating the use of guardrail systems to prevent workers from falling into large holes. Before discussing the guardrail study, a short discussion related to “Covers” is provided for completeness. If a cover is used, the material: (a) has to have sufficient strength, (b) has to be properly secured, and (c) has to be “marked with the word ‘HOLE’ or ‘COVER’ to provide warning of the hazard,” as specified in OSHA regulation 29 CFR 1926.502(i)(4) ( Current regulations for the construction industry are contained in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 29 (Labor), Part 1926 (Construction). Specifically, Subpart M, which includes Sections 1926.500 through 1926.503 and Appendices A through E, lists the requirements that are related to workplace falls. Section 1926.501 discusses the requirements for fall protection. Subsection 1926.501(b)(4)(i) states that “Each employee on walking/working surfaces shall be protected from falling through holes (including skylights) more than 6 A research project conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Division of Safety Research, Morgantown, West Virginia evaluated the effectiveness of two commercial fall-prevention guardrail systems, which were designed for edge use only, when they were installed as perimeter guardrails around a hole in a simulated roof work site. This study evaluated the two commercial systems and a typical “job-built” guardrail to compare: (a) the effectiveness of meeting the OSHA 200-lb requirement; (b) installation times; (c) overall strength; and (d) total amount of lumber used for each of the three systems. To evaluate how well the commercial products complied with existing OSHA regulations for guardrails, a test methodology and a laboratory test system were developed. A convenience sample of nine subjects (all construction workers) was recruited from the local Morgantown, WV area for this study. The minimum requirements for being included in the study were that subjects had to have at least two years of experience of working at elevation on residential roof work sites, and that they had to have been working full-time for a company engaged in roof construction, or self-employed full-time doing roof construction. The average age of the subjects was 29.6 In lieu of using an actual roof construction site, a simulated roof work site was designed and fabricated as the test fixture. The overall dimensions of the fixture were 8 The task of each of the nine subjects who participated in the study was to construct different guardrail systems around the holes in the simulated roof structure. Each guardrail system was subjected to two independent test methodologies: first, for OSHA compliance and second, for ultimate strength. Many different edge protection systems are commercially available; only two were included in this study – Guardrail 2000 and Safety Boot, shown in Over three days of testing, each construction worker built five guardrail systems: three were on a flat roof (Job-Built, Guardrail 2000, and Safety Boot) and two were on the sloped roof (Job-Built and Guardrail 2000). The Job-Built configurations were built with construction-grade lumber, which is white pine that has been kiln-fried to minimize warping, has minimal knots in it, and has no obvious defects in the boards. The Safety Boot is designed to be used on flat surfaces only and could not be tested on the sloped roof surface. The order of construction was randomly presented to each subject to minimize learning bias. During the planning and development of the test methodology, the type of fastener that was to be used during the testing was discussed. Common fastening methods during actual roofing construction include: (a) pneumatic nail gun with standard 16-penny (16-d) nails, which are 3½-inches in length; (b) hammer with standard 16-d nails; and (c) hammer with 16-d duplex (double-headed) nails, which are used for construction purposes that are temporary and will eventually be disassembled. Normally, standard 16-d nails would be used to fasten together the cross members (top rails, midrails, and toe boards) and to anchor the vertical posts to the test fixture during the construction of the Job-Built guardrail systems. All nine subjects stated that they use this nail size during typical framing operations and that this was the appropriate size of fastener to use for this testing. However, for this testing, 16-d duplex nails were used because all of the configurations constructed by a subject had to be disassembled before the next subject could be tested. Due to the extra nail head, which is used for removing the nail, the effective nail length was only 2⅞ to 3 Both the Job-Built and the Guardrail 2000 were anchored to the test fixture with the shorter 16-d duplex nails. The Guardrail 2000 did provide locations in the design of the aluminum upright to permit the use of two 2-inch (8-d) nails to fasten the top rail and midrail to the upright. The other commercial product, the Safety Boot, was anchored to the test fixture with three or four (depending on the configuration) 3/8″ At the completion of the planned testing with the nine subjects using nails to construct the guardrails, an additional research effort was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of 3″ all-purpose screws. For this portion of the testing, three of the previous subjects were selected based on consistency and availability to return and rebuild the Job-Built Flat and the Guardrail 2000 Flat configurations, using coarse thread, all-purpose 3″ screws as a comparison to the nails. This type of screw is commonly used during residential construction and the workers verified that they use them on a regular basis. It would have been desirable to use all nine subjects in this evaluation, but laboratory availability and limited funds restricted this to only three subjects. To evaluate whether the guardrail system complied with OSHA regulation 29 CFR 1926.502(b)(3) with a real-world feel, a testing procedure and a test apparatus were developed. (Note: the OSHA standard does not specifically state whether the 200-lb load is a dynamic or static load.) However, the design goal of this study was to simulate the fall of a worker, weighing 200 To create the required load of greater than or equal to 200 Three calibration drops were required for each new guardrail configuration by using the force transducer to provide the force readout. The drop distance of the manikin was adjusted so the manikin would stop within 1 The range of forces generated was from 200 to 381 The ultimate strength of each of the 45 constructed configurations was evaluated by performing a pull-to-failure (PTF) test. The design philosophy for this test, which was devised by the research team, was to evaluate the ultimate strengths of each guardrail configuration built. The PTF test was performed on a guardrail system after the OSHA 200-lb drop test was completed. The top rail was pulled in the same direction in which the manikin fell during the drop tests ( The design of the two test methods and related apparatus was described previously ( The PTF forces for Statistical Analysis System ( For each dependent variable, a SAS mixed procedure was used to evaluate the effect of each guardrail system. Several models were first evaluated to find the appropriate covariance structure of observations for each participant. These covariance structures included compound-symmetry, unstructured, and autoregressive. A model that provided the best fit based on Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC), AICC (a modified criterion from AIC for use in small samples), and Schwarz's Bayesian Criterion (BIC) was selected for the final analysis. For multiple comparisons, the Bonferroni adjustment was used to determine significant differences among the different experimental conditions. Due to the small number (n The OSHA drop test evaluated the ability of each guardrail system to withstand the applied load, which was 200 Test results showed a significant effect on the guardrail type for the PTF test (F A contrasting comparison between Guardrail 2000 and Job-Built showed that Guardrail 2000 Flat had a significantly higher mean force than Job-Built Flat (mean force 567.7 Multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni adjustment (bottom of Guardrail type also had a significant effect on installation time (F Multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni adjustment (bottom of The total amount of lumber used depended on the specific design of the system. A significant effect from guardrail type on the total materials was measured (F Multiple comparisons with Bonferroni adjustment (bottom of The Job-Built Flat and the Guardrail 2000 Flat configurations were rebuilt using coarse thread, all-purpose 3″ screws as a comparison to the 16-d duplex nails. Since the selection of the workers to repeat the experiments using screws was based on availability, it was important to examine whether the test results for the group of three were different from the larger group of six that did not rebuild the guardrails. The Wilcoxon two-sample test showed no significant differences with respect to PTF test (p Since there was no significant difference between the selected smaller group of three and the larger group of six, this indicated that the small group was representative of the abilities of the larger group and these three workers were not significantly better or worse than the others who were not tested. Results from using screws versus nails on the PTF measurements and the installation times were compared. Because the three workers constructed two configurations using both screw fasteners and nails, the statistical analysis (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, Good safety practice requires that when guardrail systems are constructed, new 2 Job-built guardrails, as evaluated with the described OSHA 200-lb drop test, can be safely constructed using construction-grade 2 Because a small opening (2 Even though only three test subjects were used to reconstruct the two configurations (Job-Built Flat and Guardrail 2000 Flat) using 3-inch coarse thread all-purpose screws, the data from all six configurations indicated that using the screws resulted in, on average, significantly stronger configurations that were built slightly quicker than the same guardrail system using duplex 16-d nails. The three test subjects that conducted these extra tests indicated that using nails was more typical, but that they often used screws on the job and felt that this was a fair test. An additional point to consider is that there are higher quality screw fasteners that are made of high-strength steel and have a self-drilling capability. These particular fasteners have been subjected to independent laboratory tests to determine their strength characteristics when installed in different materials. The use of this type of fastener could result in a stronger guardrail system that can be installed quicker than the typical all-purpose screw fasteners. Additional laboratory testing using these more sophisticated fasteners is planned for the future. Generally, it is more conservative to apply the Bonferroni method for adjusting p-values if one is interested in making all pairwise comparisons. The Bonferroni method allows the comparisons of a limited set of interest, which is less restricted than the Tukey method that only compares every pair of means. In this study, the size of the critical values was calculated under a number of different tests, thus choosing the test with the smallest critical value. However, multiple comparisons using the Tukey method for adjusting p-values were also tested and the results were consistent with our findings. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: (a): The results of this test program indicated that job-built guardrail protection (made of 2 The authors would like to acknowledge Mr. Doug Cantis, Physical Science Technician, Division of Safety Research, NIOSH whose help during the planning of the testing, the construction of the test fixture, and assistance during data collection was extremely valuable and sincerely appreciated.