The synthesis of cationic flocculants by inverse microemulsion copolymerization of acrylamide and [2-(acryloyloxy)ethyl]-trimethylammonium chloride in continuous reactors (single CSTR and two CSTRs in series) was investigated. It was found that the particular microstructure of the polymers strongly depended on the process. The polymer synthesized in two CSTRs in series presented the best performance as flocculant because it contained both short (polymer produced in the second reactor) and branched long (polymer produced in the first reactor) polymer chains.Polyelectrolytes are currently used as flocculating agents in solid–liquid separation processes where suspended colloidal particles are difficult to sediment. Applications include water treatment, mineral processing and paper making In order to obtain the high molecular weight polymer required for an efficient flocculation, the synthesis of the polymeric flocculant is usually performed in either inverse emulsion or inverse microemulsion polymerization In practice, inverse microemulsion polymerization is mainly carried out in jacketed stirred tank reactors working in semibatch mode. The flexibility of the process to produce different products in the same reactor, the ability to fine-tune the product properties and the relative easiness to control the heat generated are the reasons for the success of the semibatch process. However, in large stirred tank reactors in which the heat removal capacity is limited, the process time required to control the reactor temperature is very long. This long process time together with the time spent in cleaning, filling, heating, cooling and discharging the semicontinuous reactor strongly reduces the productivity. The current scenario of strong competition and margin reductions is pushing polymer producers to achieve an efficient production of high quality materials in a safe and consistent way In this work, the synthesis of cationic flocculants by inverse microemulsion copolymerization of acrylamide (Am) and [2-(acryloyloxy)ethyl]-trimethylammonium chloride (Adamquat) in continuous stirred tank reactors was investigated. The effect of the reactor type (semibatch, one CSTR and two CSTRs in series) on the polymer microstructure was discussed and related with the flocculating efficiency of the products obtained in the different operation modes. Technical monomers, acrylamide (Am, 50 The polymerizable inverse microemulsion was prepared by mixing under agitation the aqueous and the oil phases previously prepared. The aqueous phase contained the monomers, deionized water and EDTA, and was adjusted to a pH 4 to avoid hydrolysis of acrylamide. The oil phase contained Isopar M and the surfactant system. The whole microemulsion included 31.8 One CSTR and two CSTRs in series were used as continuous reactors. For the sake of comparison of the product performance, a reaction with the same formulation was carried out in a semicontinuous reactor. It was found that the oxygen dissolved in the microemulsion, which was fed into the reaction medium, made the process highly irreproducible. On the other hand, when the oxygen contained in the microemulsion was removed achieving very low oxygen concentrations, the microemulsion polymerized in the feeding tank. In order to improve the reproducibility of the process, a control system based on the alternative purging with air and nitrogen (depending on the value measured by an oxygen sensor, Hach Lange), was implemented in the microemulsion feeding tank. This allowed controlling the concentration of oxygen in the microemulsion between 0.2 and 0.05 The experimental set-up includes a 0.6 Continuous microemulsion polymerizations were carried out in one and two 0.3 Four reactions were carried out in the single CSTR, three of them for different temperatures (35, 55 and 70 Three reactions have been carried out in the train of two CSTRs in series at 35 Monomer conversion and copolymer composition were calculated by of a mass balance using the free monomer content of the samples determined by HPLC (HP 1100). Particle size was determined by dynamic light scattering of samples diluted in an surfactant saturated organic phase (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZT). In the polymerization of acrylates, the determination of long chain branching by The efficiency of the copolymers as flocculants was assessed in a Turbiscan Lab   The evolution of the viscosity is presented in The product obtained was a stable dispersion of polymer particles (polymer dissolved in water) in Isopar M. The final particle diameter obtained in the semicontinuous process was of 163 Four reactions changing the reaction temperature (35, 55 and 70 The same trends were observed for the rest of the reactions made in a single CSTR.  Particle diameter (dp) was not affected by the polymerization conditions nor by the polymerization process (the particle diameter in the semicontinuous operation was 163 The viscosity ( Comparison of the viscosity (molecular weight) of the aqueous solution of the polymer produced at 35 The initiator fed in each reactor was varied in the reactions carried out in the train of two CSTRs in series at 35 The results of the reactions carried out in the train of two CSTRs in series are summarized in A small effect of the initiator feed rate on the particle diameter was found. For all the reactions carried out in this work only slight changes in particle diameter were observed, indicating that particle size was mainly determined by the surfactant concentration in the microemulsion formulation. The effect of the initiator feed rate on the molecular weight was the result of the interplay between chain transfer to polymer and the termination events controlling the kinetic chain length. In the first reactor, an increase of the initiator concentration led to an increase of the monomer conversion, which in turn favored the increase of the molecular weight because of the higher chain transfer to polymer. However, the increase of the initiator concentration accelerated the termination reactions leading to a shorter kinetic length. These counteracting effects explain the relatively high viscosity obtained in the first reactor in run 2CSTR-3 as compared to those obtained in runs 2CSTR1 and 2CSTR2. The final product was the result of the polymer formed in the first reactor and at least partially modified in the second reactor through chain transfer to polymer reactions and the polymer formed in the second reactor, which represented the smaller fraction, and that was richer in acrylamide and had a different molecular weight. The differences in molecular weight resulted from the differences in the kinetic chain length (caused by the overall monomer concentration, the comonomer ratio The differences in molecular weight and branching of the polymers synthesized by different processes affect their performance as flocculants. The flocculation efficiency was characterized by three parameters, the settling rate, the clarity of the supernatant and the sediment compactness. The flocculation experiments were carried out using an aqueous dispersion of silica (210  Flocculation involves charge neutralization and particle bridging. Short and mobile polyelectrolyte chains would likely be more efficient in charge neutralization, whereas long and branched chains would enhance particle bridging flocculation and faster sedimentation. The results in The flocculant CSTR–CTA showed the opposite behavior. Because of its low molecular weight, it was able to efficiently neutralize the charges on the silica particles causing their sedimentation and yielding a clear upper phase. However, its efficiency for particle bridging was low, and hence only small flocs that sedimented slowly were formed.  The synthesis of cationic flocculants by inverse microemulsion copolymerization of acrylamide and [2-(acryloyloxy)ethyl]-trimethylammonium chloride in continuous reactors (single CSTR and two CSTRs in series) was investigated. Continuous reactors represent a way of improving the efficiency of the traditional semicontinuous processes. The process proceeded smoothly provided that the oxygen content of the feed was controlled. The microstructure of the polymer was strongly affected by the occurrence of chain transfer to polymer, which led to the formation of a branched polymer. The level of branching depends on both the polymer concentration and the time that the polymer remains in the reactor in the presence of radicals. Therefore, the microstructure of the polymer strongly depended on the process. Thus, the molecular weight and, presumably, the level of branches of the polymer produced in a single CSTR was lower than those of the polymer produced in the traditional semicontinuous process, because the time spent by the polymer in the CSTR was shorter than that in the semicontinuous reactor. In addition, the polymer produced in two CSTRs in series consisted of a blend of two different polymers: a branched high molecular weight polymer formed in the first reactor and a polymer of lower molecular weight formed in the second reactor. The performance of the polymers as flocculants for a silica dispersion was studied finding that the microstructure of the polymer critically affected its efficiency. Low molecular weight polymers (as those obtained using a chain transfer agent) were very efficient in neutralizing the charges of the silica, but formed small flocs, which sedimented slowly. Branched high molecular weight polymers (e.g., those produced in the semicontinuous process) were very efficient in forming large flocs through particle bridging that sediment fast, but they were not efficient neutralizing the charges of the silica particles. Therefore, many silica particles remained dispersed in the upper phase. The polymer synthesized in two CSTRs in series presented the best performance as flocculant because it contained both, short (polymer produced in the second reactor) and branched long (polymer produced in the first reactor) polymer chains. The financial support provided by