Controlled martensitic reversion annealing was applied to a heavily cold-worked metastable austenitic low-Ni Cr–Mn austenitic stainless steel (Type 201) to obtain different ultrafine austenite grain sizes to enhance the mechanical properties, which were then compared with the conventional coarse-grained steel. Characterization of the deformed and reversion annealed microstructures was performed by electron back scattered diffraction (EBSD), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and light and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The steel with a reverted grain size ~1.5μm due to annealing at 800°C for 10s showed significant improvements in the mechanical properties with yield stress ~800MPa and tensile strength ~1100MPa, while the corresponding properties of its coarse grained counterpart were ~450MPa and ~900MPa, respectively. However, the fracture elongation of the reversion annealed steel was ~50% as compared to ~70% in the coarse grained steel. A further advantage is that the anisotropy of mechanical properties present in work-hardened steels also disappears during reversion annealing.The presence of expensive Ni in steel as an alloying element significantly raises the overall cost of the steel grade. Based on metallurgical concepts, the alloying of Mn, Cu, C and N can be used in lieu of Ni to stabilize the austenitic structure with an acceptable compromise between the production cost and the properties of the steel. Furthermore, nitrogen has a strong, generally beneficial effect on strain hardening behaviour and mechanical properties of these steels. Several austenitic stainless steel grades based on the system Fe–Cr–Mn–N (series 2xx) with low or without Ni content have been developed as an alternative to the expensive austenitic Cr–Ni series 3xx and finding widespread applications in automotive industry, kitchen utilities and even for cryogenic applications at very low temperatures Furthermore, the minimum targeted YS for an anti-intrusion and industry application should be 600–700 The disadvantage of strengthening by cold rolling is the introduction of anisotropy in mechanical properties and the strength being different in tension and compression, as well as in different directions relative to the longitudinal direction We previously Finally, the influence of the reversion annealed grain structures of nano/ultrafine size on the mechanical properties is determined related to the deformation mechanism. The experimental materials were sheets of Type 201 (EN 1.4372) low-Ni Cr–Mn austenitic stainless steel, supplied by Outokumpu Stainless Oy, Tornio Works (Tornio, Finland), with the nominal chemical composition shown in For the reversion treatment, the steel sheets were cold rolled in a laboratory rolling mill to 60% reduction and subsequently annealed on a Gleeble 1500 thermomechanical simulator. In the controlled reversion annealing treatment, the specimens were heated to the reversion temperature between 700 and 1000 The mechanical properties were measured by uniaxial tensile tests at a constant strain rate 5×10 Tensile samples used for annealing treatment were cut from the cold rolled sheets in the rolling direction. Microstructures were studied by an optical microscope and a field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM Carl Zeiss Ultra plus) with an electron back scatter diffraction (EBSD) unit. An acceleration voltage of 20 The structural features after interrupted tensile strains were also examined in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) operated at 120 X-ray diffraction (XRD) data acquisition was carried out using Cu Kα radiation in a powder diffractometer (Siemens-D500) equipped with a secondary beam monochromator. The step scan mode, with a preset holding time of 5–10 A Ferritescope (Helmut Fisher FMP 30) instrument was also used to measure the fraction of the ferromagnetic α′-martensite phase. The readings obtained by the Ferritescope instrument were multiplied by a correction factor 1.7 for α′-martensite fractions After 60% cold rolling reduction, the martensite content measured by a Ferritescope was 30%. Hence, the cold-rolled microstructure comprises a major amount of deformed austenite with significant strain-induced α′-martensite. During reversion annealing even at low temperatures of 700–900 It is well established that with increasing the cold rolling deformation beyond 50  The results of the uniaxial tensile tests in the range of –80 XRD patterns of the coarse grained 201 steel after tensile straining in the temperature range –80 The tensile properties for the reversion annealed Type 201 steel are shown as a function of annealing temperature and duration in It is noteworthy that besides grain refinement, the TRIP and TWIP effects also significantly contribute to the tensile strength and ductility of the steel through the formation of strain-induced α′-martensite and mechanical twinning during tensile straining, respectively. The stability of austenite is dependent on its grain size and the stability increases with decreasing the grain size down to a few micrometers The activated deformation mechanisms during tensile straining have been examined using a TEM after straining to certain strains. It is generally accepted that Type 201 has a very low SFE and that, in such steel, numerous stacking faults are created due to the movement of Microscopic shear bands are seen after tensile straining to 2% engineering strain, The TEM microstructures of the tensile strained 201 steel after reversion annealed at 1000 The target strength–ductility range (the brown band) set by the European Commission for automotive steels is shown in The most relevant results of the present work concerning the deformation processes and the mechanical properties of the reversion annealed 201 steel can be briefly summarized as follows: (1) Reversion annealing of a heavily cold-rolled metastable 201 austenitic stainless steel is an efficient way to refine the austenite grain size to the order of a micrometer. The grain refinement significantly improves its mechanical properties as the yield and tensile strengths are remarkably improved (the yield stress is readily doubled), with marginal drop of the elongation, which makes them superior to the conventional annealed or work-hardened stainless steel. In addition, the anisotropy in the mechanical properties disappears. (2) Formation of the strain-induced martensite (TRIP) effect is more pronounced in the coarse grained structure. However, the nano/submicron austenite grains structure reveals superior mechanical properties with a small amount of strain-induced martensitic transformation. The financial support from the