Critical to the recovery of high value fibres from any recycling processes is the preparation of waste material for input to the processes. Higher fibre lengths have greater intrinsic value further down the carbon fibre lifecycle due to their ability to achieve higher mechanical properties in moulded parts. The fluidised bed process under investigation is more effective at processing shorter fibre lengths and thus, ideally, a narrow range of intermediate length fibres is desired from any comminution process. The granulating process is investigated here for the comminution of fibres from scrap prepreg. Various granulator screens are investigated for three woven and three non-crimp prepreg forms. The resulting material is sieved to provide an indication of mass fraction at various fibre lengths. Fibre: resin mass fractions are given at the various sieved sizes and an optical method is presented for analysis of the true size of the prepreg pieces. Results show that the materials tested behave in a predictable manner and fibre lengths are within the range sought for the recovery process. Optical analysis shows that the sieving measures the minor axis dimension of the pieces and thus with knowledge of the mean aspect ratio the sieving process can be calibrated to provide a rapid and accurate assessment of particle size.A recovery process for composite materials has been developed based upon a fluidised bed process Currently, whilst it is possible to envisage a recovery process where continuous (or practically so) fibres are removed intact from composites and subsequently recovered, it is hard to imagine how these fibres will be utilised in mass production processes in this form. Evidently the fibre length will have to be reduced and hence there is an option to reduce prior to or following fibre recovery. For this work we have investigated length reduction prior to recycling as the more promising of the two choices. The fundamental reason for this choice is the fact that all materials can be treated similarly whether end of life parts or scrap prepreg. This work focuses on the comminution processes available and aims to determine the correct procedure for the extraction of consistent high fibre lengths at high efficiency. The granulation processes is a widely used comminution process, which can achieve high material throughput with modest energy input. However, the material produced is often of widely variable size, whereas the target for this work is to achieve material with a narrow spread of fibre lengths at a length between 1 and 10 The granulating process is particularly suitable for end of life (EOL) parts because it is tolerant of the shape and size of the input parts. However prepreg scrap currently constitutes a significant volume of waste material. Prepreg scrap can be found as end-of-shelf-life rolls, in-process scrap (which in some processes can be 40% of the material used) or partially cured rolls which have not been cold stored. Use of scrap prepreg has numerous advantages; the material is traceable with respect to fibre type, the material is clean, planar and relatively storage space efficient. It can be seen that in high enough volumes and with the correct infrastructure in place, prepreg process scrap could justify a bespoke comminution processes. This work focuses on the granulating process; predominantly for scrap prepreg, although much of the data is also valid for EOL parts. Six types of prepreg have been granulated to represent a wide range of possible input materials. Three of the prepregs are woven; two lightweight materials with different unit cell sizes and one heavy material, and three of the prepregs are non-crimp; a unidirectional (UD), ±45° and a ±45/0° tri-axial. Granulator speed was held constant so there was only one variable for granulator performance which was screen size, five granulator screen sizes were used and all materials were tested at all screen sizes. Any comminution process requires some form of assessment to determine the true resulting fibre lengths. Sieving is a rapid characterisation process widely used to determine mass fractions at various particle sizes of a wide range of materials. The disadvantage of the method for high aspect ratio particles is that is does not provide a measure of true particle size. Due to its ease of use however, it does provide rapid comparative measurements. An optical method has been developed in order to characterise the actual fibre lengths and the results compared to both wet and dry sieving. Use of the optical method allows “calibration” of the sieving, such that sieving can return more accurate data on the true particle size distribution. Comminution processes are typically classified by method as follows: compression (jaw crushers, roll mills, gyratory crushers), impact (hammer mills, impactors, pin mills, turbo mills), attrition (ball mills) or cutting (shredders, knife mills, guillotine mills). The boundaries between these methods are often indistinct. The suitability of a particular process is related to the nature of the material (see for example A variety of methods are in use for the recovery of fibres Fibre length is commonly understood to be an important factor in determining composite material properties, full utilisation of the fibre properties only occurring beyond a critical length, at the transition from fibre pull-out to fibre breakage In the current context fibre length has an additional influence in that the throughput of the recovery process is highly dependant upon the length of the incoming fibres. Fragment size following comminution is required to be between 1 Image analysis has the advantage that it overcomes the issue of aspect ratio and resolves fragment size with a high level of accuracy. The most common method is 2D analysis but 3D methods have also been used (e.g. Six prepreg materials were supplied by the Advanced Composites Group with specifications as shown in A Zerma GSL180/300 slow speed granulator has been employed in this work. The machine has three sets of 10 knives arranged in a v-pattern on a rotor diameter of 180 Granulated materials were sieved using an Endecotts Octagon 2000 shaker with 200 Optical characterisation was performed by spreading samples obtained from the sieving process on a flatbed scanner and scanning at 300 Two of the six prepregs were selected for optical analysis to allow calibration of the sieving process and therefore to determine true particle size distributions contained within a given sieve size. It became clear from this work that the materials fell into two categories; the unidirectional was particularly poorly characterised by the sieving due to the high aspect ratio of the pieces whereas the remaining materials were broadly similar. For this reason UD and HW were selected for further analysis; the UD as it is unusual and the HW as it is indicative of the performance of the other materials and is a commonly found prepreg fibre architecture. The retained samples from the sieving analysis were analysed according to the method outlined above. Where samples were too large to analyse the entire mass, a representative sample was taken. Typically, the contents of the 11.2,8,4 and 2 The data of interest in the output from the image analysis software was minor axis length, major axis length, elongation (aspect ratio of segment) and area. These were converted from pixels to mm using the image scale (300 dots per inch). Mean fibre length (area weighted) was calculated as follows:  Particle size distributions are often described by a Weibull distribution (most notably by Rosin and Rammler An assumption implicit in the data reduction employed at this stage is that the major axis length of the segment is equal to the fibre length. In the case of unidirectional materials the assumption is valid but it may not hold for other materials. Whilst the mean fibre length can be calculated for each sieve sample, it is most useful to use the sieve data presented above to weight the sample area according to the proportion of the total contained in a given sieve. For instance A frequency analysis of the major axis length data has also been conducted and normalised. Mean fibre lengths are shown in As the aspect ratio is constant for the UD material it is trivial to change the The results presented above are easier to interpret when optimal targets are defined on the basis of value. Dust fraction is one measure of process suitability as dust has little value. In The fibre length range of interest was given as 1–10 One of the primary aims of this work was to establish the efficacy of granulation for prepreg comminution as preparation for fibre recovery. Significant dust production was noticed and heat build-up proved to be an issue. More that 30 A number of observations were also made during the sieving process. Errors were introduced by clumping of the material into balls which would not pass through the mesh. The level of this inaccuracy is unknown but typically only occurred in the smaller mesh sizes (<4 The optical analysis undertaken has given additional insight into the sieving results and shown that whilst most materials can be considered approximately similar in their response, unidirectional types require special treatment. The results show that for fibres under 10 It is not clear from this work how the results for prepreg can be applied to end of life parts as material thickness does appear to be a factor in determining behaviour (compare, for instance, the results obtained for heavy and light woven materials). The main influences are thought to be structure (i.e. woven or non-crimp) and fibre: matrix interface properties. Therefore the method of cure (freestanding or under pressure) may also have an effect as the materials tested were all cured freestanding and were noticeably more brittle than consolidated materials. If only prepreg rather than end of life parts was of interest a guillotine or die-cutting process may be more applicable, as fibre lengths will be constant. However, it is not clear what the throughput of this process would be, whereas granulating is an established, scalable process. Furthermore, the practical use of the granulating process is highly dependant upon cost, which, in turn is dependant on an efficient infrastructure for the collection of materials. The work presented in this Paper was completed as part of the High Value Composite Materials from Recycled Carbon Fibre programme. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the industrial partners: Ford Motor Company, Advanced Composites Group, Technical Fibre Products and Toho Tenax Europe GmbH. The assistance of H.D. Mort in completing this work is also acknowledged. The Project is co-funded by the Technology Strategy Board’s Collaborative Research and Development programme, following an open competition. The Technology Strategy Board is an executive body established by the Government to drive innovation. It promotes and invests in research, development and the exploitation of science, technology and new ideas for the benefit of business – increasing sustainable economic growth in the UK and improving quality of life.