Dried milled biomass samples are frequently utilised in small-scale batch digestion tests. However, herbage chemical composition can be altered by thermal drying, and this may affect specific methane (CH4) yields. Thus, the specific CH4 yield of herbage pre- and post-ensiling, prepared by two preparation methods were compared. Perennial ryegrass samples were either non-thermally dried (i.e. subject to cryogenic conditions, −196°C) or thermally dried (40°C), prior to milling. Specific CH4 yield was subsequently determined in a small-scale batch digestion test. Herbage pre-ensiling yielded 204 and 243LCH4
                     kg−1
                     VSadded and herbage post-ensiling yielded 212 and 188LCH4
                     kg−1
                     VSadded with non-thermal dried and thermal dried sample preparation methods, respectively. Due to opposing effects of thermal drying on CH4 yields of herbage either pre- or post-ensiling, it is not recommended to use thermal drying. Instead, it is recommended that non-thermal dried herbage samples are used in small-scale batch digestion tests.Grass is considered an important source of biomass for anaerobic digestion (AD) in the temperate climates of north-western Europe ( The aim of thermal drying herbage is to stop plant or microbial metabolism by a rapid removal of moisture from the feedstock ( Estimates of biogas and CH Due to the small size of the vessel in some batch digestion assays, this can involve using thermal dried milled samples to facilitate obtaining a sufficiently small representative sample ( It was hypothesised that thermal drying at 40 Three herbages and three corresponding silages from among those reported by Perennial ryegrass ( Herbage 1 (HI) was managed to promote an extensive lactic acid dominant silage fermentation. Thus, HI was managed to have high water soluble carbohydrate (WSC) content and was ensiled without wilting. This was to promote herbage post-ensiling with high lactic acid concentration and low pH. Herbage 2 (HII) was managed to promote an extensive clostridial silage fermentation. Thus, HII was managed to have a low WSC content, was inoculated with a source of clostridial spores and was ensiled without wilting. This was to promote herbage post-ensiling with high pH and butyric acid concentration, and low lactic acid concentration. Herbage 3 (HIII) was managed to promote a restricted silage fermentation with moderate clostridial activity. Thus, HIII was field-wilted for 24 Herbages were mown to a 5 For the thermal dried preparation method, sub-samples were thawed, dried in an oven with forced air circulation at 40 Samples pre- and post-ensiling were dried for 16 Dried (40 The specific CH The inoculum was obtained from an on-farm AD reactor digesting cattle slurry and grass silage at the Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute in Hillsborough, Co. Down, Northern Ireland. This was degassed in an incubator for 2 The inoculum and substrate were added to 160 On days 2, 5, 7, 9, 12, 19, 27 and 35 of incubation, a detachable pressure transducer (Tracker 220, Gems Sensors and Controls, Basingstoke, UK) and lubricated Vaseline® needle were used to record the gas pressure in the headspace of each bottle. The total amount of biogas produced was estimated using the following equation: Gas production (ml) An 0.8 Duplicate analytical estimates were averaged to give a single value for each replicate sample per treatment. Log transformed specific CH The mean chemical compositions of the three herbages pre and post-ensiling are reported in The daily mean (s.d.) values of CH Specific CH Whereas preparation method did not have an overall effect ( Thermally dried herbage pre-ensiling had a higher specific CH The relative rankings of specific CH In comparison to the non-thermal dried method, drying HI post-ensiling herbage reduced ( The combination of three herbage types by two herbage states broadened the conditions under which the effects of thermal drying on the specific CH A major attraction of the small-scale batch digestion assay is the ability to simultaneously digest large numbers of samples under standard conditions, including replicates within a feedstock, and therefore to rank the feedstocks for specific CH Thermal drying did not have a consistent effect on the specific CH The authors acknowledge B. Weldon and J. Larkin for technical assistance, J. Grant for statistical advice, and the contributions of the farm and laboratory staff at Teagasc Grange. The authors also thank S. Gilkinson (AFBI; Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute, Hillsborough, Co Down, BT26 6DR) for providing the inoculum. Funding for this research was provided through a 