Sesamoid injuries in the sporting population can cause long-term disability. Fractures can be acute, stress, or chronic non-unions. The medial sesamoid is most commonly affected. Clinical examination and imaging will confirm the diagnosis and identify the site, fracture gap and development of complications such as non-union, fragmentation, osteoarthritis and necrosis. There is little information upon conservative management although, with an early diagnosis, prompt immobilisation is an appropriate initial step. Surgical options include stabilisation with or without grafting. The alternative is sesamoidectomy. Consideration should be given to addressing pre-disposing factors.Hallucal sesamoid pathology can be disabling and the cause of long-term pain. Although the sesamoids are subject to a range of disorders, fractures are a particular difficulty in terms of clinical management. Unusually the patient may present following acute injury but the usual scenario is for the insidious development of a stress fracture, which may have become a chronic non-union by the time of presentation. There is a paucity of literature relating to treatment and outcomes. The popular media often refer to the lack of medical knowledge in this area and a number of elite athletes have simply managed such fractures symptomatically during their sporting careers. This review article has been prepared following a thorough review of the literature using the MEDLINE/OVID database. Keywords including “Sesamoids”; “Bipartite”; “Fracture”; “Treatment”; “Surgery”; “Conservative”; “Imaging” were used in mixed combinations. This was supplemented by manual searches of the bibliography of the key papers and the authors own clinical experience and contributions to the literature. Sesamoids are bones embedded within tendons which act as pulleys to increase the mechanical advantage of the musculotendinous unit and hence forces generated. The hallucal sesamoids are located on the plantar aspect of the first metatarsal and enclosed in slips of the flexor halluces brevis tendon (FHB). The arterial blood supply to the sesamoids is variable and the number of vessels entering each sesamoid varies between one (55%) and three (10%) The hallux sesamoids ossify at around 6–7 years old ( Considerable forces are experienced by the first metatarsophalangeal complex (1st MTPJ), including the sesamoids, during activity. Up to 800% of body weight may be experienced during high-loading jumps The hallux sesamoids have a number of functions: Increases the mechanical advantage of the FHB by increasing the moment arm of FHB from the MTPJ centre of rotation. Stabilises the 1st ray as part of the wider sesamoid complex. Protects 1st MTP plantar articular cartilage. Reduces friction of 1st MT head and acts as a platform to the joint floor as the 1st metatarsal head rolls and glides over the plantar plate. Distributes weight-bearing of 1st ray as the body force moves forward over the medial column. Protects the Flexor Hallucis Longus (FHL) tendon. Augments the Windlass Mechanism as part of the Plantar Aponeurosis-Plantar Plate continuum. The authors reviewed 176 sesamoid fractures described in the literature The patient usually complains of an activity-related plantar hallux pain and occasionally activity-related swelling. Frequently there is a history of change in physical activity or increased intensity. The examination should seek to identify the precise location of pain – under either the medial or lateral sesamoid. The 1st MTPJ mobility and stability should be established. An associated soft-tissue plantar swelling may indicate the presence of a bursa. However, there is likely to be little in the clinical findings to distinguish between fractures and important differential diagnoses such as sesamoiditis or avascular necrosis. A number of biomechanical factors have been recognised as predisposing factors for sesamoid pathology including a tight calf-Achilles complex, a plantarflexed 1st metatarsal (potentially creating a sesamoid keratosis or bursitis), forefoot pronation, hallux valgus, metatarsus primus varus, and metatarsus primus longus. More unusually, the patient gives a history of an acute injury to the great toe – usually a forcible dorsiflexion injury or direct blow. This may be associated with soft-tissue swelling, bruising and deformity. It is necessary to exclude a 1st MTP dislocation Sesamoid pain and dysfunction can be related to a number of different causes: Congenital absence – can cause pain Sesamoid coalition Sesamoid malposition – e.g. hallux valgus causing the medial sesamoid to sit on the metatarsal crista Sesamoiditis Avascular necrosis – diagnosed on plain X-ray by features such as radiolucency, sclerosis, and fragmentation Bi-partite sesamoid diastasis – Turf Toe Injury variant Sesamoid fracture Stress Acute Chronic non-union In association with certain 1st MTPJ dislocations Osteochondral fractures Osteoarthritis Gout Osteochondroma Chondromalacia Sesamoid bursitis A series of plain radiographs should be undertaken in the initial investigation of a painful sesamoid. These should include AP weight-bearing, lateral weight-bearing, oblique and axial sesamoid views including comparison AP weight-bearing views of the opposite side ( While ultrasound examination does not have the same resolution for the evaluation of osseous structures, it does have a role in examining the adjacent soft tissues. It has the ability to examine the FHL, any bursal tissue and the plantar plate. It allows image-guided injections for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes and dynamic assessment of the plantar unit. It is a more cost-effective imaging modality but requires an experienced operator to allow accurate diagnosis. MRI scans can be helpful to differentiate between soft-tissue, articular and osseous pathology to help in assessing sesamoid viability, joint degeneration and tendon continuity. However, its value is often limited due to the small size of anatomical structures of interest and its limited resolution. Cohen CT scanning has proved extremely useful in assessing sesamoid fractures – whether they be acute, stress, or chronic non-unions. It is particularly useful in monitoring progress following fracture diagnosis and looking for features such as degenerative change, cyst formation and fragmentation ( Spect-CT scanning adds additional information since it reflects bone metabolism and correlates well with pain location and is useful in distinguishing sesamoiditis from other pathologies There are no dedicated publications on outcomes of conservative treatment or the natural history of sesamoid fractures. Most modalities are mentioned in surgical papers only following failure. There are additional problems of bringing together acute, stress and non-unions groups in the same case series. Conservative treatment options have included activity modification; physiotherapy, shoe wear modification; orthotics; immobilisation; non-steroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs); steroid injections Historically, most authors have recommended a course of immobilisation and/or shoe wear modification for periods of up to six months A number of authors have recommended a non-weight-bearing cast for six weeks for acute sesamoid fractures Advice on footwear modification and orthotic provision should be given after a thorough biomechanical analysis and advice from an experienced podiatrist. Experience in North America with prevention and safe return to sport in American Football following plantar plate injuries has led to shoe wear modifications to stiffen the sole to limit dorsiflexion. Such changes would help athletes return to exercise after sesamoid injuries by limiting similar excessive movement. Within the shoe, orthotics can be adapted to offload the damaged sesamoid including cushioning, cut outs, metatarsal pads, arch supports, and the use of moulded carbon graphite turf toe plates However, chronic non-unions are unlikely to heal with conservative treatment and the decision to proceed with surgery is dependent upon the level of symptoms experienced by the patient. The reasons for failure to unite are manifold including mechanical (constant distraction by pull of FHB during weight-bearing causing instability; no compressive forces to aid fracture healing); vascular (disruption of the precarious blood supply to distal pole); and histological (fracture gap becomes necrotic; interposed fibrocartilaginous tissue inhibits healing; cyst formation indicative of osteochondrosis). Surgery for sesamoid fractures can be divided into surgery to the sesamoid itself and surgery to address pre-disposing factors. Surgery to the sesamoid can be considered to be either preservative with percutaneous or open fixation and/or bone grafting or excisional involving either a total or partial sesamoidectomy. The sesamoids can be approached percutaneously, medially, plantar, or, if dealing with a Turf toe injury, via an L-shaped incision or combined medial and plantar approach. Surgery options for pre-disposing factors for sesamoid fractures may include Gastrocnemius release; correction of Hallux valgus deformity; and correction of a plantarflexed 1st metatarsal. There are few publications on percutaneous screw fixation Open screw fixation can be undertaken when percutaneous fixation is technically not possible, if the fracture would benefit from curettage and accessory bone grafting, or undertaken as part of more extensive surgery, e.g. to include Turf Toe repair or Hallux Valgus correction Tourné Riley Anderson and McBryde Sesamoidectomy has traditionally been associated with high complication rates and concerns over altered hallux mechanics. However, in cases of wide diastasis, of the fragments, comminution, osteonecrosis or secondary osteoarthritis partial or total sesamoidectomy may be the only option ( Concerns over loss of push-off strength have been expressed with a medial sesamoidectomy leading to 10% loss of push-off strength; lateral sesamoidectomy 16%; and bilateral sesamoidectomy 30%. Medial sesamoidectomy may cause hallux valgus and lateral sesamoidectomy hallux varus. Potentially a cock-up deformity may develop due to lack of flexor strength. Two early papers by Inge in 1933 A review of four more recent case series on the outcomes of sesamoidectomy suggests a more optimistic outcome Following total sesamoidectomy, some authors have advocated soft-tissue reconstruction. Brodsky and others McCormick and Anderson Tibial bipartite sesamoids are twice as common in patients with Hallux Valgus A summary of surgical options is given in The evidence for the type and duration of conservative management of sesamoid fractures is based solely on “Expert Opinion”. Following diagnosis, patients should be counselled that the evidence for the natural history of sesamoid fractures is uncertain, the outcomes of conservative treatment not truly known, and the prevalence of patients with minimally symptomatic non-unions but still able to undertake sporting endeavours unclear. However, if an early diagnosis (<4–6 weeks) is made it seems reasonable to adopt initially conservative measures with immobilisation preventing 1st MTP dorsiflexion for 6–8 weeks. With a late diagnosis and imaging evidence of a non-union in those patients with low-level symptoms and/or a desire to avoid surgery then appropriate advice on orthotics and footwear modifications should be helpful. Surgical management should be considered if, following appropriate counselling, there is a desire for early stabilisation, after failure of conservative treatment, or if symptoms have been present for longer than 3–6 months and are having a significant impact on the patient's activities of daily living including sport. For sesamoid fractures with minimal displacement (<3 The authors declare that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organisation with financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this paper.