The helical axis (HA), or motion screw, yields a comprehensive description of joint motion. The perspective representation of this axis clearly visualizes the regularity of mandibular functional movements (Yatabe et al. 1997. Journal of Dentist Research 76, 714–719 and Gallo et al. 2000. Journal of Dental Research 79, 1566–1572). In this study, the sensitivity of the HA representation was investigated relative to (a) irregularities in pathologic motion of clicking temporomandibular joints (TMJs) for jaw opening/closing and (b) differences in food bolus size and consistency for unilateral mastication in subjects with normal TMJs. Mandibular motion relative to the head was acquired using a jaw tracker with six degrees-of-freedom with a sampling frequency of 70Hz. The HA was calculated according to an eigenvalue method (Spoor and Veldpaus 1980. Journal of Biomechanics 13, 391–393) and parameters were defined describing its position and orientation relative to the anatomy. We analyzed 39 subjects with unilateral or bilateral reciprocal TMJ clicking during jaw opening/closing and seven asymptomatic subjects during unilateral mastication of five different types of soft and hard food in two different bolus sizes. The results showed a greater variability of the HA parameters in the group of clicking joints than in the asymptomatic group: in particular, the area in which the HA moved was wider in clicking joints than in normal ones and the HA in clicking TMJs had a much greater fluctuation than in normal ones. During unilateral mastication, for more consistent food or a bigger bolus the HA showed a significantly greater excursion of the orientation parameters. Furthermore a significantly greater excursion of the dorsoventral and of the craniocaudal component of the distance vector from the HA to the condyle were found. The helical axis analysis of mandibular movements was sensitive to kinematic irregularities of the mandible due to an internal joint derangement as well as to differences in food bolus size and consistency.Although muscles produce linear forces only, joint motions in the human body have a strong rotary component in almost all instances. Joints with high congruency of the articulating surfaces and surrounding tissue constraints—such as the ulnohumeral joint—can be considered as hinge joints. However, at least theoretically, any joint rotates around an instantaneous axis. This instantaneous axis of rotation mostly changes its spatial position and orientation during joint movements and is best described by the helical axis (HA), also called screw axis or motion screw ( The use of the HA yields a comprehensive description of the joint kinematics and its perspective representation clearly visualizes the movement progression ( The HA has been used to study in vivo the kinematics of various human joints, such as for instance the elbow ( The HA model is useful for a comprehensive kinematic description also of mandibular motion, especially as the traces of single mandibular points—extensively used in the past to study mandibular movements ( TMJ clicking is a most common symptom of craniomandibular disorders and is probably connected to a sudden, relative translatory movement of the disc in relation to the condyle which causes a sudden mandibular acceleration ( Also for mastication the HA model provides a compact representation of mandibular kinematics ( Masticatory movements are influenced by consistency, dimension and texture of the food ( The aims of this study were twofold: first, to determine the helical axis parameters in a group of subjects with TMJ reciprocal clicking and to investigate whether they provide a good discrimination between patients and asymptomatic subjects, and secondly, to analyze the helical axis pathways for mastication of food boluses of different size and consistency. Potential subjects were interviewed on medical and specific TMJ dysfunction histories, according to the clinic's protocol: pain or sounds in the TMJ, pain or fatigue in the masticatory muscles, impaired jaw mobility, facial pain, headache and toothache [details in previous work ( The analysis of opening/closing movements was performed on 39 dentate subjects (31 females and 8 males) aged 26–51 years (mean age 26 years) with unilateral or bilateral reciprocal TMJ clicking that disappeared when the subjects opened and closed from a protruded jaw position. This led to the clinical diagnosis of an anterior disc displacement with reduction. The study on mastication was carried out on eleven asymptomatic subjects (7 females and 4 males) aged 25–39 years (mean age 30 years) without a history of signs and symptoms of myoarthropathies of the masticatory system, i.e. of craniomandibular disorders, in particular without any TMJ clicking. Inclusion criteria for all patients as well as asymptomatic subjects were: maximum opening >40 Jaw movements were recorded by means of the optoelectronic system Jaws-3D ( Mandibular motion relative to the head was recorded as the time-dependent rotation matrix, The subjects sat comfortably upright on a conventional dental chair with unsupported head and the feet resting on the floor. For the study on jaw opening/closing, each subject performed four consecutive cycles at deliberate rate. The opening/closing cycles had to start and end in maximum intercuspation and to reach maximum opening. For the analysis of masticatory movements, the subjects were presented four different types of food of different hardness (dried beef, bread with crust, cheese, apple). These were cut in cubes with 1.0 Prior to data analysis, the trajectories of the target-frame LEDs were low-pass-filtered for noise reduction by means of a nine-coefficient FIR filter, dimensioned according to the Parks-McClellan method ( The HA was calculated by means of an eigenvalues method ( For the sample times in which the HA was defined, the vector      As already shown in previous work (  The HA did not only change its spatial orientation, but also the excursion of its distance vector The errors of the method had been assessed statically and dynamically, i.e. performing test movements with the rotation axis stationary as well as moving in space in a previous study ( The HA in patients with clicking joints described a less regular path and fluctuated in space far more than in controls. A similar finding has been reported using a slightly different technique, i.e. recording the instantaneous centers of rotation (ICR) ( The great sensitivity of the HA pathways to irregular mandibular movements is illustrated in We recognize that a limitation of this study is the lack of a time correlation between clicking sound and sudden change in HA position and orientation. A further study that aims to correlate TMJ clicking and the degree of condylar acceleration with the HA pathways is planned with a new jaw tracking device, in development at our clinic, which has a better geometric resolution and higher data acquisition rate.  The behavior of the HA parameters The results of this study can be compared only to our previous ones ( In conclusion, the helical axis pathways fluctuated more and moved in a larger space in subjects with TMJ clicking than in those with normal TMJs. Furthermore, they were influenced by the rheological quality of the food and its size. This study showed therefore that the helical axis pathway very sensitively reflects differences in the movement of both condyles. This work has been supported by the standard financial plan of the University of Zurich.