Air pollution control residues (APCR) resulting from municipal solid wastes (MSW) are most often classified as hazardous waste. A treatment process employing aqueous and alkaline leaching was developed to extract Pb, the principal contaminant found in these residues. This treatment process generates highly alkaline (pH between 11.3 and 12.5) and Pb-loaded effluent. The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of a counter-current sorption process (CCSP) for Pb using peat moss (PM) in order to treat leachates emanating from diverse types of APCR (used lime, electrofilter ash and boiler ash). Results have shown that the CCSP process diminishes the quantity of PM required to treat these effluents by a factor of 4. Thus, a concentration of 4 g PM/L is sufficient to lower the initial Pb concentration in used lime leachate from approximately 150 mg/L to less than 0.5 mg/L. By reusing treated effluent for additional leaching and sorption cycles, our research has also shown that the quantity of water consumed during the treatment process can be reduced by 50%. Lastly, considering both the low cost of acquiring PM and managing saturated adsorbents, in addition to the efficient recuperation of Pb, the CCSP process has great potential for full-scale use.air pollution control residues boiler and electrofilter ash counter-current sorption process electrofilter ash incinerated peat moss overall lead concentration factor final lead concentration in solution (mg Pb/L) initial lead concentration in solution (mg Pb/L) final pH of the solution initial pH of the solution peat moss first sorption phase second sorption phase third sorption phase lead sorbed on incinerated peat moss (mg Pb/kg) lead sorbed on peat moss (mg Pb/kg) final lead removal yield (%) Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure used lime Air pollution control residues (APCR) generated by the incineration of municipal waste are most often classified as hazardous waste and thus require an intensive management process ( In North America, the production of APCR is estimated at more than 1.5 million metric tons annually. APCR are partly soluble in water and often contain elevated concentrations of metal contaminants containing bonds to sulphur, chlorine and in the form of oxides (Pb, Cd, Zn and Hg in used lime) ( The most common APCR management strategies currently applied in incinerators are chemical stabilization, vitrification and sanitary subsurface containment of solid wastes ( Another strategy to decontaminate APCR of potentially toxic metals explored in recent years involves a chemical leaching procedure. The proposed procedures include both the use of complexing agents (citrate, oxalate, EDTA, humic acids) ( As a result of this research, a used lime decontamination procedure was put into effect at the waste incinerator plant located in Quebec City (Canada) ( Several methods have been developed to remove metals from effluents. These methods can be divided into the following seven categories: precipitation/coprecipitation, cementation, membrane separation, solvent extraction, electrodeposition/electrocoagulation, ion-exchange and adsorption/biosorption ( The use of cheap natural materials to recuperate Pb found in alkaline leachates resulting from the decontamination of used lime was thus evaluated. A comparable study of various adsorbents conducted by Many other studies have been conducted on the adsorption capacity of PM ( The conventional one-step batch sorption process requires, however, a large quantity of PM to obtain satisfactory metal removal. For example, 10–15 kg of PM is required to treat one cubic meter of alkaline leachate produced during used lime decontamination ( The APCR used for each trial came from the domestic waste incinerator facility located in Quebec City (Quebec, Canada). For the purposes of this study, research was conducted on samples of used lime (UL), on electrofilter ash (EA) and on a mix of boiler ash (39%) and electrofilter ash (61%) (BEA). The APCR were retrieved in 210 L metal barrels coated with a protective layer of paint on their interior. The average concentrations of Pb in the UL, EA and BEA samples were 1 The standard batch test of leaching and adsorption consisted of placing 1.0 kg of APCR with 5.0 L of tap water in a stirred tank reactor kept at room temperature (22 A process combining one lead leaching phase and three counter-current adsorption phases was tested using different concentrations of PM ( Following filtration, the filtrate L The peat, PM The peat, PM The pH was recorded and 10 mL samples were withdrawn at each step of the leaching and adsorption process. Samples of incinerated peat were kept to be totally digested and then analysed for metal content. Assays of the CCSP procedure were also conducted by reusing treated effluent for an additional leaching and adsorption cycle. During this experiment, 0.2 kg of used lime was treated by two 1 h successive leaching steps, each with 1.0 L of tap water. The solutions were then filtered through Whatman No. 4 membranes. Subsequently, both leachates were mixed together and the volume was adjusted to 2 L with tap water. Three successive 1 h adsorption phases using 2.5 g/L of PM were conducted on the mixed leachates. The resulting effluent was reused during the treatment of a new APCR sample which underwent an identical treatment process to that described above. Similar to the study of the CCSP process, the pH was recorded and 10 mL samples were withdrawn at each step of the leaching and adsorption process. Samples of incinerated peat were also kept to be totally digested and then analysed for metal content. The pH was measured with a pH-meter (Fisher Acumet model 915) equipped with a double-junction Cole–Palmer electrode with an Ag/AgCl reference cell. To determine metal concentrations, the samples were first vacuum filtered through a Whatman 934-AH membrane (Whatman International Ltd, Maidstone, England). The resulting filtrates were acidified with concentrated HCl (5% v/v) and kept at 4 °C until analysed. Lead content was measured with an AA-spectrometer (Varian, model SpectrAA 220FS) (  For UL leachate containing 108 mg Pb/L, results have shown that a concentration of 15 g PM/L is required to decrease the Pb In trials using PM concentrations of 15 and 20 g PM/L, the addition of PM caused a pH decrease in the UL leachates resulting in pH Lead is usually solubilized from APCR and other wastes in very acidic and alkaline conditions and is less soluble at pH near the neutrality ( In the case of the two other types of leachates, an addition of only 5 g PM/L resulted in the almost complete removal of Pb (< Throughout the treatment of UL leachates, the quantities of fixed Pb per mass unit of adsorbent ( Notably, in all cases, the adsorption of Pb was fast, being close to completion within the first 30 min of contact with PM. The decontamination process also allows to reduce significantly the metal solubilization from treated APCR. In fact, other research works conducted in our laboratory have shown that only one short step of leaching using tap water is sufficient to reduce the soluble Pb concentration (using the TCLP [Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure] test) from treated APCR under the permitted level (< The use of a counter-current adsorption process was adopted in order to reduce the quantity of PM necessary for the treatment of leachates from APCR decontamination. The results presented in The results described in The use of a PM concentration below 4.0 g PM/L did not meet the targeted effluent norm of 2 mg Pb/L. Concurrently, in the case of the 3.5 g PM/L trial, the leachates contained very high initial concentrations of Pb (Pb Regardless, the CCSP reduced the quantity of peat required to treat 1 L of UL leachate containing approximately 150 mg Pb/L from 15–20 g to approximately 3.5–4.0 g. This diminishes the use of peat by a factor of 3.8 to 5.7. Upon examination of Results from the 4.0 g PM/L trial render a The Similarly, From a conceptual point of view, it is important to understand that the final mass of the ashes resulting from the incineration of PM counts for a very small proportion of the initial mass of decontaminated UL. The overall Pb concentration factor (OCF) values presented in As a result, the cost of securely disposing the PM combustion ash is very reasonable. By using a unit cost that combines transport costs and a disposal cost of USD$ 300/ton in addition to the disposal of adsorbent with total solid concentration of 50% (50% humidity), the cost of managing (transport and landfill disposal) saturated PM is estimated at USD$ 3.20/ton of decontaminated UL. The acquisition cost of PM is also reasonable. For example, at a consumption rate of 20 kg of PM per ton of treated UL (4.0 g PM/200 g UL) with a unit cost of USD$ 0.125/kg PM, the cost of PM is estimated to be USD$ 2.50/ton of treated UL. In this case, total cost for acquisition of PM and for final disposal of saturated PM is estimated to USD$ 5.70/ton of treated UL. In comparison, a total cost of approximately USD$ 15/ton of treated UL has been evaluated for a precipitation technique using sulphuric acid followed by landfilling disposition of the metallic residue ( When the standard adsorption procedure was applied to EA and BEA leachates, a concentration of 5 g PM/L was found to sufficiently decrease the concentration of soluble Pb to below 1 mg/L (  These results demonstrate once again the benefits of using the CCSP procedure to diminish the consumption of adsorbent required to treat effluents from APCR decontamination. Subsequently, because the quantity of PM required is very low (0.5 g PM/L), reducing the adsorbent mass by means of incineration does not seem appropriate. In effect, the direct disposal cost of saturated PM would be very low because the consumption of adsorbent would only be 2.5 kg PM per metric ton of decontaminated APCR. By considering the combined unit cost of transport and disposal at USD$ 300/ton in addition to the disposal of the adsorbent with total solid concentration of 50% (50% humidity), the cost of managing saturated adsorbent is estimated at only USD$ 1.50/ton of APCR. For the treatment of EA and BEA leachates, the acquisition cost of PM, at a consumption rate of 2.5 kg PM/ton, is estimated to be only USD$ 0.30/ton of treated APCR.  Firstly, it must be highlighted that the solubilization of Pb occurs principally during the first leaching phase (Pb The reuse of treated effluent did not negatively affect the solubilization of Pb. In fact, the concentration of Pb in solution was slightly higher during both effluent recirculation cycles, with 57.2 and 57.0 mg Pb/L for the first leaching phase and 6.8 mg Pb/L for the second leaching phase. The mixture of both leachates gave a soluble Pb concentration of 40.1 and 39.9 mg/L during both recirculation cycles. The three adsorption phases conducted on this mixture diminished the concentration of soluble Pb to 1.3 mg/L, resulting in an In short, it is thus possible to reuse the water used during the APCR leaching and adsorption decontamination procedure for at least one additional cycle. It is likely however, that it is not possible to recycle the same water from these procedures indefinitely. In addition, the results indicate a considerable decrease in the adsorption capacity of peat during the second effluent recirculation cycle. As a result, an In addition, the leaching of APCR and particularly UL incurs a significant solubilization of salts present in these residues such as calcium chloride ( This study has demonstrated foremost that peat moss constitutes an excellent adsorbent for the recuperation of Pb present in alkaline leachates resulting from the decontamination of various APCR types (used lime and electrofilter and boiler ash) generated during the incineration of municipal solid wastes. Similarly, this research established that an adsorption procedure on peat moss used during a counter-current process, can significantly reduce (by a factor of 4 or more) the quantity of adsorbent required to treat these types of effluents. In addition, the research concerning the reuse of treated effluents has shown that it is possible to reuse water from the decontamination procedure for at least one additional leaching and Pb adsorption cycle. With regards to the quantity of water used during the contamination procedure, a 50% reduction can be attained by this practice. Finally, an economic study revealed that the cost of acquiring peat moss and the management of saturated adsorbents is low. This treatment strategy when applied to APCR decontamination effluents exhibits a strong potential for application on an industrial scale. Sincere thanks are extended to the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Grants 224098-99) and the Canada Research Chairs for their financial contributions. Thanks are also extended to Alex Cendre Inc. for providing both technical and financial assistance.