This paper describes the influence of joint spacing and joint orientation on the penetration rate of a Tunnel Boring Machine (TBM) disc cutter as modeled by the Discrete Element Method (DEM). The input data for the simulations were obtained from the sandstone along the Alborz tunnel that is currently being excavated in Iran using a 5.2m diameter open TBM. Three joint spacings, 150, 200, and 300mm, were modeled together with seven values of joint orientation; 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75°, and 90°. The results show that the penetration increases when joint orientation increases from 0° to 75°, but it decreases as the joint orientation increases further from 75° to 90°. This is true for each joint spacing. In addition, for a given joint orientation increasing the joint spacing causes the TBM penetration to decrease. The optimum joint orientation, from the viewpoint of TBM penetration, is about 60–75°.Rock mass parameters, including the presence of weak surfaces, are the most important parameters that should be taken into account when analyzing rock penetration by disc cutters. By now many experimental, theoretical, and numerical simulation based studies have been performed to examine the interaction between TBM disc cutter performance and joint spacing and orientation. A brief review of some of this work is given in The Alborz tunnel, which is part of the Tehran-Shomal freeway, was chosen as a case study for numerical modeling of the simultaneous effects of joint spacing and joint orientation on single disc cutter indentation in rock. This approximately 120 The simulations used Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) to model rock fragmentation by a single TBM disc cutter. The key concepts of the DEM are the domain of interest, which is treated as an assemblage of rigid or deformable blocks and/or particles, and the identification and updating of the contacts between distinct particles during the deformation/motion process. The contacts are represented by appropriate constitutive models Three joint spacings, 150, 200, and 300 A single disc cutter modeled with different joint spacings and orientations shows two influences of joint orientation on initiation and propagation of cracks in the jointed rocks. Values of 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, and 90° give cracks that are immediately initiated beneath the disc cutter and then propagate towards the joint plane; subsequently a chip is formed. But a joint orientation of 60° or 75° gave crack initiation in the joint plane that reached the free surface while increasing the penetration. When the joint orientation is 15°, the cutter first acts on the rock by forming a fan-shaped rock failure (crushed) zone as shown in When the angle, The final rock fragmentation patterns for joint spacings of 150, 200, and 300 The effect of joint spacing and orientation on TBM penetration was investigated by calculating the ratio of chipping area to chipping stress, which indicates the frequency of chips in terms of cutting force units. The chipping stress and chipping area for different spacings and orientations are listed in The optimum disc spacing of 75 Variations in chipping stress for different joint spacings and orientations are plotted in The correlation between TBM penetration and joint spacing and orientation is shown in The rock chipping process induced by a single TBM cutter was simulated by numerical modeling. The simultaneous effect of joint spacing and orientation are described herein. This is a new contribution since previous studies only considered the effect of one of the joint conditions on rock fragmentation by a disk cutter: either spacing or orientation. The mutual interaction of joint spacing and orientation and their effect on rock fragmentation is also investigated. The results of this study show that by increasing the joint spacing for a given joint orientation causes the TBM penetration rate to decrease. The gradient of increasing penetration is higher between 45° and 75° than it is between 0° and 30°. In addition, for any joint spacing penetration increases when the joint orientation changes from 0° to 75° but decreases as the joint orientation changes from 75° to 90°. The results also demonstrate that an optimum joint orientation, from the viewpoint of TBM penetration, is about 60–75°.