The selective transport of cobalt (II) from ammoniacal solutions containing nickel (II) and cobalt (II) by emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) using 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) as extractant has been presented. Membrane solution consists of a diluent (kerosene), a surfactant (ECA 4360J), and an extractant (8-HQ). Very dilute sulphuric solution buffered at pH 5.0 has been used as a stripping solution. The ammoniacal feed solution pH was adjusted to 9.0 with hydrochloric acid. The important variables governing the permeation of cobalt (II) have been studied. These variables are membrane composition, pH of the feed solution, cobalt (II) and nickel (II) concentrations of the feed solution, stirring speed, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, complexing agent concentration and pH of the stripping solution, and phase ratio. After the optimum conditions had been determined, it was possible to selectively transport 95.0% of cobalt (II) from ammoniacal feed solution containing Co2+ and Ni2+ ions. The separation factors of cobalt (II) with respect to nickel (II), based on initial feed concentration, have experimentally found to be of as high as 31 for equimolar Co(II)–Ni(II) feed solution.The separation of cobalt (II) from nickel (II) in aqueous solution has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy. Because of their adjacent positions in the transition metal series of the periodic table, nickel and cobalt have somewhat similar chemical behaviour in aqueous solutions but differences do exist. For example, although both cobalt (II) and nickel (II) preferentially exist as divalent hexahydrated ions in dilute aqueous solution, the rate of water exchange on the cobalt (II) ion is very much higher than for nickel (II). Thus complex ion formation often proceeds much more readily with divalent cobalt (II) than with nickel (II). Cobalt (II) also in the divalent state exhibits a marked tendency to form a tetrahedral configuration under more concentrated electrolyte conditions rather than the octahedral configuration of the six-coordinated species. These general differences help to provide the basis for the various separation processes currently used or proposed for cobalt (II)–nickel (II) separation in hydrometallurgy To date there are numerous published works on cobalt (II) and nickel (II) separation by liquid–liquid systems Using classical methods, such as precipitation, oxidation, and crystallization, it is impossible to separate nickel (II) from cobalt (II) in a simple and economical way. Diluent extraction seems to be the most efficient method for separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) ions from solutions, including leach liquors Recently, the use of liquid membranes for the removal of cobalt (II) from aqueous solutions has been described. Liquid membranes have shown great potential, especially in cases where solute concentrations are relatively low and other techniques cannot be applied efficiently, since they combine the processes of transport and stripping in a single unit operation. The transport chemistry is basically the same as that found in diluent extraction, but the transport is governed by kinetic rather than equilibrium parameters, that is, it is governed by a nonequilibrium mass transfer Liquid membranes not only are an important technique for concentration, separation and recovery, but also are of fundamental importance from an environmental engineering point of view in understanding the mechanisms of ion transport. The extraction of metals ions from wastewater solutions by liquid membranes has been the subject of many studies over recent years. Hundreds of cations separation systems have been published in the literature, but only few examples are known for the separation of anions which are focused on anion separation. The removal of toxic elements such as thiocyanate anions by liquid membranes has been of great interest in recent years In the present work, in order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM technique, the major parameters, such as pH of the feed solution, stirring speed, modifier concentration, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration (8-HQ), complexing agent concentration and pH of the stripping solution, and phase ratio, influencing the extent of transport were studied and the selective transport of cobalt (II) were investigated from the ammoniacal solutions, containing Co The membrane phase in an emulsion liquid membrane consists of a surfactant, an extractant, and a diluent. The surfactant is a nonionic polyamine which is a product of ExxonMobil and commercially known as ECA 4360J. The surfactant is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as Span 80. The carrier is 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) which is purchased from Merck, Germany. A commercial kerosene (TUPRAS Oil Company, Turkiye), toluene, xylene, Escaid 100 and Escaid 200 were used as diluents. ECA 4360J, Escaid 100, and Escaid 200 are the products of ExxonMobil, that were used directly as received from the manufacturer. Etylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used as the disodium salt (complexing agent) and was purchased from Merck, Germany. Cobalt (II) and nickel (II) stock solutions were prepared from reagent grade cobalt (II) sulphate (CoSO In a 250 Initial ammonia concentration in the feed solution, containing cobalt (II) and nickel (II) ions between 100 and 500 In a 600 The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for determination of metals (Co, Ni). Hydrogen ion concentrations were measured by pH meter with a glass electrode. All the transport experiments were carried out batchwise at the room temperature of 20 If an excess amount of ammonia is added to the feed solution containing Co From the feed solution containing Co(NH Transport of cobalt (II) and nickel (II) ammine complexes by ELM using 8-HQ from ammoniacal solutions containing cobalt (II) and nickel (II) proceed, as given by Eqs. Cobalt (II) and nickel (II) can be effectively stripped by a very dilute H The transport of cobalt (II) by chelating acid extractant 8-HQ is represented by Eq. The stripping reaction, given by Eq. ELM transport studies reveal that EDTA solution was somewhat suitable for the stripping the extracted cobalt (II) Experiments were conducted under the same conditions as previously mentioned with an extractant concentration of 1% (w/w). In an ELM system, a surfactant added as an emulsifier in the liquid membrane phase affects not only the stability of the liquid membrane but also the swelling of the emulsion and the rate of metal transport. Preliminary experiments were conducted using ECA 4360J or Span 80 as the surfactant. Results indicate that Span 80 gives higher breakage values whereas ECA 4360J leads to lower break-up of the emulsion. Consequently ECA 4360J was chosen as surfactant in this study.  The extractant concentration in the membrane phase plays an important role in the overall transport of ELM systems. To study this effect, the extractant concentration in the ELM was varied in the range of 0.25–2.0% (w/w). The effect of the extractant concentration on the transport of cobalt (II) is shown in Stirring speed plays a major role in mass transfer of cobalt (II) through ELM. Since globule size distribution gets affected by stirring rates, higher stirring rates lead to formation of smaller sized globules, thereby increasing the interfacial area between feed phase and the membrane phase, leading to an increase in the rates of mass transfer. Higher stirring speeds can also lead to increase swelling effect and globules rupture. Appropriate stirring speed needs to be selected for optimal performance of ELMs. The effect of stirring speed studied was in the range of 250–325 The volume ratios of the stripping phase to the membrane phase were varied between 3/5 and 6/5. The results given in Treatment ratio is the ratio of the feed phase ( The viscosity of the diluent is the main determinant of the thickness and permeability of the membrane for the solute. Different organic diluents produce changes in emulsion stability, percentage of transport, enrichment factor and swelling The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and are shown in On the other hand, transport of Ni(NH Under the optimum conditions, the transport of cobalt (II) and nickel (II) for equimolar composition are given in Clearly, the system is selective for cobalt (II), especially within the first 4 An emulsion liquid membrane process using 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) to extract and concentrate cobalt (II) from ammoniacal solution has been investigated and the optimum conditions have been determined experimentally as given in 8-HQ can be used as an extractant for selective transport and concentration of cobalt (II) from nickel (II) in ammoniacal solutions by emulsion liquid membrane process. It was found that the increase of the extractant concentration until a certain value in the membrane solution had a positive influence on the extent of metal transport and on initial transport rate. Transport efficiency was increased by decreasing the surfactant concentration until a certain value, and then decreased due to deterioration of emulsion stability. Increasing the stirring speed over 275 The transport was maximum when the feed solution was maintained at pH 8.75 and very dilute sulphuric acid solution, buffered at pH 4.25 (buffer solution: sodium acetate/acetic acid), was used as a stripping solution in the receiving phase. At the optimum conditions, the transport of cobalt (II) has been achieved with an efficiency of about 95% from Co(II)–Ni(II) mixtures of equimolar composition within 10 At the optimum conditions, for equimolar composition, the separation factors of cobalt (II) over nickel (II), β After separation by classical methods other metals in the solution, with ELM technology cobalt (II) can be selectively transported and separated cobalt (II) from ammoniacal solutions containing cobalt (II) and nickel (II). The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the