Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-aqueous biphasic systems (ABS) and PEG-grafted aqueous biphasic extraction chromatographic (ABEC) resins have been shown to remove inorganic species from environmental and nuclear wastes. The partitioning behavior of several iodide species (iodide, iodine, triiodide, iodate, and 4-iodo-2,6-dimethylphenol (I-DMP)) have been studied for PEG (MW 2000)-salt systems and ABEC resins. Iodide partitioning to PEG-rich phases or onto ABEC resins can be enhanced by derivatization with 2,6-dimethylphenol to form 4-iodo-2,6-dimethylphenol or by addition of I2 to form triiodide. Conversely, iodide partitioning to the PEG-rich phase or onto ABEC resins is reduced by oxidation of iodide to IO3
                     −. Partitioning studies of iodide, iodate, and iodine in a PEG-ABS are compared to results using ABEC resins.Aqueous biphasic systems (ABS) have been used as a gentle liquid/liquid separation methodology for large and small biomolecules In solution, iodide can form many species and must be carefully examined in order to control the separation. It is known that in aqueous solutions, the following equilibria can exist Here, we present our investigation of the separation and quantification of iodide species from aqueous samples. Results from partitioning experiments in ABS systems and batch uptakes with ABEC resins for iodide, iodine, iodate, and the derivatized species, 4-iodo-2,6-dimethylphenol (I-DMP), are compared in order to validate the relationship between partitioning in a liquid/liquid ABS and uptake onto ABEC resins. The chemicals, NaI, NH The iodide tracer as Derivatization of iodine was carried out according to methods published by Shin et al. 25 The PEG-2000 stock solutions were prepared on a weight/weight percent basis while the stock salt solutions were prepared on a molar basis. Equal volumes from the stock solutions were added to form each ABS studied. The compositions referred to are those of the stock solutions prior to mixing to form each ABS. The corresponding phase diagrams for these systems can be found in reference For the partitioning studies in liquid/liquid ABS systems, the metal ion distribution ratios were determined radiometrically using previously described methods The uptake by ABEC resins was carried out by measurement of the dry weight distribution ratios ( The ABEC resins contain a large amount of water (60–85 The batch contacts were carried out following previously described methods The salting-out abilities of inorganic salts on PEG to form ABS can be related to the Δ Phase diagrams of PEG-2000/salt ABS reveal that as the concentration of polymer and/or salt increase (or if there is an increase in temperature) the phases become increasingly divergent. That is, if you increase the system components, the PEG-rich phase excludes more salt and the salt-rich phase excludes more PEG While salts with kosmotropic anions salt-out PEG-2000 to form an ABS, water destructuring, chaotropic, anions with small |−Δ Based on the Δ Small aromatic molecules (e.g., benzene and substituted benzenes) have been shown in our laboratory to partition to the PEG-rich phase in several ABS Trends normally apparent in distribution ratios of solutes in PEG/salt ABS as a function of salt concentration are readily seen in Since the derivatization reaction is best carried out in a slightly basic solution due to the solubility of the derivatizing reagents The results obtained from the previous experiment led to the exploration of the effect of pH on the partitioning behavior of iodide, iodate, and I-DMP. Covalent attachment of PEG to a polystyrene/divinylbenzene resin bead (the ABEC resins) allows us to carry out similar separations in a batch mode. The conditions which allow or improve separations in liquid/liquid ABS also cause retention on the analogous ABEC resins We have also studied the effect of the addition of I To further characterize the uptake of iodine species in ABS and to ABEC resins, the partitioning behavior of iodide in several salt ABS was investigated. In an effort to try to further understand this partitioning data, the uptakes of the pertechnetate probe onto ABEC-5000 from KHCO Finally, in order to understand the capacity of the ABS, the partitioning behavior for I Several key aspects of iodide partitioning in ABS and adsorption onto ABEC resins have been explored in this study. Iodide partitions to the PEG-rich phase of a PEG-2000/salt ABS and onto ABEC-5000 and ABEC-2000 resins, while iodate does not. Iodide can be separated from IO This research was supported by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Office of Science, US Department of Energy (Grant DE-FG02-96ER14673). The authors wish to thank E.P. Horwitz for his invaluable discussions and suggestions.