The Kanggur gold deposit is located in the southern margin of the Central Asia Orogenic Belt and in the western segment of the Kanggur–Huangshan ductile shear belt in Eastern Tianshan, northwestern China. The orebodies of this deposit are hosted in the Lower Carboniferous volcanic rocks of the Aqishan Formation and mainly consist of andesite, dacite and pyroclastic rocks. The SHRIMP zircon U–Pb age data of the andesite indicate that the volcanism in the Kanggur area might have occurred at ca. 339Ma in the Early Carboniferous, and that the mineralization age of the Kanggur gold deposit was later than the age of volcanic rocks in the area. Geochemically, the andesite rocks of the Aqishan Formation belong to low-tholeiite and calc-alkaline series and display relative depletions in high field strength elements (HFSEs; i.e. Nb, Ta and Ti). The δ18Ow and δDw values vary from −9.1‰ to +3.8‰ and −66.0‰ to −33.9‰, respectively, indicating that the ore-forming fluids were mixtures of metamorphic and meteoric waters. The δ30Si values of 13 quartz samples range from −0.3‰ to +0.1‰ with an average of −0.15‰, and the δ34S values of 18 sulphide samples range from −0.9‰ to +2.2‰ with an average of +0.54‰. The 206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb and 208Pb/204Pb values of 10 sulphide samples range from 18.166 to 18.880, 15.553 to 15.635 and 38.050 to 38.813, respectively, showing similarities to orogenic Pb; these values are consistent with those of the andesite from the Kanggur area, suggesting a common lead source. All of the silicon, sulphur and lead isotopic systems indicate that the ore-forming fluids and materials were mainly derived from the Aqishan Formation, and that the host volcanic rocks of the Aqishan Formation probably played a significant role in the Kanggur gold mineralization. Integrating the data obtained from studies on geology, geochronology, petro-geochemistry and H–O–Si–S–Pb isotope systematics, we suggest that the Kanggur gold deposit is an orogenic-type deposit formed in Eastern Tianshan orogenic belt during the Permian post-collisional tectonism.The Tianshan orogenic belt constitutes a major segment of the southern part of the Central Asia Orogenic Belt (CAOB), located between the Siberian Craton to the north and the Tarim Craton to the south ( As the largest gold deposit in this gold ore belt, the Kanggur gold deposit contains an estimated 40 The Eastern Tianshan metallogenic belt is one of the important producers of Cu (+/− Intrusive and subvolcanic rocks including tonalite, quartz-syenite porphyry, dacite porphyry and mafic-ultramafic bodies were primarily emplaced in the Early Carboniferous and Permian ( The Kanggur gold deposit, discovered in 1988, is located in the northern margin of the Aqishan–Yamansu arc belt ( The host rocks of the Kanggur deposit are predominantly andesite, dacite and pyroclastic rocks. The sub-volcanic rocks are mainly comprised of quartz-syenite porphyry and rhyolite porphyry. The andesite and dacite in the mining area are generally altered to some degree. The quartz-syenite porphyry rocks occur as stocks and dikes in the west of the mining area. These porphyry rocks show porphyritic textures and mainly contain quartz and orthoclase in a groundmass of feldspar, quartz and minor fine-disseminated pyrite. The rhyolite porphyry rocks are emplaced as stocks in the east of the mining area. Both the quartz-syenite porphyry and rhyolite porphyry intrusions are elongated and extend generally parallel to the structural lineations, suggesting that the intrusions are late-orogenic ( The main structures in the Kanggur mining area comprise an EW-trending brittle–ductile shear zone and one set of conjugate brittle fault trending NE and NW. Deformation is more intense in the northern part of the mining area than in the southern part. As part of the regional giant ductile shear zone, schistosity is the main structural element in the Kanggur area; it dips towards 350°–360°N at an angle of 70°–80° and belongs to a single deformation process ( The Kanggur gold deposit consists of orebodies VI and VIII within a set of mineralised bodies ( The ore minerals are mainly native gold, electrum, pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena and sphalerite accompanied by minor arsenopyrite and bornite. The gangue minerals are mainly quartz, chlorite, magnetite and sericite with minor calcite, dolomite, siderite and barite. Associated with pyrite and chlorite, native gold and electrum generally occur as inclusions in pyrite, or intergranular gold in fissures of pyrite and chlorite. The size of native gold varies from 7 to 15 The hydrothermal alteration in the Kanggur gold deposit is zoned from orebody to wall rocks. According to the mineral assemblages and alteration intensity, this alteration can be divided into three zones: (1) silicification, chloritisation, pyrite and magnetite zone; (2) pyrite-phyllic rock and/or sericite zone and (3) sericite–chlorite alteration zone ( According to the ore fabrics and mineral assemblages as well as the cross-cutting relationships of veins, the mineralization process can be divided into five stages. The first stage (I) is a native gold The andesite samples used in this study were collected near or in orebodies VI and VIII; the sampling locations are shown in The zircons for SHRIMP U–Pb dating were separated using flotation and electromagnetic methods at the Hebei Regional Geological Survey Research Institute in Langfang. The zircon grains were mounted in epoxy, and then polished for subsequent cathodoluminescence (CL) observation and SHRIMP analyses. The CL images were performed at the Electron Microprobe Group of the Institute of Mineral Resources, Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences, and the zircon grains were analysed for U–Pb isotopes and U, Th, and Pb concentrations using a SHRIMP II ion microprobe with a spot size of 30 The whole-rock major and trace element compositions were determined at the test center of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. Major elements analyses were conducted using a Philips PW2404 XRF with testing precision greater than 1%. Trace elements analyses were performed using a Finnigan MAT Element I ICP-MS, with RSD (10 The quartz and sulphide minerals were separated at the Hebei Regional Geological Survey Research Institute in Langfang by flotation and electromagnetic methods. Mineral samples were selected by handpicking under a binocular microscope. The oxygen, hydrogen, silicon, sulphur and lead isotopic analyses were conducted at the test centre of the Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology. Oxygen and hydrogen isotopic analyses were accomplished using a MAT 253EM mass spectrometer. Oxygen was liberated from quartz by reaction with BrF The CL images of 13 spots in the zircon grains separated from the andesite sample KG-58 show that the grains are mostly euhedral and colourless, have length to width ratios ranging from 2:1 to 4:1, and exhibit regular oscillatory zoning ( The Kanggur volcanic rocks were altered to varying degrees after eruption. Therefore, major element compositions have been normalised to 100% on a volatile-free basis in this paper. The Kanggur volcanic rocks have a relatively narrow range of SiO In the chondrite-normalised rare earth element (REE) diagram ( The oxygen and hydrogen isotopic compositions of six quartz samples from the Kanggur gold deposit and some previous data are listed in Silicon isotopic compositions of nine quartz samples from the Kanggur gold deposit and previously published data are shown in Sulphur isotopic compositions of ten sulphide samples from the Kanggur deposit and some previous data are shown in Lead isotopic data of ten sulphide samples from the Kanggur deposit and additional data from previously reported studies are shown in The δ The silicon isotopic compositions of the quartz samples were closely related to the Kanggur volcanic rocks (− The δ The lead isotopic compositions of sulphides from Kanggur show a generally concentrated field, indicating that these sulphides share similar lead isotopic compositions and might have the same Pb source. In the The Eastern Tianshan orogenic belt is an important part of the CAOB which is considered favourable for orogenic-type mineralization when considering metallogenic models for either subduction-related accretionary orogeny ( Previous studies have shown that the simultaneous southward and northward subduction of the paleo-Tianshan oceanic plate in the Carboniferous formed the Dananhu–Tousuquan and Aqishan–Yamansu arcs, respectively ( Based on the Rb–Sr isochron ages (291.8 In this study, the SHRIMP zircon U–Pb dating for the andesite indicates that the volcanism in the Kanggur area might have occurred ca. 339 Based on the above discussion and a comparison with typical orogenic gold deposits, we propose that the Kanggur gold deposit belongs to the orogenic gold category as defined by (1) The oxygen and hydrogen isotope systematics indicate that the ore-forming fluids of the Kanggur gold deposit were a mixture of metamorphic and meteoric waters. Analyses of the silicon, sulphur and lead isotopes suggest that the ore-forming materials and fluids were mainly derived from the Aqishan Formation, and that the host volcanic rocks of the Aqishan Formation probably played a significant role in the Kanggur gold mineralization. (2) The SHRIMP zircon U–Pb dating of the andesite indicates that the volcanism in the Kanggur area might have occurred at ca. 339 (3) On the basis of the geochronology, petro-geochemistry and H–O–Si–S–Pb isotope systematics of the Kanggur gold deposit together with the deposit geology and regional geological evolution, we suggest that the Kanggur gold deposit is an orogenic-type deposit. This research was financially supported by the