This paper presents a new criterion for assessing top coal cavability in Longwall Top Coal Caving mining technology. Top coal Cavability Index (TCI) criterion was developed through a parametric study, statistical analysis and validation against field monitoring data. A discontinuum modelling technique with plastic rock material was used to quantify the impact of parameters on top coal cavability in a more realistic manner. The study demonstrated that an increase in the value of parameters such as immediate rock strength, coal strength, coal elastic modulus, coal vertical joint spacing, coal discontinuity friction angle and top coal thickness causes a decrease in top coal cavability, whereas an increase in the value of cover depth leads to an increase in the cavability. Coal elastic modulus was found to have a minor impact, while coal vertical joint spacing has the most significant impact on the cavability. The TCI criterion successfully incorporates the impacts of coal strength, rock strength and discontinuity friction angle into the evaluation of top coal cavability. The proposed criterion can thus be utilised to explicitly assess top coal cavability taking into account coal seam characteristics, surrounding rock mass properties and the nature of discontinuities, which contributes to improving reliability of the criterion.Longwall Top Coal Caving (LTCC) can provide substantially less economic sensitivity and a reduced level of technical risk over other thick seam mining methods. A number of assessment criteria for top coal cavability have been developed and utilised in evaluating LTCC's applicability in practice. The criteria, however, have not sufficiently represented fundamental rock behaviours associated with LTCC mining such as intact rock failure, discontinuity failure and/or explicit rock caving, and this may result in assessment criteria with a restricted level of reliability. The analytical-based assessment criteria, Numerical-based criteria can provide a more rigorous and comprehensive assessment of top coal caving than analytical- and empirical-based criteria as they can represent complex geo-mining conditions. Depending on the modelling technique used, the criteria do not fully incorporate rock mass behaviours concomitant with LTCC mining, which restricts the reliability of cavability assessment. In particular, the criterion derived from continuum modelling technique This paper first presents a quantification of the impact of critical parameters related to roof strata characteristics, coal seam characteristics and pre-mining stress on top coal cavability in LTCC, which is performed by using a discontinuum modelling with plastic rock material. A new cavability assessment criterion is then developed through the implementations of statistical analysis of numerical modelling results and comparison with real LTCC performances. A corresponding cavability classification system is finally suggested and its validity is assessed using additional top coal caving performances at several mine sites in Australia and overseas. The Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) The model is developed based on one real LTCC face that was operated in a typical geo-mining condition at the Bowen Basin, Australia. The mine is named “Mine A” due to confidentiality matters. At Mine A, the coal seam has a depth at up to 300 m below surface and an average seam dip of three degrees. The longwall face in the model is advanced along the panel length and located at the corresponding mid-panel width. The model represents 203 m of overburden strata, 7 m of coal seam and 40 m of floor thicknesses ( The model was calibrated against the field distance where top coal started to cave out of installation room, which was at 8–10 m of face advance. The model was then run further to validate against the field load on face support. This field load was derived from the Longwall Visual Analysis (LVA) data monitored in the first 120 m of the real mining. Identification and quantification of parameters that have significant impacts on top coal cavability are prerequisites for the development of a cavability assessment criterion. For the purpose of prediction, the criterion should include geotechnical parameters that can be simply collected at the feasibility stage of mine design. A critical review conducted by Le et al. The sensitivity of top coal cavability to a critical parameter was quantified on the basis of the LTCC model. It is noted that in this paper, as a common approach in sensitivity analysis, only the input value of an evaluated parameter is varied while the input values of other parameters are kept unchanged for all analyses. Also, coal and rock strength (Uniaxial Compressive Strength) and coal elastic modulus are scaled to their field-scale values, Four different strengths ( Four different strengths ( Five different strengths ( Le et al. Previous study For the analysis of bedding spacing's impact on cavability, only three different bedding spacings within top coal were modelled in Le et al. The increasing trend of TCR in Based on empirical observations, Mahtab and Dixon As presented in Le et al., In the current work, five different depths of cover were modelled and the ratio of horizontal to vertical stress was kept constant throughout the models. The TCR value, as seen in The impact of horizontal stress along the panel length on top coal cavability has also been investigated. It is believed that this stress is significantly released due to the formations of goaf area and re-distributed around caving areas. The abutment stress thus becomes major principal stress while the horizontal stress in the direction of face advance becomes minor principal stress. The release of the horizontal stress, due to stress rotation and redistribution as shown in the study, A multiple regression analysis was carried out to develop a predictive equation for top coal cavability (dependent variable) from multiple critical parameters (independent variables). From the parametric study, only seven parameters (i.e., immediate roof rock strength, coal strength, coal elastic modulus, coal vertical joint spacing, coal discontinuity strength, top coal thickness and depth of cover) were proposed for the multiple regression, where impacts on top coal cavability can be generalised and are mechanistically explainable. As these impacts appeared to be linear, a multiple linear regression, which should form a simplified equation readily applicable in the feasibility stage of mine design, was considered the best fit model for the analysis. The regression outputs ( The parameters in Eq. Eq. The calculated TCI result was then compared to the field caving indices, as illustrated in The four TCI classes was suggested based on the TCI criterion as well as past cavability classification systems, The proposed TCI criterion provides a predictive tool for assessing top coal cavability with more reliable results compared to other criteria. The advantage of TCI is attributable to the sufficient dimension of face advance along panel length in the evaluation of key parameters impacting top coal cavability. In past criteria derived from discontinuum modelling, The advantage of TCI over other criteria is also attributed to the successful use of plastic rock material with strain softening behaviour when assessing the influence of parameters on cavability. In particular, the LTCC models used in the study not only explicitly represented the caving of top coal/rock but also adequately captured the intact rock failure and rock strength disintegration. With these fundamental rock responses, the impacts of parameters on cavability were realistically quantified. This contributes to more reliable TCI assessment. Furthermore, due to the use of plastic rock material in simulations, the strength of coal and immediate roof rock, which has not been considered in other discontinuum-based criteria, has been explicitly incorporated into TCI. The discontinuity friction angle is another new parameter that has been added into TCI, taking into account the impact of discontinuity strength on top coal cavability. This paper presents a new assessment criterion for top coal cavability in LTCC. The impact of critical parameters on cavability has been realistically quantified by using a discontinuum modelling with plastic rock material. The study provides further numerical evidences to confirm that an increase in the value of immediate roof rock strength, coal strength, coal elastic modulus, coal vertical joint spacing, coal discontinuity friction angle and top coal thickness causes less cavability, whereas an increase in the value of cover depth results in more cavability. Coal elastic modulus is found to have a minor impact while coal vertical joint spacing has the most significant impact on cavability. The TCI criterion successfully incorporates the impacts of immediate roof rock strength, coal strength, coal elastic modulus, coal vertical joint spacing, coal discontinuity friction angle, top coal thickness and cover depth for a more reliable top coal cavability assessment. The proposed TCI criterion can be utilised when evaluating LTCC's applicability for a new mine site. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge Adjunct Professor Dan Payne and Mr. Bob Coutts for their permission of using field measurement data. Mr. David Wines from Itasca Consulting Group are thanked for his technical help and invaluable suggestions. The multiple linear regression model in As stated in The standardised multiple regression model of Eq. The transformed variables used for and coefficients obtained from this standardised regression analysis are presented in