Numerous papers discuss the mechanism of alkaline oxidation of pyrite but there is limited information available describing the actual kinetics of the pyrite sulphide to thiosulphate reaction. A previous investigation in this series determined the rate of sulphide sulphur oxidation and thiosulphate yield in the reaction of pyrite with sodium hydroxide under various testing conditions. The goal of the current study is to validate these rates using two different gold-containing pyrite concentrates. A further objective of the current work is to investigate the simultaneous dissolution of gold with in situ formed thiosulphate during pyrite oxidation.
                  It was found that at 20psi oxygen overpressure and a temperature of 80°C, the initial rate of sulphide oxidation and thiosulphate yield were close to 0.08mol/h and 0.0155mol/h, respectively. These rates are in agreement with previously published data. However, a shift from linearity occurred when the pH decreased below 12. A rapid decay of thiosulphate was evidenced at pH 8.3–9.2 while EH was in the range of 22–141mV. Based on relevant thermodynamic analysis of metastable thiosalts system, such rapid decomposition is not expected at these pH and EH values. It is believed that the presence of unreacted pyrite acting as a catalyst caused this behaviour. It appears that under mildly alkaline conditions, the rate of oxidation of sulphide to thiosulphate becomes slower than the rate of thiosulphate degradation, which causes a net loss of thiosulphate in the system. The maximum extraction of gold and silver (96% and 75% respectively) was achieved under conditions of pH<12.The ability of thiosulphate to dissolve gold under mildly oxidative conditions has been known for many years. The most important thiosulphate leaching reagents, in addition to oxygen and thiosulphate, include ammonia and copper in order to achieve relatively fast leaching rates. The requirement for these additives coupled with the inherent instability of thiosulphate, make the chemistry of this leaching system complex and difficult to control. Alternatively, the leaching rate of gold can be accelerated by increasing temperature in the range of 25–60 Maintaining a certain minimum amount of thiosulphate in solution is essential for the stability of dissolved gold. However, the success of ion-exchange resin technology for gold recovery requires a minimum concentration of thiosulphate oxidation products such as trithionate and tetrathionate anions in solution, and this in turn means the thiosulphate concentration must be maintained as low as possible. At high concentration of thiosulphate, the amount of degradation products that accumulate becomes large enough to seriously impact the ion-exchange resin recovery of gold ( The formation of thiosulphate via the alkaline oxidation of pyrite has been reported by several authors ( According to Based on the literature review and previously studied conditions for thiosulphate yield, several experiments were conducted using two different gold and silver containing pyrite concentrates. These experiments were designed to investigate the in-situ formation of thiosulphate with concurrent gold and silver leaching. A systematic study of the factors affecting both the stability of thiosulphate and the extent of metals leaching was undertaken. Two different origin pyrite concentrates were used to study alkaline oxidation of pyrite. The first concentrate (PY 1) contained 6.3 The experiments were performed in a sealed 3 The results of three experiments conducted on PY 1 concentrate are shown in When the mole ratio of NaOH added to sulphides oxidized was maintained higher than the 1, the concentration of thiosulphate increased in time. But lowering the dosage of NaOH and the mole ratio of NaOH to sulphide resulted in a greater percentage of the sulphides being oxidized to polythionates and all the way to sulphate, and consequently to a decrease in the yield of thiosulphate. When the pH dropped 2.3 in Exp 3, any attempt to increase pH by adding drops of NaOH was ineffective, possibly owing to the rapid consumption of NaOH by reactive sulphides.    The E Experimental data of sulphur oxyanions measured at certain time intervals are plotted in In the tests at pH Simultaneous dissolution of metals from both concentrates was studied. Leaching experiments under the baseline conditions were carried out to measure thiosulphate yield and changes in metal concentrations with time. The results indicate that gold and silver extractions as high as 96% and 75% can be obtained by complexing with in situ generated thiosulphate. But there was an ∼8% difference in gold recovery in Exp 9 and Exp 10, which were carried out on the same concentrate (PY 1) under seemingly identical conditions and a similar ∼7% difference observed in Exp 4 and Exp 7 conducted on PY 2 sample. Better reproducibility was achieved with silver in Exp 4 and 7, but it seems that gold recovery could be a very sensitive function of small changes in solution chemistry. The complete sets of data are given in  In the treatment of refractory gold ores or concentrates, it is generally necessary to first oxidize the sulphides and liberate the gold that is trapped as very fine (<1 Several experiments were conducted to investigate the leaching of gold with thiosulphate that has been generated by the simultaneous oxidation of pyrite. It was found that conditions do indeed exist (20 Only a limited amount of testwork was completed on the first pyrite concentrate (PY 1), but under the best conditions, 65% of the sulphide was oxidized and 72% of the gold was leached with the in situ generated thiosulphate over a period of 28 It was observed in the testwork that any decrease in pH was accompanied by an increase in solution potential, which would enhance the rate of gold leaching as well as thiosulphate decomposition. Since the three important reactions in the overall process (sulphide oxidation, thiosulphate decomposition and gold dissolution) are all oxidation reactions, the sensitivity of the reactions to pH is likely a secondary effect, with sensitivity to solution potential being more important. Moreover, the concentration of thiosulphate in solution at any point in time is a function of the rates of both sulphide oxidation and thiosulphate decomposition, and the optimum conditions will occur when the rate of sulphide oxidation is enhanced and the rate of thiosulphate decomposition is retarded. It is likely that the overall reaction can be controlled by careful monitoring and optimization of either pH or potential. In future work, potential will be monitored and the rate of thiosulphate yield and metals dissolution will be studied under controlled pH conditions in the range of pH 9.5–10.5 using pyrite concentrates of various degrees of sulphide content.