Background
                  Although nonunions of the proximal humerus are rare, they cause significant disability to patients. Surgical reconstruction is challenging, especially with small and excavated head fragments. A promising surgical option is open reduction and stabilization using the Humerusblock device along with tension wires. The aim of this retrospective investigation was to evaluate the clinical and radiological results of this procedure.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Fifteen patients with symptomatic surgical neck nonunions were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using the Humerusblock device without bone grafting. All patients showed a loss of bone stock, leading to excavated head fragments. The mean interval from injury to the described treatment was 6.2 months (range, 3.4–10.7). At a mean follow-up of 40.5 months, the Constant-Murley score was documented, pain and patient satisfaction were evaluated using a visual analogue scale, and x-rays were taken in two planes.
               
                  Results
                  The patients’ mean age was 69.7 years (range, 52–83). The mean Constant-Murley score improved from 24 points before surgery to 62 points at follow-up, which was an average of 80.8% of the score obtained for the contralateral arm. Radiological examination confirmed bony healing in 14 patients. All but one patient felt satisfied with the results. Three patients required revision surgery because of a hematoma, and early metal removal was performed in one patient because of infection.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Nonunions of humeral surgical neck fractures can be successfully treated by fixation using the Humerusblock device along with tension wires without the need for additional bone grafting. Especially in patients with flat, concave head fragments, this procedure remains a promising reconstructive option to arthroplasty.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV; Therapeutic retrospective case series.