The behaviour of the phosphine oxides Cyanex 921 and Cyanex 923 in the facilitated transport of gold(I) from cyanide solutions is described. Transport is studied as a function of several variables such as stirring speeds of the aqueous phases, membrane phase diluent, pH of the source phase, ionic strength, and gold and carrier concentrations. The separation of the gold(I) cyanide complex from other metal-cyano complexes present in the source phase as well as the behaviour of phosphine oxides with respect to other neutral organophosphorous derivatives (tri-n-butylphosphate (TBP) and dibutyl butylphosphonate (DBBP)) are also investigated.The production of gold by hydrometallurgical processing combines a series of leaching, adsorption and precipitation or electrowinning operations Furthermore, different membrane separation processes have been reported as alternative techniques for metal separations from aqueous solutions FSSLM technology had been used for the recovery of gold from cyanide media Thus, the present investigation concerns the transport of gold(I) cyanide solutions with the commercially available solvating extractants Cyanex 921 and Cyanex 923. The phosphine oxides used in this work had the following specifications. Cyanex 921 solid extractant is composed of tri- Cyanex 923 liquid extractant is composed of a mixture of four main trialkylphosphine oxides (about 92%) The flat-sheet membrane used was Millipore Durapore GVHP4700, a 125-μm-thick microporous polyvinylidenedifluoride film with nominal porosity of 75%, effective pore size of 0.22 μm and tortuosity of 1.67. The FSSLM was impregnated with the corresponding carrier solution by immersion for 24 h and then leaving it to drip for 10 s before being placed in the transport cell. Previous tests demonstrated that longer immersion time do not influence metal transport. The FSSLM transport experiments were carried out with a two-compartment permeation cell consisting of a source phase (200 cm The percentage of metal transported was determined by monitoring the metal concentration by atomic absorption spectrophotometry in the source phase as a function of time: In all the transport experiments, the receiving phase contained water (distilled) as it is described in the literature that water is suitable for gold stripping from loaded organic phases In all the transport experiments carried out with Cyanex 921, stirring speeds of 1400 and 1000 min The influence of the addition of various inorganic salts to the source solution on the transport of gold by Cyanex 921 was evaluated. Organic solutions of 20% w/v Cyanex 921 in xylene were used. The source phase contained 25 μM of gold and 1 M of the corresponding salt. When no salts were added to the source phase, the percentage of gold transport was near 25%.  Further transport experiments were carried out with the same organic solution of 20% w/v Cyanex 921 in xylene and aqueous solutions of 25 μM gold(I) with and without 1 M LiCl. Results are shown in  The results obtained showed that the effectiveness of Cyanex 921 for gold transport is practically constant over almost the entire range of pH values, if carrier concentrations of 10% and 20% w/v are used. The influence of the initial gold concentration in the percentage of transport of this metal by Cyanex 921 was investigated. This study was carried out using source phases that contained various gold concentrations in 1 M LiCl and organic phases of 20% w/v Cyanex 921 in xylene. The results are shown in In order to investigate the effect of other metal-cyanide complexes accompanying Au(CN) The results obtained indicated negligible Ni(II) and Fe(III) transport, whereas the percentage of gold(I) transport reached 53% (after 3 h); if this value is compared with the corresponding data shown in Experimental work performed with Cyanex 923 was carried out at a pH of 10.0±0.1 in the source phase. Previous experiments had shown that in the case of Cyanex 923, the percentage of gold transport remained almost constant in the pH range of 6–11. In this pH range, the extraction of gold(I) cyanide by Cyanex 923 (and also Cyanex 921) is represented by the general equilibrium A number of experiments were performed to establish adequate hydrodynamic conditions. The transport across the membrane was studied as a function of the stirring speeds in the source and receiving solution sides. Results obtained are shown in The variation of the stirring speeds in the receiving phase has a negligible effect on the variation of the percentage of gold transport. Therefore, stirring speeds of 1400 and 1000 min Experiments were carried out using solutions of 30% v/v Cyanex 923 in xylene and aqueous solutions of 25 μM gold, which also contained 1 M of various salts. The influence of the diluent on both the stability and the efficiency of supported liquid membranes for the transport of metals has been reported in the literature The variation in the percentage of gold transported at different carrier concentrations is shown in The results obtained showed that increasing the carrier concentration in the membrane phase increased the percentage of gold transport although from 20% v/v Cyanex 923, the difference in the value is less significant than in the lower carrier concentration range.  Gold transport experiments were also carried out using TBP and DBBP as carriers. Results obtained from these series of experiments are shown in From the experimental data obtained from this investigation, it can be deduced that both Cyanex 921 and Cyanex 923, commercially available phosphine oxides, can be used as carriers for gold membrane transport from aqueous cyanide solutions even at alkaline pH values. For both carriers, the transport of gold is influenced by a number of variables, such as metal and carrier concentrations and the presence of inorganic salts in the aqueous source solution, especially lithium salts. Both carriers seem to present the same transport affinity for gold(I) cyanide although the liquid character of Cyanex 923 appears best suited for its use especially when using higher carrier concentrations in the membrane phase. Gold is transported selectively against other metal-cyano complexes presented in the source solution side, whereas phosphine oxides (i.e., Cyanex 923) seem to transport gold to a greater extent with respect to other neutral organophosphorous derivatives (i.e., TBP and DBBP). Mr.Bascones and Mr.López are gratefully acknowledged for their technical assistance.