A computer model was developed to simulate the cake formation and growth in cake filtration at an individual particle level. The model was shown to be able to generate structural information and quantify the cake thickness, average cake solidosity, filtrate volume, filtrate flowrate for constant pressure filtration or pressure drop across the filter unit for constant rate filtration as a function of filtration time. The effects of particle size distribution and key operational variables such as initial filtration flowrate, maximum pressure drop and initial solidosity were examined based on the simulated results. They are qualitatively comparable to those observed in physical experiments. The need for further development in simulation was also discussed.Cake filtration is one of the solid–liquid separation processes. It can be found in many industries, including, for example, mineral, chemical, food, pharmaceuticals and petroleum industries. The principle of cake filtration is to remove solid particles from a liquid by using a filtering medium which is permeable to fluid flow but does not allow the passage of solid particles. When a solid–liquid suspension (slurry) moves towards a medium, solid particles retain at the medium surface and form a filter cake. The cake thickness will increase with time. Therefore, cake formation and growth are most important dynamic processes in cake filtration. However, this dynamic behavior and its associated cake microstructure are usually not considered in the mathematical models proposed in the literature. Theoretical analysis of cake filtration began with the classical work of In cake filtration, cake formation and growth process are essential in particle packing process. The packing is not ordered. Instead particles generally form random or loose packing structures. Computer simulation is useful to understand cake formation and growth, like the case in the study of particle packing. In this paper, we developed a computer model to describe the dynamic cake formation and growth at an individual particle level. It can be used for modeling a three-dimensional flirtation system. The cake thickness The problem can be stated as follows. A mixed slurry under pressure drop Δ When a particle just touches the cake surface, it will contact with the medium surface, or one and then more stable particles. The process is operated with a two-stage scheme. At the initial stage, a constant rate filtration rate is used while the pressure drop Δ The fluid flow is one-dimensional, normal to the horizontal medium surface. Particles involved are spherical and larger than 1 A particle follows a one-dimensional path, and the influence of the sedimentation can be neglected, so that the particle velocity and the fluid velocity are same in the slurry layer. However, once the particle touches a particle at the cake surface, it may roll and/or fall further until a gravitationally stable position is found as described above. A stable particle is not in motion any more. The slurry is so dilute that the motion of a particle in sedimentation is not affected by other particles. So inter-particle forces as a result of particle collision can be fully neglected. In fact, the present model is better understood as a kinematic rather than dynamic model as no force is explicitly considered. The possible percolation of a small particle through pores among large particles is neglected. This is reasonable if A FORTRAN program is developed and We can use the following equation to calculate the cake thickness The average cake solidosity or packing density To avoid the influence of the so-called wall effect ( By use of the above computer model, the cake formation and growth in a filtration process can be simulated. As a first step to examine its applicability, the model was used to study the effect of particle size distribution, together with a few key operational variables, on filtration behavior. Thus, mono-sized or multi-sized particles were used. For a multi-sized case, we used binary mixtures of particles or particles with a lognormal size distribution. For binary mixtures, suppose particle diameter and fractional solid volume are respectively The simulations were conducted using the following initial data:  Under the present simulation settings, the performance of a caking process will depend on two types of variables. These include operational variables such as initial filtration rate (d  Average cake solidosity or packing density Because the interaction forces associated with fine particles such as the van der Waals and electrostatic forces are not considered in this work, the average solidosity of a cake is similar to that observed in the packing of coarse particles ( Filtration flowrate d As observed in  For particles with significant difference in sizes, solidosity should vary significantly (see, for example, Cake formation and growth process is in essence a particle packing process. In general, it can be modelled at three different length and time scales: of the processing equipment, of the computational cell, and of the individual particles ( However, the present model gives a constant structure under a given set of conditions because no forces have been considered explicitly. In fact, quite a number of forces involve in the cake filtration process, including the gravity, buoyancy, fluid drag, van der Waals and other complicated inter-particle forces. These forces will affect the flow and packing and hence the caking behaviour significantly and should be taken into account in order to generate realistic results, as already demonstrated in the study of other particulate processes (for example, see The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council for the financial support of this work.