This paper presents the results of using tiny microbubbles (MBs, diameter range: 1–16μm, D
                     32= 6.59μm) and MBs combined with “normal cyclone bubbles” (NBs) for the separation of finely emulsified oil (EO, d<16μm, D
                     32= 6.31μm) by a modified column flotation. EO samples were prepared from a palm oil product (Z67, Japan) and warm tap water, and the chemical oxygen demand (COD) of the influent and effluent was measured to estimate the treatment performance. The experiments were conducted in batch mode to observe the effects of treatment time, NB flow rate, initial EO concentration, pH, temperature, and salinity (NaCl) on the flotation method. Treatment by a combination of MBs with NBs was more efficient for EO separation than was treatment by MBs alone. For instance, at an EO concentration of 1009mgL−1 and under identical treatment conditions (treatment time: 60min, pH: 7.0, temperature: 36.5±0.5°C, and salinity: 0.0mgL−1), treatment by MBs and an MB/NB combination (NB flow rate: 2.5Lmin−1) yielded high EO removal efficiencies of 73% and 86%, respectively. The EO separation efficiency was steady under neutral (pH 7.0) to acidic (pH 3.1) conditions. Temperature and salinity significantly enhanced the efficiency of the flotation process. In the separation of oil-in-water emulsions, a modified column flotation method, which uses a variety of gas bubbles, was shown to be a high-potential approach for reducing the floated product and enhancing oil recovery; this simple method could also be applied for the design of an oil field wastewater treatment plant.In oil field wastewater, the oil concentration varies greatly from a few mg Numerous methods can be applied for the separation of oil-in-water emulsions, such as adsorption, coagulation, membrane filtration, biological treatment, flotation, hydrocyclone methods, electro-coagulation, and electro-coflotation ( Theoretical and practical implications of the flotation method showed that gas bubble size and density are the key factors influencing the gas flotation efficiency ( Considering the use of gas bubbles as a potential approach in the separation of EO for reducing the floated product and for oil recovery, a simple method for an oil–wastewater treatment plant has been developed. The main objective of this research was to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of fine EO separation by a modified flotation process under two process conditions: treatment by tiny MBs only and treatment by MBs in combination with “normal cyclone bubbles” (NBs). The experiments were conducted in batch mode to observe the effects of treatment time, NB flow rate, initial EO concentration, temperature, pH, and salinity on the flotation method. The materials used for preparing the EO samples were palm oil (Z67_Japan, density: 0.850 The main components of the designed experimental setup ( In the study, 15 According to the results, 100% of free palm oil was transferred to a fine EO ( MB size plays an important role in determining the efficiency of flotation methods. White water collector modelling by Edzwald (2010) indicated that smaller bubbles increase the performance of the flotation process ( The results of MB size distribution analyses ( The effect of NB flow rate on the removal of EO ( Applying the flotation method for the separation of very fine EO droplet sizes ( The application of a wide range of gas bubble sizes in the flotation process was shown to be beneficial for the EO removal. This can be explained by an increase in the bubble volume ( The performance upon changing the initial EO concentration was investigated over a range of EO concentrations of 103 In general, the efficiency of the flotation process is strongly dependent on the attachment of gas bubbles to fine particles ( The effect of temperature on the EO removal efficiency is shown in pH is an important factor influencing the emulsion breaking process. Strong acidic solutions have been applied to alter the pH levels before de-emulsification, such as H The changes in the EO treatment performance with the addition of different NaCl concentrations are shown in The experimental setup allows for efficient flotation to remove oil-in-water emulsions without using any coagulant. Separation of fine EO emulsions ( We would like to thank all of our colleagues in Division of Environmental Science and Engineering—Yamaguchi University for their valuable comments. The first author would like to acknowledge the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for funding his research.