Limiting the cracking of gibbsites during calcination can reduce the content of ultrafine particles in the smelter grade alumina product and increase the quality of products. However, the investigation on the cracking behaviour and mechanism of gibbsites during calcination remains a challenge. In this study, we focus on the cracking behaviour and mechanism of gibbsite grain boundary during calcination. We first observe the cracking behaviour of the gibbsite grain boundary during calcination and propose a cracking mechanism. Based on the observed crack evolution at the gibbsite grain boundary, we found that the cracking of gibbsite grain boundary is initiated on the surface of particles, and then the cracks grow into the inner side of particles with the calcination. We also investigate the impact of the crystallite size and the c-axis angle between crystallites on gibbsite grain boundary. As a result, the increased crystallite size and the c-axis angle between crystallites can result in increased crack size at the gibbsite grain boundary.Smelter grade alumina (SGA), produced by alumina refinery using the Bayer process, is the primary raw material for aluminium production. In the typical Bayer process, bauxite is firstly added to heated alkali in order to prepare the over-saturated solvent by dissolving the contained aluminium hydroxide and oxide [ In the final step of the Bayer process, gibbsite is calcined to produce SGA. During calcination, gibbsite particles can break and generate ultrafine particles. These ultrafine particles are of detrimental effects to the downstream aluminium production. The major side effect caused by ultrafine particles is inconsistent SGA feeding into the reduction cell. Low SGA feeding increases the emission of environmentally damaging perfluorocarbons due to electrolyte bath reduction, while excessive SGA feeding causes the sludging on the cathode, resulting in hot cells and poor process control [ Gibbsite particles cracking during calcination is usually considered to be induced by the shrinkage of crystallite caused by material conversion (largely alongside the c-axis) [ Structure and impurity of gibbsite particles are considered to influence the cracking of gibbsite particle during calcination [ Moreover, in order to propose the mechanism of grain boundary crack generation, we observed the internal morphology of grain boundary crack and restructured a three dimensional (3D) tomography model of grain boundary crack within calcined gibbsite particles. Mosaic gibbsite (consists of relatively smaller crystallites) and radial gibbsite (consists of relatively larger crystallites) provided by South 32 Worsley Alumina Pty Ltd. were applied as the raw material in this research. The typical SEM images of mosaic and radial gibbsite particles together with the crystallite size distribution are given in In order to observe gibbsite grain boundary’s cracking behaviour at increasing calcination temperature, mosaic and radial gibbsite samples were calcined in static air at 260, 450, and 470 °C respectively. The ramping rate was 10 °C•min In order to determine the impact of the c-axis angle between crystallites on gibbsite grain boundary cracking, mosaic and radial gibbsite was calcined at 260 °C in static air with a ramping rate of 10 °C • min In order to determine the impact of the c-axis angle between crystallites on gibbsite grain boundary cracking, mosaic and radial gibbsite was calcined at 260 °C. Cracks formed at grain boundary with the c-axis angle between crystallites larger and smaller than 90° were observed by JEOL 7001 SEM. The crack width is counted by Image J based on over 100 SEM images. FIB-SEM tomogram was applied to propose the gibbsite grain boundary’s cracking mechanism. Gibbsite was calcined in static air at 260 °C with a ramping rate of 10 °C•min The phase transmission of materials during calcination contributes to the internal stress formation by causing crystallite shrinkage and initiate crack generation by generating internal stress in gibbsite particles. Herein, we firstly analyse gibbsite calcined at different temperature by XRD, and the results are shown in In order to further identify the evolution of the crack at gibbsite grain boundary, we investigated SEM images and measured the width of the crack at the grain boundary of the calcined mosaic and radial gibbsite. The particle’s grain boundary remains impact from room temperature to 250 °C. The measured width distributions of the crack at the grain boundary of mosaic and radial gibbsite are presented in On the basis of the above observations, we can conclude that grain boundary is intact before calcination and starts to crack when gibbsite converts to boehmite at 260 °C due to the shrinkage of gibbsite crystallite caused by gibbsite conversion to boehmite. At the temperature range from 260 to 450 °C, grain boundary cracks still experience the increase in width, although there is no major phase conversion. This phenomenon can be explained by noting that the phase conversion of gibbsite crystallite during the calcination is heterogeneous. Due to the uneven thermal conduction of gibbsite, some incompletely converted parts exist inside the bulk of gibbsite, as observed in our previous work [ In order to understand the particle size effect on the grain boundary cracking, we calcined mosaic and radial gibbsite at different temperature. The cracks on the grain boundary of mosaic and radial gibbsite were observed, and the crack width distributions were measured and calculated.  In order to further analyse the influence of crystallite c-axis length on grain boundary cracking, we calculated the ratio of average crack size (nm) to crystallite’s average c-axis length (nm) for radial and mosaic at different calcination temperature and presented the result in  We further observed internal morphology at the grain boundary inside the particle bulk before and after calcination. On the basis of the crack morphology found above, we can propose a mechanism of gibbsite grain boundary cracking. The cracks are firstly initiated on the surface of particle. Then with further calcination, the cracks prolong into the bulk of particle. The cracking mechanism at the grain boundary of gibbsite particle can be attributed to the uneven thermal conduction of gibbsite [ Radial gibbsite is found to generate wider cracks at the grain boundary. This tendency can be attributed to the stronger stress generated by their large crystallites. As previously mentioned in the introduction, the motivation of cracking happens in gibbsite during calcination is the stress generated by crystallite shrinkage, which is majorly alongside crystallite’s c-axis. Radial gibbsite consists of majorly larger crystallites. Therefore, the stress generated by crystallite shrinkage during calcination is stronger, and the stronger stress causes the grain boundary to generate relatively wider cracks, as displayed in The c-axis angle between crystallites is also found to influence the width of crack at the grain boundary. As mentioned previously, grain boundary with a c-axis angle between crystallites larger than 90° tends to generate relatively wider crack. This tendency can be attributed to the stronger stress component perpendicular to the grain boundary. As mentioned previously, the crystallites shrinkage is majorly alongside their c-axis during calcination. For the grain boundary with crystallite c-axis angle over 90°, the stress component perpendicular to the grain boundary is stronger. Therefore they are likely to generate wide cracks. On the other hand, the stress component perpendicular to the grain boundary is weaker with crystallite c-axis angle below 90°, therefore the size of cracks on these grain boundary are reduced, as presented in Gibbsite grain boundary cracking during calcination is attributed to crystallite shrinkage caused by phase transition. Cracks appear on the gibbsite grain boundary at the calcination temperature of 260 °C when gibbsite converts to boehmite. Different from cracks on crystallites, cracks on grain boundary can still experience the increase in width although there is no major phase transition at the temperature range from 260 °C to 450 °C, due to the conversion of uncalcined parts in the bulk of crystallites. Cracks at grain boundary experience another growth when calcination temperature reaches to 470 °C and boehmite converts to amorphous alumina. The cracking of gibbsite grain boundary during calcination is found to be initiated on the particle surface and then grow into the bulk. Apart from the temperature effect, the crystallite size and the c-axis angle between crystallites are also found to impact the cracking behaviour of gibbsite grain boundary. Reducing the size and the c-axis angle between crystallites forming the grain boundary can result in decreased cracks at grain boundary of gibbsite. Our observation and understanding cracking and crack mechanism at the grain boundary of gibbsite can possibly limit the generation of ultrafine particles of SGA and improve the quality of SGA product. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the