This paper reports on continuous testing of a process for the recovery of vanadium from a H2SO4-HF solution, generated from the leaching of stone coal, by solvent extraction using a D2EHPA/TBP mixture as the extractant. Three unit processes are included: fully continuous countercurrent solvent extraction and stripping; oxidation and precipitation; and calcination. The solvent-extraction circuit was operated for 96h. With six stages of countercurrent extraction, 97.7% vanadium, 98.3% molybdenum, and 97.9% titanium were extracted, while the sodium, potassium, fluorine, and nickel impurities were barely extracted. Scrubbing removed co-extracted and aqueous-entrained zinc, magnesium, silicon, and arsenic impurities. Most co-extracted impurities were scrubbed in two stages. Using five stages of stripping, more than 99.8% of the vanadium was stripped, yielding a vanadium concentration in the loaded strip solution of 34.1g/L. Co-extracted molybdenum(VI), titanium(IV), and iron(III) remaining in the stripped organic phase were removed by a saturated sodium carbonate solution and the regenerated organic was reused for vanadium extraction. Vanadium was selectively precipitated with 98.5% efficiency from the loaded strip solution by oxidation and precipitation with ammonium sulfate. A high-purity V2O5 (99.61%) product was successfully produced by this flowsheet.Vanadium is always found in combination with various minerals, such as carnotite, roscoelite, vanadinite, mottramite, and patronite, which are important vanadium sources ( Traditionally, extraction of vanadium from stone coal has used roast–leach technologies, including sodium chloride roasting followed by water leaching ( Solvent extraction offers an attractive method for producing high-purity nonferrous metal products from complex leaching solutions. Previous studies ( Stone coal (from Hunan province, China) was the vanadium source employed. The acidic leach solution was generated by direct leaching in 160 Commercial D2EHPA, TBP, and sulfonated kerosene (as diluent) were purchased from Shanghai Rare-Earth Chemical Co., Ltd. Sodium sulfite, sulfuric acid, ammonium hydroxide, sodium carbonate, and hydrogen peroxide were purchased from the local market. All reagents were used as received. The trial included three unit processes: 1) Fully continuous countercurrent solvent extraction and stripping; 2) oxidation and precipitation; and 3) calcination. A flowsheet schematic is shown in The fully continuous countercurrent solvent-extraction operation comprised of six extractions, two scrubbing, and five stripping stages. Each stage consisted of an individual square box-type mixer and a settling compartment. The active mixer volume was 500 Our previous work ( Prior to starting continuous operation, all extraction compartments (EX1 to EX6) were proportionally filled with feed solution and fresh organic phase, before initiating the pumping of feed solution into EX1 and organic phase into EX6. The aqueous solution flowed from EX1 to EX6, while the organic phase flowed from EX6 to EX1. The two phases were fully mixed in each mixer, and separation of the aqueous and organic phases was observed during settling. Samples collected from each settling compartment and the final raffinate were analyzed. The oxidation and precipitation processes were conducted at atmospheric pressure in a 2000-mL glass stirred reactor placed in a temperature-controlled water bath. Vanadium(IV) was oxidized to vanadium(V) using H The ammonium polyvanadate was dried at 60 Vanadium concentrations in the aqueous phase were determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration using 2-(phenylamino)benzoic acid as an indicator ( The percentage extraction (% The objectives of the solvent-extraction trial were to: (a) further optimize the operating conditions for extraction, scrubbing, and stripping in fully continuous countercurrent operation based on data obtained in laboratory experiments; (b) study the behavior of vanadium and common impurities, and demonstrate the feasibility of the extraction process; and (c) accumulate data for plant design and operation. The aqueous-phase vanadium concentrations exiting each settling compartment are shown in The accumulative extractions of the common impurities in each extraction stage are shown in The separation factor ( In our previous laboratory study ( During continuous operation, the presence of unwanted impurities in the loaded organic phase resulting from co-extraction and aqueous entrainment is inevitable. Scrubbing is an option for production of high-purity products when using industrial solvent-extraction processes. To remove co-extracted and entrained impurities, the loaded organic phase was continuously scrubbed by 0.2 The main objective of the strip circuit was to maximize vanadium stripping efficiency, while minimizing the impurities stripped and keeping the residual acid in the loaded strip liquor as low as possible to minimize ammonia consumption in the following process step. In the five-stage countercurrent strip circuit, vanadium stripping increased and the free sulfuric acid in the strip liquor decreased with increasing numbers of strip stages. After continuous operation for 96 The results presented above indicate that the impurity behaviors can be divided into three groups. The first group comprises molybdenum(VI), titanium(IV), and iron(III), which were quantitatively extracted and not stripped by dilute sulfuric acid. The second group, comprising copper(II), arsenic(V), calcium(II), zinc(II), iron(II), and silicon, was partially extracted and can be scrubbed by dilute sulfuric acid. The third group of sodium, potassium, fluorine, and nickel barely extract was completely separated in the extraction and scrubbing processes. The behaviors of vanadium and the typical impurities of each group are shown in After vanadium stripping, low concentrations of molybdenum(VI), titanium(IV), iron(III), zinc(II), and copper(II) remain on the stripped organic phase, and should be removed to avoid aging of the extractant. To prevent accumulation of impurities and reduce the cost of regeneration, a 20% bleed of the total stripped organic was regenerated. This regenerated organic was mixed with the remaining stripped organic and recycled to vanadium extraction. The regeneration results are summarized in During regeneration, most of the titanium, iron, zinc, and copper were removed from the organic phase as hydroxide precipitates. Molybdenum forms various isopolyanions, such as MoO Vanadium(IV) in the strip solution needs to be oxidized to Vanadium(V) before precipitation. In the present study, H Following oxidation, vanadium can be precipitated by the addition of an ammonium salt, such as (NH After precipitation, the slurry was filtered and the filtrate (often referred to as mother liquor) was analyzed. The mother liquor contained 0.50 Following calcination, a powdery V A process flowsheet comprising fully continuous countercurrent solvent extraction, with six extractions, two scrubbing, and five stripping stages, followed by oxidation, precipitation, and calcination steps, successfully extracted and separated vanadium from an acidic solution generated by the leaching of stone coal. The behaviors of vanadium and common impurities in the extraction process are discussed in detail and the following conclusions are drawn. Using this solvent-extraction circuit configuration, an overall vanadium recovery of 96.4% was achieved and vanadium was concentrated from 3.56 Common impurities in the leach solution can be divided into three groups with respect to their solvent-extraction behavior. The first group comprises molybdenum(VI), titanium(IV), and iron(III), which were quantitatively extracted and not scrubbed or stripped by dilute sulfuric acid. The second group includes copper(II), arsenic(V), calcium(II), zinc(II), iron(II), and silicon, which were partially extracted and can be scrubbed by dilute sulfuric acid. The third group of sodium, potassium, fluorine, and nickel barely extract was completely separated in the extraction and scrubbing process. Organic regeneration is necessary to prevent impurity accumulation and extractant aging. Saturated sodium carbonate solution is an effective regenerant. High-purity V This work has been supported by the