Jinchuan is the largest nickel producer in China. The separation of pentlandite from serpentine gangue is difficult in this flowsheet because serpentine slime can attach to the valuable minerals as a slime coating. To solve this problem, the removal of different sized serpentine slimes from sulfide surfaces and its effect on flotation were studied using flotation experiments, particle size analysis, and X-ray diffraction. The results illustrated that the slime particles attached to coarse particle surfaces after grinding and depressed pentlandite flotation. The slimes comprised mainly MgO minerals. High-intensity conditioning could be used to remove the coarser slimes, while sodium hexametaphosphate could be used to remove the fine slimes. These two methods were used in combination in the flotation of Jinchuan nickel sulfide ore and the metallurgical performance was significantly improved: nickel recovery increased from 82.97% to 86.27% and the MgO content decreased to 6.22%.Nickel is a silvery-white transition metal, usually used as an alloying element in stainless steel and other alloy steels. Nickel deposits can be classified into two main groups: laterites and sulfides. Although nearly 70% of nickel resources are contained in laterites, the bulk of production comes from sulfides due to the complex and high-cost processing required for laterites ( Jinchuan Nickel Mine is located in Jinchang city, Gansu Province, China. It is the largest nickel producer in China. The value mineral in the ore is mainly pentlandite and the dominant gangue mineral is serpentine ( To improve the flotation separation efficiency of pentlandite from serpentine gangue, sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP), sodium silicate, carboxymethyl cellulose, and other agents can be used to disperse slime particles of MgO-type minerals on sulfide surfaces and improve sulfide flotation performance ( In this work, the removal of slimes from the sulfide surface by these two methods and the effect on Jinchuan nickel ore flotation is studied to provide a technical reference for the utilization of nickel sulfides that contain serpentine gangue. The ore sample was supplied by Jinchuan Corporation. The nickel grade of the sample was 1.43% and the MgO content was 34%. Quantitative X-ray diffraction indicated that the main sulfide minerals were pentlandite, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, and pyrite, while serpentine, olivine, and other magnesium silicate minerals were the main gangue minerals ( Ore samples were ground in a mild steel rod mill to a P70 of 74 μm. Sodium carbonate, as pH regulator was added to a dosage of 2500 g/t at the grinding stage. Bench-scale flotation tests for the nickel ore were performed in a self-aerated XFD-63 flotation cell (Nanchang Mining Machinery Company, China) with a volume of 1.5 L. The slurry was transferred to the flotation cell and diluted to 35% (w/w). The standard flotation tests were performed using an agitation speed of 1800 rpm. During the conditioning, dispersant SHMP, collector (150 g/t) and further (30 g/t) were added and conditioned for 3 min respectively. Then the flotation started with the injection of air into the flotation cell. A total of five concentrates were collected at times of 1, 3, 6, 10, and 15 min. The HIC studies were carried out similarly to the standard flotation tests, with the exception that PAX (150 g/t) was added and conditioned for different times at the required conditioning speed (see The removal of slime was measured using a sieving technique developed by To determine the mineral compositions and size distribution of the slimes, the +74 μm samples (No HIC) were also sonicated to remove the slimes and the supernatant was collected for XRD and size distribution analysis. Several studies have shown that coatings of slime form during the flotation of Jinchuan nickel ore ( To eliminate the adverse effect of slime on sulfide flotation, its removal from the coarse particle surfaces was studied using different methods.  The effects of conditioning time and conditioning speed on the flotation of Jinchuan nickel ore are shown in It can be seen from The result in The effect of SHMP dosage on the flotation of Jinchuan nickel sulfide ore is shown in HIC effectively removed the serpentine slime, reducing its coverage on the sulfide surface and improving flotation recovery; however, there were still fine slimes adhering to the surface of the sulfide mineral after HIC treatment, which would report to the flotation concentrate and reduce the concentrate grade. It is critical that the MgO levels in the concentrate are controlled to less than 6.8% to avoid causing processing problems in the flash furnace due to the adverse impact of MgO on the melt chemistry ( This rougher concentrate was further processed by different methods (the flow sheet is shown in Based on the results presented in The value mineral of Jinchuan nickel ore is pentlandite and the main gangue mineral is serpentine. Slimes particles attached to coarse particle surfaces after grinding and depressed pentlandite flotation. The slimes were mainly MgO minerals and the amount of fine slimes coated on the surfaces was more significant than that of coarser slimes. HIC could remove coarser slimes from the coarse particle surfaces, but fine slimes could not be removed by HIC and reported to the concentrate with the sulfide minerals, resulting in an increase in MgO content. HIC was suitable only for use in the rougher stage to improve recovery. The addition of SHMP could remove fine slimes from the coarse particle surfaces and was used in the cleaner stage to improve concentrate grade. The combined application of HIC and SHMP for flotation of Jinchuan nickel ore has been very successful. Compared with the production flow sheet, the nickel recovery was increased by approximately 3.3% and the MgO content was decreased by 0.68%. The authors acknowledge the support of the