Ectopic mineralization of soft tissues is known to be a typical response to systemic imbalance of various metabolic factors as well as tissue injury, leading to severe clinical consequences. In this study, coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) infection in mice resulted in significant tissue injury, especially in the heart and pancreas. Inflammatory damage and apoptotic cell death were observed in CVB3-infected heart and pancreas tissues. Along with tissue damage, substantial ectopic calcification was detected in CVB3-infected heart, pancreas, and lung tissues, as determined by von Kossa staining and calcium content quantification. In addition, CVB3 infection induced upregulation of osteogenic signals, including six genes (BMP2, SPARC, Runx2, osteopontin, collagen type I, and osterix) in the heart, three genes (SPARC, osteopontin, and collagen type I) in the pancreas, and two genes (BMP2 and alkaline phosphatase) in the lung, as determined by quantitative real-time PCR analysis. Intriguingly, we showed that α-lipoic acid diminished CVB3-mediated inflammatory and apoptotic tissue damage, subsequently ameliorating ectopic calcification via the suppression of osteogenic signals. Collectively, our data provide evidence that ectopic calcification induced by CVB3 infection is implicated in the induction of osteogenic propensity, and α-lipoic acid may be a potential therapeutic agent to ameliorate pathologic calcification.Pathological ectopic mineralization has been reported to be responsible for serious clinical outcomes in humans Final destined cells, considered to be terminal cells in specific tissues, can transdifferentiate into unwanted cells with entirely different properties distinct from intact cells. For instance, osteogenic transdifferentiation of cells within soft tissues results in localized and systemic calcification as well as irreversible dysfunction at the cellular and tissue levels. One of the most well known models of cell-mediated ectopic calcification is transdifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells into osteoblast-like cells, showing the formation of apoptotic bodies and membrane-bound matrix vesicles as well as the induction of osteogenic genes, including Despite these efforts, previous experimental animal models are not suitable for studying the pathological calcification process, and it remains difficult to analyze the mechanism of ectopic calcification in other soft tissues except for aortic blood vessels. Our recent study reported that mice infected with coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3), human pathogenic picornavirus with a single-stranded RNA genome, show increased serum levels of inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, TNF-α, and the receptor activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL), leading to substantial ectopic calcification in the heart, pancreas, and lung CVB3 (Nancy strain) was prepared in cultures of HeLa cells grown in DMEM (HyClone, Logan, UT, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (HyClone) and antibiotics (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Virus titer was measured in PFU/ml by plaque assay. Seven-week-old BALB/c mice were purchased from Central Lab Animal (Seoul, Korea) and maintained at the animal facility of Yeungnam University College of Medicine. All animal experiments were approved by the institutional review board of Yeungnam University Medical Center and were in compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Male mice at 7 Specimens fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde were embedded in paraffin and sectioned at a thickness of 4 For quantification of calcium in the heart, pancreas, and lung tissues were semi-dried and weighed. The tissues were then chopped into small pieces, and calcium deposited in tissues was extracted with 0.6 Apoptotic cells in heart, pancreas, and lung tissues from CVB3-infected or control mice were detected by using a TACS 2 TdT DAB Total RNA was extracted from tissues using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen). Two micrograms of total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using a M-MLV reverse transcription kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Takara Bio Inc, Japan) on the Applied Biosystems 7500 Sequence Detection System and software (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Relative gene expression levels were determined by the comparative Δ All results are expressed as means We extensively examined pathological signs in BALB/c mice following CVB3 infection. At three to four days after infection, mice exhibited reduced exercise performance as well as decreased food intake compared with control mice. A large amount of undigested food also remained in the intestinal tract of infected mice at 7 Ectopic calcification was detected in the heart, pancreas, and lung ( Ectopic calcification of soft tissues has been reported to be a cell-mediated, active pathological process similar to bone formation or osteogenesis We previously reported that ALA inhibits aortic calcification in mice In our analysis of the pathological signs of CVB3 infection in a mouse model, CVB3 infection resulted in severe damage to the heart and pancreas compared to other tissues as a result of persistent inflammation, and both body weight and subcutaneous fat content were reduced in CVB3-infected mice due to apparent malnutrition and subsequent increased consumption of fatty acids to satisfy the energy demands of other tissues. Pathogenesis of soft tissue calcification is known to involve multiple and complex factors as follows: (i) metabolic factors, including oxidative stress, inorganic phosphate, and vitamin D ALA, a naturally occurring antioxidant, is known to be a potent and ideal antioxidant capable of directly scavenging oxidants and enhancing levels of other antioxidants, and it inhibits the intrinsic mitochondrial apoptotic pathway This work was supported by grants from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 