Objective
                  This study assessed the reliability and validity of masticatory function assessment using a new test food, Optozeta.
               
                  Design
                  Thirty-five adults participated in the cross-sectional clinical part of the study; ten of them performed a retest. They performed two free-style masticatory tests consisting of five trials of 20 cycles each chewing three pieces of Optosil or Optozeta placed in a latex bag. Optozeta was created by mixing 50% Optosil with 50% of Zetalabor. Masticatory performance, masticatory laterality and chewing rate were assessed. Reliability and construct validity were assessed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and Spearman correlations, respectively.
               
                  Results
                  Higher ICC values were observed for each aspect of masticatory function as assessed using Optozeta compared with Optosil. All the participants showed a lower median particle size value using Optozeta than Optosil. For each masticatory parameter, a high correlation was observed between using Optosil or Optozeta.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Optozeta seems to have good construct validity and appears to be more reliable than Optosil as a test food to assess masticatory function.Restoration or improvement of masticatory function is a major objective of prosthodontic treatment ( Another important aspect of oral function is masticatory laterality, or masticatory jaw movements, and this can also be assessed using pieces of the artificial test food Optosil placed either in a latex bag or used freely ( The main objective of this study was to compare the reliability of masticatory performance assessment using Optozeta or Optosil as the test food. We also aimed to assess the reliability of masticatory laterality and chewing rate measurements using Optozeta as a test food, and to assess the construct validity with regard to masticatory performance, masticatory laterality and chewing rate using Optozeta as a test food. A preliminary study was aimed to compare hardness and elongation at breaking point of Optozeta with those of Optosil over the first 7 This study consisted of 2 parts: an in vitro and preliminary study to assess the mechanical properties of Optozeta and a clinical study to validate the new test food as a means of assessing masticatory function ( In the in vitro study, 33 specimens of Optosil (Optosil P Plus; Heraeus Kulzer, Hanau, Germany) and 33 specimens of Optozeta were prepared. Of these, 18 specimens per group were dumbbell-shaped (120 In the cross-sectional clinical study, 35 adults (23 women and 12 men; age range: 19–77 years, mean age 37), were recruited from students and staff at the University of Barcelona Dental School (Catalonia, Spain) and from patients attending the Barcelona University Dental Hospital. Of the participants, 25 had natural dentition, 6 wore removable partial or complete dentures, and 4 wore implant-supported partial prostheses ( Each participant performed two different masticatory assays each consisting of five trials of 20 cycles each chewing 2 Masticatory performance was evaluated for each masticatory assay by assessing the degree of comminution of the silicon test food ( The sample size for the main objective was calculated considering a type I error of 0.05 and a power of 0.8 in order to find an ICC of 0.9, a 95% CI of 0.2 and a test-retest of 2 time points ( The two-way ANOVA showed that time after processing and the type of silicone affected hardness (P To assess the test-retest reliability of the masticatory performance using Optozeta or Optosil as the test food, participants were excluded if their MPS was higher than 10.6 To assess the construct validity with regard to masticatory performance, among 35 participants eleven (6 with removable dentures and 5 with natural dentition) were excluded because their MPS obtained with Optosil was more than 10.6 The main finding of this study was that assessing masticatory performance using Optozeta as the test food is more reliable than doing with Optosil; therefore, the null hypothesis was rejected. This was corroborated in the clinical study, in which Optozeta showed better discrimination between participants and better agreement between sessions; not only for masticatory performance, but also for masticatory laterality and chewing rate. Furthermore, all the participants had a smaller MPS using Optozeta than with Optosil and three of them would not have been excluded taken into account the MPS values using Optozeta. Moreover, the scores for each aspect of masticatory function obtained using Optozeta as the test food were consistent with scores of masticatory function obtained using Optosil, thereby demonstrating a good construct validity of Optozeta as a test food to assess masticatory function. The masticatory performance of most of the participants with natural dentition or wearing implant-supported prostheses was assessed adequately using Optozeta. However, 4 of the 6 participants with removable dentures were not assessed adequately with Optozeta. This could be explained by the lower bite force of these patients or the fact that these patients wore removable dentures with defects. It is known that people who wear removable dentures have approximately 2- to 6-times less bite force than dentate adults ( The mechanical properties of the new test food showed that energy input was more likely to cause it to break than simply to deform. Therefore, although a slightly greater force was needed to indent it than was needed for Optosil, similar force would break Optozeta into smaller particles. The mechanical properties of Optozeta were more stable for the first 7 The mechanical properties of different types of silicone have been compared with those of different natural foods ( The Masticatory Normative Indicator, based on the median particle size before swallowing, is considered a valid discriminator between normal and impaired masticatory function using carrots or Optosil as a test food ( Masticatory laterality has also been assessed using various test foods, including chewing gum, natural foods, and artificial test foods. Optosil (placed in a latex bag or loose) has been demonstrated to be a reliable test food for assessing this function in adults with natural dentition ( One of the limitations of the present study is that reliability was measured in individuals with natural dentition and, thus only applicable on this population. However, the masticatory function of the four patients with implant-supported prosthesis was similar to the individuals with natural dentition with good masticatory performance. Therefore, it is likely that Optozeta be a better test food than Optosil to measure masticatory function in patients with implant-supported prosthesis, but this extrapolation should be taken with caution. Another weakness of this study was the small sample size in the test-retest, and, although it was sufficient to know which test-food makes the more reliable method, it was probably insufficient to know the actual magnitude of reliability. In conclusion, Optozeta appears to be more reliable than Optosil as a test food to assess masticatory performance, masticatory laterality and chewing rate. Optozeta seems to have good construct validity as a test food to assess masticatory function. Optozeta is harder than Optosil and it is also more stable for the first 7 The authors confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This research received partial funding from the This study was approved by the Barcelona University Dental Hospital Ethics Committee (Code 2015/32). The authors gratefully acknowledge the mechanical tests performed by Biomaterials, Biomechanics and Tissue Engineering Group, Department Materials Science and Metallurgical Engineering, ETSEIB Technical University of Catalonia (UPC). The authors would like to thank Dr Christopher Evans for editing the text.