The present paper deals with the grindability experimental results of an Australian bauxite sample in the Universal Hardgrove mill, the Universal Bond ball mill and the heat insulated Bond Rod Mill in the temperature range from 20 up to 80°C. As previously observed the grindability of the bauxite has improved at elevated temperature. The specific grinding energy decreased. Correlation between the Bond Work Indices calculated from three different method (HGI, Bond Ball Mill Work Index and Bond Rod Mill Work Index) was established. Appropriate correlation in the investigated temperature interval was found. Pore size distribution, SEM and BET results show that in spite of the good correlation between the grindability characteristics, the material properties of the ground products have significant differences. Namely, the various grinding stresses resulted in different material pore size distribution and specific surface area.The grindability or the resistance of materials against mechanical stress is a very important material characteristic. This property significantly affects the milling operation, the efficiency of the grinding process, the power requirement for grinding, etc. The dimensioning of mills and the specific energy demand determination are based on the knowledge of the grindability of a given material. Grindability is generally characterized by the grinding work required for a unit weight or a unit volume of material. This material property is determined in a standard apparatus under exactly defined conditions. However, several problems can arise during mill dimensioning. Some of them originate from the determination of the grindability. Three different grindability indices – the Bond work index (BWI), the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) and the Zeisel specific grindability (W Due to the extreme conditions of bauxite grinding during the Bayer process, i.e. high temperature and caustic liquor, the laboratory investigation of its grindability requires special apparatus and methods. The Institute of Raw Material Preparation and Environmental Processing at the University of Miskolc have developed the Universal Hardgrove mill ( Hardgrove Grindability Index of various bauxites was investigated in alkaline media as well as in water (    The above developed simulation methods are proven for dry grinding. However, there are many industrial applications where wet, alkaline or acidic grinding is performed at high temperature where the conventional tests and simulations cannot be used reliably. Based on the systematic research work carried out on bauxite grindability in spent liquor, Temperature and alkaline liquor have a significant effect on the grindability of bauxites for which the increase in temperature involves chemical reactions as well (chemical and mechanochemical effects occur). Similar results were found by Possible reasons of the Bond work index decrease were revealed: (1) the reaction of kaolinite and amorphous silica with caustic liquor (and lime) and the loss of the textural structure, (2) the dissolution of the aluminium hydroxide and (3) the physical characteristics, namely the density and the specific surface area of the particles have significant impact on the grindability in the case of hot alkaline grinding of bauxite. In addition to the significant decrease of grinding energy, advantages may appear in further processes (especially during alkaline extraction), which must be taken into account when testing the given material. In the case of grinding under alkaline media conditions it is suggested to apply the above presented methods instead of traditional dry grinding tests at ambient temperature to predict the specific grinding work more accurately. Based on the good correlation between methods it can be stated that HGI and BWI can be interconvertable. In such cases too, the Universal Hardgrove mill provides advantageous application possibilities for testing the grindability and for estimating the Bond work index for mill dimensioning and operating parameter (size distribution of grinding media, ball filling ratio, operation of classifier, etc.) selection resulting in significant savings in both investment and operating costs. Of course, further experiments are necessary at the industrial scale to ensure these last statements concerning an industrial application are valid.  In 2011 a heat insulated Bond rod mill was constructed at the Institute. The objective of this paper is to investigate the correlation between the Bond Work Indices of an Australian bauxite. A further aim was to study the effect of various mills (grinding stresses) on the material characteristics like pore size distribution, BET specific surface area, microstructure by SEM and material structure by FTIR. The investigated lateritic bauxite sample (gibbsitic) originated from the Darling Range in Western Australia. The main physical characteristics of the ‘as received’ sample can be found in During the systematic experimental series three various grindability tests were used, namely (1) the Universal Hardgrove mill method, (2) the Universal Bond ball mill method and (3) the modified Bond Rod mill test. In the case of the Universal Hardgrove mill the required temperature was achieved using an electrically heatable jacket around the grinding chamber which can be heated within the temperature range of 20 to 300 Our previous Hardgrove experimental results proved ( The traditional Bond grindability test ( The Bond Ball Mill Work Index (BWI) is used in conjunction with Bond's Third Theory of Comminution to calculate grinding net energy requirements. The test is conducted in a horizontal axis ball mill with rounded corners and smooth lining. The ball charge consists of 285 balls of different sizes weighing 20.125 During the development work by University of Miskolc this type of batch mill was equipped with a suitable heating jacket and the procedure was improved for alkaline media. The electric heating of the Universal Bond mill ( The evaluation of the experimental result is completed following the “standard” of the Bond procedure, viz. the Bond work index (kWh/t) is determined using by the following equation: The detailed description of the developed Universal Bond and Hardgrove test procedures and devices was written by The Bond Rod Mill Work Index (RWI) is used in conjunction with Bond's Third Theory of Comminution to calculate net energy requirements for sizing rod mills. The test is conducted in a 305 This index allows more precise calculation of comminution energy requirements. In the calculation of the total energy requirement using the Bond procedure the RWI is used for secondary crusher product size 25 The RWI allows further observation of the behavior of the ore at larger particle sizes. An ore with a significantly higher RWI than BWI shows a tendency to be more competent at larger particle sizes and may indicate problems in SAG milling ( In the determination of RWI the representative ore is staged crushed to 100% -12.5 In order to perform grindability tests under high temperature a thermal insulator jacket was constructed for the previously presented Bond Rod Mill. The developed rod mill can be seen in Pore size distribution of the ground bauxite samples using mercury intrusion porosimetry ( Pores in the material can be determined by the volume of mercury, which is a non-wetting liquid. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopic measurements of the bauxite samples were carried out using a JASCO FT-IR 4200 type Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer in attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode (single bounce, diamond crystal). The average of three spectra was used for each sample. The morphology and microstructural characterization of ground bauxite samples were carried out using a Hitachi TM-1000 Tabletop Scanning electron microscope equipped with energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). The accelerating voltage was 15 BET specific surface area (SSA) of the bauxite samples were determined by a Micromeritics Tristar Data were measured by the use of nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms at liquid nitrogen temperature and relative pressures (P/P The grindability of the Australian bauxite was measured with the previously discussed modified Bond ball-, rod- and the Universal Hardgrove mill run in parallel at different temperatures but using the same caustic liquor. The alkaline grinding experiments were performed in Bayer refinery liquor with a concentration of 190 To determine the grindability indices of bauxite experimentally, first dry grinding tests were carried out under “standard” Hardgrove test conditions at room temperature. With the bauxite in liquor grinding tests, a slurry was prepared from the dry bauxite and liquor and subsequently fed into the mill. The mass concentration of the slurry was 37% m/m in each test. In the case of the Universal Bond ball and rod mill tests, closed-cycle grinding was carried out as follows: firstly, the average moisture content of the sieve residue was determined after the first grinding cycle, and knowing this value, the dry mass of the wet screen residue was calculated using this number in the later grinding cycles. This method was introduced by The particle size distribution of the mill product was measured by HORIBA LA-950V2 laser diffraction particle size analyzer in wet mode using distilled water as dispersing media and sodium-pyrophosphate as dispersing agent. In this section the results of the grindability experiments, FTIR, pore size distribution, SEM and BET studies are presented, respectively. The results of the systematic grindability experimental series are presented in three parts: 1) Universal Hardgrove mill, 2) Bond Ball mill and 3) Bond Rod mill. Then, the results of each test are discussed. Average values were calculated from duplicate Universal Hardgrove mill measurements at each temperature. The Bond work indices calculated from the Hardgrove Grindability indices are plotted in The Bond ball mill work indices obtained at various temperatures can be seen in However, the R-squared is 0.64. A line can reliably describe the relation of the Bond Rod Mill work index (RWI) and the temperature as shown in Based on these results, it can be seen that temperature has a significant effect on the Bond rod mill work index, i.e., grindability improves significantly with an increase in temperature. It can be seen that all three work indices decrease with increasing temperature. In addition, the slope of the fitted lines for both the calculated (from HGI) Bond work index and Bond Ball Mill work index are almost the same, however, the Bond Rod Mill work index curve is steeper such that increasing temperature significantly improves grindability. This difference between Bond Rod mill and Ball mill or Hardgrove mill curve slopes is presumably due to the coarser feed particle size of the Rod mill experiments ( Additionally, at various temperatures the changed viscosity and surface tension of the Bayer liquor allows different penetration into the micro- and mezopores of the particles. In this way the chemical effect of the liquor takes part more efficiently when the rheological behavior of the suspension is Newtonian, resulted in decreasing the grinding energy. The grindability coefficient (G) as function of temperature in the case of Bond ball mill and Bond rod mill grindability tests is presented in R-squared As The relative and cumulative pore size distribution of the Hardgrove, ball and rod milled bauxite samples are discussed here. The relative pore volume distribution of Hardgrove milled samples can be seen in The finest pore volume distribution was found at ambient temperature grinding (median size 0.45 In the case of Bond ball milled samples, the amount of coarse pores (10–100 It should be noted that, in addition to the effect of mechanical stresses on the particle characteristics (pore size distribution), residence time is an influential factor ( Increasing the temperature of rod milled samples results in the appearance of more fine pores in the sub micron size range ( In the rod mill the dominant grinding stress is impact which resulted in the finest pore size distribution, followed by the Hardgrove milled samples, where compression is the relevant grinding load. The coarsest pore size distribution was observed when the cascade movement of the grinding media generated abrasion, friction in the ball mill. The characteristic pore size values of the volumetric pore size distribution curves ( The characteristic pore sizes increased as a function of temperature in the case of the Hardgrove mill. The data from the Ball milled sample shows a slight decrease and then a slight increase (almost constant). However, in the case of the rod milled sample the characteristic pore sizes decreased dramatically. It is important to note that the chemical reactions played an important role in the observed effects beside the mechanical stresses in addition to the respective grinding tests. Therefore, the mechanochemistry of the above material-process system is of great importance. FTIR spectra of feed bauxite and milled product is shown in The peaks at 1020–960 Since there are not significant differences between the spectra, it can be concluded from the FTIR results that structural changing did not occur due to the alkaline grinding in any of the mills. Only in case of 60  In Scanning Electron Microscopy images were taken for monitoring the variation in the surface of the fracture and microstructure of the ground bauxite samples. SEM micrographs in On the other hand significant differences were found between particles in terms of surface attack; for instance BET measurement results of specific surface area (SSA) are shown in The specific surface area of the Hardgrove milled samples remained almost constant. Only slight fluctuations can be seen which correlate well with the results of the pore size distribution where only slight changes were observed as well. Concerning the contact time with hot liquor, the Hardgrove mill only operates for three minutes in batch mode, which results in only very small chemical changes caused by the alkaline liquor at temperature in comparison to the reaction times for the rod and ball mill tests where closed cycle grinding is carried out. This might be the reason of the constant BET specific surface area of the ground bauxite. Based on the research results the following conclusions can be drawn: Rod mill tests under strongly alkaline conditions can be undertaken using the modified Rod Mill in order to simulate the circumstances of bauxite grinding during the Bayer process. Grinding work indices for bauxite in liquor reduce as a function of temperature (specific grinding energy decreases). The grindability method and apparatus, either Hardgrove, Bond ball or Bond rod mill, will have differing effects on bauxite milled under elevated temperature and alkaline conditions and is characteristic of the mill type. These differences can be observed using porosity and surface area measurement and depend not just on grinding technique but also the contact time of bauxite and liquor during the test. Furthermore, in the next stage of our research it is planned to carry out a systematic research work on the correlation of grindability, rheological and leaching characteristics of bauxite. The described research work was carried out in the framework of Centre of Excellence of Sustainable Resource Management, University of Miskolc. Additionally, authors greatly appreciate the help of ALCOA Australia for supporting the bauxite sample.