In the present study, the effects of a calcium magnesium silicate bioactive ceramic (akermanite) on proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSC) have been investigated and compared with the classical ceramic (β-tricalcium phosphate, β-TCP). Akermanite and β-TCP disks were seeded with hBMSC and kept in growth medium or osteogenic medium for 10 days. Proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation were evaluated on day 1, 4, 7 and 10. The data from the Alamar Blue assay and lactic acid production assay showed that hBMSC proliferated more significantly on akermanite than on β-TCP. The analysis of osteoblast-related genes, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP), osteopontin (OPN), bone sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin (OC), indicated that akermanite ceramics enhanced the expression of osteoblast-related genes, but type I collagen (COL I) showed no noticeable difference among akermanite and β-TCP ceramics. Furthermore, this stimulatory effect was observed not only in osteogenic medium, but also in normal growth medium without osteogenic reagents such as l-ascorbic acid, glycerophosphate and dexamethasone. This result suggests that akermanite can promote osteoblastic differentiation of hBMSC in vitro even without osteogenic reagents, and may be used as a bioactive material for bone regeneration and tissue engineering applications.The replacement or augmentation of bone tissue lost caused by injury or disease remains an important surgical challenge. Good biocompatibility makes certain bioceramics very attractive for use as implants Akermanite (Ca Marrow stromal cells (MSC) are known as adult stem cells, which can be differentiated into various types of cells including osteoblasts, chondroblasts and adipoblasts under appropriate conditions In the present study, we investigated the effects of ceramics upon hBMSC morphology, proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation as compared with Akermanite and hBMSC were isolated and expanded using a modification of methods previously reported At the time of cell seeding, cells were enzymatically lifted from culture dishes with trypsin/EDTA (Invitrogen; Carlsbad, CA). Cells were centrifuged for 5 The hBMSC were cultured on the akermanite and For cell proliferation assays, cells were seeded on biomaterial disks in 24-well plates at 5×10 The content of lactate in the culture medium was analyzed using the The hBMSC were seeded on the akermanite and Total RNA was isolated from hBMSC using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Addition of chloroform to the thawed cell extract separated the RNA into an aqueous phase, which was recovered and precipitated with isopropanol. The RNA pellet was washed with 70% ethanol treated with the RNase inhibitor diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC), and then solubilized in sterile DEPC water. Concentration of RNA was determined from the optical density of the sample measured at 260 All measurements were collected with In order to reveal the cell adhesion to the surfaces of the two distinctive biomaterials, hBMSC cultured on the biomaterials were examined by SEM 24 The Alamar Blue assay was used to compare cell proliferation on different biomaterials based on detection of metabolic activity. Analysis of these data showed that proliferation proceeded more significantly on akermanite than on The hBMSC were cultured on akermanite and RT-PCR for the detection of several markers for osteoblastic differentiation was done at 4 and 7 days after hBMSC growth on biomaterials based upon the data from ALP activity studies. It was determined that ALP gene expression was increased when the cells were cultured on akermanite as compared to culture on We investigated the effects of akermanite on proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of hBMSC. The stimulatory effects of akermanite ceramics on hBMSC were compared with The success of bone substitution materials largely depends upon the formation of mechanically stable and strong interface between materials and bone tissue The results presented in this study demonstrated that akermanite ceramics promoted proliferation of hBMSC with a higher rate proliferation as compared with Differentiation of hBMSC is one of the key processes for bone regeneration. The hBMSC grown on the akermanite disks expressed a higher level of ALP activity and mRNA for osteoblastic differentiation-associated genes such as OPN, BSP and OC as compared with those of the As the previous studies show, the Mg together with Si and Ca concentrations in medium increased after soaking the akermanite ceramics Our findings demonstrate that, in addition to the enhancement of cell proliferation, akermanite promoted osteoblastic differentiation of hBMSC in vitro by up-regulating osteogenic gene expression. Akermanite bioactive ceramics not only enhanced the osteoblastic differentiation of hBMSC in osteogenic media ( This work is supported by the National Basic Science Research Program of China (973 Program) (Grant no. 2005CB522700) and Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (Grant no. 05JD14005).