Introduction
                  Management of distal femur fractures above total knee arthroplasty (TKA) remains challenging. Two common surgical options are locked lateral plating (LLP) and distal femoral arthroplasty (DFR). Unfortunately, approximately 30–50% of patients may die within one year of injury, require further surgery, or not regain prior mobility performance. We compared 87 LLP to 53 DFR patients – to our knowledge the largest comparative study – focusing on 90- and 365-day mortality, mobility maintenance, and further surgery.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective review of patients at least 55 years old who sustained femur fractures near a primary TKA (essentially OTA-33 or Su types 1, 2, or 3) from 2000 to 2015 assigning cohort based on treatment: LLP or DFR. We excluded patients having prior care for the injury, whose surgery was not for fracture (e.g. loosening), or having other surgical intervention (e.g. intramedullary nail).
               
                  Results
                  Results Cohorts were similar based on body mass index and age adjusted Charlson Comorbidity Index (aaCCI). LLP was more common than DFR for fractures above and at the level of the implant, but similar for fractures within the implant for patients with aaCCI ≥ 5. LLP and DFR had similar mortality at 90 days (9% vs 4%) and 365 days (22% vs 10%), need for additional surgery (9% vs 3%), and survivors maintaining ambulation (77% vs 81%). Patients whose surgery occurred 3 or more days after presentation had similar mortality risk to those whose surgery was before 3days. The mean age of one year survivors was 77 whereas for patients who died it was 85. Neither surgical choice nor aaCCI was associated with increased risk in time to surgery.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Fracture location, remaining bone stock, and patient’s prior mobility and current comorbidities must guide treatment. Our study suggests that 90- and 365-day mortality, final mobility, and re-operation rate are not statistically different with LLP vs DFR management.Recent studies have highlighted the poor prognosis of geriatric patients with distal femur fractures We performed an Institutional Review Board-approved retrospective cohort study of patients treated for distal femur periprosthetic fractures at a single network of tertiary referral hospitals between 2000 and 2015. Patients were identified by reviewing operative logs of all femur fracture surgeries and manually reviewing imaging to confirm implant used. All fractures fit the general classification of OTA-33. We included patients who were at least 55 years old, had a femur fracture near an existing TKA (as proximal as the diaphyseal-metaphyseal transition) and had no fracture care prior to our initial LLP or DFR. We excluded patients with non-primary TKA, any treatment prior to our initial fracture surgery, or management with any technique other than LLP or DFR. Patient factors evaluated included age at injury, Charlson Comorbidty Index (CCI) as well as age-adjusted CCI (aaCCI), body mass index (BMI), and smoking status. Major outcome measures were re-operations, 90- and 365 The CCI is a common validated metric for estimating future mortality and is a weighted sum tally of existing patient diseases. A value of one point each is given for myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, connective tissue disease, peptic ulcer disease, mild liver disease, and uncomplicated diabetes; two points each for hemiplegia, moderate to severe renal disease, complicated diabetes, malignancy within five years of diagnosis, leukemia, or lymphoma; three points each for moderate to severe liver disease, and six points each for AIDS (not HIV) and metastatic solid tumor. The one year mortality for the different scores is estimated at: 0 points A total of 87 LLP and 53 DFR patients fit inclusion and exclusion criteria.   Based on two recent studies of patients with distal femur fractures managed with LLP with  Patient age has been identified as an independent risk of mortality There were nine complications requiring re-operations in the LLP cohort and three re-operations in the DFR cohort within one year of treatment. Patients who had a fasciotomy performed at the index surgery and were taken back for routine irrigation and debridement (I&D) and dressing reapplication or skin grafting were not counted as re-operations as these are an expected part of the injury care and not a complication. Two LLP patients had removal of a prominent screw (at 2 and 335 Our series of 87 LLP and 53 DFR represents the largest distal femur Clouding the understanding of the outcomes of patients with this injury is the lack of agreement in the relevant variables and outcomes to be assessed. Patients experiencing this injury tend to be older and frailer, with some authors drawing comparisons to geriatric hip fracture patients Delaying surgical care more than two calendar days after presentation has been associated with increased mortality both for native joint and arthroplasty patients Recent studies have identified age 78 In addition to the size of our cohorts, strengths of our study were the similarity of our patients by as assessed by demographics and aaCCI, suggesting they are likely comparable cohorts. All patients had a primary TKA and presented immediately after acute fracture; there were no confounding infections, revisions, nonunions, or other prior procedures obfuscating comparison. We also had similar numbers of patients of both treatment cohorts whose fracture was within the femoral component (essentially Su type 3 We had hoped to test the hypothesis that DFR patients would achieve unassisted weight bearing sooner than LLP patients. However, in review of our physical therapist notes, it is apparent that although DFR patients are permitted and encouraged to bear full weight immediately, nearly no patients were able to do this and ambulate at least 10 feet before being discharged. Since our hospitals can transfer patients directly to inpatient rehabilitation facilities, many were transferred within 2–3 The main weakness of this study is the retrospective design. We also pooled data from over 10 surgeons; their own biases and expertise may have influenced not only the procedure choice but potentially also led to variability in the technical skill and post operative management. As a geographically broad referral hospital system, we may also have selection bias as patients too sick or too challenging for management at their local hospital or by their original surgeon may be preferentially referred. In other words, we may have treated a disproportionately unhealthy population of The management of femur fractures above TKA remains challenging. Approximately 20% of patients may die within one year of injury, 30% may not regain prior mobility performance, and 10% may require at least one further operation. Factors such as fracture location and remaining bone stock, as well as patient’s prior mobility and current comorbidities must guide treatment. Our current study suggests that 90- and 365