Thermal stability of CoCrFeNi high entropy alloy in as-milled and sintered conditions was investigated using X-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, transmission electron microscopy, and atom probe tomography. Composite microstructure consists of FCC and carbide with a fine dispersion of oxide was observed in the sintered condition. Unsolicited contamination of carbon and oxygen in the as-milled powder due to the milling medium had led to the formation of composite microstructure. An exceptional thermal stability was observed upon exposure of sintered compact to higher temperatures (0.56Tm to 0.68Tm) for the prolonged duration of 600h. Sintered compact exposed to 700°C (0.56Tm) for 600h showed negligible change in hardness and grain size. Analysis based on the modified Hall-Petch model for two phase alloy indicates the phase boundaries act as a strong obstacle while the major contribution to strengthening comes from grain boundaries.Alloy design, since its discovery Among the processing routes, MA is a solid state processing route originally developed to produce oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) nickel and iron base superalloys In spite of the initial promise by HEAs for a large number of compositions, most of the studies are limited to few elemental compositions. Among them, HEAs consisting of Co, Cr, Fe, and Ni with the addition of other elements such as Al/Ti/Mn are more prominent than any other combinations The equimolar CoCrFeNi alloy was synthesized by MA from pure metal powders and subsequently consolidated at 900  It is important to note that the second phase was interpreted to be a sigma phase The DSC trace of CoCrFeNi MA powder ( No further phase changes were observed in the milled powders when exposed in the temperature range of 700  The grain growth is almost negligible for samples annealed at 700   It is also interesting to note that the composition of the carbide phase in the as-sintered condition and after heat treatment at 1000 Having established the formation of FCC phase together with the carbide phase and oxide precipitates, it is necessary to rationalize the stability of carbide and oxide. Similarly, it is also important to examine the possible reasons for an excellent thermal stability observed in this alloy. Thus, the following discussion illustrates the various aspects involved in formation and stability of Cr In general, there are three types of stable chromium carbides: Cr As shown in TGA curves of A general expression for grain growth kinetics is given by Sriharitha et al. Hardness dependence on grain size can be expressed in the form of Hall-Petch equation, which is given by Wu et al. also observed the similar values for single FCC phase CoCrFeNi alloy [H The Hall-Petch relation expressed in Eq. The modified Hall-Petch relation is expressed as The overall efficiency of strengthening, k The overall hardness H Based on the APT analysis, it is quite reasonable to assume that FCC phase in the present CoCrFeNi alloy is primarily composed of Co, Fe, and Ni. Wu et al. reported the value of H Since the Hall-Petch coefficient only indicates the efficiency of strengthening and in order to estimate the individual contribution of strengthening from grain boundaries and phase boundaries, the Hall-Petch coefficient is multiplied by the topological parameter The first, second, and third part of the right-hand side in Eq. In a polycrystalline material, the strength of an alloy is a combination of several strengthening mechanisms. In the present study, the strengthening may be primarily because of precipitation strengthening and grain boundary strengthening. Thus, the total hardness can be expressed as It is of our opinion that implications of this study are quite profound and suggestive for further ideas in the direction of designing thermally stable microstructures. Thus, based on this comprehensive study, the following are the possible variants of the microstructure that can be thought of giving similar or better thermal stability. By varying the carbon and oxygen content or both of them independently, one can vary the concentration of carbide phase (B) and oxide phase (C) in an HEA matrix phase, and hence their thermal stability can also be controlled depending on the application requirement. Thus, such alloys can also be anticipated to be having better high-temperature properties due to their thermal stability. A similar strategy will be to design phases similar to B or C that can be coherent phases (similar to gamma prime phase in superalloys) within HEA matrix phase, so that their room temperature strength and creep strength can be increased quite significantly. Recently, He et al. Another approach that is similar to ODS steels is to have nanocrystalline clusters similar to YTiO Although the suggested strategies b and c are quite rudimentary and speculative in approach at this stage, they provide ample opportunities in the alloy design. Thermal stability of CoCrFeNi alloy synthesized by MA and SPS was investigated in the present work. Upon exposure to higher temperature, the MA CoCrFeNi powders showed microstructural changes such as crystallite growth, strain recovery, carbide and oxide phase formation, and dissolution of carbide phase. Dissolution of carbide and evaporation of oxide phase was observed above 1000 Authors thank Professor B.S. Murty for granting unconditional access to use his laboratory equipment, and also for invaluable interactions during the initial stages of the present work. Authors would like to thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at