Cuban serpentines are known as one of the richest deposits of Ni and Co in the world. These ores are usually treated by pyrometallurgy or by hydrometallurgy. These processes generate huge volumes of mining residues, which still contain high amounts of Ni (0.25%) and Co (0.09%). Since metals are partially oxidized, the chance to use sulphur-oxidizing bacteria (Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans) which are able to generate sulphuric acid to leach the residues from CARON process has been evaluated. Thus, in this work, inorganic and organic acids produced by cultures of A thiooxidans or Aspergillus niger respectively were used to study the extraction of Co and Ni from laterite tailings. The results are compared with those obtained in leaching experiments with direct inoculation of those microorganisms. Using A. niger and sucrose as carbon source, 7% Ni and 16% Co were leached after 3 days although there was a significant metal precipitation later. In one-stage batch experiments using A. thiooxidans and elemental sulphur as energy source higher percentages of metal solubilization (100% Ni and 80% Co) were reached after 15 days. In two-stage batch experiments with sulphuric bio-acid the metal recoveries were much higher (79% Ni and 55% Co) than those obtained with citric bio-acid but lower than those reached in one-stage batch experiments. Since the mineral composition of raw material is a crucial parameter to select the suitable leaching agent for oxide ore, the treatment of residual nickel-ferrous material from the CARON process with bio-sulphuric acid produced by cultures of A. thiooxidans could be an attractive alternative in the development of a sustainable technology for the Cuban mining-metallurgy industry.Laterites are oxide ores widely distributed in the tropical regions. They were formed during laterization, a weathering process of ultramafic rocks that is favoured by warm climate and abundant rainfall. Lateritic deposits usually consist of three layers, namely the limonite, the saprolite and the garnierite layer. Limonite, which comprises the top lateritic layer, is a homogeneous ore consisting mainly of goethite associated with nickel ( The Cuban nickel deposits are recognized as one of the biggest deposits in the world and represent one of the most important sectors of the Cuban economy. Cuba has an estimated 37% of the world reserves of Ni and ranks first in the world reserves of Ni and second in world reserves of Co. Bioleaching of oxide and silicate ores requests heterotrophic microorganisms which are able to produce organic acids, mainly citric acid, oxalic acid, gluconic acid, tartaric acid, and pyruvic acid. The nickeliferrous laterites are usually treated by pyrometallurgy or by hydrometallurgy. These processes generate huge volumes of tailings with considerable amounts of metals like Ni (0.25%) and Co (0.09%) that are partially oxidized. Sulphur-oxidizing bacteria are considered to be one of the most useful microorganisms for the bacterial leaching of sulphide ores. Chemical analysis and mineral composition of the laterite tailings used throughout this paper are given in The strain Two different methods were used in the bioleaching experiments. In the one-stage batch, tailings (5% w/v) were added directly to the cultures inoculated with heterotrophic or autotrophic cells. In the two-stage batches, organic acids were obtained from cultures of heterotrophic cells after 7 days of incubation in medium 3a (see above) at initial pH value 5.0 and inorganic bio-acids from cultures of sulphur-oxidizing bacteria in 0 K medium containing 1% w/v sulphur and initial pH value 3.0. In both case, the biomass was separated from the liquor by filtration through Filtrak paper. Those cultures were carried out in 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks with final volume of 100 ml incubated at 200 rpm and 30 °C. In a second step (leaching step), tailings (10% w/v) were put in contact with those liquors containing organic or inorganic bio-acids. The leaching experiments were carried out in 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks with final volume of 100 ml incubated at 200 rpm and at 60 °C. Citric acid (0.1 M) and sulphuric acid (0.1 M) were used to evaluate chemical leaching of the tailings. The leaching solutions were prepared from analytical reagents. A consecutive leaching using citric and sulphuric acid was carried out. For that, after a first chemical leaching using citric acid (or sulphuric acid) for 7 days (200 rpm, 30 °C), the residue was treated with the other acid under the same conditions. Metal concentrations in the liquors were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. Acid concentration was determined titrimetrically ( Results in  Laterite leaching by Metal extraction in two-stage batches using organic bio-acid produced by  In order to analyse whether citric and sulphuric acids are able to dissolve the metals present in different mineral species and to find out which of them is more efficient, chemical leaching experiments were carried out using 0.1 M solutions of those analytical reagents. That concentration was selected because it is approximately reached in cultures of The results are represented in As it was expected, the lower the pulp density the higher metal recoveries were obtained. However, the second leaching improved the metal recovery and was more efficient at higher pulp density suggesting that the metal recovery stopped in the first leaching step when the acid was exhausted or when the concentration was not high enough to leach the total solid material. Total metal extraction was independent of the order in which the acids were used, at least within the range of experimental errors. These results indicate that both acids are adequate agents for leaching the laterite tailings. X-ray diffraction patterns of laterite tailings before and after the chemical leaching with citric or sulphuric acid are shown in The mineralogical composition of raw material is a crucial parameter in the processes of bioleaching of laterite ore. Usually laterites are leached using organic acids; however our results show that nickel and cobalt can be leached from laterite tailings also by sulphuric acid treatment. In chemical leaching, sulphuric acid was as efficient as citric acid. In both cases, higher acid concentrations allowed higher metal solubilizations. Both acids seem to leach laterite tailings via acid attack although some complexation effects may occur when citric is used. The bio-production of these acids could be important in order to decrease the cost of the leaching processes. However, The highest metal recoveries (100% Ni and 80% Co) were achieved when tailings were directly added to This work was supported by the Cooperación Argentino–Cubana (SECYT-CITMA) through the grants CU/PA04-BVIII/039, ANPCyT (PICT 25300) and CONICET (PIP 5147). Authors gratefully acknowledge the BIORECA (CYTED) and Dr. Gisela Pettinari (CIMAR-UNC) for X-ray diffraction assays.