The major objective of this work is to study the hardness data at the domain of ferrite and Austenite phases. Nanoindentation and microhardness study has been conducted on austenite and ferrite present in the microstructure of hot rolled and heat treated duplex stainless steel (2205 DSS). Furthermore, Optical microscopy and field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) were used to identify the microstructural distribution and phases present. Austenite reveals higher nanohardness data value than ferrite, as oppose to ferrite average elastic modulus which is higher than that of austenite. Also, higher value of microhardness data was observed for austenite in comparison with the ferrite at different load application. Phases were determined by image analysis taken by optical microscope (OM) (Model Axio observer 7 for materials, Carl Zeiss microscopy, GmbH, Germany). Also, phases present was obtained by field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (model Carl Zeiss sigma, Germany) X-ray diffraction of patterns of the as received hot rolled annealed sample was carried out by Xray diffractometer. The reflection peaks in as received sample shows the presence of two phases only: The experimental datasets were obtained through the experiment that was carried out on an ultra-nanoindenter (UNHT), manufactured in Switzerland, equipped with a three-sided pyramid, berkovich diamond indenter. However, all the indentation tests followed ISO 14577 The Vickers microhardness (HV) was measured by Vickers microhardness tester (FUTURE-TECH FM 800) at a load (P) 20 gf (1.0 N)- 200gf and dwell time of 10 s at room temperature, with five repeat tests to ensure data reliability For the indentation test, the total indentation time is 40s which was divided using load control function with a 20s loading time, 5s holding time and 15s unloading time. However the load was vary from 30mN to 50mN for the test. For the Vickers hardness test, load was varied from 20g, 50g,100g,200g on both austenite and ferrite phases. The data gotten can be used in the Industries to determine the mechanical properties of metallic alloy. The methodology, data, and the techniques used in analyzing, can be easily replicated by other researchers at different laboratories for further insights and development of experiments. A mechanical characterization technique has been presented, which can be used to determine nanohardness and vickers hardness of Duplex stainless steel experimentally. Future research on nanoindentation analysis can be built on the work done. The dataset in this article describes the microstructure and mechanical analysis of DSS (2205). The chemical composition data analysis of the as received DSS (2205) is shown in The material investigated in this research was obtained from Columbus stainless (pty) Ltd. as 6mm The nanoindentation was carried out on an ultra-nanoindenter (UNHT), manufactured in Switzerland, equipped with a three-sided pyramid, berkovich diamond indenter. All the indentation tests followed ISO 14577. Before the indentation tests, the contact area was calibrated by an indirect method to maintain accuracy. The total indentation time is 40s which was divided using load control function with a 20s loading time, 5s holding time and 15s unloading time. Also, varying load from 30mN to 50mN, and the grid of indents was spaced 2 According to Tao et al. From Kicks Law Showing that the load is directly proportional to the square value of indentation displacement. Where The initial unloading curve  The indentation hardness and elastic modulus was obtained from Oliver -Pharr analysis The Vickers microhardness (HV) was measured by Vickers microhardness tester (FUTURE-TECH FM 800) at a load (P) 20 gf (1.0 N)- 200gf and a dwell time of 10 s at room temperature, with five repeat tests to ensure data reliability. The Vickers microhardness test was conducted on both the ferrite and austenite phases. Meanwhile, the Vickers microhardness experimental data, indicated that there was no significant difference between the hardness value of the austenite phase and the ferrite phase except for the hardness test carried out at 50g load giving an average hardness values of 343 HV and 311 HV for ferrite. However, we can conclude and assume that, the factors responsible for high Nano hardness can also be the same factors for austenite high micro hardness. This research work was carried out under the research grant of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.