It is known that earthworms can increase the content of water-extractable silicon (Si) in soil, thus contributing to the availability of Si for plants. However, effects of earthworms on other Si fractions in soil, such as adsorbed Si, Si bound to SOM, Si occluded in pedogenic oxides and amorphous silica have not yet been studied. Therefore, we investigated the effects of the endogeic earthworm Octolasion cyaneum Savigny on the fractionation of Si in soils and that of the epigeic earthworm Eisenia andrei Bouché on the release of Si from model substances (quartz, wheat straw, bioopal). We quantified the amounts of Si in different soil fractions and those released from model substances before and after passage through the earthworm gut by sequential Si extraction. The amounts of Si extracted from the earthworms’ casts were generally larger than in the undigested samples. This was especially pronounced for Si bound to soil organic matter (SOM; up to 41%), and for Si in wheat straw (up to 71%) and quartz (up to 1730%). With the soils, the increase in extracted Si was pronounced for the more mobile fractions (Si bound to SOM and occluded in pedogenic oxides) at the expense of amorphous silica. The amounts of mobile and adsorbed Si (plant-available Si) in soil tended to decrease after the passage through the earthworm gut, possibly by occlusion of adsorbents in aggregates formed in the gut. Our results indicate that both mechanical weathering of ingested Si-containing particles and microbial processes, promoting aggregate formation, SOM transformation and mineral solubilization, contribute to the increased release of Si, which induced the redistribution of Si among fractions.Silicon is an important element for plant development ( The Si content of soils varies from < 10 up to 450 g kg Earthworms play an important role in the improvement of soil physical conditions and plant growth ( The aim of this study was to clarify the effects of earthworms on the release of Si from soil constituents and on the distribution of Si among operationally defined fractions in soil. We hypothesize that chemical, biological and physical weathering of Si-containing minerals together with transformation of SOM during the passage through the earthworm gut lead to increasing Si solubilization in soil and to a redistribution of Si among fractions. We expect an increase in the amounts of Si in more mobile fractions at the expense of Si in less mobile fractions after the passage of soil through the earthworm gut. For a quantification of Si among fractions, we applied a sequential Si extraction procedure ( In additional independent experiments, we checked the effects of earthworms on the release of Si from models of Si-containing soil constituents. These model substances comprised quartz, bioopal and wheat straw. We used quartz as a model of a crystalline Si form, bioopal as a model of amorphous Si and wheat straw as model of Si-containing plant material in soil. Using defined model substances may help to explain the findings from the experiments with soil and thus to differentiate the superimposing processes that occur during the (re-) distribution of Si in a complex mixture like soil. We tested the effects of endogeic earthworms on the distribution of Si among fractions on soil samples from three sites with different land use, representing different earthworm habitats. We used endogeic earthworms, as they are abundant in the studied areas. As geophagous species, they contribute to silicate weathering and Si mobilization in soil ( We sampled the A horizons from soil profiles on three study sites that represent typical sites of arable land, grassland and forest of southwest Germany. Three replicates per site (each 500 g) were pooled to one composite sample per site. The soils comprised a Stagnic Luvisol (SL; WRB classification ( The soil samples were passed through a 2-mm sieve and stored at 5 °C. Particle-size distribution was determined by wet sieving (sand) and sedimentation (silt and clay). For consistency, we determined the pH of both, the soil samples and the earthworm casts, with a glass electrode in 0.01 M CaCl The model substances ( We carried out two sets of experiments - (a) with soil samples and the endogeic earthworm species For experiment (a), we placed about 15 g of each soil sample in a Petri dish (in total, six Petri dishes per sample) and adjusted the gravimetric water content to 36–38%. Subsequently, one For experiment (b), we mixed 12 g of wheat straw (milled to powder), 7 g of quartz and 5 g of bioopal separately with peat (5–12 g, depending on the model substance; After drying (35 °C) the soil samples, model substances with peat and pure peat as well as the respective earthworm casts, we applied a sequential extraction scheme ( Mobile Si (Si Adsorbed Si (Si Si bound to SOM (Si Si occluded in pedogenic oxides and hydroxides (Si Si in amorphous silica (Si For experiment (b), we restricted the extraction to steps 1–3 and 5 (SSR 1:20 in steps 1 and 2, and 1:60 in step 3), as we did not use any oxide as model substance. Samples with bioopal were not subjected to step 5, since bioopal is completely dissolved in this step, even without passage through the earthworm gut ( All extracts were centrifuged (1400 We analyzed Si using its most sensitive atomic line with negligible spectral interferences at 288.158 nm. Atomic lines are less susceptible to matrix effects ( The amounts of extracted Si were related to the material dried at 30 °C. The amounts of Si extracted from the model substances (experiment (b)) were corrected for the Si amounts determined in pure peat obtained in identical experiments. About 5–10 particles from each experiment (b) were mounted on an Al sample holder with double-sided adhesive and conductive carbon tape, sputtered with a thin layer of Au/Pd alloy. We analyzed them by scanning-electron microscopy (LEO 420, LEO Electron Microscopy, Cambridge, UK) in secondary-electron mode to visualize particles before and after their passage through the earthworm gut. We used SigmaPlot 11.0 (Systat Software Inc., San Jose, USA) for statistical analyses. We used the Spearman rank correlation coefficient ( Relative to the earthworm-free soil samples, the sum of Si extracted from the earthworms’ casts in the five extraction steps increased by 10% and 28% (SL and HL, respectively), but decreased negligibly by 2.5% (HU, The passage through the earthworm gut hardly affected the contents of mobile Si The contents of Si bound to SOM were positively affected by The contents of Si The contents of Si from amorphous silica were larger for the casts (increase of 13% and 29%) of the SL and HL samples and lower for the casts of the HU samples (decrease of 5%), relative to the earthworm-free samples. Silicon in amorphous silica constituted the largest Si fraction, making up 1.8–2.6 mg g The largest changes in the distribution of Si among the fractions were found for the HL samples after their passage through the earthworms’ guts. Relative to the earthworm-free treatment, the share of Si The pH of the SL samples (6.0–6.2) was slightly increased in casts of Unlike for the bioopal samples, the total amounts of Si extracted from the model substances increased after passage through the earthworm gut, by 257% for quartz and by 20% for wheat straw, relative to undigested samples ( The smallest total contents of Si extracted were found for the quartz samples (0-0.14 mg g The largest changes in the distribution of Si among forms were found for quartz. The casts exhibited an increase of Si shares by six and 34 percentage points after extraction in the first and second step, respectively, and a decrease by 40 percentage points after extraction with H The passage of all model substance mixed with peat through the gut of We detected an increase in the contents of Si extracted from soils and model substances after the passage through the earthworm gut. This increase was especially pronounced for the HL samples, wheat straw and quartz. Silicon bound to SOM was the major contributor to the additional extractable Si from soils. The largest increase in the contents of Si Furthermore, Si released from the earthworm casts of the soil samples by H The partly negative to negligible effect of Moreover, the Si firstly released from Si-containing minerals (such as silicates or amorphous silica) and then adsorbed on SOM in the earthworms’ guts, may have contributed to the enhanced contents of Si Microorganisms living in the earthworm gut may promote weathering of Si-containing minerals and increase Si extractability ( Additionally, during the passage through the earthworm gut, minerals may be mechanically altered. Earthworms hardly affected the solubilization of Si from bioopal. The solubility of amorphous silica increases with increasing pH ( In the experiments with soils, the pH values of the casts did not change. However, the amounts of Si Bacteria of the earthworm gut may participate in redox reactions. Our study demonstrates that earthworms ( The major contributor to the additional extractable Si from the casts was Si bound to SOM, indicating transformation of SOM by earthworms. The Si occluded in oxides and hydroxides as well as amorphous silica also contributed to the increase of extractable Si from casts. The sum of extractable Si from all analyzed fractions in the casts may be considered as potentially plant-available Si. Thus, earthworm casts may act as an important source for this kind of Si in soil, with larger contents than the surrounding soil. The Si may become available for plants after destruction of the aggregates. However, stability of such aggregates as well as the Si release in the soil solution after their destruction has not yet been studied. The role of such aggregates for the long-term Si release and retention is neither clarified. On the one hand, Si release from mineral particles after their passage through the earthworm gut increases due to mechanical stress or microbially induced weathering. On the other hand, organic matter, covering or embedding these particles can oppositely pose as sorbent for previously released Si. These open questions may be answered in long-term experiments that offer the possibility of repeated ingestion of soil by earthworms. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: