The interactions between kaolinite clay particles and a comb-type polymer (polycarboxylate ether or PCE), so-called PCE super-plasticizer, were investigated through viscosity and surface forces measurements by a rheometer and a Surface Forces Apparatus (SFA). The addition of PCE shows a strong impact on the viscosity of concentrated kaolinite suspensions in alkaline solutions (pH=8.3) but a weak effect under acidic conditions (pH=3.4). In acidic solutions, the high viscosity measured is attributed to the strong electrostatic interaction between negatively charged basal planes and positively charged edge surfaces of clay particles. Under the alkaline condition, the suspension viscosity was found to first increase significantly and then decrease with increasing PCE dosages. The results from surface forces measurement show that PCE molecules at low dosages can bridge the kaolinite particles in the concentrated suspensions via hydrogen bonding, leading to the formation of a kaolinite-PCE “network” and hence an increased suspension viscosity. At high PCE dosages, clay particles are fully covered by PCE molecules, leading to a more dispersed kaolinite suspensions and hence lower suspension viscosity due to steric repulsion between the adsorbed PCE molecules. The insights derived from measuring viscosity and interfacial properties of kaolinite suspensions containing varying amount of comb-type super-plasticizer PCE at different pH provide the foundation for many engineering applications and optimizing industrial processes.The viscosity and interfacial properties of clay mineral suspensions are important for many engineering and industrial applications including processing of ceramics, manufacture of cements, formulation of inks and paints, production of pulp and paper, transportation of coal Polymer additives have been widely used in various colloidal suspensions to either stabilize or flocculate the colloidal particles, depending on the purpose of applications. Comb-type polymers have been shown to be effective additives in stabilizing different colloidal systems In this work, kaolinite clay particles were chosen as a model system, due to its wide range of applications in many industrial processes and products, to investigate the effects of PCE on the viscosity and interfacial properties of the kaolinite suspensions. Combined with settling tests, various fundamental measurements including viscosity, zeta potential and surface forces provide complementary information regarding the interactions between PCE and kaolinite particles, and their consequences on stability of kaolinite suspensions. The results obtained in this study provide an insight into the basic interaction mechanisms between clay particles and polymer additives in many colloidal suspensions, which is of both practical and fundamental importance. The kaolinite clay used in this project was purchased from Kentucky Tennessee Clay Co. The particle size distribution was determined with a MasterSizer 2000 to be D90 Clay suspension was prepared by mixing kaolinite particles with the DI water. A given amount of clay particles were added slowly into the DI water under constant stirring until a desired solid concentration was reached. PCE solutions of different concentrations were then added by following the same procedure. In this work, the “PCE dosage” refers to the mass percent of PCE to kaolinite, that is, the same as “polymer/kaolinite mass ratio.” Viscosity was measured using a concentric cylinder with the standard vane rotor on a TA Instruments AR G2 rheometer. A thermal jacket was used to control the temperature of suspension samples at 25 Zeta potential of kaolinite suspension was measured using a ZetaPALS instrument (Brookhaven Instrument Corporation, USA). Kaolinite suspensions of 2 Kaolinite suspension of 2 Interaction forces as a function of separation distance ( The effect of pH on the viscosity of 35 The kaolinite clay consists of a silica tetrahedral layer and an aluminum hydroxide octahedral layer on the basal plane surface. The edge surfaces of kaolinite clay consist of both broken aluminum–oxygen and silicon–oxygen bonds. It is traditionally believed that kaolinite clay carries a permanent negative charge on the basal planes due to isomorphic substitution of Al The viscosity of kaolinite suspension as a function of shear rate, pH and PCE dosages was determined to understand the interactions between PCE molecules and kaolinite surfaces. The kaolinite–PCE suspension shows shear thinning behavior over the whole range of shear rates studied (10–1000 The results in Yield stress can be used as a single parameter to describe the fluidity of a colloidal suspension. Casson equation, shown in Eq.  The viscosity of pure PCE in water with the same dosages as that in the above kaolinite–PCE suspension was measured at pH The stability of the kaolinite suspensions with and without PCE was investigated by settling tests. It has been suggested At pH At pH Hommer Zeta potential of kaolinite particles in the presence of different PCE dosages at both pH In order to elucidate the role of PCE in kaolinite suspension, the normal forces between two model clay surfaces (mica with similar surface composition as kaolinite) were measured by an SFA in PCE solution of different concentrations. The normalized force–distance profiles measured at pH As shown in From For both acidic and alkaline conditions, adhesion was observed in PCE solutions of low concentration (0.1 At pH Under alkaline condition (pH Based on the above results via the various techniques including viscosity measurement, microscopic imaging, settling tests, zeta potential and surface forces measurement, a schematic model for the interactions between PCE molecules and kaolinite particles is proposed in At pH The viscosity and interfacial properties of kaolinite clay particles and the impact of a polycarboxylate ether comb polymer were determined at both acidic and alkaline pHs. Solution pH, concentration of clay particles and PCE dosage (weight percentage of the particles) all play important roles in the viscosity and interfacial properties of the clay suspension. For 35 The impact of pH and the presence of PCE polymer on the viscosity of clay suspension and its interfacial properties were further elucidated by determining the intermolecular and surface interactions among the clay particles and PCE molecules. Under acidic condition, the high viscosity of kaolinite suspension was mainly attributed to the electrostatic attraction between negatively charged basal planes and positively edge surfaces. For highly concentrated clay suspension, as the particles were close to certain critical distance the PCE molecules could induce attractive bridging interaction via hydrogen bonding between clay particles, leading the clay particles and PCE polymer to form a strong “network” and thus dramatically increasing the suspension viscosity under alkaline condition. At high PCE dosages, the steric repulsion force between the PCE molecules absorbed on clay particles dominates the particle interactions, decreasing the viscosity of clay suspension and forming a stable clay–polymer suspension. The viscosity and interfacial properties obtained in the present study on kaolinite suspension with comb-type PCE polymer provide an insight into the fundamental interactions between clay/colloidal particles and polymer additives in many engineering applications and industrial processes. This research was supported by Teck Metal Ltd. and the Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) Grant of the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada). The authors also acknowledge the support of an NSERC Discovery Grant Award and an NSERC RTI Grant Award (for a Surface Forces Apparatus). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 