Since the development of the new Austrian tunnelling method (NATM) in the 1960s, this technique has been applied successfully in many tunnels. However, opinions of NATM principles emerged till 2000, i.e. NATM is not a tunnelling method, but an approach covering all general principles of tunnelling. To investigate the general principles of the NATM, this study focused on tunnelling practises in the Bolu tunnel, and evaluated the conditions under which the NATM practises could be effective. The Bolu tunnel project was designed following the NATM principles. It is evident that practises adopted in this tunnel are important with respect to the NATM. In addition, it shows that the solutions to the problems encountered in this tunnel are consistent with the NATM principles. Finally, the study determines the ground types of the NATM principles and proposes associated updates.The new Austrian tunnelling method (NATM) was developed between 1957 and 1965. In 1944, Rabcewicz categorised rock masses into seven types (from clay to hard rock) and loosesing, squeezing and swelling. Moreover, the rock mass was classified into loosening, squeezing and swelling status ( Stable, to potential for large overbreak; Friable, to heavily friable; Squeezing, to heavy squeezing; and Special classes. From then on, NATM has been widely applied in many countries. Significant developments in the NATM were explained by  Debates and different opinions have been proposed for the NATM since its proposal. Some researchers hold different option against the integration of general tunnelling method and classical drilling and blasting (DB) method with a single name. In addition, In 1978, rock mass classification for tunnelling became part of the Austrian standards ( In 2001, the rock mass classification was revised again. A significant modification of ONORM B2203 was that the issues of rock mass characterisation and classification were excluded. Standards were re-visited in 2001 and 2004 ( In China, many highways and railway tunnels are under construction. However, some problems were encountered in these tunnels because of the high rate of deformations during tunnel excavations (e.g. Furthermore, the Zhegushan, Laodongshan, Minyazi, Xiangshan, Yingfeng, and Yezhping tunnels in China represent similar problematic cases ( In this study, applications of NATM principles in Bolu tunnel will be discussed. The conditions under which NATM principles fail will be discussed and possible solution suggestion will be provided. The NATM principles which failed in weak soils and fault zones will be determined and the revisions to be made will be demonstrated. The NATM is based on the principle of maximising the capacity of the ground to sustain its own weight by precisely and rationally balancing the pressures that affect the surrounding rock and support. This is achieved by forming a cavity in the rock or ground through which the tunnel will pass and reinforcing this cavity with support elements ( There are two types of support systems. The first system involves a flexible outer arch or protective support designed to balance the structure. The system is reinforced by additional steel ribs, bolts, and shotcrete. The ring is then closed using invert concrete. During the rearrangement of forces, the behaviours of the protective support system and the ground surrounding the tunnel are controlled by a highly developed measurement system ( The second support system involves an inner concrete lining. However, this lining is not fabricated until the outer lining reaches the balance. The purpose of this concrete arch is to maintain or increase the safety factor as necessary ( The main element of the tunnel support is the surrounding rock. The main function of the artificial supports is to aid the rock around the tunnel in supporting itself. The initial robustness of the rock should be preserved. The main principle is preserving the original strength of the rock mass to the feasible extent. The loosening of the surrounding rock should be prevented to the feasible extent. This is because loosening of the rock reduces its bearing resistance and increases dead loads. The protective zone should be formed without reducing the bearing resistance of the rock. The deformations that occur after excavation will be sufficient for forming the protective zone. However, the deformations should be controlled so that they will not lead to loosening of the rock, which will reduce the bearing resistance. If this is achieved, the safety factor and cost-efficiency of the works will increase. Reinforcement should be carried out in a timely manner (neither too early nor too late) and with the necessary flexibility to ensure that the structure providing the lining resistance is neither too rigid nor too weak. The reinforcement forces must be using the binding type. If substantial deformations and loosening are likely to occur after excavation, the reinforcement resistance should be in the form of distributed loads, whereas the reinforcement measure should cover the cavity surface. This is most effectively achieved by using shotcrete, which binds within a short period of time. Both temporary and permanent reinforcement linings should be in the form of ‘thin shells’, i.e. thin, shell-shaped, and bendable. The bending moments in the shell, as well as the pull and shear fractures resulting from these, can be prevented in this way. Reinforcement should be carried out with wire meshes, bolts, shotcrete, and steel ribs. Wire meshes and ribs can provide the necessary flexibility instead of thickening the shell. In order to enable the rock to carry its own weight, the effective stresses should be conveyed into the rock mass through anchorages. The reinforcement shell should have a closed ring-shape. From a static perspective, the rings must be closed so that an opening could be completely load-bearing. A ring with joints, springs, or notches is unstable compared with a circle. With this consideration, excavation and reinforcement lining of the top heading and the right/left sides should adhere to the cavity wall in an annular manner. Evidently, this can be achieved well by reinforcing shells that follow the complete cross-section of the excavation. The ring should be established at the earliest. The behaviour of the rock during the formation of secondary stresses depends on the deformations of the lining. A tunnel section that is not completely closed will not assume the role of a carrier/bearing ring, and hence will lead to the loosening of the rock. Rounded spacer profiles should be used. The cross-section of the underground cavity should be circular or elliptical, with no protrusions or corners. The first lining should be thin to prevent undesirable bending moments. The inner lining should also be thin and be tightly bonded to the first lining frictionlessly. However, to prevent inner lining from interfering with the loads that may be transmitted from the first lining, it must be placed firmly by using its entire surface, with no friction applied to the inner lining. The stability of the structure must be ensured with pre-reinforcement procedures. Deformations in the underground rock structure consisting of the lining and surrounding rock should be halted before the inner lining is put in place. The secondary stresses should achieve their balance. The task of the inner lining is to enhance safety and improve architectural appearance. The water pressure transmitted to the lining via the rock mass should be discharged through drainage. To achieve this, drainage pipes should be installed around the space. Bolu tunnel located on the İstanbul–Ankara highway consists of two tunnels, each having three lanes. Excavation initiated at the Asarsuyu (Istanbul) side on 16 June 1993 and at the Elmalık (Ankara) side on 24 June 1994. The excavation of the tunnel was completed in 2006, and it was open to traffic in 2007 ( Between the two tunnels, there is a buttress with 50–60 m width. The tunnels are constructed mostly 100–150 m below the ground surface, with the deepest point at 250 m. With the changes of the ground conditions, lining thickness, and deformations, the cross-sectional area of the tunnel face varies between 133 m The tunnel route is located near the active North Anatolian transform fault between the Eurasia plate in the north and Anatolian plates in the south. It is shifting westward from the Anatolian plate. The general geological structure adopts the form of the North Anatolian metamorphic crystalline base. The Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous layers are composed of conglomerates, arkose, sandstone, mudstone, marl, shale, limestone, and dolomitic limestone ( In the young Paleozoic layer, the northern continental basin was separated from the marine basin to the south. This formation resulted from low-grade metamorphism transforming old sediments into marble, phyllite, and schist. Owing to many faults on the route of the Elmalık tunnel, a large number of rock mass blocks (crystalline bedrock, metasediment rock series, and the relevant sections of the flysch formation) are buried within a large-scale matrix of clayey faults, stretching to several hundred meters. The geology of the Elmalık side in the fault zone contains flysch series with largely tectonic and rigidly weighted fault clay infilling with smooth discontinuity surfaces and exhibiting plastic properties. These flysch series comprise of claystone, siltstone, and limestone units. The Asarsuyu side is generally traversed by a metasediment series and cataclastic zones formed by these series. This formation continued until the transition to the Bakacak fault and intersects with Bolu tunnel within a 200 m wide fault zone. The fault is oriented in EW direction and crosses the tunnel route perpendicularly between chainages 62 + 800 km and 63 + 000 km (in the left tunnel). These faults have north-oriented plunge angles on cross-sections and cut the tunnel by means of fault clay materials at 75 m in the left tunnel and 91.5 m in the right tunnel, respectively. This fault clay material is comprised of the mixture of metasediments (metasilt stone, quartz limestone, crystallised limestone, low to medium plastic, dense and well-cemented sandy silty fault clay matrix, smooth and polished surface, and water flow) and quartz rocks + amphibolite + metacrystalline basement. This fault zone is located at the junction of the Asarsuyu and Elmalık geological formations. The units in the Bolu tunnel can be classified into four main groups: metacrystalline base (Yedigöller formation), metasedimentary base (İkizoluk formation), flysch sequence (Fındıcak formation), and clayey fault zones ( The fault zone material at the tunnel elevation is in a series of two units. The first unit is a dark brown, highly plastic, and smoothly polished surface. Meanwhile, the second unit consists of a reddish brown, medium plastic, highly smooth-hard polished surface, and these materials constitute the Bakacak fault and geology. Owing to the complex geological and geotechnical conditions in Bolu tunnel, there are large differences between the expected and practical rock classes. In the flysch series and the clayey fault zones, significant displacements have occurred in the support systems due to the swelling and compression characteristics of the ground. Large deformations (approximately 1.5 m) have occurred in the tunnel while crossing the clayey fault zone in the Elmalık right tunnel. This section was filled with a backfill material to prevent the total collapse of the tunnel ( In Bolu tunnel, the project was performed according to the NATM principles. Austrian standards (ONORM B2203) were also implemented. Accordingly, rock behaviours were divided into three categories as stable, brittle, and squeezing (  According to ONORM B2203, excavation would be conducted theoretically as a full face in class A1 rocks. In practise, it is excavated in two parts: top and bottom. Rocks of class A2 are similar to those of class A1. Excavation in class B1 rocks is divided into two parts: top heading and bench. In class B2, two separate excavations were performed for top heading-bench and basement, respectively. In general, excavations were conducted by DB method. Excavation of rock masses sensitive to vibration was performed by excavators. The top and bottom excavations were performed separately in class C1 rocks. Excavation was performed by DB method or excavators. Separate excavations were performed at the top heading and bench section of class C2 rocks. In many cases, reinforcements were required at the face of the top heading. Excavation was performed by DB method or tunnel excavators. Excavation was conducted for the top heading, middle, and basement sections in class L1 soils. In many cases, reinforcements are necessary for the face of the top heading. Excavation was conducted by vibration-free blasting or tunnel excavators. Blocks and hard rock sections need to be detonated. Staged drilling and implementation of side galleries were required to overcome instability problems at the face in class L2 ground units. Excavation was conducted with tunnel excavators. In the design phase of the Bolu tunnel, 1% A2 rock, 9% B1 rock, 40% B2 rock, 19% C1 rock, 11% C2 rock, 10% L1 rock, and 10% L2 rock were expected. The rock classes estimated during the design stage before excavation are presented in the The CM support system is essentially a method developed specifically for Bolu tunnel ( Metasediments (observed in Asarsuyu); Metacrystalline (observed in both Asarsuyu and Elmalık entrances); Flysch series (observed only at the entrance of Elmalık); and Clayey fault zones (observed in the transitional sections of the ground types mentioned above). These support systems were grouped under four main headings ( Option 1: CM class temporary shotcrete basement with or without invert (CM 35); Option 2: CM class (flysch series, low swelling potential) with reduced ring closure distance and temporary shotcrete with invert (CM 45); Option 3: Intermediate (Bernold) lining, temporary shotcrete with invert; and Option 4: Bench section—pilot tunnel excavation. Option 1 is implemented through metacrystalline layers, whereas Option 2 is generally excavated through fracture-crushed metasediment rocks and flysch series with low swelling potential. In addition, Option 3 is implemented for small fault zones with blocky flysch series exhibiting high swelling potential, whereas Option 4 is designed for the worst-case fault conditions such as thick fault clay layers. In accordance with the above explanations, the details of the support and excavation class of these sections are summarised below ( Option 1: CM class (Metacrystalline layer): Standard CM class is a tunnel support system having shotcrete lining of a maximum of 35 cm, monolithic basement concrete, and 360 m rock bolt installed in each advance. This class has a maximum ring closure distance of 30 m. The excavation speed remains constant in this ring closure distance ( Option 2: CM class (Flysch series) reduced ring closure distance, implementation for more unfavourable rock conditions. Intermediate (temporary) basement concrete is required for the top heading section. Shortening the ring closure distance does not affect the excavation speed. The shortest ring closure distance is 22–23 m. The shotcrete lining is 45 cm ( Option 3: Intermediate (Bernold) lining: Option 3 is applied for weak flysch series and clayey fault zones (length less than 20 m). The purpose of this system is to ensure the stability of the excavation with rigid supports without applying a large amount of shotcrete in the areas where deformation increases. The intermediate linings are applied while the tunnel displacements continue at high speed, aiming to maintain the stability of excavation with an intermediate lining. The Bernold lining is implemented after installing monoblock basement concrete. The ring closure distance ranges from 20 m to 24 m, and a temporary basement is applied to the top heading section. The Option 3 project is prepared for blocky flyer floors. This project can also be used for thin clay layers of fault zones. The basement concrete is installed as a monoblock with iron reinforcements. If necessary, large deformation can be suppressed by applying a temporary basement at the top heading section extending to the bench section. The primary lining in the support systems includes highly tight rock bolts for each interval (generally 1.1 m) with a shotcrete shell supported by TH-29 steel ribs ( Option 4 (Lower half pilot tunnel method): Under highly unfavourable ground conditions, pilot tunnel excavation of bench section is the only choice. Pilot tunnel excavation of bench section was performed in almost all the conditions in Bolu tunnel, particularly in clayey fault zones spreading over more than 20 m. In this case, the primary support consisted of 40 cm-thick steel fibre shotcrete applied to the tunnel face. The intermediate lining was located 8–16 m behind the face and consisted of an 80 cm-thick steel fibre lining. A bench and a deep (depth of 5.35 m) monoblock basement concrete arch were formed 22–35 m after the tunnel face so as to complete the tunnel circle (ring closure). The final lining (inner lining concrete) was comprised of 60 cm-thick concrete with class B40 iron reinforcements (  The CM support system was implemented following the fundamental principles of the NATM, from 1995 to 1997. No significant differences were imparted to the support systems during this period. In accordance with the progress rate of displacement, there was no change in the support system except for altering the shotcrete thickness, steel ribs, and arrangement of the rock bolts. Meanwhile, in the left tube of the Elmalık tunnel, the tunnel excavation was interrupted due to the unavoidable displacements. These were overcome by applying 60 cm-thick shotcrete lining to the flysch units. Subsequently, it was understood that Bolu tunnel potentially violated the fundamental principle of the NATM, and a ‘flexible outer lining’ failed to combat the displacements around the tunnel to form a protective zone. Therefore, it was decided that a more rigid lining method was applied in the flysch series and fault zones of Bolu tunnel. This resulted in implementation of the Bernold lining method (Option 3) ( The tunnel behaviours and recorded displacements were consistent with the predicted values in chainages 61 + 900 km (left tunnel) and 51 + 800 km (right tunnel) from the entrance of Asarsuyu. The tunnel support systems were selected based on the rock classes, ranging from A2 to C2. Moreover, the number of rock bolts was altered when the deformation exceeded 1 m at points approximately 150 m from their entrances, and a significant number of remediation processes had to be carried out. As a result, the C2 support class was adapted to C3, and the number of rock bolts installed per meter of progression of the tunnel increased from 123 to 350. In the Elmalık tunnels, the class C2 support was applied at chainages 64 + 140 km in the left tunnel and 54 + 074 km in the right tunnel. Subsequently, from this location, the C2 rock class was revised according to the increase in displacement and the deterioration of the ground, and the implementation of the CM support system was initiated. In the left tunnel, an attempt was made to advance from chainages 64 + 140 km to 63 + 880 km without excessive alterations to the support. In this section, the only modifications were to increase the number of rock bolts, alter the steel ribs, and vary the thickness of the shotcrete. This section of the tunnel is located in the fault zone between chainages 64 + 140 km and 64 + 210 km. This fault zone is a low angle fault zone with high plastic properties ( The deformation in the left tunnel led to the observed fractures and cracks in the concrete. Over elapsed time, these movements continued over a distance of 200 m from the tunnel face. Comprehensive repair and strengthening work started in the tunnel ( As presented in To cross the clayey fault zone in the right tunnel of Elmalık between chainages 54 + 080 km and 54 + 140 km ( The displacement measurements between chainages 54 + 141 km and 54 + 240 km in the right tunnel of Elmalık are illustrated in  Various solutions were considered for the section that was filled following the collapse. First, it was concluded that the support system should be a method not based on NATM principles. The principle of maintaining an arch through a flexible outer lining lost its validity in the fault zones. Therefore, it was decided to utilise a more rigid lining. Eventually, the most appropriate project design for crossing this fault zone would be applying the bench pilot tunnel method ( It was not feasible to decide what support class should be implemented in the flysch series of the right tunnel (from chainages 54 + 140 km to 54 + 080 km). Based on the experience gained during applications in the left tunnel, it was clear that a rigid shotcrete layer of 60 cm would be insufficient and a middle lining would be required for these sections. The middle lining (Bernold lining) is a lining located between the shotcrete and the inner lining, for which a lining method was applied after completion of top heading, bench, and invert concrete linings ( NATM is an approach that covers the principles of general underground support rather than a tunnelling method. The results obtained from Bolu tunnel reveal that it is not always feasible to implement the principle of “ensuring an arch with a flexible outer lining”. Thus, the implementation of this method could not always be an appropriate or economic approach. Implementation of this method resulted in significant increase in the cost of Bolu tunnel. The collapse of a 50 m section in the right tunnel can also be induced by implementation of this method. Furthermore, in the left tunnel, excavation works were halted for approximately 10 months, and continuous repair and reinforcement works were required. A wide range of opinions is that each tunnel brings with a site-specific method. The results obtained in a tunnel tend to serve as a guide for other tunnels. By the time, the excavation was completed for Bolu tunnel, which was originally designed according to NATM principles, but completed without it. Implementation of NATM principles and proposing solutions for the encountered problems would be appropriate only if they are revised according to the solutions developed for a case wherein the NATM provides unsatisfactory outcomes. The NATM principles consist of 22 items set out by The reinforcement lining should be in the form of ‘thin shells’. However, when the ground conditions are highly inadequate (such as presence of widespread fault zones and flysch series containing low angle faults having the potential of swelling and squeezing), the outer lining should be significantly more rigid than the thin shell. If necessary, the bench pilot tunnel method should be applied in large fault zones. In sections where the ground is in good condition, both the temporary and permanent reinforcement linings should be thin, shell-shaped, and sufficiently flexible to permit bending. This aids in preventing the formation of bending moments in the shell. It also prevents the formation of associated pull and shear fractures. Reinforcements should be made of steel meshes, bolts and steel ribs, rather than by thickening the shell, to provide the necessary flexibility to the shell. With the deterioration of ground conditions, a more rigid system such as the Bernold lining will be required as a supplement to the reinforcement elements in the fault zones and flysch series. The inner lining should be thin and frictionless, yet tightly bonded to the outer lining. The outer lining should be thin to prevent undesired bending moments. To prevent them from interfering with the loads originating from the outer lining, the inner and outer linings should be placed firmly by using their entire surface without friction. Bolu tunnel has demonstrated that thin outer lining is not suitable for all ground conditions. This is why a rigid system should be preferred for the outer lining under weak ground conditions. The stability of the structure must be ensured during the pre-stabilisation phase. Deformation in the underground rock units including the crust and surrounding rock should be halted before the inner lining is installed. That is, the secondary stress condition should be finalised in a balanced manner. The purpose of the inner lining is to enhance safety and provide an appropriate architectural appearance. However, when groundwater is present, the inner shell should be sized to receive all loads. In these cases, the layer between the outer and inner shells should be waterproof using bitumen, nylon, membranes, etc. As a highly important element of temporary stabilisation, bolts must be protected against corrosion, so that they can be relied upon for permanent strengthening. When the stability of the structure is not secured by the outer lining, the deformation could not be completely halted, and they continue to a certain extent. Thus, the inner lining should be installed as close to the tunnel face as possible. Moreover, the tunnel should be reinforced with steel bars before deformation rates decrease below 2 mm per month based on the Austrian Standards. The author declares that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author thanks to General Directorate of Highways (KGM) for their supports.