The failure analysis of diamond impregnated bits, which are found as particulate composite materials consist of diamond particles randomly distributed within a metal matrix, is conducted to study the pull out behaviour of diamond grits for an assessment of diamond retention capacity of these drilling bits. The finite element technique is used to model the diamond-matrix system where a zero thickness surface based cohesive zone modelling technique is used to simulate the failure at the interface between the matrix and the diamond particle. For the validation of the model, few numerical examples are initially solved and the results produced by the model are compared with the published results which show a good performance of the model. Finally, a parametric study is conducted to show the effects of shapes, orientations and protrusions of diamond particles as well as interface properties on the retention capacity of diamond particles.Since the invention of synthetic diamonds dated back to 1950s, these diamonds have been increasingly used as impregnated diamond tools for drilling, grinding, sawing and similar activities of hard materials such as rock, concrete, metal and glass. The popularity of diamond impregnated tools is due to various advantages such as low friction coefficient, high stiffness and thermal conductivity as well as high bulk modulus exhibited by these tools In order to study the mechanical properties of particulate composites, Huang et al. The retention of diamond grits by the matrix is a complex and system-dependent process which is affected by the properties of the matrix, interfacial materials as well as the size, shape and orientation of diamond particles Initially, some experimental studies A satisfactory solution of the above problem can be achieved by using the concept of fracture mechanics which can be implemented through finite element modelling. In this context, the Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT) Actually, the delamination problem in multilayered composite structures has drawn a significant attention in recent past which has helped to develop this modelling technique (CZM) so well that it can be used with full confidence. The fundamental idea of the CZM technique is based on the concept of fracture process zone which is characterise by the cohesive law or traction separation law for the de-cohesion of atomic lattices as proposed by Barenblatt The CZM technique, which has been successfully applied to various problems, should to be most suitable for the present problem but it has not been exploited so far. Thus the matrix-diamond interface failure is modelled by finite element and CZM techniques in combination for the first time in this study. This will help to understand the wear mechanism of impregnated diamond bits due to diamond pull out more accurately that can benefit the design of these bits. Moreover, there is a need for investigating the effect of different parameters such as protrusions, shapes and orientations of the diamond particle on its retention capacity which is undertaken in this research as this has not been studied previously. Similar to the previous investigations Although the natural diamond particles are highly irregular in shape (either round and/or few sharp edges and corners), the shape of synthetic diamond grits, used in impregnated diamond bits, are controlled and these can be treated as regular polygons (2D model) in most cases. A square geometry has typically been used by different investigator for simplicity which is also used in most of the cases of the present study. The typical size of synthetic diamond particles varies from 0.01 to 0.5 Since diamonds behaves like a brittle material, they are treated as elastic and isotropic materials. In the present study, the modulus of the elasticity is taken as The traditional continuum based approach is not computationally attractive for modelling the interfacial failure in the present study as the thickness of the interface is very small which needs a very fine mesh to capture the sudden variation of displacements and stresses within this small distance. In this situation, the concept of cohesive zone modelling approach As the present problem is based on 2D analysis, an interface may have two possible modes of failure: 1) Mode I or opening mode due to tensile stress acting normal to the interface and 2) Mode II or sliding mode due to shear stress parallel to the interface. Thus the traction separation law ( The normal and tangential components of these relative displacements According to the isoparametric formulation, the coordinates of an element can be written as The above vectors may be taken at any point on the interface after substituting as As the above equation gives a normalized unit vector Once The damage introduces nonlinearity in the system that requires an incremental/iterative procedure for solving the governing equations. As the damage is an irreversible process, the solution technique dependent on the loading history. Thus there is a need of storing the maximum values of these relative displacements ( The interfacial normal and shear tractions ( For the bilinear traction separation law ( The above Eqs. Similarly, the power law In a mixed mode failure analysis, the traction separation relationship ( With the above equations, the stiffness matrix of the interface can be derived using Virtual Work Principles following the unusual steps of finite element technique. It should be noted that the Newton-Cotes integration technique is used to evaluate the interfacial stiffness matrix following the full integration scheme in order to have better results as recommended by Goncalves and de Borst Although some researchers studied the behaviour of diamond impregnated bits experimentally This problem is picked up from the paper of Zhou et al. Similar to Zhou et al. In order to study the effect of plastic deformation of the matrix (metal) on the final results, a typical elastic-plastic material model based on von Mises yield criterion with isotropic hardening and associated flow rule is used to the matrix (bronze). A bi-linear stress-strain curve with a yield stress of 70 A similar investigation was carried out by Suh et al. For both cases of diamond wear as mentioned above, the variation of von Mises stress along the diamond-matrix interface obtained in the present analysis is plotted in As there is no data available for the validation of diamond-matrix interfacial damage as mentioned earlier, the problem of a double cantilever beam (DCB) as shown in In order to validate the crack propagation under mixed–mode loading condition of the developed model, the experimental test data reported by Crews et al. In this study, five different G With initial confidence gained from the validation of the proposed modelling technique carried out in the previous section, the method is applied for the interfacial failure modelling of diamond-matrix system in this section. As there is no published result available for this problem, a large number of cases are investigated in the form of parametric study. The specific parameters used in this study include diamond shapes, diamond orientations, diamond protrusion levels and interface material properties. In order to have an understanding of the effect of an individual parameter, the value of that parameter is varied while the values of other parameters are kept unchanged. The previous studies The forces produced at the diamond tip points due to the displacement imposed at these points are captured. The force-displacement variation for two representative cases (square and hexagon shaped particles) is plotted in The critical values of the cutting force corresponding to the initiation of the interface failure for each of the case studies are plotted in In order to show the variation of crack opening at the critical point with respect to the cutting force, one of the cases considered in the above study ( Although it is more realistic to apply distributed load on the cutting edge of the diamond particle to simulate the real drilling process, it is observed in the present study that the load distribution has no effect on the retention capacity of the diamond particle when compared with the point load. In order to demonstrate this, one of the cases of the problem considered in The problem studied above ( The effect of orientation of the diamond particles on their retention capacity is studied in this section for all seven particle shapes shown in The critical forces corresponding to the interface failure of all these cases obtained from the present analysis are reported in The wear of diamond bits is a complex process and it depends on a number of parameters associated with different operating conditions encountered while cutting different types of rocks. The material properties of diamond and matrix used in this section are same as those provided in Section In the present study, thirteen different cases of protrusion levels are considered where seven cases are due to the diamond wear (from 0.0197 In order to study the interaction of neighbouring particles, a typical example of a diamond bit consists of five diamond particles having identical shapes and protrusions as shown in The interface properties can be affected by several reasons associated with the sintering process and type of metal matrix. As discussed earlier, the cohesive zone model is used for simulating the interface failure and the cohesive model is characterized by four parameters. In order to investigate the effect of these interface parameters, four different cases having different values of these parameters ( The variation of critical force corresponding to the initiation of interface failure with respect to the number of sides of the diamond particles is plotted in In this paper, a failure analysis of diamond impregnated bits found in the form of particle composite materials is attempted for the first time. The present study has a focus on the interfacial failure mechanism between the matrix and diamond particles. This provides the vital understanding of diamond pull out mechanism which is one of the significant failure modes of diamond bits. For this purpose, a single diamond particle along with a portion of the surrounding matrix is used as a representative part of diamond bits. The diamond is subjected to a tangential force at its tip which simulates the cutting force whereas the matrix is restrained at its far ends. The finite element modelling is used to simulate the diamond matrix system where 4 node plane strain quadrilateral elements are used for the diamond and matrix materials. A zero thickness surface based cohesive zone modelling technique is used to simulate the failure at the interface between the matrix and the diamond. In order to validate the finite element model and investigate its performance, numerical examples are solved and the results produced by the finite element model are compared with the results available in literature. The performance of the model is found to be good in majority of these test problems which include interfacial stress analysis of diamond impregnated bits, and de-bonding simulations of a double cantilever beam and mixed-mode bending tests. Based on the confidence gained from the observation, the present model is used to conduct a parametric study for the critical force prediction of the interface failure initiation of diamond impregnated bits. It has been observed that the shapes, orientations and protrusions of diamond particles, and interfacial properties have significant influence on the retention capacity of diamond particles. As the efficiency of the entire drilling process is also dependent on the sharpness of the cutting surface, the hexagon shaped diamond particle is found to have a better performance for drilling because it has a relatively higher retention capacity when it is under sharp cutting face. The results also indicate that the critical force decreases with the increase of protrusion height in all cases. It is also observed that the interface properties are the dominant parameters for the retention ability of diamond particles as the value of critical force decreases steadily with the decrease of interfacial strength as well as the fracture toughness values, and the contribution of the Mode I properties is more than that of the Mode II properties. The work has been supported by the