Lithium-ion batteries are widely used as a power source for portable equipment. In the present work a sample of batteries was submitted to a series of mechanical processes to recover cobalt, copper and aluminum. The initial milling process promoted a previous particle distribution of the metal content fractions. Each of these fractions underwent to the most suitable recovery process according to their composition, especially regarding the presence of copper and magnetic metals such as iron and cobalt. The magnetic separation was efficient for particle sizes from 1mm to 2mm, resulting in a concentrate with up to 54% copper. The gravimetric separation with a Wilfley table, performed on the fraction with lower concentration of magnetic metals, resulted in a concentrate with up to 66% copper. Cobalt is found mainly in the fine material with particle sizes smaller than 1mm. Quantitative chemical analysis has shown promising results when the concentrate is leached, with the cobalt concentration corresponding to 80% of the dissolved elements. The results demonstrate that it is possible to obtain rich concentrates of cobalt and copper through mechanical processing of lithium-ion batteries, and that it is feasible to concentrate aluminum as a by-product by applying additional mechanical processes.The world production of LIBs (lithium-ion batteries) in 2000 reached 500 In addition to these environmental demands, these batteries are a rich source of metals of great commercial interest. Around 36% of the battery's metal compositions is cobalt. Lithium corresponds to about 6% of its metal content. Additionally, these batteries contain around 13% copper and 9.5% aluminum ( As a consequence, many studies have been conducted recently addressing the development of environmentally sound processes for battery recycling ( The most recently developed processes for recycling LIB tend to combine different routes and techniques in order to reach a better product and optimize environmental performance. Umicore uses a hydro-pyrometallurgical process designed for both LIB and NiMH battery recycling, where cobalt and nickel are recovered as Co(OH) Although there have been many research advances in the recycling technologies of LIBs, the development of efficient methods to recover the valuable metals present in their composition, such as cobalt, copper and aluminum, remains an important challenge for a sustainable world due to its environmental pressure and economic advantages. Physical processes, or mechanical treatment, are always required since metals in batteries are encapsulated in plastic or iron shells ( A total of 520 wasted lithium-ion batteries, collected from local technical assistance shops, were used in the present study. The samples were divided into three separate lots in order to better understand the influence of different parameters, such as milling time, material flow and battery brand, on the recovery of metals and on the characteristics of the final material obtained. In all experiments the samples were submitted to mechanical processes, such as cutting, milling, sieving, magnetic and gravimetric separation, in order to obtain metal concentrates. The processes used on the three lots to upgrade the material were basically the same, with small variations between them. The specific tests conducted on Lot 1, Lot 2 and Lot 3 are outlined in Lots 1, 2 and 3 were milled separately in a hammer mill, producing three separate lots of milled batteries. After this procedure, Lot 3 was submitted to a granulometric separation by dry sieving, resulting in two fractions: Lot 3 All fractions obtained from this second dry sieving stage were kept for chemical analyses, in addition to fractions 2M and 3M resulting from the previous wet sieving. Only material 1M underwent a further gravimetric separation stage before being analyzed. In order to obtain a concentrate rich in copper, samples from the three fractions from Lot 1 that presented the largest amount of this metal in the chemical analyses were submitted to further separation processes. Copper concentration was carried out by following two different routes: gravimetric separation in Wilfley table, and magnetic separation for iron removing. The final copper concentrates obtained after both processes were chemically analyzed through atomic absorption spectrometry, as were the other fractions. The gravimetric separation in Wilfley table was carried out in fraction 1C. Before the separation, the material 1C was subjected to a milling process to reduce its granulometry, adapting it to the process in Wilfley concentrating table. The granulometry was diminished to 0.5 Since the iron content in fractions 1A and 1B was high, these fractions were submitted to a dry magnetic separation process, with roller induced rare earths magnets. The magnetic separation was carried out twice in each non-magnetic fraction obtained after processing. As this technique is efficient for particles as small as 0.074 By the end of each test, samples from all the final fractions obtained were leached for quantitative chemical analysis in a 5H  For Lot 1, the milling time on the hammer mill was of 10 A higher weight on the finer fraction after longer milling time was expected. One inconvenience is that other materials (Cu, Fe, Al) could also have larger concentrations in the finer fraction. However, it is necessary to estimate the optimum time to generate the largest amount of fine particles containing cobalt, with less presence of other metallic elements. The chemical analysis of the four granulometric ranges is presented in The recovery of cobalt, copper and aluminum among the four granulometric ranges are detailed in As presented in the three figures, the top recoveries of cobalt occurred in the finest fractions. For Lot 1 ( Copper and aluminum can be found spread among fractions with higher granulometric ranges. The best aluminum recovery was achieved for the experimental conditions used in Lot 2 (fraction 2C), while copper was mainly recovered in fraction 1C (70.2%), where the copper foils were not totally crushed. The fine fractions obtained from the three lots were identified as being composed mainly of cobalt ( The results show that, after Co, Mn was the second most abundant metal in the fine fraction for Lot 2 and Lot 3, i.e., the two tests that used a higher feed flow rate on the hammer mill (239.4 and 241.4 Fractions 1A, 1B and 1C were conducted to further concentration methods in order to concentrate copper.  However, for a granulometry between 2 Initially, the material to be concentrated (1C) was sieved to 0.1  The content of copper obtained after separation from polymers and ceramics in the gravimetric process (1C-W) is far greater than the original concentration of 18% found in fraction 1C, reaching 66.38%. However, parameters such as agitation rate, horizontal and vertical inclination of the table, water flow and feed rate must be investigated in more depth, since their modification has direct influence over the quality of the concentrate. Further studies for the optimization of these parameters are of great interest, as the results seems promising for the separation of copper and aluminum from secondary sources such as lithium ion batteries. As for the fine particles < It increases the efficiency of the process, promoting the adjustment of the load granulometry to the range recommended for Wilfley table operation ( It avoids that fine particles containing high concentrations of cobalt are washed away with the water, reducing the wastage of this metal and water contamination. The results of the cobalt analyses in the fine fraction confirm the predominant presence of this element in the finest particle sizes after milling. Therefore, the methods used in this work resulted in a concentrate of copper with a superior purity than those normally obtained in concentrates produced with ore improvement processes, which reach 30% of copper, on average. Subsequent purification techniques of the obtained concentrates are still necessary, but these concentrates can be considered adequate for further processing by hydrometallurgy. The results obtained in this work proved that mechanical processing provides a potential method for metal preconcentration from lithium-ion batteries. It is feasible to obtain rich metal concentrates applying only ore processing techniques, improving the quality of this material for further metallurgical processes. It was possible to obtain concentrates with up to 66% copper as well as fractions with cobalt concentration corresponding to 80%. By doing this, the number of following purification steps necessary to obtain virtually pure metals is reduced, meaning a more environmentally friendly approach for LIB recycling. This fact also favors the process of beneficiation considerably because of the low costs of these techniques, which do not require qualified labor. According to the results obtained, it is observable that the milling time and the feeding flow rate in the hammer mill interferes directly in the distribution of cobalt, copper and aluminum in each particle size range. A higher milling time with a higher feeding flow in the hammer mill stage resulted in a superior recovery of cobalt, which is found mainly in the fine material with particle sizes smaller than 1 The authors wish to thank