Dental enamel, the hardest tissue in the human body, is derived from dental epithelial cell ameloblast-secreted enamel matrices. Enamel mineralization occurs in a strictly synchronized manner along with ameloblast maturation in association with ion transport and pH balance, and any disruption of these processes results in enamel hypomineralization. G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) function as transducers of external signals by activating associated G proteins and regulate cellular physiology. Tissue-specific GPCRs play important roles in organ development, although their activities in tooth development remain poorly understood. The present results show that the adhesion GPCR Gpr115 (Adgrf4) is highly and preferentially expressed in mature ameloblasts and plays a crucial role during enamel mineralization. To investigate the in vivo function of Gpr115, knockout (Gpr115-KO) mice were created and found to develop hypomineralized enamel, with a larger acidic area because of the dysregulation of ion composition. Transcriptomic analysis also revealed that deletion of Gpr115 disrupted pH homeostasis and ion transport processes in enamel formation. In addition, in vitro analyses using the dental epithelial cell line cervical loop–derived dental epithelial (CLDE) cell demonstrated that Gpr115 is indispensable for the expression of carbonic anhydrase 6 (Car6), which has a critical role in enamel mineralization. Furthermore, an acidic condition induced Car6 expression under the regulation of Gpr115 in CLDE cells. Thus, we concluded that Gpr115 plays an important role in enamel mineralization via regulation of Car6 expression in ameloblasts. The present findings indicate a novel function of Gpr115 in ectodermal organ development and clarify the molecular mechanism of enamel formation.inner enamel epithelium ameloblastin G protein–coupled receptor cervical loop–derived dental epithelial cell line postnatal day scanning electron microscopy energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy gene ontology cytomegalovirus amino acid. Dental enamel is comprised of greater than 97% hydroxyapatite and those crystals have a 1000 times greater volume as compared with that in bone or dentin, making enamel the hardest tissue in the human body ( Ameloblasts in the maturation stage have essential roles in ion transport for importing enamel components as well as exchange of various ions for pH regulation ( This reaction occurs under a weak alkaline condition and during expansion of hydroxyapatite crystals, when protons will be released, as shown above. pH balance is strictly regulated by ameloblasts during enamel formation. A major function of the proton buffering system in ameloblasts is excretion of bicarbonates ( G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) consist of five main families in mammals, with more than 600 individual members known in humans ( The present results indicate that Initially, the expression of Gpr115 during tooth development was analyzed. Both Northern blotting ( Next,  The detailed structure of incisor enamel was further analyzed using scanning EM (SEM) (  Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in P7 WT and Next, CLDE, a mouse-derived dental epithelial cell line, was used to analyze the effect of Carbonic anhydrases catalyze the interconversion between carbon dioxide and water and bicarbonate. During enamel formation, hydroxyapatite crystals produce protons and induce crystal size growth ( The present study examined the role of  Previous reports have noted expressions of several carbonic anhydrases in ameloblasts and carbonic anhydrase family members have been suggested to play a role in enamel mineralization ( During the maturation stage of enamel development, pH changes occur, termed pH cycling. In this step, ameloblasts transform their morphology from ruffle-ended to smooth-ended ( Although In summary, the present results identified a novel mechanism for regulation of pH by The The mouse cervical loop–derived dental epithelial cell line CLDE was maintained in keratinocyte serum-free medium supplemented with EGF and BPE (Invitrogen) at 37°C with 5% CO Total RNA was extracted from P1 rat tissues using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), and 20 μg of RNA was separated by electrophoresis and transferred to a Nytran membrane (Schleicher & Schuell), as described previously ( Total RNA from mouse tooth germs as well as CLDE cells was isolated using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer's protocol. cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng of total RNA using SuperScript  The predicted protein sequence of GPR115 was obtained from NCBI GenBank ( Heads from 8-week-old mice were dissected and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Scanning was performed using a SCANCO μCT50 device, as described previously ( Incisors of 8-week-old mice were extracted and embedded using an EMbed 812 Kit (Electron Microscopy Science), then sectioned in the middle frontal area. Sectioned layers were etched with 0.1% nitric acid three times for 10 s each and with 10% sodium hypochlorite for 15 s. After etching, 5 nm sputter coating with gold-palladium was performed. The samples were scanned using a Miniscope® TM3000 (Hitachi). Bromphenol red staining and resazurin were used to indicate pH levels of enamel, as described previously ( To construct each cDNA library, total RNA in P7 first molars from littermate WT and Gpr115-KO mice was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). cDNA libraries were produced using a Nextera XT library kit (Illumina), and samples were run on a HiSeq1500 (Illumina) configured for 150 × 150 pair-end reads. Differential gene expression analysis was performed with DESeq2 ( CLDE cells were cultured in 12-well plates, then after transfection of siRNAs were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen) with 2.5 m A two-tailed Student's The RNA-Seq data presented in this paper have all been deposited with the NCBI GEO This work is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Yoshihiko Yamada, who passed away in 2019. He was a pioneer in matrix biology, and a mentor and friend to many. We thank Dr. Olivier Duverger and Dr. Emily Y. Chu for their kind technical advice. We also thank Dr. Ashok Kulkarni, Glenn Longnecker, and the NIDCR Gene Targeting Core Facility for performing the embryonic stem cell injections to generate     