The present study examines the sintering behavior and effect of yttria alumina garnet (YAG) addition on ferritic (434L) and austenitic (316L) stainless steel during solid-state and supersolidus liquid-phase sintering (SLPS). Up to 10 wt.% YAG (Al5Y3O12, AlYO3) was added to 316L and 434L stainless steel. The compacts were solid-state- and supersolidus-sintered at 1200 and 1400 °C, respectively. The sintered samples were characterized for their density and hardness. The effect of sintering and YAG addition on the microstructural evolution in supersolidus-sintered samples is compared with that obtained by solid-state sintering. Through electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), the distribution of various elements in intergranular as well as intragranular regions was quantified for stainless steel with and without YAG addition. The density of stainless steel samples sintered through the supersolidus route was higher than that of solid-state-sintered samples. Up to 5 wt.% YAG dispersed samples exhibited much better hardness when compared to the straight powder metallurgy (P/M) stainless steel both in solid-state- as well as supersolidus-sintered conditions.Stainless steels produced by powder metallurgy (P/M) are widely used in automotive and structural applications. Still, this is only a small fraction when compared with the use of wrought stainless steel. The ongoing efforts are aimed at improving the properties of P/M stainless steel through compositional and sintering modifications. Generally, P/M stainless steel are usually consolidated by solid-state sintering The present study compares the effect of yttria alumina garnet (YAG) addition on the solid-state and supersolidus sintering of 316L and 434L stainless steel. It is hypothesized that the presence of yttrium aluminum oxide will result in greater densification and mechanical properties of stainless steel. The effect of sintering temperature and YAG addition was evaluated by characterizing the microstructure, elemental distribution through electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), and hardness. 316L and 434L powders used for the present work are gas-atomized and round in shape. The median size ( Sintering of the green compacts was carried out in a SiC-heated tubular furnace in a reducing atmosphere of hydrogen with a dew point of −35 °C. The hydrogen gas was passed through activated alumina and catalyst dryers to remove traces of moisture from the gas. The sintering temperatures were 1200 and 1400 °C. Green and sintered densities were calculated from dimensional and weight measurements. The sintered samples were polished to mirror finish and were etched in Marvels reagent (12 g CuSO Vickers bulk hardness measurements were performed on all the microstructural surfaces at a 2-kg load. The observed hardness values are averages of five readings taken at random locations throughout the samples.  The sintered density of the samples increased with increasing temperature. The formation of liquid phase when sintered at 1400 °C resulted in higher sintered density. For both ferritic as well as austenitic stainless steel, the sintered density increases as the YAG content increases up to 5% YAG and thereafter decreases. At lower YAG content, there is chemical interaction with the matrix phase; this is confirmed by EPMA analysis of samples. In case of higher YAG composites (10% YAG) because of the fine particle size of YAG, there is a probability of YAG–YAG interaction and formation of its agglomerates at grain boundaries, and thereby reduction of metal–YAG chemical interaction, which causes a decrease in sintered density.   EPMA was performed on 316L and 316L-10YAG, as shown in Hardness measurements were done on the sintered samples in order to study the effect of sintering temperature and YAG addition. In conclusion, we have shown that, as compared to solid-state-sintered steel, supersolidus-sintered 316L and 434L stainless steel have higher density and hardness. Addition of 5 wt.% YAG enhances the sintered density and hardness of both ferritic and austenitic stainless steel. YAG dispersoids in the matrix are much more effective in densifying the compacts when sintering is carried out at 1400 °C.