Two marble columns in the bottom floor of a school building were exposed to intensive heat in the fire, and were subject of a debate about their load-carrying capacity following the event. After their removal from their original spots, series of tests on column samples were carried out to investigate variations in their engineering characteristics due to fire hazard. The temperature at the surface of the marble columns hit by the flames directly during the fire was estimated to be on the order of 500°C using an empirically established relationship between porosity and temperature on intact marble core samples. Results of mechanical tests indicated that marble columns were still holding a significant load-carrying capacity despite 23% loss of strength at fire temperature. The spallings at the corners of the blocks forced the board of education to give the decision of replacing the gray marble columns with steel members. Occurrence of these spallings is attributed to stress concentrations and widening of micro fractures. Based on the results of mechanical, physical and chemical tests, a methodology to assess influence of fire hazard on marble and similar geological materials was developed.The historical Mithatpasa Technical Junior High School built in 1881 was damaged by a major fire that took place recently in the city of Izmir. The school building has undergone a major renovation following the fire hazard. The main school building and accompanying service structures involve two normal stories and a basement. The structural system consists of stone masonry walls; hybrid adobe-filled wooden frames and frame walls. The educational complex is an important and noticeable element of the historical heritage in the southern coastal line of the city of Izmir ( Cracks, crusts and spallings were observed on the blocks following the fire hazard. One should note that the term crack refers to discontinuities formed by thermal gradients within the marble blocks during the fire. Crust and spalling, on the other hand, are, respectively, used to define a few centimeters thick thermally stressed slice below the block surface, and a reduction in the cross-sectional area of the block due to the breakage of relatively large size pieces along fractured surfaces where high thermal stress concentrations took place ( The goal of this study is the assessment of load carrying capacity and overall condition of structural marble columns following a major fire hazard in the historical building. Among the several methods employed during laboratory studies, it was found that the data from Schmidt Hammer Test, porosity determinations and rock mechanics tests provided more insight for assessment purposes when evaluated in a systematic manner. The methods utilized in the research were similar to those applied for fire-exposed concrete, reinforced concrete and masonry elements The Schmidt hammer tests were conducted as a fast and economic non-destructive testing method in damage assessment studies. Schmidt hammer tests were carried out according to the method outlined by Initially, a full-scale grid system on the fire-exposed surfaces of the marble columns was established using transparent sheets. After this process, discontinuity surfaces and crusted surfaces generated in the fire were mapped on the above mentioned grid squares. This map is called as “deformation map” in this study. The Schmidt hammer rebound values (SHV) were also recorded with respect to the grid system to come up with the “The Schmidt Hammer Zoning Map”, which was based on the equivalent SHV contour lines. The Schmidt hammer has been in use as a practical non-destructive testing tool to provide cost effective data that can be utilized for indirect determination of certain engineering parameters of rocks such as Young's modulus, uniaxial compressive strength, P-wave velocity and number of joints The Schmidt hammer employed in SHV readings was an L-type instrument with impact energy of 0.735 Overlaying of deformation and Schmidt hammer zoning maps formed the disturbance map of each column. It should be mentioned that formation of such a disturbance map is original to this study. A multi-stage petrographical investigation program has been undertaken in order to observe response of calcite crystals to heat effect at elevated temperatures on three groups of marble samples. Petrographic description of marble samples was carried out according to the method suggested by ISRM Mechanical tests were made on two groups of samples. These sample groups were recovered from opposite surfaces of the marble blocks in standard sample size. Laboratory tests involved determination of porosity, uniaxial compressive strength, secant deformation modulus, Poisson's ratio, angle of friction and cohesion of the marble samples at various temperature increments. Main objective of mechanical tests was to estimate the average temperature on the fire-exposed side of the blocks during the fire and examine dependence of other engineering parameters on temperature changes. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) values of nine intact marble core samples tested at varying temperatures including the room temperature (20 One of the sample groups consisted of five samples that were preheated up to 300 The original mineralogical structure of the marble columns prior to fire hazard was determined on thin sections recovered at faces that were not directly exposed to flames in the fire. Such portions of the column blocks were considered to be slightly affected by the heat, and may form a basis for comparison purposes. A polarized microscope and a point counting equipment were utilized in the study. The texture of the marble blocks consisting of mainly coarse calcite minerals has been found to be granoblastic structure ( The cracks, fissures, crusted surfaces, primarily foliation planes, and spallings observed on flame exposed faces of all 16 blocks of the marble columns were carefully plotted on transparent papers following the establishment of a grid system consisting of 5×5 Although most low SHV readings are associated with visible cracks, it can be observed on The Schmidt hammer zoning map is especially applicable to locations where invisible structural deformation anomalies such as crusts due to heat effect need to be uncovered. The SHV readings drastically attain low values where such spots are met. SHV readings may be statistically evaluated using frequency histogram method The first group of petrographic thin-section analyses consisted of fire-exposed materials. Some samples of this group were cored in heavily damaged marble zones (samples 2–1, 2–2, and 2–3 of Separations along cleavage surfaces, inter-crystals, disintegration and loss of transparency reflected as gray color formations were observed beyond 600 The effect of the fire on the physical properties of the marble is investigated by determining the variations of porosity and water absorption by weight before and after the fire-exposed marble. Porosity tests were performed on samples taken from both sides of the blocks. Several tests on samples representing the fire-exposed side yielded an average porosity value of Uniaxial compressive strength of the marble samples exhibited strong dependence on temperature elevations. This was well reflected by the samples that were cored from the intact block surfaces. It can be seen in Variation of the secant deformation modulus and Poisson's ratio with increasing temperature has been observed on instrumented samples obtained from the fire-exposed block surface (i.e. the second group of the uniaxial compressive strength test samples), and testing them to record axial and radial strains at equal load increments. Thus, the secant modulus corresponding to the fire temperature is found as Variation of angle of friction and cohesion of marble preheated samples were determined by means of triaxial testing. As shown in Among the several methods employed during laboratory studies, the Schmidt hammer test method, porosity determination and rock mechanics tests were considered to be more applicable to the load carrying capacity and overall conditional assessment of marble blocks. Other methods such as chemical, petrographical and X-ray diffractometry analyses did not provide much insight although they could always be used as supplementary tools for research. The image analysis, however, could be very promising in quick assessment purposes if extensive research is performed and data sets are made available in the long run. Color changes of heated samples were quite apparent and can be identified even by naked eye. The Schmidt hammer testing method has proved to be a useful tool for practical and nondestructive evaluation of the fire-exposed marble blocks. Lower SHV values have been shown to be associated with zones with a high crack density. The Schmidt hammer test was also able to detect crusts and underlying hidden cracks. The porosity test results were in good correlation with temperature. Porosity of the samples from the undamaged surfaces of the marble blocks has increased with increasing temperature. It has been shown that estimation of the average temperature over the surfaces of the blocks that were hit by the flames directly would be possible provided that porosity of the damaged portions is established reliably. Large differences on the order of 10 folds between water absorption values of both damaged (i.e. fire exposed) and undamaged surfaces are attributed to the increase of the porosity on the fire-exposed surface since rapid change in temperature and expansion of moisture before the fire caused expansion of marble. The moisture content before the fire is not known, and current study does not cover influence of pre-existing moisture on the fire behavior of marble. However, previous studies on concrete members showed that moisture in closed pores could be quite effective on the initiation of spallings Temperature-based rock mechanics tests indicated that uniaxial compressive strength, secant deformation modulus, Poisson's ratio, angle of friction and cohesion of the marble samples were all reduced with increasing temperature nonlinearly in a similar manner. The rate of decrease has been found to increase beyond 700 An extensive field and laboratory study has been made in order to assess load carrying capacity and overall condition of marble serving as structural member following a major fire hazard in a historical school building. The Schmidt hammer test rebound values yielded good correlation with the deformed state of the fire-exposed surfaces of marble. It is highly likely that this testing method could be utilized for initial assessment of overall condition of other fire-exposed structural elements such as reinforced concrete columns. Practical assessment of fire temperature would be made based on simple determination of porosity of marble samples provided that variation of porosity with temperature is known for a particular marble type. Such a relationship has been established in this study. It would be beneficial to develop similar correlations for other geo materials. Once the fire temperature is known conclusions may be drawn regarding load-carrying capacity of such members. Following this methodology it has been determined that marble has experienced a reduction of 23% in uniaxial compressive strength during 2