By using PbS powder as raw materials, high-purity compact and machinable galena bulk was successfully prepared by sintering method under high pressure and temperature for the first time. The hot pressed sintering was performed at 0.9 GPa and 550 °C for 1 h. The as-prepared products were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA), Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES), Carbon and Sulfur Analyzer, and optical microscopy, respectively. XRD results show that the as-prepared samples have a cubic structure and were identified as galena without any impurity. Based on microscopic observations and element analyses, only galena was identified, and it is consistent with the results of XRD analysis. The density of galena bulk was measured and it is equal to the theoretical value. It is machinable and can be processed into fixed shape.Galena (PbS) is an important semiconductor mineral with special electrochemical, electrical, optical, thermoelectric properties However, it is very difficult to find high purity natural block galena as the research object that can up to the research standard. Natural galena is often associated with sulfide minerals such as sphalerite, pyrite, and chalcopyrite. The galvanic interaction between symbiosis minerals will cause interference to the electrochemical corrosion process of galena. Besides, the presence of impurity in the galena crystal would change the structure energy band and semiconductor type of galena Though various methods have been employed to produce galena pellets, films, or nanoparticles The sample assembly is shown in XRD (Empyrean, PANalytical, Holland) was used to measure the crystal structure and identify phase of as-sintering galena precisely. The mineralogy of the post-sinter sample was observed by reflected-light optical microscopy. Chemical composition, element content and distribution of the sintered galena were studied by EPMA (JXA8230, JEOL, Japan), ICP-AES (ARCOS II, SPECTRO, Germany), and Carbon and Sulfur Analyzer (CS-206, BAOYING TECHNOLOGY, China). The density of the prepared galena bulk was measured by an Electronic Densimeter (DH-1200, DAHON, Japan). The wear resistibility of as-sintered sample was tested by a grinding machine. A multifunctional autoclave was used to test the compactness of the samples after grinding and polishing. The XRD patterns are shown in  According to the calculation of the lattice parameters, the theoretical cell density of galena is 7.580 g/cm  In this study, we have described a novel and simple method to obtain high pure compact massive galena bulk. Using the powder PbS as raw material, the galena bulk obtained by high temperature and pressure sintering under 0.9 GPa and 550 °C in a LVP. The products are high purity, and the density is almost equal to the theoretical value. It is machinable and can be processed into fixed shape. Remarkably, the successful preparation of these samples makes it possible to realize the feasibility of studying the corrosion electrochemical corrosion properties of galena in high pressure hydrothermal system. This research was financially supported by the