In this study, an inorganic mixture of 40wt% MgCl2·6H2O and 60wt% Mg(NO3)2·6H2O was impregnated into two types of the expanded graphite (EG): EG flakes and EG matrix. Different methods of preparation usually used in the organic composite preparation, such as direct blending, vacuum impregnation, ultrasonic impregnation and immersion were applied in this work. Considering the samples with EG matrix, it can be concluded that the optimal result of the encapsulation and ΔH ratio can be reached with the experimental time of 1, 3 and 4h using the vacuum, ultrasound and immersion methods, respectively. Moreover, the percentage of encapsulation increases with the experimental time and with the EG percentage for the EG matrix and for the EG flakes, respectively. Concerning the supercooling phenomena, the results show that the presence of EG reduces the difference between fusion and crystallization temperature for up to 65%, acting as а nucleating agent. The resulting composite samples (CPCM) were proved to have good latent heat and a significant reduction of the supercooling effect, which eliminates the need to use nucleating agents, that are essential for pure PCM of 40wt% MgCl2·6H2O and 60wt% Mg(NO3)2·6H2O. Moreover, using EG suppresses significantly the melting time which indicates the heat transfer enhance of the mixture. This circumstance could allow to empower the utilization of the mentioned mixture in different fields of thermal energy storage at low temperature.Under today's increase of energy demand, using phase change materials is one of the most promising methods for thermal energy storage. The energy is stored as a combination of sensible and latent heat. During the process of phase change, thermal energy is absorbed or released at a constant temperature which allows to control temperature during the thermal energy storage (TES) process. Inorganic salt hydrates are particularly convenient as materials for low temperature TES. However, one of the main problems of their use is supercooling due to weak nucleating properties. At the melting temperature, nucleation rate in most of the cases is very low. That is why, to reach a reasonable nucleation rate, the solution has to be supercooled and thus the energy is being discharged at much lower temperature. Thereby, a liquid crystallizes much below its melting point. G. Lane Another important problem of inorganic PCM is that of low heat charging and discharging rates due to their low thermal conductivity. So far, the methods carried out to enhance heat transfer in energy storage systems include adding finned configurations, dispersing high conductivity particles (metal, ceramic, graphite, graphene), impregnating a porous matrix (metallic or carbon), and encapsulating the material According to the provided literature, there is still a lack of understanding on developing of the EG/inorganic PCM composite. To help reduce this knowledge gap, this work reports the results of the preparation of composite materials, using an inorganic mixture of 40 Binary magnesium nitrate/magnesium chloride mixtures with different compositions are well-studied and characterized in literature as phase change materials Two different types of EG (matrix and flakes) to prepare composite EG/PCM (CPCM) samples were utilized in order to improve thermophysical properties of the selected mixture of 40 In order to provide the best way of preparing the composite EG/ inorganic PCM, different methods, usually applied for organic composite, including direct blending, vacuum impregnation, ultrasonic impregnation, and immersion, were studied in this research. The composite samples (CPCM) were proved to have excellent latent heat and significant reduction of the supercooling effect, which eliminates the need of nucleating agents. Moreover, the usage of EG suppresses significantly the melting time which indicates the heat transfer enhance of the mixture of 40 Both magnesium chloride MgCl Both salts were dried at 40 The CPCM samples were prepared using different techniques, including vacuum impregnation, ultrasound impregnation, immersion and direct blending. Two types of the expanded graphite were used: EG flakes in different weight fractions (5–10–15 For vacuum impregnation, the solid salt mixture and the EG matrix samples were placed into the vacuum rotary evaporator (Rotavapor BUCHI R-210). The ultrasound impregnation was performed with an Ultrasonic Elmasonic S 30 (H). For this experiment, the mixture of inorganic salts and EG matrix samples were placed in a beaker inside the ultrasonic bath. For the immersion, EG matrix samples were put into a beaker with the molten salt mixture and were contained in a THERMOSCIENTIFIC FD1500M oven. A number of samples was extracted depending on the experimental time. The obtained samples were abbreviated as CPCM As for EG flakes, different weight fractions (5–10–15 A scanning electron microscope Jeol JSM6360 LV coupled to an energy dispersion spectrometer Inca Oxford was used to perform the chemical analysis of the samples. The experiments were carried out under the low vacuum with an electron beam of 20 Measurements of melting temperature, heat of fusion, specific heat capacity, thermogravimetric analysis and analysis of cycling stability were conducted. A DSC NETZSCH 204 Phoenix F1 with N Specific heat analysis was performed by means of DSC method, in the range from 20 In addition to the DSC method, measurements with K-type thermocouples were performed to reveal the thermal performance of chosen mixtures with the larger amount of substance (about 7–8 Thermal stability analysis was performed using a Mettler Toledo Model TGA/DSC1 1100 LF in the temperature range from 20 The densities of solid salt mixtures were determined using a pycnometer with n-dodecane, while the liquid samples were evaluated by an oscillating densimeter (Mettler Toledo model ED50). Brookfield Rheometer DV-III Ultra model was applied for measuring viscosity using a SC4-18 needle and Thermocel accessory was used to maintain the temperature. Analysis for different speeds of 10–80 The morphology of the samples studied is shown in The chemical composition of the prepared CPCM was further determined by EDX analysis attached to the SEM. The EDX spectrum sustains that the CPCM consists of C, O, Mg, Cl elements. Since spectra of the other samples present very similar result,  The specific heat capacity was determined to reveal the effect of EG addition on thermal properties. Specific heat capacities of pure PCM and CPCM samples varied with temperature are presented in In the phase change process, the specific heat decreased with the increase of EG content ( The most representative results of the composite samples thermal properties determination are included to Considering the samples with EG matrix in their composition, it can be concluded that the optimal result of the encapsulation and enthalpy ratio can be reached with the experimental time of 1, 3 and 4 One of the important parameters of composite PCM is the impregnation efficiency, which can be defined by Eq. Therefore, the impregnation efficiency calculation results for the composite samples with EG matrix are reported in The melting and solidification DSC curves of the second cycle of the pure salt and the PCM/EG matrix are presented in Two measurements of thermal stability were carried out with TGA for each sample, first in opened crucibles and then in sealed crucibles with a pierced lid. Eventually, all samples tested in sealed crucibles do not present any weight loss, i.e., they reach 130 In addition to the DSC method, tests with K-type thermocouples were carried out to reveal thermal performance of the composite PCM/EG samples. Temperature curves for pure PCM and CPCM Additionally, the freezing curves (see The CPCM Solid samples densities were determined with a pycnometer and n-dodecane, while for the liquid samples, densities were measured by an oscillating densimeter Mettler Toledo ED50. Moreover, the temperature dependence of n-dodecane was measured with the same densimeter. Eq. The results of density measurements are shown in Viscosity measurements were performed with pure PCM (40 According to the expectations, viscosity decreases with increasing the temperature and moreover, viscosity values do not depend on torque speed which indicates the Newtonian behavior of the studied PCM. That is why, In this study, an inorganic mixture of 40 Considering the samples with EG matrix, it can be concluded that the optimal result of the encapsulation and ΔH ratio can be reached with the experimental time of 1 TG analysis for both types CPCM samples in opened crucibles reveals that there is a slight weight loss which begins from about 80 The results with K-type thermocouple measurements show that for the pure PCM there is a significant decrease in supercooling (4 Authors from Universidad de Antofagasta thank