Rupture of the extensor apparatus of the knee in adults is infrequent and dominated by patellar fracture, which in our experience is six times as frequent as quadriceps or patellar tendon tear. Patellar fracture poses few diagnostic problems and treatment is now well codified. Tension-band osteosynthesis is generally used, involving two longitudinal K-wires and wire in a figure-of-eight pattern looped over the anterior patella; sometimes, for more complex fractures, cerclage wiring is added to the tension band. Non-union is rare and generally well tolerated. Quadriceps tendon tear mainly affects patients over 40 years of age, in a context of systemic disease. Diagnosis is easily suggested by inability to actively extend the knee, but is unfortunately still often overlooked in emergency. In most cases, early surgical management is needed to reinsert the tendon at the proximal pole of the patella by bone suture. For chronic lesions, it is often necessary to lengthen the quadriceps tendon by V-Y plasty or the Codivilla technique. Patellar tendon tear, on the other hand, typically occurs in patients under 40 years of age, often involved in sports. Diagnosis is again clinically straightforward, but again may be missed in emergency, especially in case of incomplete tear. Surgery is mandatory in all cases. The procedure depends on the type of lesion: either end-to-end suture or transosseous reinsertion. In most cases repair is protected by tendon augmentation. Old lesions often require tendon graft or a tendon-bone-tendon-bone graft taken from the opposite side.The knee-extensor apparatus comprises the quadriceps, patella and patellar ligament. Rupture may involve any of these, and usually results in failure of active extension of the knee, with highly disabling functional consequences. Frequency varies according to reports, but is generally considered low, especially for quadriceps tendon and patellar ligament tear. The 21-year experience of our department totals 102 quadriceps tendon avulsions, 98 patellar ligament tears and 600 patellar fractures. Quadriceps lesions classically involve rectus femoris lesions at the proximal insertion onto the antero-inferior iliac spine and distal insertion onto the vastus intermedius aponeurosis; as they have little impact on knee extension, they will not be dealt with in this update. The quadriceps or femoral muscle is the extensor of the knee. When the knee is in hyperextension, the quadriceps is not required to maintain upright posture, but acts strongly to prevent falling as of the first degrees of flexion. The quadriceps comprises four muscles, ending in a common tendon on the anterior tibial tuberosity The patella is a sesamoid bone, part of the knee-extensor apparatus ( Fracture may be caused by direct or indirect trauma. Direct trauma is a shock to the anterior side of the knee in falling; it involves patellar compression, resulting in comminutive or stellate fracture. Although frequently without displacement, there may be major associated cartilage damage Indirect trauma involves knee-extensor apparatus tension, which may fracture the patella if it exceeds bone resistance Classification should consider on the one hand fracture displacement and on the other the location of the fracture line or lines. A fracture may be said to be displaced if there is a step and/or inter-fragment space exceeding 2 or 3 Duparc's classification, referred to by Neyret Patients usually present with a swollen knee, total functional impotence and active knee extension failure. Palpation confirms fracture site detachment. In some cases, the presenting symptom is simply anterior knee pain with moderate edema and partial loss of function without active extension defect. Clinical examination finishes with exploration for associated lesions, which are quite frequent in high-energy fracture. AP and lateral X-ray easily confirms transverse fracture and proximal or distal patellar pole fracture-avulsion. Sagittal and fragmented fracture is better seen on skyline view. If patella bipartita is suspected, contralateral views will help diagnosis. Fragmented fractures are often associated with traumatic patellar dislocation, sometimes showing spontaneous reduction, and tend to occur on the medial side of the patella or on the posterior side as an osteochondral fracture ( Conservative treatment consists in 30–45 days’ strict immobilization in a trochanter-malleolar cast. Some authors Conservative treatment should be reserved for non-displaced sagittal fracture (which in fact we manage functionally, with no immobilization), transverse or stellate fracture with little or no displacement ( Braun et al. Extensor apparatus failure is the main indication for surgical management. Surgery may also be indicated in some cases despite conserved active extension, to correct a step and/or inter-fragment space exceeding 2 or 3 Open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) is the treatment of choice for displaced patellar fracture. Several skin incisions have been described as approaches. The classic horizontal approach should be avoided, as it compromises possible future intervention on the knee. A vertical median incision centered on the patella is preferable, and can easily be extended upward or downward. Parapatellar arthrotomy is often useful to control reduction. Tension-band osteosynthesis is the most commonly employed technique Isolated screwing is rarely recommended, except for certain displaced sagittal fractures. Minimally-invasive techniques were recently recommended by Luna-Pizzaro et al. Partial patellectomy of the distal pole is an interesting alternative when it is too comminutive for stable and solid osteosynthesis, but leads to patella baja. Reinsertion is generally protected by frame-shaped reinforcement between the patella and the proximal extremity of the tibia, using either wire, hamstring tendon or a synthetic band. In some lateral sagittal patellar fractures with lateral fragment comminution, sagittal patellectomy may have much less negative impact. Saltzman et al. Total patellectomy should be reserved for exceptional cases where no satisfactory reconstruction is feasible: highly comminutive fracture or open fracture with bone loss. Once solid and stable osteosynthesis has been achieved, rehabilitation can be initiated quickly, to recover satisfactory range of motion. Walking with full weight-bearing can be authorized as of the day after surgery, as long as a moveable splint and crutches are used. In the first postoperative days, it is important to combat flexion contracture and to “awaken” the quadriceps. Passive flexion on a motorized splint helps remodel the patellar cartilage. Flexion exercises, in prone position, are an excellent means of recovering good knee flexion without putting strain on the osteosynthesis. Concentric quadriceps exercises may, generally, be initiated as of postoperative day 45. Intolerance of material is a frequent complication, due partly to the subcutaneous position of the patella and partly to the K-wires turning or migrating and to the metal twist. It may hinder rehabilitation. Skin perforation may require early removal of material, which may generally be removed as of the 6th postoperative month. Non-union is rare, at least in closed fracture, with a rate of less than 1% in most reports, but of 7% in open fracture Deep infection is also rare, at least in closed fracture, where it is estimated at 0–5%, and 11% in open fracture Knee stiffness is a frequent complication, and is multifactorial. The most frequent causes are insufficient rehabilitation due to fragile osteosynthesis, patella baja, complex regional pain syndrome and abnormal soft-tissue fibrosis. Recent reports rarely mention arthritic complications. In 1972, Boström Recent quadriceps tendon tear is most often found in over 40-year-olds Diagnosis is founded on the triad of sudden-onset intense syncopal pain at the moment of tearing, sometimes accompanied by a cracking sensation, failure of active knee extension, and palpable suprapatellar depression. Active knee flexion is unaffected, and quadriceps contraction induces no mobilization of the patella. Despite such fairly typical signs, diagnosis may be missed in emergency – in up to 50% of cases, according to some reports. AP and lateral X-ray views are sufficient in normal forms, showing: a suprapatellar mass, indicating proximal retraction of the torn tendon; suprapatellar calcification, corresponding to patellar bone fragment avulsion, or dystrophic calcification within the quadriceps tendon; patella baja; and forward shift of the proximal pole of the patella, detached from the femoral trochlea ( MRI should not be systematic, but is recommended when radio-clinical correlation leaves a doubt. We prefer MRI to ultrasound, as interpretation is easier for a surgeon who did not make the examination. It confirms diagnosis and specifies lesion type: complete or incomplete tear, avulsion or intratendon tear Partial tear is managed conservatively by trochanter-malleolar cast immobilization with the knee in extension, for at least 6 weeks. The cast is then replaced by a movable splint until active extension without pain or deficit becomes possible. Total tear is managed surgically, as early as possible (within the week following trauma), to avoid quadriceps retraction. A vertical median approach is used, centered on the proximal pole of the patella. The patellar wings are usually torn transversally and have to be sutured after tendon reinsertion. The quadriceps tendon is laced with two or three thick and preferably non-resorbable sutures. Reinsertion may use bone suture through two parallel craniocaudal tunnels drilled through the patellar body. Some authors recently suggested using anchors to reinsert the tendon, but this technique provides no benefit in terms of solidity or functional recovery The knee is immobilized in a trochanter-malleolar walking cast for at least 6 weeks. The cast is then replaced by a movable splint until active extension without pain or extension deficit becomes possible (i.e., a further 2 weeks to 1 month). Some authors recommend early rehabilitation; Rougraff et al. The series in the literature report good or very good functional results after surgical treatment of quadriceps tendon tear. Rougraff et al. Vidil et al. Reconstruction of overlooked or chronic quadriceps tear is difficult; the literature generally reports poorer surgical results than in recent tear If the extremities of the tendon can be approximated, repair is relatively easy and similar to the above technique for recent tear. The interval between the extremities may, however, be too large for this, in which case the quadriceps has to be detached from the anterior, medial and lateral sides of the femur, to bring the tendon down to the patella. If the extremities still cannot be approximated, the tendon has to be lengthened, either by V-Y plasty or by Codivilla's technique Postoperative management is the same as for suture of recent tear. Unlike quadriceps tendon tear, patella tendon tear more often occurs in active under 40-year-olds, usually after indirect trauma due to sudden quadriceps contraction with the knee in slight flexion (sudden impulsion, sprint, avoiding a fall, etc.). It is generally agreed that a healthy patellar tendon will not tear, and that tearing usually involves a tendon weakened by iterative microtrauma There has usually been sudden quadriceps contraction during a sudden impulsion, landing from a jump or stumbling on stairs, with intense pain and immediate functional impotence preventing unaided standing. Active knee extension is impossible, except in certain cases in which the patellar wings remain intact, enabling extension with greatly reduced force. Palpation finds a sub-patellar “hole” in which the index finger can be inserted without resistance ( AP and lateral X-ray confirms diagnosis, showing a patella alta ( Ultrasound is not very contributive in recent patellar tendon tear, but may be indicated in some chronic cases. Likewise, MRI is not very contributive in recent tear except in case of doubt (which is exceptional). It is, on the other hand, very useful in chronic cases or in case of suspected associated intra-articular lesion, where it provides preoperative lesion location: avulsion of the patella tip or anterior tibial tuberosity or full-body tear with or without tendon laceration. Surgery is mandatory, regardless of age and physical activity, and should be as early as possible. Either end-to-end suture or tibial or patellar transosseous tunnel reinsertion is performed. A frame-shaped reinforcement is often added between the patella and tibial tuberosity, using either wire or, preferably, a semitendinosus band as wires tend to break, often requiring ablation. In full-body tear, end-to-end suture is performed using thick resorbable suture; non-resorbable suture should be avoided, as it often becomes visible under the skin once the edema has resolved. It is important to check that the patella is not lowered during suturing, comparing the patella on fluoroscopy with the contralateral patella on X-ray of the knee in 45° flexion. It is in these cases that a semi-tendinosus tension band is especially useful ( In proximal avulsion, the tendon is anchored to the bone by two thick non-resorbable sutures through two parallel bone tunnels to the proximal pole of the patella. Distal avulsion is very rare in adults, but can be managed by one or two notched staples or using anchors. End-to-end suturing is often difficult beyond 45 days after tearing Repair usefully associates tendon reinforcement such as a fascia lata Autograft using the contralateral patellar tendon was suggested by Dejour et al. in 1992 Other authors Care must be taken postoperatively in both recent and old tear. The quadriceps is a very powerful muscle, and sutures may break under sudden contraction, as, for example, to stop oneself falling or stumbling. Strict immobilization of the knee in a walking cast is recommended for at least 1 month, followed by a movable splint until rehabilitation begins to restore passive flexion on a motorized splint, followed by excentric quadriceps exercises in prone position and finally concentric exercises. The motorized splint is removed once active extension is complete, with good quadriceps contraction (often, by 2 or 3 weeks). Four to 6 months are usually needed to recover normal knee function. The vast majority of recent lesions recover good mobility and quadriceps force, despite slight residual quadriceps atrophy There are no reports of large series of chronic tear, but only isolated cases using a variety of techniques. Dejour, in his original article Knee-extensor apparatus rupture in adults is relatively rare, mainly comprising patella fracture, which, in our experience, is six times frequent as quadricipital or patellar tendon tear. In case of loss of active knee extension, surgery is mandatory, to restore quadriceps force fully. Neglected patella fracture is exceptional, whereas quadricipital or patellar tendon tear may often be overlooked in emergency. If surgery is performed within a week of trauma, functional results are generally satisfactory. In case of quadriceps retraction with tendon defect, however, the surgical technique and results are less straightforward. Patellar tendon repair is usually reinforced with a semitendinosus, synthetic or metallic frame-shaped reinforcement to facilitate rehabilitation and reduce risk of recurrence following the end of immobilization. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.