Strontium sulphide (SrS) was water-leached at 85°C, generating a saturated solution of approximately 50 g/L Sr. About 92% of the strontium contained in the SrS was leached within 60–80 min. Almost all of the water-soluble strontium were completely leached out from the sulphide material. The strontium-saturated solution was treated with carbon dioxide to precipitate strontium carbonate (SrCO3). Precipitation efficiencies in excess of 99% were attained in both batch and continuous multi-column test programs. Hydrogen sulphide gas was generated as a byproduct in the precipitation process at a slurry pH≤8. Particle size analyses of SrCO3 precipitates indicate that a longer retention time enhances crystal growth.Strontium carbonate (SrCO Industrial production of SrCO Although the black ash process is commercially practiced, relevant details of the process are virtually unavailable in the literature, except for one recent publication The SrS used for the test program was supplied through the courtesy of Production Mineral (Mexico). Preliminary analysis indicated that the feed assayed approximately 94% water-soluble strontium and 6% water-insoluble strontium at 60–65°C temperature. Approximately 12 L of water was heated to a temperature of 83±2°C. At temperature, 1000 g of the as-received SrS was added (about 7.7 wt.% solids). The slurry was agitated. The temperature and pH were measured at regular time intervals. After 2 h of leaching, agitation was stopped. The slurry was quickly filtered, and the residue washed three to four times with hot water. Both filtrate and residue were chemically analysed for strontium. The leach slurry was sampled at regular time intervals for a kinetic study. Technical grade carbon dioxide was employed as a carbonating agent to precipitate SrCO The batch precipitation was a one-column process. The column had a 6-L working volume. It was fitted with a long central shaft with two radial impellers Continuous precipitations were carried out in a three-column series setup. Each column, with a 6-L working volume, was fitted with a long central shaft with two radial impellers Particle size analysis was performed on unflocculated SrCO SrS decomposes in hot water according to: As the leaching reaction proceeded, there was a gradual increase in the slurry pH from near neutral at time=0 to pH 11.5–12.5 due to the increasing OH In a highly alkaline solution, e.g. pH>14, strontium ions, Sr Thus, the lower the pH of the leaching solution/slurry, the higher the Sr Generation of hydrogen sulphide gas was detected in the early stages of the leaching when the slurry pH was relatively low. The solubility of Sr(OH) The extent of leaching of strontium from SrS can be expressed quantitatively as: SrCO (a) Dissolution of carbon dioxide gas in solution (or water) to form H (b) Dissociation of H (c) Dissociation of the bicarbonate species: (d) Sr From the above reactions, it can be determined that a mole of CO It is obvious from At the standard state, the reaction is not thermodynamically favourable (due to the positive Gibbs free energy). However, changing [H The generation of H  At a CO A comparison between the theoretical and experimental times required to effect 100% SrCO Continuous precipitation of SrCO Under the operating conditions employed in this study, almost complete precipitation of SrCO Particle size analysis was performed on unflocculated SrCO Strontium-rich solutions were generated from leaching SrS at 83±2°C. A 92% leaching efficiency for strontium was attained. Filtrates generated were used in subsequent carbonate precipitation experiments. Both batch and continuous precipitations of SrCO