Separation and concentration of indium from a liquid crystal display (LCD) was conducted using homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction (HoLLE) in order to completely recycle the LCD. First, using 2.40M hydrochloric acid, 1.52mg of indium was leached from the LCD of a mobile phone while keeping the amount of leached foreign metals, such as iron and aluminum, as low as possible. The ability to recycle the LCD glass is also expected because arsenic and antimony, which are used as antifoamers for the glass, were separated in the leaching residue. Next, on the basis of the metal leaching results for a mobile phone LCD, HoLLE with Zonyl FSA (CF3(CF2)nCH2CH2SCH2CH2COOH, n=6–8, Du Pont Co.) was conducted via the formation of metal-1,10-phenanthroline chelates on a solution formulated to simulate the leachate from a mobile phone LCD. Using this technique, more than 96.7% of the indium was extracted from the simulated leaching solution into the sedimented liquid phase. After phase separation, the volume ratio (Va/Vs) of the aqueous phase (Va) and the sedimented liquid phase (Vs) was 438 (46ml→0.105ml). In addition, the sedimented liquid phase was dropped on a filter and evaluated using X-ray fluorescence analysis. After determination of the elements concentrated into the sedimented liquid phase, the mass concentration of indium in the sedimented liquid phase was estimated to be 10.4wt%. This result indicated that the mass concentration ratio was 405 because the mass concentration of indium in the mobile phone LCD was 0.0257wt% on the basis of being determined by heating and leaching with aqua regia.The demand for liquid crystal displays (LCDs) has been increasing worldwide because they can save electricity and resources. In addition to a marked increase in the production quantity of LCDs, it is expected that the production of larger LCDs will also increase. Because of these circumstances, the available supply of indium, which is a key material in the production of LCDs, has been largely consumed ( However, to meet such a large continuous demand for indium, a constant supply of this substance is still required. Recycling of indium is considered to be one solution. The separation and recovery of indium from the indium tin oxide (ITO) used in the production of LCDs and other devices has been achieved using various methods, after following the leaching of the indium with hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid ( The concentrations of rare metals in industrial products are low. Therefore, it is necessary to both separate and concentrate the rare metals in order to recover and recycle them from the industrial products. The separation and concentration of rare metals for recycling has been accomplished via pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical treatments ( The examples of the concentration of rare metals using HoLLE are as follows: HoLLE–inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) of lanthanoid ions with di(2-ethylhexyl)ester in strongly acidic aqueous media ( An LCD of a mobile phone produced by DoCoMo and received from Re-tem Corporation (Tokyo, Japan) was used as a raw material in this study. Aqueous solutions of metal ions were prepared by diluting 1000 The following instruments were utilized in this study: an M-12 pH meter manufactured by Horiba (Kyoto, Japan), a 7780 centrifugal separator manufactured by Kubota (Tokyo, Japan), an XGT-5000WR X-ray fluorescence spectrometer manufactured by Horiba (Kyoto, Japan), and an ICP ULTIMA 2 ICP-OES manufactured by Horiba (Kyoto, Japan). The LCD of a mobile phone was divided into four parts, and all of the parts were added to a 300 The LCD of a mobile phone was cut into 2–3 A 1000 A simulated leaching solution containing seven metals was adjusted to 20 To conduct a qualitative analysis of a mobile phone LCD, the mobile phone was manually dismantled as part of a leaching experiment. The results of the X-ray fluorescence analysis of the removed LCD is shown in Next, to determine the distribution of indium in the LCD, nine sections of the removed LCD were measured using X-ray fluorescence analysis. The results are shown in A piece of the LCD (6.25 For indium recovery from LCDs, it has been suggested that it may be possible to efficiently leach indium with hydrochloric acid ( The leaching weight of the indium and tin that constituted the ITO electrode in the LCD glass decreased in the order of the hydrochloric acid concentration (3.20 The behavior of indium during the HoLLE of a pure indium solution was then confirmed. In particular, HoLLE using Zonyl FSA with metal-1,10-phenanthroline chelates in weakly acidic aqueous media was examined. After phase separation, approximately 100 Thus, it was concluded that it was possible to concentrate indium with high efficiency using this volume ratio. Moreover, 94.9% of the indium was extracted into the sedimented liquid phase on the basis of analysis of the aqueous phase using ICP-OES. It is thought that the volume ratio is also the same as the concentration ratio when the recovery level approaches 100% yield. The experimental conditions were then optimized. First, the extraction behavior of indium in a weakly acidic solution was confirmed. It was found that the intensity of the indium peak in the X-ray fluorescence spectrum was highest at a pH of 2.0 ( Overall, it was confirmed that indium was efficiently concentrated using HoLLE with Zonyl FSA. Furthermore, the sedimented liquid phase was easy to treat because the indium was concentrated into a microvolume. On the basis of the metal leaching results for a mobile phone LCD, HoLLE of a simulated leaching solution was then conducted. In this experiment, it was important to include the other leaching metals besides indium that were found in the leachate from the mobile phone LCD in order to determine their potential on the complexing ability using 1,10-phenanthroline. The solution was adjusted to 20 HoLLE of the pure indium solution was conducted in a nitric acid solution, while the simulated solution was prepared with HCl. For the extraction of the simulated leaching solution that was prepared with hydrochloric acid, however, there was some concern about the presence of a significant amount of chloride ions. It has been reported that the distribution of solute during HoLLE is simultaneously and gradually reduced as to decreasing the volume of the sedimented liquid phase with increasing the chloride ion ( The aqueous phase contained a high concentration of chloride ions under the acidic conditions. Chloride ions have complexing ability for indium. Therefore, it was considered that the aqueous phase could be recycled in order to leach indium from LCDs. After phase separation, the aqueous phase was analyzed using ICP-OES, and the ICP spectrum for indium is shown in On the basis of these results, it was concluded that concentration of indium leached from a mobile phone LCD with hydrochloric acid was possible using HoLLE. In addition, the separation of calcium, silicon, and strontium from a simulated leaching solution with containing seven main metals was achieved using HoLLE. This system includes not only separation by HoLLE but also separation via leaching in order to lower the metal content of foreign metals, except indium. Therefore, it was confirmed that a high percentage of the indium was concentrated in the sedimented liquid phase. To further confirm the concentration of indium in the sedimented liquid phase, X-ray fluorescence analysis of the aqueous phase and the sedimented liquid phase (using approximately 100 Solvent extraction is a commonly used method for the purification of indium in process metallurgy. Among solvent extraction methods, HoLLE has several merits, such as the volume of organic solvent used, its operability and the volume ratio. For these reasons, it is expected that HoLLE can be a practical process for the recovery of indium. In this study, first, the leaching of a high concentration of indium from a mobile phone LCD was demonstrated. In addition, it was shown that, with the use of an optimum hydrochloric acid concentration, the leaching of indium could be achieved along with the leaching of only a very low concentration of foreign metals, such as iron and aluminum. Furthermore, the arsenic and antimony used as antifoamers for the LCD glass were separated into the leaching residue, making the recycling of the glass possible. On the basis of the metal leaching results from the mobile phone LCD, HoLLE with Zonyl FSA was then conducted using the formation of metal-1,10-phenanthroline chelates. The indium was concentrated at a high volume ratio and was extracted into the sedimented liquid phase with high recovery. A method for obtaining an extract of indium from the sedimented liquid phase was also proposed. Therefore, it is expected that this acquired knowledge will have the potential to lead to the development of a new concentration and separation technology for rare metals. Results on related to development work by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry on efficient rare metal extraction and separation technology are quoted in this paper. The authors would like to express their appreciation to Re-Tem Corporation (Tokyo, Japan) for provision of the used mobile phone. The authors are also deeply thankful to Nakayama Co. Ltd. (Hitachi, Japan) for assistance with the leaching experiment. Finally, the authors would like to thank Enago (