Background
                  A combined fracture of the glenoid rim, greater tuberosity, and coracoid process after anterior shoulder dislocation is a rare event. Only 1 patient has been reported in the literature.
               
                  Methods
                  All patients with a first-time traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation in a level A trauma center were retrospectively reviewed. Among the 2068 patients treated between 1998 and 2013, we identified 6 patients (0.3%; 1 female, 5 male) with “triple dislocation fracture” (anterior shoulder dislocation with concomitant fracture of the glenoid rim, greater tuberosity, and coracoid process). All patients underwent surgery and had computed tomography scans before surgery and the first postoperative day. Mean follow-up time was 59 months. Clinical and radiographic evaluation, Constant-Murley Score, Simple Shoulder Test, and Subjective Shoulder Value were performed at the final follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Surgery was determined individually according to the radiologic findings, patient's age, and personal demands. Glenoid reconstruction was performed in all 6 patients, greater tuberosity refixation in 4 patients, and coracoid process refixation in 3. Two patients needed revision surgery due to loss of reduction. At the final follow-up, mean abduction was 133°, mean anterior flexion was 138°; the mean Constant-Murley Score was 72 points; the mean Simple Shoulder Test was 9 points; and the mean Subjective Shoulder Value was 72%. No recurrent instability occurred.
               
                  Conclusions
                  A “triple dislocation fracture,” especially coracoid process fractures, can easily be overlooked in radiographs. Computed tomography scans are strongly recommended in patients with a first-time traumatic shoulder dislocation. Because recurrent joint instability and secondary arthropathy are serious complications after anterior shoulder dislocation, surgery should be considered and provides satisfying to excellent results.With an overall incidence rate between 24 and 56 per 100.000 person-years, the glenohumeral joint reveals the highest dislocation rate of all joints. We retrospectively screened the patient records of the Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology of the Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg between 1998 and 2013 for first-time traumatic anterior shoulder dislocations with associated fractures of the glenoid rim, greater tuberosity, and coracoid process. Among the 2068 patients with anterior shoulder dislocation treated during the study period, we identified 6 patients (0.3%; 1 female, 5 male) with triple dislocation fracture. Demographic data, including sex, age at surgery and latest follow-up, and affected side and handedness, are reported in Standardized radiographs in 3 planes (true anterior-posterior view, scapular Y view, axial view) and computed tomography (CT) scans, including a 3-dimensional (3D) reconstruction were performed preoperatively in all patients to determine the associated fractures ( The decision concerning the surgical treatment of the glenoid, the greater tuberosity, and the coracoid process depended primarily on the radiologic findings: The glenoid in every patient with fragment displacement was treated operatively to ensure glenohumeral stability. The greater tuberosity was refixed in case of displacement >5 mm. The coracoid process was surgically treated in case of fractures type I according to Ogawa and type II when displaced ( All patients underwent surgery under general anesthesia in the beach chair position. The method of reduction of the glenoid fracture depended on the classification according to Scheibel et al After surgery, the affected shoulder was immobilized in a sling for 4 weeks. Passive movement exercises were allowed until pain threshold from the beginning. After sling removal, active abduction up to 90° was allowed. Heavy manual work and sports were allowed after 8 to 10 weeks. To ensure anatomic reduction of the fractures and correct positioning of the osteosynthesis, all patients underwent standard radiographs in 2 planes immediately after surgery ( At the final follow-up, the clinical outcome was measured using the Constant-Murley Score (CMS), Simple Shoulder Test (SST), and Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV). Patient satisfaction was classified as “very satisfied,” “satisfied,” “good,” and “dissatisfied.” Clinical examination was performed in the outpatient clinic by an experienced resident. Range of motion in active and passive anterior flexion, abduction, and internal and external rotation was measured. The strength of the affected side was assessed using an IDO isometer (Innovative Design Orthopaedics Limited, Redditch, Worcestershire, UK) with the arm in 90° abduction. All patients underwent radiographic evaluation in 3 planes (true anterior-posterior view, scapular Y view, axial view) to assess bony union and position of the osteosynthesis. The mean follow-up time was 59 months (minimum, 27; maximum, 147 months). No patient was lost during follow-up. Revision surgery was necessary in 2 patients. Patient 1 needed repeat osteosynthesis of the coracoid process after 7 days because of loss of reduction (screw removal, reduction using a trabecular bone screw, and additional tension band wiring). Patient 2 underwent repeat osteosynthesis of the greater tuberosity after 5 days because of loss of reduction (new tension band wiring). At the final follow-up, the mean abduction was 133° (range, 90°-180°), and the mean anterior flexion was 138° (range, 90°-180°). The mean CMS was 72 points (range, 42-98 points), the mean SST was 9 points (range, 5-12 points), and the mean SSV was 72% (range, 40%-95%). Four patients rated their outcome as “very satisfied” and 2 as “satisfied.” No patient reported recurrent shoulder instability. We present the functional and radiologic outcomes of a series of 6 patients with triple dislocation fracture, a combined fracture of the anterior glenoid rim, greater tuberosity, and coracoid process after traumatic anterior shoulder dislocation. Only 1 report of a patient with this rare injury pattern has been published until now. Bony lesions of the glenoid rim are common after anterior shoulder dislocation, with an incidence of between 5% and 56%. No unequivocal treatment recommendations in favor of conservative or surgical treatment exist. In the past, glenoid rim fractures have been mainly treated conservatively. Maquieira et al In general, decisions concerning conservative or operative treatment depend on factors such as fragment size, amount of dislocation, position of the humeral head (centered or subluxation), and the patient's age, general state of health, and personal demands. Nevertheless, glenoid rim fixation should be considered in any case to prevent possible recurrent glenohumeral instability. In case of chronic fracture types, bony glenoid augmentation such as Latarjet procedure, J-Bone graft, or iliac crest bone grafts could be performed. Greater tuberosity fractures occur in up to 30% after anterior shoulder dislocation. Numerous surgical techniques for reduction of the greater tuberosity are reported, including open reduction and internal fixation, tension band wiring, percutaneous screw fixation, transosseous suture fixation, and arthroscopic double-row fixation. Up to now, there is no consensus on which technique is preferable. The decision should be made individually considering the radiologic findings (amount of displacement, comminuted, etc). Because fractures of the coracoid process after traumatic shoulder dislocation are rare (0.8%-2%), According to Ogawa et al, The only published patient with a triple dislocation fracture was treated conservatively. The patient reported by te Slaa et al, Early CT scans with 3D reconstruction, as well as a precise clinical examination after traumatic shoulder dislocation, is strongly recommended to estimate the injury pattern and associated pathologies. The fixation of the multiple bony injuries in the triple dislocation fracture may be considered when there is risk for recurrent instability, rotator cuff dysfunction, or coracoid impingement based on prior classification and treatment recommendation for the individual fracture components. The goal of fixation in these complex fractures is to ensure a stable glenohumeral joint, maximize function, and minimize risk of secondary arthropathy. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.