Material sampling is a critical component in mining and mineral processing industries. Nonetheless, sampling is often considered to be a simple matter and, as such, non-rigorous sampling protocols are often applied. The use of inappropriate methods produces inferior, non-representative estimates of sampling target composition. To address weaknesses in sampling protocols and evaluate the representativeness of collected samples, we performed a feasibility study of the ability of handheld X-ray fluorescence (HHXRF) to achieve a satisfactory characterization of a raw material lot at a pyrometallurgical ferrosilicon plant. Using composite and grab samples, we determined the various sampling error manifestations stemming from the fundamental sampling error, grouping and segregation error, as well as increment delimitation, increment extraction, and increment preparation errors), and performed a first foray determination of optimal sample mass, and estimated the heterogeneity within the sampling target. HHXRF results were compared with the results obtained using laboratory XRF. A first estimate of optimized sample mass for HHXRF was 10 kg, given the large size of crushed quartz blocks used in ferrosilicon plants—roughly cubic, 10 cm per side; accuracy improved with increased sample mass (18% error with a 10 kg sample versus 35% error when using a 1 kg sample). A 10 kg sample is also the mass a technician can realistically transport from the sampling site to the preparation facilities. The main contribution to the global estimation error is from primary sampling. Variographic analysis illustrated a sill equal to the nugget effect, indicating that two adjacent samples are no more similar than two samples separated by larger distance; this suggests equal spatial heterogeneity at all scales larger than the increment mass in the sampling target. Analytically, the HHXRF and desktop XRF results compared very well. Overall, the error associated with our first attempt at field composite sampling was half of that obtained via grab sampling for both the HHXRF and desktop XRF protocols. Relative to conventional analysis based on grab sampling and analysis via desktop XRF, the use of handheld XRF coupled with composite sampling would appear to be a feasible approach for an improved sampling protocol for obtaining fit-for-purpose characterizations of industrial quartzite.The theory of sampling (TOS) addresses heterogeneity, one of the most important phenomena in the characterization of materials. Heterogeneity, regardless of scale, complicates sampling of a larger sampling target, Despite this fundamental uncertainty, it is surprising to find that sampling strategies and the verification of sample accuracy are often trivialized. The primary objective of sampling is to provide reliable information about the entire lot with a known and acceptable level of total uncertainty (sampling + analysis variability). Nonetheless, few industry professionals change from established, albeit potentially erroneous, sampling strategies to a more representative approach without serious reasons. Thus, the collection of a single sample, or a few haphazardly selected specimens, Grab sampling does not, however, provide representative samples except by chance ( Most laboratories provide a valid estimate of the total analytical error (TAE); however, few laboratories include sampling error contributions (total sampling error, TSE) despite there often being 10–100× greater than TAE ( To improve the validity of sample measurements, standard sampling protocols must be revised to reduce or eliminate the most significant and dominant errors. In the mining and mineral processing sectors, increasing profitability often requires an increase in production capacity with a concomitant need to process greater amounts of unprocessed material. This scenario implies larger lots to manage, monitor, and characterize, and this is often combined with increased processing rates. A likely consequence is that it becomes more difficult to obtain representative results—from samples typically on the order of grams—when the target lot is on the order of several hundred metric tonnes. For such large mass-reduction situations, it is particularly important that the sampling practice be guided by TOS ( The use of handheld X-ray fluorescence (HHXRF) tools can address some of the key issues surrounding the need to obtain rapid, in-situ chemical characterization with minimal sample preparation ( In an earlier study, the specific analytical performance of a dedicated HHXRF showed good potential in evaluating and quantifying quartzite geochemistry ( Elkem Métal Canada Inc. is a producer of ferrosilicon alloy. Production relies on two main pathways characterized respectively by a base of 50% or 75% silicon, and it has several customer-specified additive options, e.g. foundry and steel plants. For this type of production, the plant reduces quartz (SiO As the matrix is essentially SiO Although grab sampling may, by chance, result in a sample having a broadly similar composition as the larger lot, it is never possible to identify when this situation occurs in practice. TOS can provide the necessary framework to ensure representative sampling of a lot. TOS is also the proper basis upon which specific HHXRF evaluations should be carried out. According to TOS, all units of the lot, TOS also mandates the use of composite sampling with a heterogeneity-related number of increments (Q). An increment designates a single extracted unit, which is often defined by the volume of the sampling tool. When combined with other such units, these ‘partial lot units’ make up a composite sample. The only free parameter in composite sampling is the required number of increments Q to ensure the results are fit-for-purpose. Combining spatially dispersed Q that cover the entire lot is thus the only sampling process that will be acceptable; this protocol should also be able to indicate the total sample weight (Q × the increment weight). TOS identifies five types of error that may occur during the sampling of stationary lots ( The grouping and segregation error (GSE) increases as spatial heterogeneity increases. Heterogeneity is most often due to the presence of local “hot spots,” The increment delimitation error (IDE) occurs when the geometric delineations of the increments being sampled are unable to be reproduced precisely. The increment extraction error (IEE) relates to the extraction of increments with a specific sampling tool. Sampling becomes more accurate depending on that all particles can be extracted with equal probability by the sampling tool employed; increment must only reflect the delineated inctement volume (no contamination etc.). IEE can be reduced by careful equipment design and careful monitoring of the sampling process. The increment preparation error (IPE) encapsulates all errors produced during post-sampling handling, mixing, comminution, transportation, or other processes in the laboratory. It is related to the potential loss of matter—via dust, moisture, improper cleaning, etc. IPE is also a reflection of potential chemical or physical alteration of the sample, and any negligence or non-adherence to good laboratory practices by technicians. These three sampling errors, IDE, IEE, and IPE, are collectively termed the “incorrect sampling errors” (ISE). These are critical sampling errors because, if not eliminated from the sampling process, they generate critical biases, which cannot be corrected by any means ( Variation between samples that have been sampled by the exact same procedures can be quantified by analyzing replicate samples. The precise number of replicates needs to be defined after careful consideration (see The RE approach can be applied to primary sampling or in a hierarchical fashion to each sampling, processing, or analytical stage. The latter quantifies the effective errors that are produced at each stage. We selected this approach in the present study as our main feasibility objective was to quantify the effective error for each step of the sampling procedure. The evaluation of each step requires a minimum of ten replicate sampling operations ( The first step in mass reduction is crushing. Although reducing sample mass appears simple and straightforward, mistakes do occur, and highly significant sampling errors can be introduced during mass reduction ( Composite sampling involves collecting many increments (Q) to form an aggregate, composite sample. The greater the number of increments used, the greater the likelihood that the resulting aggregate sample will be a better representative of the full lot. However, the spatial pattern of the increment locations must comply with the FSP. By adhering to the latter (FSP), this approach has a profound effect on TSE, which will decrease as the number of increments increases ( There is a natural, minimum state of heterogeneity for all aggregate materials; in fact, homogeneity is an ideal state that does not exist for all naturally occurring and technological materials ( Variographic analysis provides a superior characterization of the combination of a specific sampling process and the heterogeneity of the lot material. Thus, this approach is always preferred for characterization ( In industrial settings, such as mineral processing, critical tasks are outlined in formal guidelines, standards, and procedures. However, such documents do not always specify the optimized or required sample mass, but they often recommend a “constant mass”. Worse still, such fixed sample masses that are often derived from historical and non-TOS practices are unable to deal with the variable heterogeneity within lots. At Elkem Métal Canada Inc., the primary mass of a typical sample is ca. 10 kg, this being the weight limit that allows a technician to transport the collected material easily from sampling points to the laboratory. Note that this mass historically was determined without any preliminary study or prior knowledge of TOS for that matter. To determine whether a 10 kg mass is adequate for fit-for-purpose sampling in the present context: For each experiment detailed below, we collected 55 kg of quartzite grab samples (crushed blocks of quartzite measuring about 10 cm on a side) from the stockpile ( We spread the samples on a table; From these samples, we randomly selected quartz rocks to form ten subsamples of increasing mass. The first subsample was 1 kg, the second subsample 2 kg, the third was 3 kg, etc. up to 55 kg of rock sample in total (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 + 10 kg = 55 kg); We then prepared each subsample (1, 2, 3 … 10 kg)—crushed, pulverized, and mass reduced (split) to an analytical mass (50 g)—and then analyzed as a regular sample ( The weighted average of the samples was determined by: For determining the accuracy of each mass, we followed: This calculation was carried out for each element (analyte), see further below. To produce an overall representative estimate of accuracy, we repeated these measurements eight times. We then calculated the mean accuracy corresponding to each mass. We determined the mean accuracy via the following equation: To determine the stage that most contributed to the GEE, we performed a replication experiment in the form of repeated sampling of the primary sampling stage along the complete ‘from-field-to-analysis’ pathway ( All samples, whether grab, composite, or variogram samples, were collected on the same day from the same primary lot. The estimated total lot mass (from the calibrated truckloads) was ca. 5000 t. We also prepared ten primary composite samples, each having a mass of 150 kg from this lot, as follows: Each composite sample comprised 15 individual grab increments (of 10 kg each), collected randomly over the entire surface of the stockpile ( Each 10 kg increment was crushed (grain-size reduction) and the mass reduced (split) down to 1.25 kg. We performed mass reduction using a riffle splitter following a TOS-compliant approach ( We then aggregated and homogenized the 15 × 1.25 kg samples by mixing them in a plastic barrel (half-filled with 15 × 1.25 kg ≅ 19 kg) that we rolled on an inclined plane (approx. 30° incline) to ensure effective mixing ( We emptied the barrel’s contents (ca. 19 kg) slowly into the roll crusher and reduced it to a ca. 100 mesh; we then mass reduced the contents seven times down to 0.15 kg, again using riffle slitting; For the XRF analyses, we pulverized this 0.15 kg fraction to a 400 We repeated all the steps for each of the ten composite samples. For the variogram analysis, we characterized the typical stockpile of quartz ( To compare the alternative sampling protocols, we followed a strict procedure for all subsequent crushing and splitting steps ( We selected a Niton XL3t GOLDD+ (8 mm beam footprint diameter) developed by We used the XRF laboratory facilities at Elkem Métal and UQAC were used to compare analytical results from the field (HHXRF, UQAC) and laboratory (desktop XRF, Elkem Métal). The Elkem Métal laboratory is equipped with a WDX Primini (Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan), which uses a sequential-type X-ray fluorescence spectrometer. This model can analyze the elements fluoride (Z = 9) through uranium (Z = 92) ( We applied the Eurachem approach to establish the specific HHXRF detection limits for this quartzite ( The analytical quality will be affected by small chemical heterogeneities. The presence of sub-microscopic minerals having trace elements as their major constituent, such as Fe-Ti oxides (ilmenite, FeTiO With the HHXRF, we analyzed each quartzite block within a 10 kg sample bag. We ran more than 500 in-situ analyses with the HHXRF. We applied the grand mean of all analytical results, and we submit that this approach provides a relevant and reliable approximation of the composition of the full stockpile, constituting a useful datum with which to assess all variabilities. Given that there is no access to a single, true value of the various elemental concentrations of a lot, the best estimates are obtained from the above analytical average of the 500 multiple measurements. For industrial projects, the aim is to achieve an acceptable ‘best estimate’ at the lowest cost; therefore, a compromise is very likely regarding the sampling strategy. The adequate number of samples, increments, measurements and the derived minimum mass, will depend on the needs of the given industrial process and context and, in particular, the degree of inherent and observed heterogeneity. The combination of the different sample types in this study, Desktop XRF and HHXRF produced similar ranges and comparable results, except for MgO. RSD levels for HHXRF were high as all the remaining elements are found in very low concentrations, and Mg, Ca, and Al are analytically ‘light elements.’ RSD values for MgO and CaO are extremely high for the desktop XRF due to the higher sensitivity of the desktop instrument combined with the very low absolute concentrations of these two elements. A full comparison of the results obtained by both instruments in terms of their estimates of the composition of a quartz matrix is presented in the parallel study described in To determine a first optimized sample mass under the constraining requirements described above, we replicated chemical analyses on one sample bag using the desktop Primini XRF. Accuracy has been computed as the obtained result for a mass minus the weighted average divided by average of all results in a test ( For sample preparation to be adequate for XRF analysis, we must identify those steps that most contribute to the overall uncertainty of the sampling preparation process. We use Fe as an example, as it presents typical relative sample variability values (RSV) for the entire process; this pattern suggests that sample preparation is well controlled ( Variograms are sensitive to extreme values and outliers ( HHXRF and the desktop XRF results for TiO A flat variogram may also reflect a situation in which the lag chosen for characterizing the variogram is mistakenly too large for the encountered small-scale heterogeneity ( Comparing the concentration estimates for the ten samples analyzed in situ using HHXRF with those obtained via desktop XRF on pressed pellets, the desktop XRF produced better results than HHXRF for Al For Fe A handheld XRF instrument (HHXRF) used on a basis of deliberate composite sampling provides more accurate sampling + in-situ analysis than the use of conventional grab samples as analyzed by desktop XRF. The lower error of the composite sampling is a consequence of successful reduction of GSE + FSE errors and due to the central limit theorem. Given that the composite sample is the sum of the contribution of each primary unit, measurements generally follow a normal distribution even in cases where the primary samples are not normally distributed. This occurs as the sum of the independent random variables having finite means and variance will gravitate toward a normal distribution ( HHXRF offers the advantage of minimal sample preparation and a fast analytical turnaround. Average lot concentrations can be estimated within an hour, and this approach improves the control over sampling error. However, the application of HHXRF is limited by its lower sensitivity. Analytical results are also easily influenced by traces of minerals found erratically under the XRF beam and by surface quality, this impact being more pronounced for light elements. Thus, a high number of HHXRF scans—five for each block making up a sample bag—are necessary and will, to a certain extent, compensate for these shortcomings. An acceptable HHXRF-based approach based on these empirical results is foreseeable; nonetheless frequent assessments of experimental lot heterogeneity remain necessary. Fortunately, these assessments are now relatively easy using the HHXRF-based approach. The feasibility of HHXRF has been successfully demonstrated with its intrinsic limitations. The present study outlines a basis for comparing the pro’s and con’s in the case of a typical industrial lot size, given the specific analytical conditions for HHXRF. This project was funded by The authors declare no conflict of interest.