Pilot scale filter testwork on various concentrate and cobalt plant streams was conducted in the mid 1990s. Ceramic filters were selected for use on copper concentrates at Nkana and Mufulira Concentrators. This was based on the assumption that thermal dryers would be eliminated from the dewatering circuits thus lowering operating costs significantly. A review of their performance and future plans is considered in the context of expanding production requirements.During the era of Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM) and particularly in the late 80s, new project work became very difficult to implement for various reasons. Production levels had dropped ( In the early 90s a number of projects were investigated by the Technical Services Unit of ZCCM. One was to investigate new technology for filtering concentrates which was then performed on conventional drum filters or disks, supplemented where necessary by thermal dryers ( The objective was to identify a filter which would: eliminate the need for a dryer; give a “dry, easy to handle” product for transporting by conveyor, road or rail; be relatively simple to operate and maintain; have a competitive installed cost; have a low operating cost. Furthermore, filters are very application specific due to: the nature of solids (size, shape, SG); feed slurry density; washing requirements, particularly in hydrometallurgical applications; product specifications (moisture required, nature of cake, clarity of filtrate). In order to find the most appropriate filter, various technologies were examined and pilot scale work initiated with the assistance of the suppliers on three types of filter: hyperbaric; filter press; Ceramic. Concentrates at all mine sites were tested, apart from Luanshya as filter operations there were simple and effective with no dryer. The hyperbaric unit was only tested at Nkana where it gave acceptable results. However, it was difficult to operate due to stringent requirements for service water and air so further work was abandoned. The filter press gave an acceptable cake in nearly every application albeit with some rather long drying times. There were concerns about the mechanical performance and costs of these units but some were installed at Nchanga Concentrator. The ceramic filter reduced the moisture content by approximately 5% on each concentrate compared to the existing drum filters, but only produced a “dry, easy to handle” cake on copper concentrates at Konkola, Mufulira and Nkana. The moisture levels indicated that a dryer would not be necessary ( Filter rates at these sites were also high, averaging up to 750 The predicted pay-back of the project was one year and it was approved even with the prevailing uncertainty about the privatisation of the mines. Ceramic filters were installed at each site and commissioned early in 1996. Performance met or exceeded the pilot unit results and the dryers were soon decommissioned. Since the ceramic filter had been so successful in these particular applications, a further series of tests was conducted at the two cobalt plants on the copperbelt at Nkana and Chambishi mine sites. Here the objective was to increase recovery by improving washing efficiency of the cake and reducing the solids content of the filtrate. Some of the streams tested were: calcine residue; ferric residue; hydroxide cake. Again, the moisture content on each application was reduced by about 5–10% compared to the existing rotary belt filters and cakes were relatively dry. Displacement washing was very effective and clarity of filtrate was excellent at <50 However, due to the dilute nature of the feed streams, filter rates were low varying from 50 to 200 Choosing the correct filter for a task is particularly relevant for ceramic filters since the technology used will not give a dry enough cake in some applications. For example, the gangue content of the Nchanga concentrates and Nkana cobalt concentrate is high (ca 40%) and contains a large proportion of ultra-fines. These not only reduce filter rate but give a sticky cake when using the relatively low differential pressure of a vacuum filter compared to a pressure unit. The basic operating principle is well known using a ceramic filter medium which prevents any air being sucked through it due to capillary action in the 0.7 a very effective vacuum of 80 requires only a small vacuum pump with low power draw (2.2 produces a “crystal” clear filtrate. dilute feed gives low filter rates due to the large volume of filtrate to be removed; ultra-fines block the membrane and can be difficult to wash effectively. The two filters at Nkana and Mufulira have now been operating for nearly nine years during a very unstable period. Initial results exceeded design parameters. The costs were within the predictions and the pay-back period of approximately one year was achieved. Plans to install a second unit at Mufulira were shelved due to the high mechanical availability which removed the need. The filter at Nkana was also used to filter cobalt concentrate in batch mode due to spare capacity on the unit. The earlier M66 plates were subject to breakage if the backwash pressure became too high or there were shocks in the system. The later S1 membrane plates were mechanically stronger and had higher filter rate due to the very thin ceramic layer. The life of these plates is approximately 24 months if kept in good condition by regular backwashing. In order to spread cost and keep a constant filter performance it is better to change a complete disk every six weeks rather than all the plates at one time. At Nkana it has been noted that when the milling product size is reduced from 60% to 65% passing 75 The recycle of scrubber effluent from the drier off-gas at the Smelter in Mufulira has caused problems in blocking the filter pores. This stream contained very fine iron oxides which can only be removed by periodic washing of the filter with oxalic acid at monthly intervals. The new smelting technology being introduced at Mufulira will eliminate this stream and should have a beneficial effect on filter performance. Availability of the filters has been excellent at 95–98%. They are shut down weekly for 8 vacuum pump; acid pump; filtrate pump; control valves. These are readily resolved by having standby units available to replace the defective item. For the first few years, the only significant costs were the consumables such as plates, nitric acid and water filter cartridges. Costs were less than $1/t concentrate compared to the $7/t for the previous drum filter/drier operation. In the past three years costs have risen to nearer $2/t as mechanical and instrument components have had to be replaced. The main problems have been: High pH levels (Nkana 12.5, Mufulira 10.5) have a detrimental effect on the life of plates. This issue needs to be addressed further. Quality and pressure of the back-flush water must be maintained at specified levels to ensure adequate washing of plates. The filter rate on the disks nearer the distribution plate is significantly greater than those at the other end. This is particularly noticeable at Mufulira and could be due to ineffective backwashing but has not been fully explained or rectified. During the privatisation process, Mufulira and Nkana mine sites (apart from Nkana smelter and refinery) were acquired by Mopani Copper Mines plc in April 2000. Both ceramic filters thus became Mopani property. Production levels at Mopani have doubled since 2000 and are expected to treble in the next four years with the completion of several new projects. Both filters are already exceeding design production rates and further capacity as well as some stand-by capacity is required at each site. The options of using alternative technologies such as filter presses or Larox pressure filters compared to the existing filters were examined. It was decided to continue with the existing type of filter for the following reasons: Ceramic filters have proved very successful in the two applications from both operational and maintenance perspectives. Installed cost of new units is lower than other types of filter. Compatibility of skills, accessories and spares. Some improvements have been made which should improve performance further. Anticipated close liaison with the supplier.