Magnesium-based alloys are among the promising materials for hydrogen storage and fuel cell applications due to their high hydrogen contents. In this work, the hydrogen release and uptake properties of Mg/5%Ti nanopowder mixture prepared by a chemical vapor synthesis (CVS) process were investigated. Samples were made in a CVS reactor, in which reactant powders were fed into evaporator placed inside the reactor by means of specially designed powder feeders. The produced Mg/5%Ti was hydrogenated in an autoclave under 10.3MPa pressure and 150°C for 12h. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) showed that 5.2wt% of hydrogen began to be released from 190°C while temperature was increased at a heating rate of 5°C/min up to 350°C under an argon flow. This onset temperature of Mg–Ti nanopowder dehydrogenation was much lower than that of MgH2 alone, which is 381°C. In addition, the activation energy of dehydrogenation was 104kJ/mol, which is much smaller than that of as-received MgH2 (153kJ/mol).A major challenge for using hydrogen as a fuel today is to develop efficient and effective methods for hydrogen storage that can not only store hydrogen safely but also supply it where and when it is needed. Thus, the development of solid-state hydrogen storage materials that will work at sufficiently low temperatures has been recognized as a key requirement for hydrogen fuel cell applications Among the many different candidate materials based on metal hydrides, magnesium and magnesium-based alloys are considered very attractive candidates as rechargeable hydrogen storage materials because of their high hydrogen capacities (theoretically up to 7.6 In the present study, we investigated the feasibility of producing Mg–Ti nanopowder via the CVS process and its hydrogen storage properties. The experimental results on the hydrogen release/uptake behaviors of synthesized and commercial powder will be discussed below. The starting materials, magnesium (Mg, 99.5%) and titanium chloride (TiCl The experimental apparatus for the CVS process, which consists of a downstream reactor, two separate powder feeders, evaporators, a powder collector, and an off-gas scrubber, is shown in The thermal gas release properties of the mixture were examined by the use of a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, Shimadzu TGA50) in which 10 The identification of phases in the reactants and products before and after the hydrogenation process was carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Siemens D5000) with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation ( A scanning electron microscope (SEM, TOPCON SM-300) coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) was employed to determine the particle size and to observe the morphology of the samples after synthesis and the uniformity of mixing of Ti powder used as a promoter. The samples were protected from exposure to air by a conductive tape in the glovebox during the transfer to the SEM sample chamber. For additional measurements of the particle size, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method was used to measure the specific surface areas of the powders, which were obtained by the Micromeritics ASAP 2010 model (Norcross, GA), using nitrogen as an absorbate after drying under vacuum. Before analysis, samples were degassed at 100 The microstructure was analyzed further to confirm the grain size of the sample by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on a FEI Tecnai 30 operating at 120 Mechanical milling is well known to change various properties of materials, as a result of the formation of special microstructure, meta-stable phases, and modified surface. More specifically, this technique has been found to be an effective way to obtain nanoparticles of magnesium under H To investigate the effect of temperature on the equilibrium composition in the Mg–Ti–H system, the thermodynamics of reaction  The particle size was further confirmed by the results of BET and TEM. The BET surface area data ( X-ray diffraction analyses were performed on the synthesized Mg–Ti powder, and the powder was hydrogenated in a custom-made autoclave under 10.3 TGA was performed in combination with the XRD analysis to determine the dehydrogenation behavior of the hydrogenated products of Mg–Ti nanopowder, compared with Ti-doped MgH As the next step, non-isothermal runs were performed in order to evaluate the activation energy for the dehydrogenation of as-received MgH Based on equation The method of synthesis and doping in a vapor-phase reaction process has been successfully applied to the production of Mg–Ti nanopowder, and its hydrogen storage properties were determined to be superior to that of commercially available MgH This research was supported by the financial support from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under contract number DE-FC36-05GO15069.