A parameter study using a jaw crusher is designed to investigate the influence of feed gradation, feed rate, crusher setting and crusher speed on the crusher operation and the quality of the produced aggregates. The study is focused on the production of all-in large-size (top size ⩾90 mm) aggregates, suitable for use in subbase and frost protection layers in a pavement structure. Aggregate quality is measured in terms of product gradation, particle shape and mechanical properties.
                  Feed gradation, crusher setting and crusher speed affects the specific energy consumption during crushing. Particle shape is affected by all parameters; feed gradation, feed rate, crusher setting and crusher speed. Mechanical properties are least affected by the jaw crusher parameters, but sample preparation using laboratory crushing clearly affect mechanical properties.
                  The results from this study provide valuable knowledge for the optimisation of single-stage crushing regarding crusher operation and aggregate quality. By adapting the crushing process to the available feed material and desired product, the quality of the crushed product can be optimised along with the crusher operation.In road construction, local aggregate resources can be utilised through aggregate production on the construction site. The aggregate production process, where construction aggregates are produced from bedrock, often involves several crushing steps. The output is normally considered a product after two or more crushing stages. However, primary, or single-stage, crushed aggregate materials can be used as products in road construction, in e.g. unbound subbase and frost protection layers. Such productions usually involve a simple setup with mobile crushing equipment. Research into aggregate production and quality have traditionally been focused on products from subsequent crushing stages, not products from primary crushing. There is a knowledge gap regarding the influence of the crushing process on the quality of primary crushed aggregates. Compared to many other countries, the Norwegian practice for aggregate use, with particle sizes up towards 300 mm in the pavement structure is uncommon. In a survey, The European standards for aggregates ( Quality assessment of aggregates is mainly ruled by tests regarding mechanical strength for the rock type in question. These tests are related to the rock deposit, and test results are regarded as representative for all aggregate gradings produced from the source rock. The current requirements for mechanical aggregate properties are based on laboratory testing of crushed material in standardised fractions. When the materials used in the pavement structure are of a coarser size fraction than what is required for the laboratory tests, the material tested has to be crushed down to the appropriate size in the laboratory. This practice implies the assumption that aggregate properties are predominantly determined by the geological origin of the resource (i.e. mineralogy, petrology), and only negligibly influenced by the production, e.g. blasting and crushing. A growing focus on the utilisation of local aggregate resources at construction sites has increased the interest in the quality of primary crushed aggregates in Norway. The construction of long tunnels has created a surplus of hard rock resources in several road and railway construction projects. Large volumes of blasted rock are available at tunnel construction sites, and the production of primary crushed aggregates provides an affordable construction material with low CO The part of aggregate processing investigated in this paper is the crushing, specifically primary crushing using a jaw crusher. Coarse aggregates for unbound use are often produced using a single crushing stage in a jaw crusher, as opposed to concrete or asphalt aggregates, where at least two and often three or four crushing stages are used, employing several crusher types. Most published literature is focused on the use of cone crushers and several types of impact crushers. There is a gap of knowledge regarding the quality of large-size aggregates, especially coarse aggregates produced in a single-stage crushing plant. To close this knowledge gap, a jaw crusher parameter test is designed based on previous research into crushing and aggregate production, presented in the following: As a general rule, the strength of rock increases with decreasing mineral grain diameter (    The subject for   When testing several materials from one deposit,    None of the presented research had focus on products from primary crushing. For applications where large-size aggregates are used, such as unbound aggregates for road structures, single-stage crushing can be applied. The interest of the current research is to conduct full-scale tests with jaw crushers in the primary crushing stage, to gain knowledge about how a single crushing stage after blasting can affect the quality of the produced aggregate. The aim is to verify whether relations known from research into finer aggregates produced using more than one crushing stage are valid also for large-size aggregates produced from primary crushing. The hypothesis used in the research design is: Crushing efficiency and product quality can be optimised by adjustments to crusher and feed parameters. Crushing efficiency can be measured as capacity and energy consumption. Product quality is measured in terms of particle shape and mechanical properties. The crusher and feed parameters used are closed side setting ( This paper presents a parameter study investigating the effect of feed and jaw crusher parameters on the quality of aggregates produced from single-stage crushing. The parameter study is evaluated using mechanical and geometrical tests for aggregate properties. In order to keep the focus on the gradation and crusher parameters, the study is limited to one rock type. The aggregates produced during the study are in the size range 0–125 mm. To correlate the production parameters with the resulting aggregate properties, the geological properties were held constant while the crusher properties were changed. The test was therefore restricted to a single rock type. The material tested was a granodiorite, a coarse-grained intrusive igneous rock from Nokia, Finland. The test material was supplied from an open-pit quarry in regular operation. The test material was pre-assessed through testing of its resistance to fragmentation (Los Angeles test, The blasted rock material supplied to the test plant was in the 0/500 mm To create variations in minimum and maximum size of the feed material, the materials were scalped at the test plant before being fed to the jaw crusher. The scalper had elongated openings with slot widths 100 mm and 225 mm. The oversize removal and scalping process enabled the production of five particle size fractions ( 0/400 mm 100/400 mm 180/400 mm 0/300 mm 100/300 mm The particle size distributions for the five feed sizes are shown in Although each test was run in minimum three parallels with identical test portion preparation, there is variation in the sizes for every feed material. To account for these variations, the sizes The test setup followed the process flow sheet in The tests were conducted using a Nordberg C80 jaw crusher. The crusher has an opening of 800 x 500 mm; the recommended maximum material size for this crusher is specified to 410 mm. The crusher was fed by a vibrating feeder with adjustable feed rate. The stroke of the crusher was constant at 30 mm, while three Two feed levels were used, defined as high and low feed rate. At the high feed rate, the crusher was choke fed, ensuring the crusher could run at maximum capacity. The low feed rate allowed the crusher to run empty during the crushing; hence involving a lower density of material in the crusher and reduced throughput. The feed rates were not fixed, but manually adjusted by the crusher operator. A summary of the parameters can be seen in In each test, a minimum of 1500 kg of blasted rock was crushed. Depending on the feed gradation and the setting of the crusher, the amount of material crushed varied from 1500 kg to 2500 kg. During testing, the crusher was monitored, and data for power draw was extracted from the monitoring system. To measure the throughput of the crushing operation, a sample was taken from the output flow from the crusher using a wheel loader during the middle of the test when the crusher was running steadily. This way, the effects of lower quality crushing during starting and stopping of the crushing operation was eliminated from the sampled material. The duration of the sampling was registered, the amount of material was weighed, and from this data, the throughput [tonnes/hour] of the crushing operation was calculated. Photos for image analysis was taken after the material was loaded onto the feeder, before the feeder was started. The feed gradation curves are calculated using the digital image processing (DIP) software Split-Desktop 4.0, based on one photo from each test feed. The images were scaled by two 250 mm spheres included in the image with the feed material. Consistency in the DIP was ensured by analysing a share of the images separately by two different analysts, and the results were compared with compliant results. Material samples for particle size distribution analysis were taken from each crushing test by extracting material directly from the output conveyor from the crusher using a wheel loader. The amount of material in these samples varied from 130 kg to 430 kg, depending on the expected gradation. To avoid segregation and ensure representativity, the full test portion from the wheel loader bucket was collected. The remaining material after a finished test was then screened to extract 8–16 mm material for mechanical testing. Samples of minimum 50 kg 8–16 mm were collected from each test product.  The particle size distribution for the product from each test was measured combining manual sieving for the material > 90 mm, and mechanical sieving for the material  < 90 mm. Following The mechanical sieving method was based on standard EN 933-1 ( Smallest sieve size used: 1 mm The test portions were not washed prior to sieving; the analysis followed the procedure for dry sieving For some samples, material <25 mm was subsampled to minimum 6.3 kg using a riffle box before sieving continued      The laboratory crushing followed the method description from When the crusher is fed at the high feed rate, the measured throughput can be characterised as the capacity of the crushing operation. This capacity varied from 77.8 t/h to 194.3 t/h. The highest capacity is registered for the tests including fines in the feed material. Reducing the feed rate resulted in a 50–56% reduction of the throughput. The capacity of the crushing operation can be modelled using regression analysis combining categorical and continuous predictors. Regression analysis for capacity using Specific energy consumption ( Reducing the speed of the crusher results in increased energy consumption per tonne of crushed material. The increase is about 0.25 kWh/t, independent of The test setup did not combine The effect of changing crusher openings on PSD for feed materials crushed at several The effect of reduced crusher speed on PSD is seen in The effect of reduced feed rate on the PSD is seen in The reduction ratio for each test is calculated as the ratio between the respective screen sizes through which 80% of the feed and product distribution passes (Eq.  The samples crushed at reduced feed rate had a somewhat reduced As seen in Section The average The general trend for Another general tendency in Including fines in the feed material results in a decreased flakiness index for the product, as seen in  The data show good correlation between Equal correlation is also found between Although few samples represent the low feed rate, a trend of increased When the crusher speed is reduced, No correlation is found between Overall average results from mechanical testing of primary crushed material and laboratory crushed material are displayed in  No correlation is found between results for laboratory crushed vs primary crushed material neither for The two measures for mechanical properties are compared in In the size range used for mechanical testing (10–16 The standard The closest predictor of The average The scalping process successfully enabled the separation of five different feed gradations from the original material provided from the quarry, as seen in Due to the lack of suitable laboratory equipment for sieving of large-size materials, PSD for the feed materials are found using digital image processing (DIP). There are few specifications available regarding capturing of images for DIP for full gradation aggregate samples. A standard focused on large-sized aggregates ( To obtain valid PSD results for the feed materials from sieving, the whole test portion of 1500–2500 kg should be analysed due to the large particle sizes. The reliability of the results would have improved had the feed samples been sieved, but due to the large particle sizes and sample weights, this was not feasible. The method of taking photos of the feed material when it was loaded onto the feeder limited the number of particles in the analysis. On the other hand, this method ensured that the particles analysed in DIP were the exact same particles present in each crushing test. Capturing images from the stockpile would enable more particles to be present in each image, but would involve a risk of not uncovering differences in gradation between parallel tests due to segregation. In a production setup with continuous feeding, images could be provided from a conveyor belt feeding the crusher, allowing for the combined analysis of several images to obtain a valid number of particles. DIP using images from the feeder enabled individual analyses of each feed sample, and the PSD curves in As would be expected, a higher Although  The reduced feed rate corresponded to operating the crusher with a throughput of about half of the capacity. The tests where the feed rate was lowered had the lowest power draw, but the production is inefficient due to the low throughput. The power draw measured for these tests will be affected by the material flow through the crusher not being constant. The top size of the product was not affected by the feed rate, but the PSD curve is steeper when the feed rate is reduced. The results are ambiguous for fines/lower size because the amount of fines was reduced for the 100/400 mm feed material when feed rate was reduced, while it remained unchanged for the 100/300 mm feed material. The PSD curves show that there is more material in the sizes above As the throughput is reduced by about 50%, the reduced material density in the crusher results in less particle-to-particle crushing; hence, the material passing through the crusher will be subject to fewer crushing events. Reducing the feed rate results in a more flaky product for all particle sizes below 50 The reduced feed rate was tested with feed materials where Reducing the crusher speed results in an increased  For the tests where fines are present in the feed, some of the material assessed after crushing will have passed through the crusher without any size reduction. The improved particle shape when fines are present in the feed could raise the question of whether the feed material had lower The flakiness index is found to be higher for the smaller particles of a distribution, corresponding to the results from A deviation from the FI standard is that also larger particles than described in the standard procedure (> The example in In further research on this topic, alternative methods for calculation of 22/125 The lack of relationship between The general assumption that the results from mechanical tests are an expression for geological properties of the material is refuted, as it is clear that production methods affect the mechanical properties of the material. Thus, mechanical strength should not be assumed constant for all products produced from a specific rock deposit. It is generally accepted that the mechanical properties of an aggregate are improved from each crushing stage because weak minerals are worn off. Hence, there is a risk of overrating the quality of an aggregate when the tested samples are laboratory crushed twice after primary crushing. A sample processed in such a way should not be considered representative for the quality of primary crushed aggregates. When the difference in test result due to sample preparation is as big as 26%, there is a clear risk of ranking alternative available materials wrongfully if the sample preparation is not identical for all samples. Both In the current dataset, the largest amount of flaky particles was found in the size range used for mechanical testing. The samples used for laboratory crushing was in the 63–90 mm size range and had a considerably lower  There is no correlation between Los Angeles abrasion and micro-Deval wear, neither for primary crushed nor laboratory crushed aggregates. The differences in gradation of the test portions after testing, as seen in One could assume that the amount of material remaining in the original size after testing is a more valuable parameter than the amount of material broken down to 1.6 mm or smaller. However, both Los Angeles and micro-Deval are empirical tests where requirements are set with reference to practical experience ( Including fines in the feed during crushing improves particle shape and reduces specific energy consumption, but can result in a particle size distribution including excess fines, thus requiring an extra screening process to obtain a valuable product gradation. What is gained by a high crushing capacity may be lost due to the need for further processing. The product yield, or the proportion of valuable products vs by-products, has not been part of this study. A simple single-stage crushing plant can be used for various products and the definition of valuable products and by-products depends on the applications. Generally, a high fines content is undesirable because the aggregate material becomes sensitive to moisture and frost. Moisture content is generally considered an important factor for the stability and compactability of unbound aggregates, as pointed out by e.g. In order to systematically use the knowledge gathered from the full-scale tests, the results should be implemented in models for predicting crusher operation and product quality. The dataset produced in this study could be used to calibrate or validate the model presented by The data presented here is limited to a single rock type and a single jaw crusher. A natural continuation of this research would be to extend the test programme to include several rock types of varying strength and brittleness. Another possibility is to include other jaw crushers to assess the effect of crusher geometry. The full-scale parameter study allowed for a range of feed material sizes, reduction ratios and crusher operation parameters to be combined. The subsequent quality assessment was conducted using laboratory tests for particle shape and resistance to wear and fragmentation. From the results, the following conclusions can be drawn: Particle shape is the quality parameter most affected by variations in the crushing process. The maximal product particle size is highly dependant on the setting of the crusher, so for comparison of particle shape for full gradations, the size range analysed should be related to crusher setting ( To investigate the effect of changing crusher parameters, analyses of particle shape of individual particle size fractions is necessary in addition to the full size range. The calculation method for flakiness index hides variation of particle shape within a product gradation, increasingly for wider gradations. Products in a specific particle size have lower flakiness when produced at a lower Reduced crusher speed increases the specific energy consumption of the crushing process by 50–150%, depending on The lower size of the feed material ( Reducing the feed rate results in a less well-graded product, and increases the flakiness for particles smaller than the crusher setting. The poor particle shape produced using low feed level and single-graded feed (180/400 mm) shows that inter-particle crushing is a prerequisite for cubical shape. Mechanical strength should not be assumed constant for all products produced from a specific rock deposit. Also, mechanical properties are highly affected by sample preparation; laboratory crushed samples are not representative of primary crushed aggregates. The amount of material remaining in the original test portion size after the LA test ( The aim for the parameter study was to investigate whether previous research results regarding crusher operation and aggregate quality are valid also for a simple single-stage jaw crusher operation on large-size aggregates. In response to the original hypothesis the results show that crushing efficiency and product quality in terms of particle shape can be controlled. The quality of construction aggregates can be optimised by adjustments to the production process, even for a single-stage crushing process. In order to improve mechanical properties, several crushing steps are needed. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The study is financed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration, Metso Minerals and the Research Council of Norway through the industrial innovation project The field work was conducted at Metso Minerals’ test plant in Tampere, Finland during May and June of 2017. The laboratory work took place at the laboratory of Norwegian Public Roads Administration in Trondheim, Norway during 2017 and 2018. The authors would like to thank workers at Metso Minerals and Norwegian Public Roads Administration for valuable contributions to the field and laboratory work. Thanks also to master student Nils Arne Fjeldstad Luke who took care of a portion of the laboratory testing.