Proper characterization of a dense-graded aggregate base/subbase material should include both quality and strength aspects. Gradation, passing the No. 200 sieve (smaller than 0.075mm) fines content, and Atterberg limits for plasticity index (PI) are the most important properties that affect the quality and longevity of aggregates used as unbound layers in flexible pavement applications. The criterion used for allowing fines in high quality aggregates for highway applications vary among the state agencies. Most specifications call for controlling fines content, PI and the dust ratio, which is defined as percent passing the No. 200 sieve divided by percent passing the No. 40 sieve. In this study the effect of these fines on moisture-density relationship and strength of a crushed limestone aggregate with 25.4-mm (1-in.) maximum particle size was investigated. A typical range of 5–12% fines content inclusion with plasticity indices of 5–13% and dust ratios of 0.4–1.0 were studied. In order to evaluate the influence of each of these properties of the fines, a comprehensive number of samples were tested for the soaked California Bearing Ratio (CBR). The moisture sensitivity of aggregate strength was evaluated within ±1.5% of the optimum moisture content. The findings were summarized to propose a new approach for proper material selection based on the fines content and dust ratio.The flexible pavement structure contains several layers as the asphalt concrete surface, base, subbase, and subgrade. Base and subbase layers being conventionally unbound are located between the pavement surface and subgrade to transfer the load. The lifespan of any highway pavement is dependent on the performance of the base and subbase distributing the wheel load over subgrade. Therefore, the material used to construct these layers should have adequate strength to protect the subgrade and resist pavement rutting under traffic loading. The rutting performance of the aggregate base is attributed to many factors such as gradation ( The influence of fines in unbound aggregates are controlled by the fines content (percent passing the No. 200 sieve, i.e., 0.075 In terms of fine sizes, the distribution of particle sizes smaller than the No. 16 sieve (i.e., 1.19 Since the Atterberg limits of minus No. 40 sieve material influences the aggregate strength ( The maximum allowable fines content in dense-graded aggregate base specifications ranges from 12% to 20% for different state highway agencies. In terms of PI, allowable maximum value varies from 4% to 13% in different specifications, see Since high quality aggregate materials have become less accessible and more expensive for highway applications, it is critical to identify the appropriate limits for index properties of unbound aggregates that allow use of fines without compromising performance. However, the interactions of dust ratio, fines content and plasticity index properties of an aggregate material and their influences on the strength have not been systematically investigated. Therefore, this study aims to identify the effects of fines content, dust ratio, and plasticity index on moisture-density relationship and strength of crushed limestone aggregates used for base and subbase layers by the help of soaked California Bearing Ratio (CBR) test results. The moisture sensitivity of aggregate strength is also evaluated to identify the optimized configurations of these aggregate properties needed for the quality classes and to provide the required strength zones. Since fines in an unbound aggregate assembly were the focus of this study, a test matrix including different configurations of fines content, dust ratio and plasticity indices of aggregates had to be developed. In this test matrix, typical ranges recommended by the standards and specifications for base and subbase aggregate applications were considered. In order to quantify the effect of fines on strength and for comparison purposes, three percentages of passing the No. 200 sieve (i.e., 5%, 8%, and 12%) were targeted to study a typical range of fines content. As far as Atterberg limits, the LL criterion was not considered in this study because: (1) not many state highway agencies require this limit and (2) if the aggregate material has PI of less than 9%, it is less likely to encounter LL of more than 25%. This conclusion can also be drawn by examining Since the standards require DR of 0.6 (see Crushed limestone aggregate, which was a mix of fine and coarse grains, was tested in this study. The L.A. Abrasion loss value of 26.1% was reported for utilized material. The commonly used gradation for base and subbase layer construction in Illinois, which is very comparable to typical Gradation C of ASTM Since the utilized crushed limestone material had very low PI, in order to target the PI of 5%, 9% and 13% shown in test matrix, a clayey material with higher plasticity were blended with the fines of the studied aggregate to reach the targeted plasticity indices. According to the test matrix (see The developed target gradations using Eq. The achieved void ratios for each configuration in the test matrix are presented in Several laboratory tests are typically considered to evaluate performance, stiffness and strength characteristics of base and subbase aggregates, e.g., resilient modulus, R-value, triaxial and CBR tests. CBR test requires less material preparation and is very commonly used as a quality control measure by transportation agencies. In order to identify the effect of the moisture content during compaction on strength of aggregates, soaked CBR tests were utilized in this study per AASHTO T193. For each test configuration shown in Compaction results were divided into three groups based on percent passing the No. 200 sieve. Compaction curves regarding configurations with 8% passing the No. 200 sieve are shown in The maximum dry density is varied more noticeably in According to As the moisture content of constructed base/subbase might be different than the optimum moisture content, the strength of unbound aggregates should be evaluated both on the wet and dry sides of the Optimum Moisture Content (OMC). Therefore, soaked CBR results are presented within a range of ±1.5% of the optimum moisture content in   Soaked CBRs of samples engineered with 12% passing the No. 200 sieve is presented in It is concluded that depending on the level of fines in an aggregate matrix, the effect of dust ratio and plasticity index on strength might differ. For example, on one hand, samples with a dust ratio of 1.0 had the lowest average soaked CBR when 5% passing the No. 200 sieve was included in the specimens. On the other hand, the samples with a dust ratio of 0.4 had the least average soaked CBR when samples had 12% passing the No. 200 sieve. Furthermore, a high plasticity index of 13% does not affect the average soaked CBR any different than 5% or 9% PI does. Additionally, the bar charts show that the maximum soaked CBR is not necessarily obtained at OMC and the sample on dry side of OMC does not necessarily show higher strengths. The averages and the standard deviations of soaked CBR values at five different moisture contents within OMC ±1.5% for each specific dust ratio and plasticity index were determined and graphed in According to The dust ratio above 0.6 is generally not recommended by standards and specifications. However, according to The plasticity index has been limited to 6% by most standards and specifications. However, as shown in As shown in the previous section, plasticity index has a negligible influence on the aggregate strength for the studied crushed limestone aggregate. Therefore, the selection criteria for the fines content can be based on the dust ratio and the percent passing the No. 200 sieve. Quality control of unbound aggregate materials used in flexile pavement base and subbase courses is critically important. Currently, standards such AASHTO and ASTM, as well as state specifications mostly have set limits on index properties such as gradation, Atterberg limits, and dust ratio. Dust ratio is defined as the ratio between percent passing the No. 200 sieve and percent passing No. 40 sieve. The effectiveness of present limits was studied in a comprehensive laboratory testing program based on Gradation C of ASTM The maximum dry density becomes the highest for samples with a dust ratio of 0.6. For the fines content of 5% and 8%, the maximum dry density of samples with a dust ratio of 1.0 was the minimum. For 12% fines content, the samples with a dust ratio of 0.4 had the lowest maximum dry densities. It is observed that with an increase in fines content from 8% to 12%, dust ratios greater than 0.6 are desired to achieve higher densities. Also, an increase in PI from 5% to 13% resulted in a decrease in the maximum dry density. Comparisons between compaction curves and soaked CBR values showed that the maximum soaked CBR is not always at the optimum moisture content. Furthermore, soaked CBR on the dry side of the optimum is not always higher than soaked CBR on the wet side of the optimum moisture content. When there was 5% passing the No. 200 sieve, all samples showed average soaked CBR values of about 60% except the samples with a dust ratio of 1.0, and 5–8% fines content that had up to 30% less average soaked CBR values. Samples prepared with 8% passing the No. 200 sieve showed more variation in terms of average soaked CBR values within ±1.5% of OMC. Unbound aggregate materials engineered with 12% passing the No. 200 sieve indicated more sensitivity to moisture content variation as well as index properties studied because the average soaked CBR ranged from 17% to 58%. Interestingly, the dust ratio of 0.4 had the smaller soaked CBR values when compared to samples with dust ratios of 0.6 and 1.0. Among the studied index properties, plasticity index and fines content had both the least and greatest influences on soaked CBR values. Plasticity indices of up to 13% did not affect the strength of unbound aggregates. Overall, samples with fines contents of 5% and 8% had about 50–60% soaked CBR values with some moisture sensitivity characteristics. However, the increase of fines to 12% reduced the CBR values for up to 30%. With an increase in fines content, low dust ratios are not recommended. Finally, note that the results of this study are limited to one crushed limestone aggregate material studied herein with the discussed mid-range dense-graded gradation. These configurations may not perfectly be representative of practiced material in the field, as the mineralogy, composition and gradation of coarse aggregates and fines content might vary from the targeted material in this study. Therefore, further verification and performance validation in the field will be needed. The authors would like to acknowledge the Illinois Department of Transportation and Illinois Center for Transportation for the support provided for this project. The authors also like to acknowledge many undergraduate students who worked on this project. The contents of this paper reflect the views of the authors who are responsible for the facts and the accuracy of the data presented herein. This paper does not constitute a standard, specification, or regulation.