Shape properties of talc and quartz particles ground by a laboratory size ball, rod, and autogenous mills were studied using scanning electron microscope (SEM). More than 100 particles were measured to do the shape analysis of each mill product. The wettability behavior of (γ
                     c) a highly hydrophobic of talc mineral was determined by contact angle measurements and micro-flotation tests using a contact angle goniometer and EMDEE MicroFLOT test tube, respectively. On the other hand, wettability (γ
                     c) of quartz, which is a highly hydrophilic mineral, was determined by the micro-flotation method only. The results showed that the particles ground by rod mill gave higher flatness and elongation ratio, which meant higher hydrophobicity with lower γ
                     c values in the separations by flotation method.micro-flotation recovery, % the contact angle, degree (°) the liquid–air surface tension, mN/m the critical surface tension of wetting, mN/m length of axes of particle projection, μm width of axes of particle projection, μm area of the particle projection, μm perimeter of the particle projection, μm elongation ratio flatness roundness relative width In the separation of the mineral processing technology, comminution is essential to liberate the valuable minerals from its gangue as well as to decrease the size that is necessary for projected separation method and the market requirements. As mineral particles are gradually reduced in size, their shape and surface properties become more important in particle processing operation The distribution of particle sizes and shapes has great importance in many industries such as civil engineering, chemical, pharmaceutical, and mining. Moreover, the flowability of powders, bulk flow, and packing necessitate a considerable knowledge of the size and shape of constituent particles Since shape is a factor in the behavior of powders, the shape difference between the products of different mills has a particular significance in mineral processing recovery and separation systems or any other industry where particles are involved The shape property differences caused by using different mills depend on the grinding mechanism where abrasion, impact, and chipping occur. The balls and rods that are used as the grinding media in conventional grinding exercise point and line load on the particles, respectively. In autogenous grinding, on the other hand, the grain boundaries are affected and the proportion of fines produced, in general is lower in comparison to conventional grinding Princen On the other hand, Forssberg and Zhai In spite of the contradictory reports, it is well established that shape and surface properties are effective in many aspects of mineral processing, especially in flotation. The wettability, which plays a key role in flotation, can be estimated by a number of techniques. These are immersion time Wettability characteristics of mineral surfaces can be quantitatively characterized in terms of their critical surface tension of wetting values ( The critical surface tension of wetting of a mineral is determined by two major techniques; contact angle approach and flotation methods. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of shape properties such as elongation ratio, flatness, roundness, and relative width on the wettability properties of talc and quartz minerals determined by flotation and contact angle. The research was conducted by using two minerals, namely talc and quartz. Pure talc from Turkey contained 59.2% SiO Quartz mineral sample was also from Turkey which contained 97% SiO The grinding tests were performed in dry conditions. A laboratory size ball mill having 200 Rod milling tests were conducted at 200 For autogenous grinding, a 420 For providing a comparative work in the subsequent processes such as scanning electron microscope (SEM), contact angle, and micro-flotation tests, different grinding period were applied to get similar size distribution. The grinding periods for talc were found as 32, 16, and 256 The amount of material necessary for further tests was also encountered in determining the grinding periods. The shape properties of the particles ground by different mills were determined with the method reported by Forssberg and Zhai COREL Draw 10.0 computer program was used to measure the lengths and widths of particles in question. The area ( The shape properties studied, roundness (Ro), flatness ( Roundness has its maximum at 1.0 for a circle; conversely flatness has its minimum for a circle at 1.0. Relative width increase with increasing major axis length, hence more rounded grains can be observed. Rame-Heart Inc. 100 NRL goniometer for the sessile drop technique was used in order to determine the critical surface tension ( The surface tensions of the methanol–water solutions ( The critical surface tension ( The critical surface tension ( EMDEE MicroFLOT instrument ( The product size distribution of talc ground by ball, rod, and autogenous mills in different times is seen in   In that case, it can be discussed that the flat particles with the lowest area and perimeter have the higher hydrophobicity comparing to the rounder ones. It can be said that attachment of an air bubble to flat particles, which were produced by rod mill, is more likely than the round ones. This result provides good agreement with previous studies The relationship can be defined in the form of correlation between shape properties of talc particles and High coefficient of correlations ( The product size distribution of quartz ground for different grinding periods is seen in The The critical surface tension of wetting of quartz by the contact angle method somehow was not measured although the concentration of collector was increased. As it is seen from The results of SEM measurements of quartz particles showed that the particles ground by rod milling do not have the lowest area and perimeter but has the lowest roundness and relative width. The flatness and elongation ratio were the highest for rod mill product. The results are outlined in Similar results were obtained with the studies of talc in which flat particles have higher hydrophobicity due to their lower The shape properties of quartz were correlated with the The comparison of ball, rod, and autogenous mills from the hydrophobicity point of view is not a matter of discussion in this paper. These grinding methods were applied to produce the particles in different shape. The comparison of the grinding systems with the present data would lead to misunderstanding, because the simulation of autogenous grinding is not as easy as the simulation of conventional grinding and requires much more extensive grinding tests. Hence, this study refers to the critical surface tension of particles to the shape properties, but not to the mill type. It is also noted that the different grinding mechanisms produced by different mills used in the study would cause differences in the particle shapes and wettability for the same mineral. The shape properties of talc and quartz particles were determined by using SEM. The lowest roundness and relative width with highest flatness and elongation ratio were obtained with particles ground by rod mill. Critical surface tension ( The established correlation between the surface properties (i.e. flatness, roundness, relative width, and elongation ratio) and critical surface tension ( The authors thank the Scientific Research Projects Council of Cumhuriyet University (project number M 145) and the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (project number 100Y058) for the support provided.