In order to investigate the formation of sigma-phase in two cast heat-resistant steels of wide industrial use, two ferrous alloys containing 25.02Cr–4.26Ni–0.53C and 31.23Cr–6.08Ni-0.36C were prepared by casting techniques and then subjected to sigma precipitation by heating the alloys, for increasing periods of time, at a temperature which resembles the average thermal level usually encountered in service conditions of these materials. Initially, the phase nucleates along ferrite–austenite boundaries, but with more time sigma precipitates inside the ferrite grains. Furthermore, both alloys showed a behavior that resembles the well-known Johnson–Mehl–Avrami's mechanism, stated for a nucleation and diffusion-controlled growth process in metallic systems. Hence, the phenomenon reached asymptotic values of approximately 25 and 55vol.% in the HC- and HD-grade, respectively, after 120h heating at 1053K. The experimental results may help in controlling the behavior of these materials when they are to be utilized in industrial applications at elevated temperatures.High-alloy cast stainless steels, usually known as Since only a small amount of precipitation is required to reduce the tensile ductility, toughness and pit-corrosion resistance, precipitation of sigma-phase has been heavily investigated. However, detailed phase identification is not easily obtained, i.e. precipitates are often difficult to observe and require precise etching techniques. In fact, although X-ray diffraction is very useful for identifying crystalline products, microstructural techniques are essential for understanding transformation phenomena in metals and alloys. Moreover, computer-aided microscopy, where image analysis depends upon the ability of the optical system to resolve the subject in question, requires high-quality experimental data; in general, the presence of more than three phases makes it very hard to obtain accurate results. In view of these considerations, the present investigation was performed to evaluate the microstructural morphology of sigma-phase formation on annealing with increasing time, of two heat-resistant steels, namely HC- and HD-grades, where the phase forms quite readily. The expected results are intended for their utilization in current industrial applications. The castings analyzed in this study were prepared in an induction furnace (INDUCTOTHERM) of 30 Representative specimens suitable for heat treatment, light microscopy and X-ray diffraction experiments, were machined from the test section of the Y-blocks with dimensions of 45 In addition to metallographic observation results, X-ray powder diffraction experiments were performed on all studied specimens to identify the component phases. Hence, the presence of ternary ferrite (Fe–Cr–Ni), ternary austenite (Fe–Cr–Ni) and chromium carbide of the Cr In order to determine the relative amounts of phases in the heat-treated alloys, particularly sigma-phase, quantitative X-ray powder diffraction based on Rietveld processing of the experimental data ( The relative amounts of sigma-phase precipitated in HC- and HD-grade alloys upon increasing treatment time at 1053 The effects of alloying elements on sigma-phase formation in the studied materials is such that increasing chromium, molybdenum and silicon contents cause an increase in the rate of precipitation and in the maximum amount produced; conversely, increasing the nickel content decreases the maximum amount of sigma that can be formed, but increases its rate of formation ( Although the influence of temperature on the rate of sigma-phase formation was not considered within the goals of the present article, the selection of the working temperature made use of available qualitative information. In fact, sigma formation exhibits C-curve behavior with the shortest time for formation, generally occurring between 973 and 1083 Finally, hardness values shown in In summary, the results of the present study have assessed the formation of sigma-phase in two cast heat-resistant steels with wide industrial applications, when subjected to prolonged heating at relatively high temperatures. The phase initially nucleates along austenite–ferrite grain boundaries, followed by growth into the ferritic phase; during a second stage, sigma particles massively nucleate and grow in the bulk of the ferrite grains, reaching saturation levels depending on the specific type of alloy. The knowledge gained from the experimental results of this work can be fully integrated into design, prediction and control of the mechanical behavior of the investigated materials when utilized as parts or devices in high-temperature duty. Support for this work was provided by the Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH) and FONDECYT Project No. 1050022 on precipitation of sigma-phase in welded joints of heat-resistant steels. The authors greatly appreciate this assistance, as well as experimental assistance given by Mrs. Alicia Durán, Ms. Gladys Olivares and Mr. Felipe Jiménez.