Methods were investigated to reduce the salt content of beef-containing smallgoods as high-salt intake has been identified as a public health risk for most individuals. Raw meat batters were manufactured from retail beef mince (4–7% fat) using various NaCl concentrations (0–2%), and were packed into casings and subjected to high pressure processing (up to 400 MPa for 2 min at 10 °C). Following pressure treatment, samples were cooked to an internal temperature of 72 °C and cooled. Cooked products were assessed for cooking loss, colour and physical consistency by texture profile analysis. Flavour and overall acceptability were assessed by sensory panels. High pressure processing (HPP) was found to produce a dramatic improvement in the moisture retention of the cooked products. Control (unpressurised) sausages containing 2% NaCl had a similar cook loss (9.3%) to pressure-treated sausages containing just 1% NaCl, whereas unpressurised samples with 1% NaCl had a cook loss of 24.9%. The hardness and gumminess of pressure-treated samples was higher compared to untreated samples, at all salt concentrations. The greatest differences in texture with pressure treatment were seen in the 1% NaCl samples. Pressure treatment generally caused no changes in the colour of either the raw or cooked product; however there was a slight increase in “whiteness” with pressure treatment. Sensory panels reported a greater acceptability in both appearance and texture of pressure-treated sausages of lower salt content compared with non-pressure-treated samples. Examination of extracted proteins using SDS-PAGE and of muscle proteins by thermal analysis indicated that pressure contributed to enhanced binding through protein solubilisation and gelation through partial protein unfolding. The application of high pressure to beef sausages with low-salt content resulted in reduced cooking losses and improved texture.
               
                  Industrial relevance
                  Enhanced meat binding through extraction of salt-soluble proteins is an essential step in the formulation of meat products such as sausages and emulsion-type products. The ability to reduce salt and achieve high binding and water retention through use of HPP is important in being able to produce healthier foods.Various salts (particularly sodium chloride) have been added to smallgoods formulations for their known effects on improved functionality such as better gelation, higher water-holding capacity and fat retention, reduced cooking losses and for reducing microbial growth during storage ( High pressure processing (HPP) has been used as a possible means of improving the functional properties of muscle proteins as it has been shown to increase the solubility of certain myofibrillar proteins ( For seafood pastes, which generally have low gel-setting abilities, it has been common to use endogenous or exogenous transglutaminase with a pre-setting temperature of about 40 °C to covalently bond adjacent proteins ( It was the aim of this study to investigate the effects of pressure on beef batters and determine the lowest salt concentration that would be equivalent, in terms of functional properties, to a standard beef batter formulation, and to assess various functional properties over a range of salt and pressure treatments. We also sought to determine the mechanism by which pressure resulted in enhanced binding and to relate our findings to those observed in other meats. Meat used for this work was a high grade, low-fat, minced beef product that was purchased from a local supermarket on at least 6 occasions over a period of 2 months. The low-fat beef mince was produced daily from predominantly The formulation of the batters used throughout was chosen so that differences between treatments (salt concentrations and pressure) would be most evident. This was achieved by preparing batters containing high amounts of water, often referred to as ‘stressed batters’. Stressed batters ensure that any positive effects from the treatments, such as reduction in cook loss is easily evident. Raw meat batters were prepared by comminuting beef mince (75%) with ice/water (23–25%), together with varying concentrations of NaCl, ranging from 0 to 2% (w/w) using a Stephan mini-bowl chopper. During the cutting process, the batter was maintained at a temperature of less than 12 °C. The batters were then filled into sausage casings (filled diameter 24 mm) and linked every 150 mm, so that the mean weight was approximately 60 g. All processing was performed in a food processing laboratory at an air temperature set to 10 °C. Immediately following production of the various formulations, the sausages were individually sealed in barrier bags (Vac LS LUS, Micris Packaging PL., Cleveland, Qld) and maintained at a temperature of 5 °C prior to HPP. HPP was performed within 2 h of their production. Pressure treatments were performed using a 0.3 L capacity 850 Mini FoodLab high pressure vessel (Stansted Fluid Power Ltd., Stansted, UK) with temperature control between 5° and 80 °C. The compression fluid used in the sample chamber consisted of 30% propylene glycol in water (v/v) and was previously cooled to 10 °C by a thermostated jacket. Beef batters were subjected to various pressures of up to 400 MPa at initial temperatures of 10 °C, and were held at the desired pressure for 2 min. When using a pressure of 200 MPa, adiabatic heating resulted in a temperature increase to about 14 °C in the compression fluid. The inherent ramp rate was set at 20 MPa/s, so the time to reach 200 MPa, the main pressure used, was approximately 10 s. Decompression of the chamber took place over a period of 45 s.  Control samples (no pressure treatment), were held at 14 °C for 2 min. All samples were then stored at 0–1 °C. For those batters that were cooked, sausages were heated in a water bath set to 76 °C for 25 min until they reached an internal temperature of 72 °C. They were then cooled and stored at 0–1 °C until required for analysis. Cooking losses were determined by weighing individual samples before and after cooking, and expressing weight loss as a percentage of original weight. Raw and cooked products were assessed for texture profile analysis (TPA) using compression testing on a Lloyd Texture Analyser (Model TA Plus). Using a two-cycle procedure, cylindrical samples (24 mm diameter and 20 mm length) were positioned vertically and compressed with a 6 mm cylindrical probe, penetrating to a depth of 40% using a cross-head speed of 50 mm/min. Measurements on each sample were replicated 5 times. All measurements were undertaken at ambient temperature (20–25 °C). Hardness, cohesiveness, springiness, gumminess, chewiness and fracture force were obtained for each sample. Overall colour of cooked samples was assessed on a freshly cut surface using a Minolta Chromameter (CR300) calibrated against a white tile. Averaged CIE Each of the raw batters was homogenised in 0.6 M NaCl (1:4, v/v) at 4 °C. The homogenate was then centrifuged at 20,000 The protein composition of the solubilised fraction was determined by sodium dodecylsulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), ( The measurements of the thermal behaviour of proteins in the mince and batters were performed using a micro-differential scanning calorimeter (Micro DSC III, Setaram Inc., Lyon, France) equipped with a refrigerated circulating water bath (Julabo, Seelbach, Germany). The instrument was calibrated for temperature and enthalpy using naphthalene as a standard. Each sample (~ A number of taste panels, involving Food Science Australia staff, were used to evaluate flavour, texture and appearance of the cooked batter products. Trained panellists (6 to 8) were asked to assess visual appeal, bite, mouthfeel, density of texture, saltiness, flavour and off flavours of the warmed samples. Subjective information was collated and overall assessments were made for each product. A confidence level of 5% was used to compare significant differences between means ( It was the aim of this investigation to determine specific HPP conditions that would enable the formulation of low-salt, low-fat beef batter product that would display high moisture retention during cooking and have textural attributes at least equivalent to a standard high-salt batter. In addition, we attempted to further substantiate a mechanism for the improved binding of muscle proteins by specific high pressure treatments. Although a number of studies have been undertaken in this area, it is somewhat difficult to compare many of them given that such a variety of conditions have been used, particularly those using pressure at low (1–7 °C) ( The desired properties for quality meat batters, showing high protein binding and water retention and gel strength, are highly dependent upon a number of factors, such as ionic strength and particularly pH. Meat used in this study was selected based on it having both the specified fat content (4–7%) and pH of about 5.6 to 5.8. Pressure treatment of meat and raw meat products is known to produce a small increase in pH ( Inclusion of NaCl to the non-pressure-treated batter formulations affected the cook loss in a concentration-dependent manner. When cooked, the standard batter formulation containing 2% NaCl lost about 9% of its weight, but this increased in a linear manner to about 36% as the added salt was reduced to 0% ( Given that in the above trial the greatest differences in cooking losses with pressure were observed with 1% salt, in a separate trial, we used formulations containing 0.6, 0.8 and 1% NaCl and investigated the effect of pressure on losses over the range 0.1 to 400 MPa to determine if reduced cooking losses could be maintained at these lower salt concentrations. Although pressure treatment at both 100 and 400 MPa resulted in large reductions in cook loss at each of the salt additions compared with the control, treatment at 200 MPa gave the greatest effect ( For simplicity, a determined value, “whiteness”, rather than There are a number of reports suggesting that muscle protein gels induced by pressure have a finer and smoother appearance, together with a firmer consistency ( As 1% NaCl in the batters appeared to be optimal for many of the textural attributes, this concentration was selected for determining the optimal pressure conditions over the range 0.1 to 400 MPa ( The formulation of the batters used throughout was selected so that differences between treatments (salt concentrations and pressure) would be most evident. This was achieved by using a “stressed” batter containing high amounts of water. Irrespective of the salt content, panellists found that the non-pressure-treated samples had an open, dry and crumbly texture. However, at 1% NaCl, all of the sensory parameters of the batters were improved by pressure treatment, with panellists reporting that the texture was firmer with a more appealing bite. This was optimal at 200 MPa (data not shown). Pressure is known to have a number of effects on proteins including disruption of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions ( Differences between treatments were assessed by visualising with SDS-PAGE, proteins that were soluble in 0.6 M NaCl ( Raw beef muscle ( Comminution of raw beef mince with 1% NaCl and water ( Pressurisation of batters caused a similar denaturation of proteins with a further reduction in total denaturation enthalpy (2.29 J/g at 100 MPa, 2.1 J/g at 200 MPa and 0.54 J/g at 400 MPa), and a decrease in the transition temperature for myosin, and the formation of intermediate compounds at lower temperatures (42–45 °C). These new compounds were most evident with 200 and 400 MPa pressure treatment; the enthalpy of these compounds increased with pressure levels. The remaining non-denatured proteins present with pressure treatments, around 60 °C, could be related to myosin and/or connective tissue proteins, particularly collagen. Myosin undergoes denaturation by several molecule domains ( Moderate pressures of about 200 MPa for 2 min at 10 °C were most effective in producing cooked beef batters having reduced salt contents together with high quality textural properties. Whilst pressure treatment gave significant reductions in cooking losses in batters with just 0.5% added salt, cooking losses were reduced by about 75% with 1% salt, compared with no pressure treatment. In addition to the benefits of reduced cooking losses, various texture attributes such as hardness, fracture force, gumminess and chewiness were all improved. The colour of the treated raw batters was not different but the pressure-treated batters were slightly whiter than the untreated samples. Gel electrophoresis of 0.6 M NaCl extracted batters suggested that pressure caused an increase in solubilisation of myosin and actin and some other proteins which would aid in the binding of the meat particles. In general 1.8 to 2% salt is required in meat emulsions to achieve extraction of salt-soluble protein to give an acceptable texture in a cooked sausage product. The poor texture of low-salt meat products (1% salt) has been one of their downfalls in their commercialisation. Using HPP on meat batters containing 1% NaCl produced products having similar, if not better, texture and cooked yield compared to the non-HPP samples with normal (2%) salt equivalents. Emulsified products, such as sausages and luncheon meats, are perceived as being high in fat and salt and generally unhealthy. The HPP technology can now be used to produce healthier versions of these products. We wish to thank Sharon Kennedy, Joanne Mountford, Janet Stark and Shane Beilken of Food Science Australia for their assistance.