This paper has focused on various sintering routes for the preparation of bulk Bi2Fe4O9 (BFO) ceramic synthesized via thereverse chemical co-precipitation. The influence of different types of sintering, including the conventional sintering (CS), two-step sintering (TSS) and microwave sintering (MS) with different heating cycles on the magnetic and morphological properties of BFO bulk samples was studied in detail. The density of green compact was about 60% of the theoretical density and rose to 84, 85% and 91% for the CS, TSS and MS, respectively. The results of X-ray diffractometery (XRD) confirmed that all the samples have an orthorhombic crystal structure, which belongs to the space group pbam. Nanopowders morphological characteristics were examined by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and the average particle size was 72 nm. Also, the morphology of bulk samples was studied using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). The average grain sizes in the sintered samples were about 260, 295 and 210 nm for the best heating cycles of CS, TSS and MS, respectively. Based upon FESEM micrographs, it was found that the MS method because of the low sintering time and good heating gradient has the slightest grain growth. In addition, the line-scan spectroscopy showed the accumulation of Bi ions and vacancies of oxygen near the central line of grain boundaries in the CS and TSS methods, which is due to the long sintering time and high diffusion rate of bismuth ions. The M-H curves of the sintered samples measured through the vibrating sample magnetometery (VSM) confirmed antiferromagnetic behavior in all samples. The surface and grain boundary uncompensated spins led to the emergence of magnetization in Bi2Fe4O9ceramics. Generally, a decrease in the particle size and/or an increase in grain boundaries and porosity resulted in more uncompensated spins, thereby improving the magnetization.Over the past decades, considerable worldwide efforts have been made for the preparation and characterization of Multiferroic materials due to highly exciting properties such as their use in storage devices In this study, the reverse chemical co-precipitation technique has been used for the preparation of the BFO nanoparticles at the constant pH value of 9. Also, this paper has focused on various sintering routes for the preparation of bulk Bi The reverse chemical co-precipitation technique was applied to synthesize the Bi Iron nitrate was solved in deionized water, and bismuth subnitrate was solved in 2 M nitric acid (HNO  The relative densities of the green and sintered pellets were measured by the Archimedes method. The calcined BFO powders phase identification was made via an X-ray diffractometer (BRUKER X-Ray) using the Cu-Kα radiation and the scan rate 0.5°/min in the scattering angular range (2θ) of 20–80 For the observation of size distribution and crystalline nature of a selected sample, the transmission electron microscope (TEM, PHILIPS-CM3U) with 150 kV was utilized. The sintered samples microstructure was examined via a field emission scanning electron microscope (MIRA3-TESCAN) at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. Also, the average grain size of all samples was measured using The magnetic hysteresis loops of the attained samples within the field scope of ±1.5T were obtained at room temperature via a vibration sample magnetometer (VSM-AGFM). The phase formation of the BFO samples calcined at 750 ̊C with a constant pH value of 9 was specified from X-ray diffraction (XRD). In order to investigate the morphology, size distribution and crystalline nature of the developed samples extensively, the reversely co-precipitated sample, which has a pH value of 9, was examined via transmission electron microscopy. As can be observed in the The fresh fractured surface morphology of sintered samples, particle size and distribution were investigated using FESEM. In the case of the conventional and two-step procedure, the method nature has the secondary importance and the first-hand matter is the temperature and time span of the total sintering procedure. For example, by comparing the relative densities and AGS of CS2, TSS1 and TSS2, we achieve this in spite of the two-step heating of TSS1 (0.8T Generally, by increasing the sintering time (in example CS1 to CS2) and sintering temperature (for example TSS3 to TSS1 to TSS2) more densification is madeand porosities are decreased from 19.81% of CS1 to 14.79% for TSS2 samples. Additionally, AGS of the sample increases from 217 nm for CS1 to 294 nm for TSS2 samples by increasing the temperature or time span of heating procedures.  For the understanding of the chemical composition of grain boundaries, as well as the diffusion process in the grain boundaries and core, the line-scan EDS analysis was assayed and the results have been shown in The magnetic hysteresis loops of the sintered BFO ceramics through the CS, TSS and MS routes with an applied magnetic field in the range of ± 1.5 T at room temperature were measured in this investigation as well and the results have been presented in BFO was treated via different types of sintering, including the conventional sintering (CS), two-step sintering (TSS) and microwave sintering (MS) in different heating cycles. The XRD results confirmed that all the samples have a pure phase without any undesirable phases. The FESEM images of sintered samples show a non-homogeneous particle distribution with average grain sizes in the range of 217–292 nm, 228–294 nm and 105–211 nm for CS, TSS and MS methods, respectively, consisting of grains with prismatic and pyramidal crystalline morphology. Also, by increasing the sintering time and/or temperature more densification is made and porosities are decreased. The line-scan analysis reveals the accumulation of Bi