Plasma is probably the most underused tool applied for nuclear waste management. To study the feasibility of putting this technology in practice, a non-thermal microwave based atmospheric pressure plasma jet (APPJ) had been developed. The device was characterized by spectroscopic technique prior to its actual deployment inside glove box to narrow down its operational regime and also tested on Ta, a known surrogate of Pu which showed its efficacy in etching. The device was then used for removal of Pu based synthetic radioactive wastes inside radioactive glove box. Thereafter, optimization studies were conducted to maximize decontamination efficiency and it was seen that oxygen in plasma plays a significant role. The same device was later scaled up to a multi-electrode model and used for similar radioactive waste removal. Both these devices under optimized condition could remove 
                        ∼
                     92% radioactive wastes and the scaled up model reduced duration by 50%.High demand for non-conventional energy sources for supply of uninterrupted clean energy has resulted in recent surge in nuclear industry. It is undeniable that nuclear power generation has shown remarkable progress over the last decades ( In any nuclear energy programme, volume reduction of radioactive waste is of paramount importance. Many researchers are working towards development of innovative decontamination techniques for this purpose ( Since early nineties few research groups have reported plasma etching as an alternate option for decontamination of solid nuclear wastes ( Among other related research, researchers of Hicks’ group (  These reports suggested that microwave based APPJ can serve as a potential alternative technique for radioactive decontamination on account of high chemical conversion rate, favorable economics, ease of operation, small size and low operational costs ( In spite of these advantages, there exists an absolute scarcity of recent reports on plasma based radioactive decontamination and this is where our research can contribute. In this study we have developed & characterized a prototype APPJ device and installed it inside a glove box for solid radioactive waste removal. Parametric optimization studies have been conducted on synthetic solid radioactive wastes. Based on its success a scaled up multi-electrode version was designed and employed inside the glove box. Both of these devices under optimized condition could successfully eliminate radioactive wastes and the scaled up APPJ device reduced the operation time by 50%.    The design of the microwave APPJ device was based on co-axial structure ( Photograph of the APPJ device is shown in  For the experiment in set I, a mixture of 3.5 LPM Ar and 100 SCCM H For set II a gas mixture of Ar and CF In set III, two different experiments were conducted on Ta surrogate both in presence and in absence of O After successful plasma generation in laboratory, the device was transferred into a glove box for radioactive decontamination experiments and parametric optimization studies. All experiments were conducted with net microwave power ranging between 80–100 W. Initially, Ar flow rate was kept fixed at 8LPM while, CF Pu was chosen as the radioactive source since it has one of the highest specific activities among all transuranic elements. Several synthetic samples of Pu were prepared on different SS 304L discs of Based on our results using a single electrode APPJ device, a multi-electrode APPJ device was designed in phase IV to scale up the waste removal process. Design of this device involved prior simulation as analytical solutions were unavailable for impedance matching for such a device. The design and experimental results obtained with this device will be discussed Section As stated in previous section, OES was used to measure electron temperature (     For OES measurements, O   During Ta etching experiments, CF    After successful etching of Ta surrogates, the APPJ device was installed inside a radioactive glove box for carrying out decontamination experiments on active samples. Synthetic radioactive samples of Pu having   Based on the encouraging results obtained with the single electrode APPJ device, a multi-electrode model of the device was conceptualized for scaling up of the decontamination process. However, designing a multi-electrode AAPJ device by analytical means, with appropriate matching of impedance not being simple as single electrode device (Section   In the work being reported here, OES has been used extensively to narrow down operational regime of a plasma device before deploying the device inside a glove box where actual parametric optimization has been carried out. From During decontamination experiments inside glove box, for a given plasma power, efficient decomposition of CF Based on extensive experiments conducted with APPJ device and considering factors like increase in DF, plasma stability and gas economy, we have arrived at optimized operational parameters corresponding to 6 LPM Ar flow, with CF To validate our measured data on alpha activity post plasma etching results, a few samples after decontamination were dissolved completely in 8 M HCl and the resulting solution of known volume was subjected to radiometry to measure Plasma probably is the most underused tool applied towards nuclear waste management system. Limitations in scaling up often said as a reason for restricting widespread application of this technology ( We have designed and developed an APPJ device for solid nuclear waste removal. Plasma characteristic of this device has been analyzed by OES. Employing a device inside a glove box we have successfully achieved removal of hazardous radioactive contaminant. It is seen that presence of oxygen in plasma has a very crucial role in efficient etching of contaminated surfaces. Optimized Ar flow rate of 6 LPM ensured stable plasma jet and high decontamination efficiency. Pu was used as a source of