Impure rhenium and molybdenum bearing solution was passed through a column of Varian strong base anionic resin for selective adsorption of rhenium and molybdenum ions from the solution. Elution of molybdenum and rhenium was carried out using 2 N NaOH and 0.2 N NH4SCN, respectively. The effect of resin bed height on breakthrough time was investigated. Experimental and theoretical curves were compared with good agreement. The results showed that the behavior pattern of these curves was repeatable and almost constant.The best sources of rhenium are molybdenite concentrate and flue dust from molybdenite roasters ( In a column process, the breakthrough takes place when the concentration of the counter ion in the effluent begin to increase predominantly until it finally reaches the same concentration as in the influent. After this point no more ion exchange takes place. The breakthrough point is considered as the time of completion of the adsorption cycle in industrial applications. In simple cases, analytical equations relating concentration and time are obtainable. Equilibrium and kinetic factors determine the shape of curves and the time scale. A summary of the simplest analytically derived breakthrough curve equations for conditions of no axial mixing, invariant rate coefficients (liquid film mass transfer coefficients and diffusion coefficients) and equilibrium data defined by Evidence on the rate controlling process is sought by examining the effects of liquid velocity and bed height. Simple analytical results have value in determining the rate controlling mechanisms in experimental work and in illustrating clearly the effects on plant performance of the major design variables. Batch experiments may be used for this purpose and the Helfferich's criterion should be used for guidance. Literature lacks essential information on breakthrough curves of rhenium recovery from rhenium bearing leach solutions which come from copper production plants or spent catalysts. Significant amounts of these materials are created worldwide. Determining that the equilibrium is favorable or unfavorable is the first purpose of this work. The data obtained for rhenium recovery from a molybdenite flue dust leach solution by an ion exchange column were formulated into appropriate equations for breakthrough curves and some column experiments were carried out to examine the column behavior with respect to parameters in the theoretical equations. Solutions A and B, which came from the leaching and purification processes of molybdenite roasted flue dusts were used in this study as initial solutions. By increasing the pH of the solution the rhenium distribution coefficient increases while that of the molybdenum decreases and the separation factor of rhenium ( The ion exchange resin was purified according to the method discussed by In order to draw the breakthrough curves and compare them with the theoretical ones, fixed bed processes were used using the solution B. The flow rate of solution in the adsorption cycle was 375 mL/hr and 250 mL/hr in the elution cycles of molybdenum and rhenium using 2 N NaOH and 0.2 N NH    In order to calculate the thickness of the boundary layer, the flow rate of the solution should be determined:  To determine the rate controlling step, Helfferich number ( For determining Helfferich number, Diffusion coefficients in solution are ( Since all anions have a single electrical charge, molar concentrations can be replaced with ionic fraction. So: For both adsorption and elution cycles the value of The effective diffusivity in resin for the adsorption and elution cycles are 5.1 By substitution of Helfferich number for both the adsorption and elution cycles is greater than 1 so according to To calculate mass transfer coefficient in liquid film,if  To calculate By using the calculations of Experimental values of breakthrough time are presented beside the theoretically calculated times using empirical factor It can be seen that there is a greater difference between experimental and calculated predicted values in the elution cycle than in the adsorption cycle. One reason for this error arises from the calculation of thiocyanate concentration in the eluate solution according to the concentrations of rhenium and molybdenum. It was assumed that molybdenum and other ions were removed by the NaOH solution before the elution of rhenium-- but in reality the ion exchanger was not free from these ions, so their elution magnifies the error. According to Impure rhenium and molybdenum bearing solutions were passed through a column of Varian strong base anionic resin and selective separation of rhenium and molybdenum ions from the solution was successfully done. Batch experiments showed that the equilibrium in both adsorption and elution was favorable. At the specific condition that column experiments was performed, the rate controlling mechanism was the diffusion in the liquid film which was determined by calculating the Helfferich's number. Empirical mathematical equations can be established that predict breakthrough curves.