We investigated the charge transport property of DAlq3 within the framework of the charge hopping model. The reorganization energies and charge transfer integrals of DAlq3 were calculated by density functional theory (DFT). The theoretical calculation shows that the reorganization energies of DAlq3 are smaller both for electron and hole than that of Alq3. The charge transfer integral of DAlq3 for electron transfer is larger than that of Alq3. This explains why DAlq3 has better electron transporting property and then higher EL efficiency than Alq3, which is agreement with experimental observations. The charge transfer integral is a more crucial parameter affecting the charge transfer properties of DAlq3 than the reorganization energy just as Alq3. Additionally, the electron affinity (EA) and ionization potential (IP) were also calculated. Compared with Alq3, the larger EA and smaller IP of DAlq3 implied that it is more favorable for electron transport than Alq3.Since the first discovery of organic light-emitting diode (OLED) by Tang and Vanslyke Generally speaking, there are two widely used theories for describing the charge mobilities: the band model and hopping model. The band model is usually suitable for inorganic semiconductors where the interaction between the neighbor sites is through strong valence bonds and the room temperature mobility is far bigger than 1 The charge hopping rate To investigate the electron transport property of DAlq The optimized geometrical structures of The structure modifications upon oxidation and reduction occur mainly in the Al–O and Al–N bond lengths and the Al bond angles for DAlq Since the frontier molecular orbitals play a important role in charge transport, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) were calculated for Alq To obtain the reorganization energies For Alq The ionization potential (IP) includes vertical ionization potential (IP The IP and EA can provides additionally insight into electron and hole transport in viewpoints of thermodynamic stability and injection barrier of charge. The larger EA of DAlq The relative position of the neighboring pairs of molecules in the hopping complexes is necessary for calculating charge transfer integral of DAlq The geometrical structure of We thank the Key Laboratory of Coal Science & Technology (Taiyuan University of Technology), Ministry of Education, for the software. This research work was financially supported by State Basic Research Development Program of China (973 program) (Grant No.2004CB217808), National Natural Scientific Foundation of China (20471041, 20671068), Key Project of National Natural Science Foundation of China (90306014), Key Program of Science and Technology of Ministry of Education (207015), Shanxi Scientific Research Foundation for Returned Scholars (200523), Scientific and Technological Key Project of Shanxi(2006031121),and Scientific and Technological Research Program of Taiyuan City(07020401).