Detection of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) using non-selective sensor requires an array of multiplexed sensors followed by pattern recognition approach. Based on this concept, we compare three different approaches for selective detection of ethanol, ammonia, toluene, acetone and chloroform at different concentrations using non-selective sensors which are: (a) an array of sensors operated at a fixed temperature (hybrid class sensors), (b) operating one sensor at different temperatures (mono-class sensors), and (c) operating all sensors in an array at different temperatures (hybrid and mono-class sensors). Contrary to common practice of using sensors with partially overlapping response patterns (hybrid class sensors) in an array, we demonstrate that even one type of sensors (mono-class sensors) operated at different temperatures can be used for the selective detection of VOCs. It is further shown that an array consisting of hybrid and mono-class sensors each operated at different temperatures not only results in approaching 100% classification but also the quantified samples fall within 10% of error, which is an encouraging result.Selective detection of volatile organic compounds using chemical sensors is one of the open challenges in chemical sensing. Practically most chemical sensors suffer from the problem of cross sensitivity. Common practice to minimize this problem is by tailoring the material properties. In a situation where sensors have cross-sensitivity with other chemicals one of the interesting ways to improve their selectivity is to use them in the form of an array A rule of thumb for the performance of an array in selective detection of test VOCs is “larger the array size, better is the selectivity” Even under these constraints it is possible to realize high-density array by having an array of mono-class sensors operated at different conditions along with hybrid class sensors. Mono-class sensor array consists of the same type of sensors, whereas, hybrid class sensors constitute an array of different types of sensors made of different materials. Recent investigations have shown that gas solid interactions, being highly temperature dependent, even a small change in operating temperature of sensor results in large shift in sensor response In order to show the capability of the mono-class sensors and hybrid class sensors in VOC identification, systematic experiments were performed by exposing the gas sensors to different laboratory chemicals at different flow rates and operating conditions using an automated test-bed developed in our laboratory. Three different problems (case of mono-class sensors, case of hybrid class sensors, and case of and hybrid and mono-class sensors) were formulated, using an illustrative example, for the identification and quantification of test VOCs. Principal component analysis (PCA) was then used to evaluate the suitability of the data sets and selecting the features for each of the test case for further neural network (NN) analysis. Finally, using the selected features/components as input variables to neural network classification approaching 100% was achieved while the quantified samples fall within 10% of error. Four different types of Taguchi sensors (TGS821, TGS826, TGS2611, TGS2620) operated at different temperatures were selected for experimentation. Sensors were characterized by exposing them to different flow rates and concentrations of ethanol (C Experimental set-up used for the sensor characterization is shown in Three exposure sequences consisting of 20, 30 and 40 Response patterns generated from the array exposed to the test VOCs were examined to check their suitability for the identification. TGS sensors being responsive to more than one vapor, it was found that when a sensor is exposed to varying concentration of test VOCs at a given temperature, it results in number of ambiguities. For example, the plot shown in Operation of these sensors at different temperatures is one such option that can be exploited in the construction of an array with overlapping sensitivity as illustrated in Further, by considering the combined response of TGS2620 at 5 With this view, we formulated three case studies: (A) an array of different type of sensors (hybrid class sensors) operated at a fixed temperature, (B) an array of same type of sensors (mono-class sensors) operated at different temperatures, and (C) an array of hybrid and mono-class sensors each operated at different temperatures, to evaluate their performance in the identification and quantification of the selected test vapors. For the analysis of array response, steady state data were collected. In order to evaluate the suitability of data sets response of sensors generated at 10, 20 and 30 PCA, a supervised pattern recognition technique, is extremely useful in understanding the distribution of objects in the area of chemical sensing and explaining how much and why they differ  Loading plots of the principal components in Group A: Group B: TGS826 (2 Group C: TGS2611 (2 Although the PCA is powerful tool for discriminating responses, it does not help to identify the gas. It is merely a clustering technique Backpropagation trained feed-forward neural network To test the VOCs sensitivity matrices generated in Section The arguments given in Section Same as in identification, different neural networks were built for hybrid class sensors, mono-class sensors, and hybrid and mono-class sensors for the quantification of test VOCs. For each of these cases, three different neural network architectures corresponding to the input features that include response of all the sensors in array and the features selected/transformed on the basis of principal component analysis were investigated to achieve best result. Output layer consists of only one node, output of which determines the concentration of test vapor. Number of nodes in hidden layers was fixed by trials. Training and test data matrices were prepared in the same way as described in previous section except the output vector, which varies between 0 and 1 in the present case, corresponding to the normalized concentrations. As far as training and test sessions are concerned, the procedure used was exactly the same as adopted in identification of VOCs. From the quantification results presented in the scatter plots of The selective detection of VOCs requires use of an array of sensors with partially over lapping sensitivities normally achieved by varying the properties of the sensing material. Such an array can also be realized by the way one excites them. Interaction of gas and solid being highly temperature dependent, operation of a sensor at different temperatures results in the differential response patterns analogous to an array of sensors made of different materials, and hence they can be exploited in selectivity enhancement as has been shown in this work. By combining an array of sensors made of different materials (hybrid class sensors) with an array of mono-class sensors in which a sensor made of same material is repeated several times but operated at different temperatures, selectivity of the array can be improved substantially. One of the direct implications of the array consisting of hybrid and mono-class sensors is in the construction of integrated array, which is a challenging task due to technological problem in patterning multiple materials on a single substrate. However, with this scheme one can, of course, realize high-density array but achieving different operating temperatures zones on a single substrate is an obvious question. This requires heater with special geometry that produces varying temperature zones and the substrate on which array is constructed must have high temperature coefficient for rapid heat transfer. This work was supported primarily by the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative of the National Science Foundation under NSF Award Number EEC-0118025.