Background
                  Failure to achieve stable fixation with medial support in proximal humeral fractures can result in varus malalignment and cut-through of the proximal screws. The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of an intramedullary fibula bone graft on the biomechanical properties of proximal humeral fractures stabilized by angular stable plate fixation in a bone model under cyclic loading.
               
                  Methods
                  Two fixation techniques were tested in 20 composite analog humeri models. In group F– (n = 10), fractures were fixed by an anatomically formed locking plate system. In group F+ (n = 10), the same fixation system was used with an additional fibular graft model with a length of 6 cm inserted in an intramedullary manner. Active abduction was simulated for 400 cycles by use of a recently established testing setup. Fragment gap distance was measured, and thereby, intercyclic motion, fragment migration, and residual plastic deformation were determined.
               
                  Results
                  The addition of a fibular graft to the fixation plate led to 5 times lower intercyclic motion, 2 times lower fragment migration, and 2 times less residual plastic deformation. Neither screw pullout, cut-through, nor implant failure was observed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Medial support with an intramedullary fibular graft in an angular stable fixation of the proximal humerus in vitro increases overall stiffness of the bone-implant construct and reduces migration of the humeral head fragment. This technique might provide a useful tool in the treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures, especially when there is medial comminution.Surgery of displaced fractures of the proximal humerus is technically demanding. A stable fixation can be very difficult to obtain, especially if the bone stock is reduced by osteoporosis. These fixation systems are able to stabilize fracture fragments without the need for friction between the plate and bone. Because of the vascular and neural anatomy surrounding the rotator cuff insertions and the biceps tendon, Failure to achieve stable fixation with medial support can thus result in varus malalignment followed by cut-through of the proximal screws, with a dramatic effect on shoulder joint function and consequent pain, eventually requiring revision. Even when calcar screws are used, screw penetration rates still range from 6% to 8%. The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of an intramedullary fibula bone graft on the biomechanical properties of proximal humeral fractures stabilized by angular stable plate fixation in a bone model under cyclic loading. Two fixation techniques were tested on 20 composite analog humerus models (Osteoporotic Humerus; Synbone, Malans, Switzerland). These bone surrogates comprised an osteoporotic-like trabecular network inside a rigid layer replicating cortical bone. A fracture with a metaphyseal comminution zone was simulated by removing a 10-mm section at the base of the greater tuberosity ( In group F– (n = 10), fractures were fixed by an anatomically formed locking plate system (Philos; Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) in a conventional mode. Proximally locked 3.5-mm screws were placed at plate levels A (2 × 40 mm), C (anterior, 38 mm; posterior, 40 mm), and E (2 × 45 mm, “calcar screws”) according to the manufacturer’s manual. For the shaft, 1 conventional cortical 3.5-mm screw (34 mm, level F) and 2 locked screws (32 mm, levels G and H) were used. In group F+ (n = 10), the same fixation system was used with an additional 6-cm-long fibular graft model (Fibula Left; Synbone). This was inserted in an intramedullary manner as previously described, The shoulder testing device simulated a fixed scapula and a humerus activated by muscular tension ( An increasing force-controlled profile from 50 N to a maximum of 125 N for SSP and DELT each induced active glenohumeral abduction. These muscular forces resulted in an abduction movement from approximately 45° to 60° while lifting a simulated arm weight of 3.75 kg. This weight was attached at the center of gravity of the arm, approximately 75% distally to the humeral rotation center with respect to total humeral length. The joint position obtained with a 50-N SSP and DELT tensile load was defined as the initial starting position of the humerus. Muscular forces of the infraspinatus/teres minor and subscapularis muscle were simulated by constant loads of 25 N each ( The vertical speed of the machine actuator of 300 mm/min induced an abduction speed of the humerus of approximately 5°/s. In total, 400 loading cycles were performed for each sample. The fragment gap distance was measured during abduction movement from 45° to 60° by means of an inductive sensor (BAW M18; Balluff Sensortechnik, Dietikon, Switzerland) ( Intercyclic motion (in millimeters)—the fragment gap amplitude within 1 loading cycle from 45° of abduction to 60° of abduction (stiffness of the construction); these data were determined at 100, 200, 300, and 400 cycles Fragment migration (in millimeters)—the change in the fragment gap distance during cyclic testing in the loaded condition Residual fragment gap deformation (∆d) (in millimeters)—the difference in fragment gap distance before and after 400 loading cycles in the unloaded condition (plastic deformation) Statistical analysis of residual fragment gap deformation, intercyclic motion, and overall fragment migration was done by use of the Student A post hoc power analysis for comparing change in fragment gap distance (alpha error: .05) was calculated by use of PS Power and Sample Size Calculations (version 3.0 The fragment gap amplitude within 1 loading cycle was about 3 times higher in group F– than in group F+ when compared at 100 cycles ( The change in fragment gap distance during cyclic testing in the loaded condition was about 2 times higher in group F– than in group F+ ( The remaining deformation after 400 loading cycles in the unloaded condition (plastic deformation) in group F– was almost twice as much as the fibula design ( Neither pullout or cut-through of the screws nor implant breakage or loosening of the screws out of the plate was observed. The fixation of displaced proximal humeral fractures with locked angular implants is still associated with high complication rates. In particular, varus deformation sometimes resulting in the cut-through of the proximal screws is observed frequently. The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of an intramedullary fibula bone graft on the biomechanical properties of proximal humeral fractures stabilized by angular stable plate fixation in a bone model under cyclic loading. Our study showed significantly lower intercyclic fragment motion, lower overall fragment motion, and a lower residual gap distance deformation after 400 cycles of loading for the group with the fibular graft when compared with the conventional technique. In both groups, half of the overall fragment migration was already reached after approximately 20 loading cycles, comparable with data published previously for non-augmented fracture models. In addition, our data are consistent with a previous study loading the humerus in bending, where higher stiffness and higher failure loads were shown for an angular stable fixation of a proximal humeral fracture augmented with a fibular graft. To date, there exists no standard in biomechanical testing of proximal humeral fractures. Generally, the humerus was tested in nonphysiologic bending, axial compression, or torsion and with large variations in applied external loads or a large number of cycles. Bone models have material properties differing from real bone. However, their use allows the avoidance of intersample variability in anatomy or bone quality as a result of age, sex, nutrition, race, or predominant side. To avoid cut-through The need for immediate postoperative stability is clear and may partially be achieved by medial impaction or proper cortex-to-cortex reduction. However, especially if there is a large defect zone with medial comminution, it may be difficult to yield sufficient initial stability solely by medial impaction or, according to our results, the use of calcar screws. Other solutions for strengthening the medial support such as compound osteosynthesis with bone cement can be considered. Yet, osseous grafts implicate a good bone stock for a subsequent endoprosthetic replacement in case of post-traumatic osteoarthritis of the shoulder. In a preliminary clinical trial, the surgical procedure of implanting a fibular graft in an intramedullary manner has been described and found to be safe in a preliminary case series of 7 patients. In comparison to the standard technique, the medial support with an intramedullary fibular graft in angular stable fixation of the proximal humerus in vitro remarkably increases overall stiffness of the bone-implant construct and reduces migration of the humeral head fragment. This technique might provide a useful tool in the treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures, especially in case of medial comminution. We thank Synthes (Oberdorf, Switzerland) for donating the plates and screws that were used for this study. We also thank b-cube AG (Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland) for providing their micro–computed tomography scanner to create This study was financially supported by the RMS Foundation (Bettlach, Switzerland) (project E1 0_0001). The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.