Enrichment of food products with beneficial Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB) is an important methodology used to develop functional food products. Lactobacillus reuteri E81 was successfully nanoencapsulated into poly (vinyl alcohol)-based nanofibers for its application to the surface of fish fillets. The Scanning Electron Microscopy analysis confirmed the nanoencapsulation of L. reuteri E81 in electrospun nanofibers (LRNF) that had an average diameter of 381.83 ± 130.69 nm. LAB growth in rainbow trout fillets and fatty fish (mackerel) and were found to be 2.92 and in the range of 3.27 and 2.66 log CFU/g, respectively. Importantly, the antioxidative characteristics of fish fillets significantly increased following their coating with LRNF. The results revealed a significant increase in the inhibition of free radicals in the samples treated with nanoencapsulated L. reuteri as compared to control group fish fillet samples. DPPH activity significantly increased to 40.24%, 44.96%, 44.97 in mackerel samples treated with nanoencapsulated L. reuteri (MLR) and increased to 19.76%, 20.87%, 21.46% in rainbow samples treated with nanoencapsulated L. reuteri (RLR). MLR samples exhibited the highest ABTS radical-scavenging activity (1631 μmol TEAC/g). FRAP value of MLR samples was found to be 1.70 times higher than the control group samples.Fish meat is a well-known nutritional food source for the human diet ( One of the important probiotic bacteria is All chemicals used were of analytical grade. 2,2-diphenylpcrylhydrazyl (DPPH), 2,2-azinobis (3-ethylenebenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium salt (ABTS), 2,4,6-tripyridyl-  The morphology of nanoencapsulated The zeta potential measurements of the nanofibers were carried out in phosphate-buffer solution by a disposable folded capillary cell containing electrodes. The capillary cell was put in a temperature controlled holder at 25 °C. The average value of zeta potential obtained from measurement of three, was recorded to be “mV”, using a ZetaSizer of Malvern Instruments Corp. (Worcestershire, U.K.). About 1 g nanofiber containing LAB numbers in fish fillets were counted by preparing serial dilutions from each application in PBS and plating to MRS agar which was incubated at 37 °C for 24 h ( The method proposed by DPPH radical-scavenging activity test was used to determine the antioxidant activity ( ABTS assay was performed according to the method described by The FRAP assay was performed using the method of JMP software (Version 9.0.2. SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina-USA) was used to evaluate statistical differences. One way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by least significant difference (LSD) post-test was applied to reveal significant differences (p < 0.05) between the control and the fish (rainbow trout and mackerel) fillets treated with This study aimed to produce probiotic-loaded nanofibers to test their efficiency in fish fillets with regards to improving the functional characteristics of the fish fillets. At first, we tested the successful production of the nanofiber (NF) and To reveal the stability of the NP and LRNF, we determined the zeta potential values and these values were found to be −2.91 mV and −4.1 mV for NP and LRNF, respectively. Loading L. After nanoencapsulation of LAB in fish fillets is disregarded due to the low percentage of sugars, the high content of low molecular weight nitrogenous molecules, and the rapid growth of pH-sensitive psychrotolerant marine Gram-negative bacteria like Fish is one of the most healthy food sources that is widely used in most food industries. With this study, functional properties were successfully provided for fillets using a natural nanomaterial having a larger contact area. In addition, the raw fish flesh having a functional property may be used in the marinated fish industry or for cold smoked fish, and lightly processed fish products like gravlax. Therefore, the use of LRNF in the fisheries industry will provide extra benefit for human health. As antioxidant activity assays are affected by several factors such as the type of food, chemical and physical state of food, food components etc., there is a requirement by different assays to determine antioxidant activity of foods ( The DPPH radical scavenging, ABTS radical-scavenging and FRAP values of control group samples and the fish fillets treated with nanoencapulated On the 2nd day of storage, ABTS radical-scavenging activity of samples ranged from 617 to 1631 μmol TEAC/g. MLR exhibited the highest ABTS radical-scavenging activity (1631 μmol TEAC/g) (p < 0.05). It was followed by RLR (901 μmol TEAC/g), MC (710 μmol TEAC/g) and RC (617 μmol TEAC/g), respectively. While the highest ABTS radical-scavenging activity were obtained in mackerel fish fillets treated with nanoencapulated On the 2nd day of storage, the FRAP values of samples were 2.63–16.32 μM TE/g. While FRAP value of MLR was 1.70 times higher than MC, FRAP value of RLR was 1.58 times higher than RC. FRAP value of all samples decreased gradually towards the end of storage days. During the storage period, the highest FRAP value was observed in MLR samples treated with nanoencapsulated Our results revealed that nanoencapsulated Food-derived peptides have antimicrobial properties and antioxidant activities. Many peptides found in the animal or plant are called bioactive peptide due to the fact that they exhibit antioxidant activity and have regulatory functions ( The antioxidant activity is widely enhanced by enzymatic hydrolysis of peptides. These peptides can be released  This study reported the successful fabrication of This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.