It is essential to objectively evaluate the many CO2 mitigation strategies in order to prioritize investments of capital and research. Aqueous CO2 mineralization is one potential strategy to permanently sequester CO2, without the associated long-term monitoring and liability issues. Investigators are studying and optimizing aqueous CO2 mineralization for the production of inorganic carbonates and are scaling up some of these processes. This paper adopts a life-cycle approach toward the evaluation of energy requirements and discusses other potential barriers for three CO2 mineralization pathways: industrial caustics, naturally occurring minerals, and industrial wastes. This analysis is based on CO2 capture from a 1GW coal-fired power plant using one of the three mineral mineralization pathways. The investigators utilize consistent system boundaries and process-modeling assumptions, standard engineering calculations to estimate energy requirements, and publicly available data for upstream energy requirements and for the production of products/co-products. The results suggest that some industrial wastes show promise for CO2 mineralization, but their availability is limited. The other pathways currently have large energy penalties and face other significant barriers, such as the production of large quantities of potentially hazardous waste and large-scale mining.The United States (US) produced 5839 million tonnes CO Several research groups are studying and optimizing aqueous-phase CO Given the variety of options for mitigating CO Two CO Reactions (1)–(3) are exothermic and proceed rapidly to completion. However, they both rely on sodium hydroxide, which is produced by the energy-intensive chlor-alkali reaction process: Naturally occurring mineral silicates are another pathway to CO A number of industrial wastes contain significant fractions of reactive metal oxides, in particular CaO and MgO, that will react to form mineral carbonates as in the following example: The following analysis is intended to provide bounds for energy use and is based on publicly available data. The basis for this evaluation is a theoretical 1 The evaluation includes major energy-consuming processes for each pathway, such as separation of CO  One challenge for the evaluation of this pathway is the allocation of energy requirements between sodium hydroxide and the three potential co-products from the chlor-alkali process: hydrogen, chlorine, and hydrochloric acid. This can done on a monetary value basis ( The lower bound of energy required to produce sodium hydroxide is based on a Gibbs free energy minimum work calculation and the allocation of energy between sodium hydroxide, chlorine, hydrogen, and hydrochloric acid (see Alternatively, the hydrogen and chlorine gas can react to form hydrochloric acid and produce energy: For sodium hydroxide production, the upper bound of the life-cycle energy requirement is 6.9 The same procedure is applied to estimate the energy requirements for the production of sodium bicarbonate to produce sodium hydroxide ( The brine flowrate is another key factor in the evaluation of this pathway. It affects the energy requirements for mixing and pumping as well as the size of process equipment. The required brine flowrate is based on the concentration of alkali-earth ions (Ca Drying of the carbonate product is assumed to utilize low-grade heat from the power plant and to require no additional energy. The energy value for calcium/magnesium carbonates produced via this pathway is estimated at 0.073 Drying of the sodium bicarbonate product is also assumed to utilize low-grade heat from the power plant. In order to assess the value of the sodium bicarbonate product, one can consider its manufacturing process. Sodium bicarbonate is commonly produced in conjunction with soda ash. In the US, soda ash and sodium bicarbonate are typically produced from natural sources, and in Europe and Asia the Solvay process is typically employed. The lower-bound energy value for this product is estimated using a minimum work calculation for sodium bicarbonate production by the Solvay process (  For the same process conditions, our estimates of energy requirements for compression, pumping and heating agree within 10% of Huijgen's results ( To facilitate comparison of this pathway with other pathways, we included two potentially significant process steps, CO Although numerous industrial wastes have been proposed for CO The conditions are based on the work of The estimates are based upon the recent pilot study of CO  The net energy penalty for producing the sodium bicarbonate product via the industrial caustic pathway ranges from 45% to 78%. The main difference between the lower and upper bound energy requirement is the sodium hydroxide production estimate, with the lower estimate based on the minimum work calculation ( The production of calcium/magnesium carbonates via the industrial caustic pathway has a large energy penalty, greater than 90% using a minimum-work calculation for sodium hydroxide production and a brine concentration corresponding to that in the Dead Sea. The upper-bound energy requirement bound is based on publicly available life-cycle energy requirements for sodium hydroxide production (  The two wastes included in this analysis use quiet different process to achieve mineralization and illustrate the wide range of energy penalties. The Fe slag is ground and reacts with CO The CO The energy balance for the production of sodium bicarbonate is more favorable (45–78% penalty) than that for the production of calcium or magnesium carbonates (90–100+% penalty), primarily because sodium bicarbonate requires half the amount of sodium hydroxide (or other industrial caustics) compared to calcium or magnesium carbonates. The production of sodium hydroxide is the main contributor to the energy penalty for this pathway. It is also possible that the production of calcium or magnesium carbonates could yield materials with cementitious properties ( In addition, the brine source can play a significant role in the energy required for pumping and mixing. A brine with high concentrations of calcium and magnesium ions, such as the Dead Sea, would be more suitable than a brine with calcium and magnesium ion concentrations in the range of sea water. As discussed in the approach section, the widespread adoption of this pathway would also result in the generation of large quantities of chlorine or hydrochloric acid wastes. For example, coal-fired power plants in the US generate 2125 million tonne/yr CO In summary, because the lower bound energy penalty is at least 45% and because of the chlorine/hydrochloric acid waste generation, the production of sodium bicarbonate via this pathway is only potentially viable on a small scale unless another source of alkalinity is available.  In addition to the energy requirements, the mining of the mineral silicates is another potential barrier to the adoption of this pathway on a wide scale. Each tonne of CO Because this pathway has only received attention relatively recently and has only been studied at the laboratory scale, room for improvement exists. For example, recent studies, such as those by This pathway requires process improvements to reduce the energy penalty before it could be considered feasible. In their cost evaluations of aqueous mineral carbonation,  The use of fly ash for CO The mineralization of CO  One challenge associated with using fly ash to mineralize CO Other wastes show promise but need further study and optimization. Huntzinger et al. (2006) experimentally evaluated the mineral carbonation of cement kiln dust with the flue gas from a cement kiln and obtained 60% carbonation. Their process would have low energy requirements because it takes place at ambient temperatures and pressures, but their residence time (8 In addition to the need for study and optimization, the greatest challenge to the adoption of this pathway is the availability of wastes containing reactive oxides ( The waste pathway may offer additional benefits including pH reduction, thereby converting some caustic hazardous waste to a non-hazardous classification, modification of material properties, and reduction of the potential for metals leaching from wastes ( The challenge for the adoption of ex situ CO The naturally occurring mineral pathway would need to be optimized to become more energy efficient in order for this process to become feasible. The energy penalties for grinding and for CO This research was sponsored by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 