Background
                  To date, there is a lack of consensus regarding surgical treatment recommendations for complex proximal humerus fracture (PHF) patterns, especially between joint preservation and joint replacement techniques.
               
                  Methods
                  Between 2012 and 2017, 146 patients (aged 74.1 ± 8.0 years) with complex PHF were treated with locking plates (open reduction-internal fixation [ORIF]) or reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA). Complications and unplanned revision surgery were recorded in a mid-term follow-up. Potential patient and surgical risk factors for complications were extracted. Univariate and multivariate analyses were conducted.
               
                  Results
                  Follow-up data were available for 125 patients, 66 (52.8%) of whom were treated with locking plates, and 59 (41.2%) with RTSA. Both groups had comparable Charlson indices. The overall complication rate was 37.8% for ORIF and 22.0% for RTSA, with a revision rate of 12.1% and 5.1%, respectively, as driven primarily by persistent motion deficits. Multivariate analyses demonstrated no significant differences between the 2 procedures (P = .500). However, age was an independent protective factor against overall complications (P = .018). Risk factors for major complications in ORIF included osteoporosis, varus impaction fractures, posteromedial metaphyseal extensions <8 mm, head-shaft displacements >4 mm, and multifragmentary greater tuberosities. For RTSA, higher complication rates were seen in patients with higher Charlson indices, diabetes, or altered (greater) tuberosities. In contrast, Neer’s classification system was not predictive in either group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  RTSA led to fewer complications than ORIF and thus can be considered a valuable option in complex PHF of the elderly. Paying attention to specific prognostic factors may help to reduce the complication rate.Proximal humeral fractures account for approximately 6% of all adult fractures and are the third most common fracture seen in patients over 60 years of age. However, complications, such as scapular notching, hematoma, postoperative infection, glenoid loosening, and persistent instability, remain high and can be seen in up to 68% of the cases. To improve the preoperative decision making, the current study was designed to evaluate which surgical procedure (angular-stable plating or RTSA) leads to lower complication and revision rates, and to determine possible independent risk factors in an elderly population. This is a retrospective study of the outcomes of surgical management of complex fractures of the proximal humerus in the elderly. Patients were selected by searching the clinic’s patient management system (medico by Cerner Health Services GmbH, Idstein, Germany) of 1 level-I trauma center from 2011 to 2017 for all proximal humeral fractures, using the code S42.0 of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Edition. Data from all patients ≥60 years of age were analyzed, and those treated surgically by plate osteosynthesis or reverse shoulder prosthesis were identified. Ipsilateral injuries to the affected extremities were not exclusion criteria. Plain radiographs and CT scans were reviewed by 2 orthopedic surgeons to identify 3- and 4-part fractures, head splits, and dislocation fractures defined by Neer for inclusion in the groups. The choice for the treatment method was based on individual criteria for every patient taking not only the actual age or fracture type, alone, but also a variety of different criteria, for example, biological age or functional demands of the patient into consideration. All surgeries were performed by 1 of 4 experienced shoulder surgeons in a beach chair position under general anesthesia with preoperative single-shot antimicrobial prophylaxis using cefuroxime. A standard deltopectoral approach was used to enter the shoulder joint. The fracture was exposed, and the tuberosities were identified and grasped with No. 5 FiberWire sutures (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA), if possible. The following implant systems were used: Reverse Shoulder Prosthesis (Delta Xtend, Depuy, Warsaw, IN, USA) ( In case of RTSA, the glenoid was minimally reamed to conserve as much subchondral bone as possible. Then the glenoid baseplate was placed inferiorly on the glenoid with an inferior tilt to minimize scapular notching. After removal of the head fragments and preparation of the proximal humerus, a cemented stem was implanted at between 10° and 20° of retroversion to avoid tension on the greater tuberosity during internal rotation. Tension of the glenohumeral joint was considered ideal if the tip of the surgeon’s fifth finger could pass between the trial glenosphere and the polyethylene. Finally, when possible, both tuberosities were reattached anatomically to the prosthesis and the humeral metaphysis with sutures. In case of ORIF, reduction was done under biplanar fluoroscopic control using temporary fixation with K-wires as needed. An angular stable plate was then chosen and positioned on the humeral bone so as to avoid impingement under the acromion. Screws were used as needed, including 2 inferomedial calcar screws. In all fractures, the tuberosities were reattached with additional FiberWire (Arthrex) cerclages knotted against the plate or additional screws in large fragments. No bone grafts or cement augmentation was used to support the fixation. Postoperatively, RTSA patients had to wear a protective sling and were treated with passive external and internal rotation and active-assisted elevation exercises for 6 weeks. ORIF patients began physiotherapy with active (without weight-bearing)/active-assisted and passive flexion/extension exercises on the first postoperative day for the first 6 weeks. No limitation in arc of motion was advised. Depending on the radiographic findings after 6 weeks, patients were then allowed to increase weight-bearing to full load. The medical records were reviewed for demographic characteristics, complications, and reoperations after at least 1 year of follow-up. The overall burden of comorbidities was compared between groups with the respective Charlson comorbidity indices. Complications were defined as adverse events directly related to the chosen treatment, and revision was defined as any subsequent surgical intervention related to the index procedure. We then differentiated between medical complications, such as pulmonary emboli or cardiac events, and operative complications that stemmed from the surgical site such as need for transfusions, wound complications, dislocations, avascular necrosis (AVN), or infections. According to Dindo et al, All available radiographs were evaluated. In RTSA, implant position, inferior scapular notching, signs of loosening, and greater tuberosity healing were analyzed radiographically on standardized anteroposterior and axillary lateral radiographs at the final follow-up. Scapular notching was classified according to Sirveaux et al, For ORIF, follow-up radiographs were evaluated for successful union, loss of reduction and fixation, intra-articular screw perforation, AVN (graded according to Cruess The statistical analysis was performed using IBM software (SPSS version 21; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). To determine the differences between ORIF and RTSA, categorical variables were compared using χ Between 2012 and 2017, 146 subjects met the inclusion criteria for this study, and a complete radiological and clinical data set including a follow-up period of at least 1 year was available for 125 cases, of whom 66 (45 females and 21 males) were treated by angular-stable plating (mean follow-up, 5.1 ± 1.9 years) and 59 (53 females and 6 males) by RTSA (mean follow-up, 3.5 ± 1.3 years). The average patient age was 74.1 years, with RTSA patients being older than the ORIF patients ( All injuries were solitary lesions to the proximal humerus, but in 4 cases, a concomitant injury to the ipsilateral extremity (elbow, forearm) was seen. According to Neer’s classification system, 24 fractures were classified as 3-part (19.2%) and 73 (58.4%) were classified as 4-part fractures. A head split was seen in 25 cases (20%), and in 3 cases (2.4%), an anterior dislocation-fracture was apparent. Both groups showed no significant differences in common comorbidities as well as in the Charlson index ( The mean operation time was 140 ± 34 minutes for RTSA and 92 ± 31 minutes for ORIF. Postsurgical radiographic controls documented an anatomic reduction of the tuberosities and a correct restoration of the head-shaft angle (average, 135.4°; standard deviation, 9.7°) in all cases. During the follow-up period, a bony union was achieved in 65 of 66 patients with no signs of posttraumatic osteoarthritis on the final follow-up radiographs. However, superior migration of the greater tuberosity was documented in 4 cases, with 1 case of complete loss of fixation and a subsequent varus collapse during the first year. Overall, we saw complications in approximately 37.8% of the cases, of which 12.1% required a surgical revision, including early hardware removal and arthrolysis. The primary cause of these complications was a persistent motion deficit seen in 25.8% of all patients and accounting for 62.5% of all revision procedures. Avascular necrosis of the humeral head (4 stage II, 2 stage III) was found in 6 cases (9%), 2 of which were revised for associated screw perforation. In 1 patient, a peri-implant infection with In the multivariate regression model, several independent variables associated with negative outcomes could be identified ( Major postoperative complications were reported in 13 cases (22.0%), of which 3 were treated by surgical revision (5%). These reoperations included open reduction for dislocation of RTSA, débridement and irrigation for infection, and open arthrolysis of adhesions for intractable stiffness. Persistent motion deficits and instability (n = 3) were seen in 15% of all cases (n = 9), and postoperative axillary nerve lesions were evident in 2 patients. During the follow-up period, no loosened glenoid baseplates or humeral stems were detected, although in 7 patients a discrete (grade I) scapular notching and in another 2 patients radiolucent areas occurred in zones 1 and 7. Furthermore, we documented 2 cases of a pulmonary embolism and 1 case of postoperative anemia requiring a blood transfusion. The multivariate model revealed a higher risk for complications in patients with diabetes or a higher Charlson index, whereas, in contrast, increased age was associated with a decreased risk ( After defining treatment-specific risk factors, we then ran a multivariate logistic regression analysis, containing age, gender, fracture classification, BMI, Charlson index, and the treatment method to determine independent risk factors for overall complications ( The treatment of PHF in the elderly presents major challenges for the treating surgeon. Although no significant differences between surgical and nonoperative treatment have been reported in the recent literature, Surgical treatment options include ORIF, HA, and RTSA, but conflicting data exist on complication rates for these options. In our study, we analyzed the complication and revision rates of 125 consecutive elderly patients with a complex proximal humerus fracture undergoing surgical treatment either by locked plated osteosynthesis or by RTSA during 2011 and 2017 at a single-center institution. Although RTSA patients were substantially older and mostly female, the Charlson index between both groups showed no statistical difference. We identified postoperative shoulder stiffness and avascular humeral head necrosis as the 2 most common major complications after ORIF, with screw cut-out or complete loss of fixation described in only 3 cases. Similar complication rates have already been described by several authors. We identified several risk factors for complications including varus impaction, multifragmentary greater tuberosity, posteromedial metaphyseal extension under 8 mm, a preoperative head-shaft a-p displacement greater than 4 mm, and an insufficiently reconstructed medial hinge. These findings are consistent with the current literature. In a study of 252 patients, Jung et al In 2004, Hertel et al Interestingly, in contrast to prior studies, Although several patient-derived risk factors (eg, age, smoking, steroid use, and diabetes) have been described in the recent literature, The most common complications were instability and intractable shoulder stiffness during follow-up, leading to an overall major complication rate of 22% and a revision rate of approximately 5%. These findings reflect the current literature, which reports complication rates ranging from 4.8% to 68% and revision rates mostly under 10%. Several patient-dependent variables for adverse outcomes after RTSA have been described in the literature. Farng et al In contrast to that, our multivariate analysis revealed a protective effect of age on the complication rate in the RTSA group, confirming the report of Villacis et al. Although union of the tuberosities and function of the rotator cuff are not as important in patients treated with RTSA, in contrast to hemiarthroplasty, we could demonstrate a significant reliance of the complication rate on the state of the tuberosities. We tried to reattach both tuberosities and can confirm that either resection (n = 14) or resorption (n = 7) of the greater tuberosity was associated with a higher risk of dislocation and prolonged motion deficits, consistent with the current literature. Gallinet et al To date, only few data exist regarding a comparison of ORIF and RTSA in the context of PHF. In a large systematic review of 92 studies, Gupta et al In comparison, we detected higher overall major complication and revision rates for both procedures. However, in contrast to the previously mentioned study, we included only elderly patients with complex fracture types, who usually have a greater risk for postoperative complications and additionally classified persisting painful motion deficits as major complications, because of their high relevance for each patient. If motion deficits were excluded, the major complication rates decreased to 12.1% (ORIF) and 11.8% (RTSA), respectively. In 2016, Cvetanovich et al In contrast to that, Neuhaus et al Although we did not assess functional outcomes in this study, some authors demonstrated that RTSA could also lead to better clinical results, especially in the elderly population. In a matched-pair analysis, Chalmers et al Our study has some limitations. Because we analyzed a number of consecutive patients with rather rare fracture entities at a single-center institution, our study population has some heterogeneity with respect to age and gender. Furthermore, the choice of the treatment method was not based on hard criteria, like actual age or fracture type, alone, as a variety of different criteria, for example, biological age or functional demands of the patient may have influenced the surgeons’ decision. In addition, we did not include functional scores, except for AFE <90°, in our results as our focus was solely on complication and revision rates in the context of predictive factors. However, several larger studies have confirmed that the inability to achieve AFE >90° may limit the patient’s activities of daily living and could hamper independent living for some patients. Nevertheless, this study is one of only a few studies comparing the complication and revision rates of 2 concurrent surgical procedures for complex PHF in a population at risk. Treating complex fractures of the proximal humerus in the elderly remains challenging. ORIF with locking plates and RTSA are 2 commonly used procedures, with no clear guidelines to justify the recommendation of one over the other yet. In the present study, RTSA showed fewer complication and revision rates—although not statistically significant—compared with angular stable plating and it thus should be considered a viable option for treatment in these cases. Careful analysis of the individual characteristics of the patients and fractures are necessary to minimize complications and revision rates. In older patients, knowledge of possible negative predictive factors becomes crucial for choosing between joint conservation and arthroplasty. As shown in our study, older patients with a varus impaction fracture, multi-fragmentary tuberosities, head-shaft displacement >4 mm, or osteoporosis may benefit from a primary RTSA. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at 