The aim was to quantify medium term litter type and litter mixture effects on the translocation and transformation dynamics of root and leaf litter C during decomposition. Partitioning of 13C-labeled root or leaf litter C (beech – Fagus sylvatica L., ash – Fraxinus excelsior L.) to CO2, water-extractable organic C (WEOC), microbial biomass C (CMB) and light (LF) and heavy soil fraction (HF) was determined in a laboratory decomposition experiment of 206 days. The proportions of C mineralized from ash leaf (34%) and root litter (29%) were higher than those from beech leaf (24%) and root litter (23%). In mixture with beech, the mineralization of ash leaf litter was enhanced. Mineralization was positively correlated with litter-derived WEOC until day 29. Water-extractable organic C declined with time, until <0.1% of litter C remained in this fraction. Litter-C recovery in CMB was higher for ash (0.7–1.0%) than for beech (0.2–0.4%). The litter C recovery in HF (4–12%) was positively correlated with that in WEOC (days 9 and 29) and CMB, but did not differ between treatments. Ash leaf litter mineralization showed different behavior in mixed treatments from pure treatments. Thus, the ability to transfer results from pure to mixed treatments is limited. The litter differed in chemical composition and in mineralization dynamics, but differences in partitioning to HF, WEOC and MB were finally of minor importance.Temperate and boreal forests of the Northern hemisphere provide an important sink for atmospheric CO Most studies report slower decomposition of root litter than of respective leaf litter ( Few studies examined the patterns of translocation and transformation of leaf or root litter C in the course of decomposition ( Under natural conditions, often a mixture of litter from different species exists at one site. Several studies have found non-additive effects of leaf litter mixing on decomposition, most of them synergistic ( In the present study, we investigated the decomposition of Mineral soil was collected from a beech stand in Hainich National Park, Thuringia, Germany and consisted of about 50% each of Ah and Al horizon ( Young ash ( For the experiment, leaf litter and fine roots (in the following text also considered “litter”) of European beech ( The incubation experiment was carried out using an automated microcosm system ( The fractional abundance of litter-derived C ( Carbon dioxide concentrations in the air input (“in”) and exhaust air (“out”) of each microcosm (3 times a day) and of calibration gases (9 times a day) were measured continuously using an automated gas chromatographic system ( For the determination of labeled litter mineralization rates, the exhaust air from each microcosm was sampled in glass vials of 12 ml volume that were sealed with a rubber septum and a plastic lid, called “Labco Exetainers” (Labco Limited, Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom). The Exetainers were flushed with exhaust air from the microcosms for 30 min via two cannulas forming the air inlet and the air outlet ( The litter-derived CO To determine concentration of total and litter-derived WEOC, for each treatment six 300 ml Erlenmeyer flasks were filled with a mixture of 60 g soil and 0.5 g litter (cut into ∼1.5 cm pieces), i.e. the mixing ratio was identical with that of the microcosms. On days 9 and 29, three replicates of each treatment were destructively harvested from these Erlenmeyer flasks. On day 206 a subsample of the harvested microcosms was used for WEOC measurements. The soil-litter mixture was transferred into 200-ml polyethylene bottles. The bottles were then filled with 120 ml of cold (∼20 °C) H Microbial biomass C (C  The extracts from the CFE-analysis were freeze-dried (Christ Delta II, Osterode Harz, Germany). The salt was then measured for its δ In order to separate the heavy fraction (HF; organic matter associated with mineral surfaces) from the light fraction (LF; partly decomposed free and occluded particulate organic matter), a modification of the density fractionation method after In order to detect possible differences between treatments, an (1) ANOVA or an (2) ANOVA with repeated measures followed by a Tukey's HSD Test (p < 0.05) was conducted using Statistica 10.0 (StatSoft, Inc., 2010). In cases when the residuals were not normally distributed and/or the standard deviation was not homogenous and correlated positively with the mean, a Box–Cox transformation of the data was conducted. If no reasonable transformation was possible, a Kruskal–Wallis–ANOVA was conducted instead (recovery of litter C in HF, proportion of litter-derived C to total WEOC at day 29, proportion of cumulated litter-derived C to total cumulated CO The litter types differed considerably in their chemical composition ( The C:N ratio was lowest in unlabeled ash root litter (22) and highest in unlabeled beech leaf litter (47; The chemical compositions of the litter types resulted in the following conditions in litter mixtures. In ML-ash The total and litter-derived CO After 206 days, more ash leaf litter-derived than beech leaf litter-derived CO Mixture of litter types enhanced the decomposition of ash leaf litter since the recovery of ash litter C in CO Regression analyses (p < 0.05; n = 12) on the pure labeled treatments revealed that the initial litter chemistry parameters could explain differences in litter-derived CO For deriving more detailed insights into the mineralization process, the study period was divided into three phases: days 1–9 (the mineralization peak), days 10–29 (strong decline in daily CO Slight differences between treatments in the cumulated recovery of litter C in CO Nonetheless, regression analysis revealed that litter chemistry parameters could explain mineralization during the first nine days. Cumulated mineralization of litter in pure treatments was best explained by a combined linear model of the lignin-to-N ratio (negative correlation) and the sum of the macronutrients N, P and S (positive correlation; The strongest differences between treatments in the cumulated recovery of litter-C in CO From day 10 to 29, a combination of the lignin-to-N ratio and the N concentration explained 96% of the variation (negative correlation), while lignin-to-N alone explained 90% of the variation ( Differences between treatments have mostly vanished after 29 days ( Similarly, the correlations of litter-C recovery in CO Total WEOC declined in all treatments from day 9 over day 29 to day 206 ( At the beginning of the experiment (days 9 and 29, respectively), the treatments showed significant differences in the recovery of litter-derived C in WEOC ( The proportion of litter-derived C (from the labeled litter type) to total WEOC differed significantly between ash and beech as well as between leaf and root litter of one species at the beginning of the experiment (day 9). These differences were found for both, pure and mixed treatments, e.g. ML-ash Recoveries of litter C in WEOC until day 9 and day 29, respectively, correlated positively with cumulated recoveries of litter C in CO Microbial biomass C measured in the end of the incubation at day 206 averaged 83 mg kg The recovery of litter C in MB was positively correlated to the cumulated recovery of litter C in CO In the control, 18% of the SOC was found in the LF and 82% in the HF at the end of the incubation time. These values differed from all treatments with added litter where on average 37% of total SOC was found in the LF and 63% in the HF. The recovery of litter-derived C in the HF and LF did not differ between treatments, probably due to a high variation within each treatment. Most litter-derived C was left in the LF (on average 55%) and 4–12% was found in the HF ( The chosen standardized conditions minimized effects of e.g. (1) small scale variability in soil conditions and climate, (2) differences in the contact of litter with soil and (3) variability of the abundance and community of soil mesofauna and macrofauna. Thus, the experiment allowed the elucidation of the influence of litter composition and litter mixtures on general short and medium term dynamics of litter mineralization and transfer of litter C during microbial decomposition to different soil organic matter fractions. The pre-treatment of the soil, especially the drying and rewetting, probably led to a reduction of microbial biomass and alteration of the community in the initial soil ( As expected, the labeled litter types differed considerably in their chemical composition. As has been observed before, ash litter contained less lignin and had lower C:N and lignin-to-N ratios than beech litter ( Mineralization was negatively related to the lignin-to-P ratio, a correlation that In addition to these strong correlations of litter chemistry with mineralization rate, physical parameters such as leaf tensile strength ( Similar to the results of our study, Fine root litter mineralization proceeded more slowly than leaf litter mineralization in the case of ash. This is in agreement with findings in several studies on various tree species ( Even though differences between pure treatments in the recovery of litter-C in CO Differences between species in the recovery of litter-C in CO After 30 days differences between species in the recovery of litter-C to CO We propose that after 30 days initial litter chemistry parameters are not a good predictor for litter mineralization any longer, because litter chemistry strongly changes during the decomposition process due to nutrient leaching and incorporation of N to the litter ( Mixture of ash and beech leaf litter led to enhanced mineralization of ash leaf litter but did not affect beech leaf litter mineralization, which agrees with findings of a decomposition experiment in a beech stand ( Decomposition studies on root litter mixtures are scarce and we are not aware of any that were conducted for temperate tree species. In their study on decomposition of EM and AM infected root litter from arctic species, Most of the WEOC derived from older soil organic matter (>70% at day 9 and >77% at day 29) and not from the fresh litter. These findings are supported by Total and litter-derived WEOC strongly declined during our experiment. The reason for this is that WEOC, a labile organic matter source ( Although we found only small portions of total litter C as WEOC (<1%, After 206 days of incubation, no effect of litter addition, litter type or mixture on the concentration of C Overall, the amount of C Although C The recovery of litter-derived C in C Recoveries of litter-derived C in the HF (4–12%) did not differ between beech and ash or between root and leaf litter of the same species, which indicates that in the short run litter type did not affect C sequestration in the soil. In contrast, Litter C in the heavy soil fraction was positively related to cumulated litter mineralization (R Most litter C was left in the LF (>40%), but the amount was highly variable even within one treatment. Error propagation revealed that the recovery of litter-C in the LF had an uncertainty of ±12% irrespective of the treatment. The measurement accuracy of Litter type affected the partitioning of litter-C to CO This project B5 was funded by the