Polymeric supports are presented as an alternative to granular activated carbon (GAC) for organic contaminant removal from groundwater using permeable reactive barriers (PRB). The search for suitable polymeric sorbents for hydrocarbon extraction from aqueous streams has prompted the synthesis of new resins incorporating new functionalities or modifying the polymer network properties that solve many of the existing problems. Between them, the new type of polymeric sorbents Macronet Hypersol containing a styrene–divinylbenzene macroporous hyperreticulated network has been evaluated. Because of their potential sorptive properties, tests were conducted to determine the feasibility of using them as a low-cost reactive material for groundwater applications. The present work describes the sorption of six polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAHs) from aqueous solution onto both Macronet polymeric sorbent MN200 and granular activated carbon. Batch experiments were performed to determine loading rates of a family of PAHs (naphthalene, fluorene, anthracene, acenaphthene, pyrene, and fluoranthene), from a simple two-rings PAH (naphthalene) up to a four-ring PAH (pyrene). The behavior of a non-functionalized Macronet support (MN200) was compared with the behavior of a recognized material, granular activated carbon (GAC). Analyses of the respective rate data with three theoretical models (pseudo-first- and pseudo-second-order reaction models and the Elovich model) were used to describe the PAH sorption kinetics. Sorption rate constants were determined by graphical analysis of the proposed models. The study showed that sorption systems followed a pseudo-first-order reaction model, although the pseudo-second-order reaction model provides an acceptable description of the sorption process. Graphical analysis showed that the sorption process with activated carbon is a more complex process than the one observed for hyper-cross-linked polymers (MN200). A simulation of the barrier thickness needed to treat a PAH-polluted plume showed that 0.1–1 m of sorption media is enough even for high water fluxes such as 0.1–2 m3/m2/day for both sorbents.Groundwater contamination by monocyclic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (BTEX and PAH) is a typical situation for many pollution scenarios, such as many former manufactured gas plant sites in Europe and the United States Sorption processes are one of the alternatives for PAH elimination. Sorption of hydrophobic organic contaminants from aqueous solutions generally increases with decreasing solubility of the compound (or increasing octanol/water partition coefficient, One major advantage lies in the fact that persistent compounds are removed from groundwater, rather than being broken down to potentially dangerous metabolites such as those produced by oxidation or reductive processes. One of the biggest disadvantages of the sorption processes is sorbent regeneration. This is the case of GAC, which needs thermal destruction and thermal activation when exhausted. One of the possibilities for overcoming this problem is the use of improved polymeric adsorbents, such as a new family of polymeric resins, Macronet Hypersol (MN200). These materials present a hyperreticulated structure that provides macroporosity and microporosity to the solid at the same time. This means a control on the size of pores and relatively high surface areas (1000–2000 m Permeable reactive barriers (PRB) serve as a containment technology for polluted groundwater. As contaminated groundwater flows off site, contaminants may be reduced by barrier media to concentrations below target values, which often are set as the maximum contaminant level (MCL). Design of permeable reactive barriers such as a funnel and gate system (FG) For pollution scenarios with high groundwater flow velocities and common thickness of the sorption wall (1–2 m), the residence time of groundwater will range from hours to less than a day. If the mean residence time is too short for equilibrium, the Thus, it is necessary to determine practical kinetic parameters to account for problems derived from the use of equilibrium data. The prediction of the rate-limiting step is an important factor to be considered in the sorption process In a previous study, the sorption equilibrium parameters were determined to predict the sorption properties on the expected pollution scenario of PAH decontamination with permeable reactive barriers. Based on these experiments, a preliminary estimate of the retardation factor was calculated for two sorbents The objective of this work was to determine the sorption kinetic parameters of both MN200 and GAC for a family of six polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Linear regression was used to determine the best-fitting rate equation. The determination coefficient was also applied to the linearly transformed kinetic rate equations to confirm the agreement between experimental data and kinetic rate equations. Purolite Hypersol Macronets samples of MN200 were provided by Purolite Ltd. Typical physical and chemical characteristics are described in Granular activated carbon (GAC) samples were provided by Aguas de Levante (Spain). The sample used (F40124A) is an activated carbon specially tailored for the treatment of organic contaminants, macromolecules, color, taste, and smells. It is a macroporous activated carbon with a macroporous volume of 1.5 cm Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons were purchased from Merck (acenaphthene, anthracene, fluorene, fluoranthene, naphthalene, and pyrene) and Aldrich Chemical Co. Some characteristics of these PAHs are shown in PAH solutions were prepared from stock solutions of each PAH in acetonitrile. Synthetic solutions were prepared by proper dilution in deionized water. A standard agitated reactor experimental setup was used to determine the kinetic data for MN200 and activated carbon. For both sorbents only a wet-sieved fraction of narrow particle size range were used, 0.5–0.7 mm for MN200 and 3–6 mm for GAC. Dynamic contacts between resin and solution were performed on a mechanical shaker at different shaking speeds to determine the minimum shaking speed above which the kinetics is independent of the degree of agitation and hence not influenced by film diffusion. Sorption rates were always measured at a shaking speed much above this minimum value. To determine sorption as a function of time, dynamic contacts were carried out in small batches, separately for each time period. Solid and liquid phases were separated after each specific period of shaking by draining the solution quickly through a proper filtering medium. The extent of sorption was determined by measuring the residual amount of sorbate in the liquid phase. PAH concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically (Hewlett–Packard, Model HP-8453). The absorbance values of PAHs were determined at the following wavelengths: acenaphthene, 281 nm; anthracene, 358 nm; fluoranthene, 286 nm; fluorene, 261 nm; naphthalene, 266 nm; pyrene, 272 nm. The sorption of organic compounds, such as PAHs, onto natural sorbents and synthetic polymers has been described as a complex process, where often the properties of the solute and solvent play a critical role. Numerous publications have shown that the sorption process occurs within the boundary layer around the sorbent and proceeds in the liquid-filled pores or along the walls of the sorbent pores The aim of this kinetic study was to find a simple mathematical model that describes the sorption process in the form of a rate constant. For that reason, data were collected under conditions of minimum film diffusional resistance. Such conditions could be expected on scenarios where the water flux is as high as 1–100 m/day. Accordingly, three simplified models were adopted to examine the sorption kinetics of a family of six PAHs on MN200 and GAC: (1) The pseudo-first-order model proposed by Lagergren (2) The pseudo-second-order equation based on the sorption equilibrium capacity in the form (3) The Elovich model, where the sorption process is described as a group of reaction mechanisms such diffusion in the mass of dissolution, surface diffusion, and activated catalytic surfaces, in the form If Kinetic measurements of extraction of the PAH family of model compounds with MN200 and GAC in the range 1 to 10 mg/dm Regarding GAC sorption and considering the same period of time, only between 30 and 60% of the PAHs has been extracted. In the case of GAC, the sorption of PAHs follows a first step with a low decrease of the concentration in the aqueous phase (first 100 min) till a second step is achieved with an increase in the sorption rate. This can be due to a charge effect of the ionized groups of the carbon structure, creating a first electrostatic repulsion effect. This phenomenon is reduced as far as molecules of PAH are sorbed on the surfaces of pores with low ionized groups. Macronet MN200 are highly and rigidly cross-linked in the swollen state and thus characterized by very high surface area, approaching those of GAC. A polymer matrix structure, based on cross-linked polystyrene, has been shown particularly suitable for the efficient sorption of high-molecular-weight organic molecules with lipophilic properties, as in the case of PAH molecules.  The determination coefficient and the regression coefficients were used as the guiding parameters to find the kinetic models providing the best description of the sorption process on both sorbents. The determination coefficients (   It is observed that the magnitude of the The graphical analysis of both functions was also used to determine the loading equilibrium values ( The liquid/solid sorption is a mass transfer process between the liquid phase and the sorption sites in the porous sorbent. The first step of solution/solid transfer is assumed to be rapid in comparison to the intraparticle diffusion process, which is the last step of the sorption corresponding to the extraction of PAHs. As hydrophobicity of the compounds increases, the particle resistance becomes less important and the solution film is the controlling step of the mass transfer rate. Bigger PAH molecules will penetrate that solution/solid interface at a lower rate because of their lower diffusivity, which is related to their molar volume. The effects of hydrophobicity given by the  Thus, both equations (pseudo-first- and pseudo-second-order) provide a good description of the sorption process that can more effectively describe the sorption behavior of the PAH family for Macronet resin MN200, as can be seen by comparing the values of The hydrophobic properties of MN200 have been characterized by Perner et al. This approach could also be used for describing the behavior of granular activated carbon under previously given limitations. Plots of the linearized form of the Elovich equation are collected in Few data are published in the literature on kinetic evaluation of PAH sorption on activated carbon and polymeric sorbents. In addition, all the studies have been directed to sorption and desorption onto soils and sediments. In the study of Chang et al. Brion and Pelletier reported kinetic rate sorption values for three PAHs (fluorene, fluoranthene, and pyrene) sorbed on two different sediments Groundwater velocity, barrier reactivity, and contaminant concentration, among other factors, affect the required size of the barrier. The groundwater velocity may be determined from hydrologic data and groundwater modeling and reactivity of the barrier media may be determined from laboratory column tests For a barrier width of The design task is to determine a barrier width (  Barrier thickness calculated varied between 0.1 and 1 m, which is compatible with design requirements and economical feasibility of the technology. In the same table, barrier thicknesses are compared with those needed when activated carbon is used. Fast equilibration would be achieved more quickly (in time) for small particles with high surface-to-volume ratios. Small particles, however, result in low permeability. In PRB and FG systems the permeability of the gate has to be at least as high as that in the aquifer. As a first approximation, the permeability increases with the grain diameter of the adsorbent and with the granular porosity. Since the porosity packed beds lies within a relative narrow range (0.4 and 0.6 mm), the main factor influencing the permeability is the size of the sorbent. The sorption of a family of PAHs, ranging from two to four rings, was successfully performed using two different sorbent materials: MN200 resin and granular activated carbon. The sorption kinetics showed a fast removal of PAHs in both cases. The pseudo-first- and pseudo-second-order kinetic models described the experimental behavior for MN200. In the case of GAC, the PAH sorption is characterized with a two-stage process with two different rates. Then both chemical kinetic models, typically used for design applications of PRB, should be considered as a preliminary approach. A better description of the sorption kinetics should be based on the description of the system by diffusion models. The calculated values for the simulation of barrier thickness using both sorbents, and taking into account the EU requirements for PAH in groundwater effluent, were notably reasonable as a first estimate. The better kinetic properties of MN200 are traduced in lower hydraulic residence times and consequently in lower barrier thickness. Thus, the PAH sorption rates of both sorbents MN200 and GAC are enough for even expected high fluxes such as 0.1–2 m/day. This work was supported by MCYT Project CQT2005-08957-CO2-01/PPQ (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia de España). Purolite Ltd and Aguas de Levante are thanked for Macronet and activated carbon samples supply. Finally, the authors are indebted to T. Rovira and A.M. Lozano for laboratory help with sorption experiments.  Elovich model constant (g/mg min) Elovich model constant (g/mg) effluent concentration of solute (ng/dm influent concentration of solute (ng/dm equilibrium solute concentration (mg/dm hydraulic gradient (m/m) pseudo-first-order constant (min distribution coefficient (dm octanol/water coefficient pseudo-first-order rate constant (min pseudo-second-order rate constant (g/mg min) porosity of material amount of solute sorbed at time amount of solute sorbed at equilibrium (mg/g) initial amount of solute (mg/g) retardation factor of a target contaminant determination coefficient hydraulic residence time on the barrier (min) barrier width (in the direction of the flow) (m) predicted data for each model experimental values average of the experimental values interstitial groundwater velocity (m/min)