Ultra High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concretes (UHPFRC) present outstanding mechanical properties and a very low permeability. Those characteristics make them very attractive for the rehabilitation of existing structures and the conception of new structures. To define the range of admissible tensile deformation in those materials, the influence of imposed tensile deformation and subsequent cracking on permeability and absorption was studied. The transport properties of water and glycol were assessed in order to estimate the effect of the interaction of water with a specific UHPFRC. The experimental results demonstrate that permeability and absorption increase steadily until a residual tensile deformation of 0.13% is reached in the material, then water seeping rises distinctly. During experiments, the interaction of water with the UHPFRC decreases by 1 to 3 orders of magnitude the permeability and reduces absorption by approximately 50 to 85%. Test results reveal the high capability of the material to seal cracks and improve its water-tightness with time.Over the last 10 years, considerable efforts to improve the deformation capacity by incorporating fibers in cementitious materials have led to the emergence of Ultra High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concretes (UHPFRC) characterized by a very low water/binder ratio and a high binder content. These new materials provide structural engineers with a unique combination of extremely low permeability, high strength, tensile strain hardening behavior, and excellent rheological properties in fresh state. Until now, most applications of UHPFRC were dedicated to new structures Although in-situ conditions are different from laboratory conditions, especially when it comes to the variability of the saturation level of concrete, mechanisms suggested to explain the interaction between concrete and water in permeability and absorption tests may also explain field observations. A first mechanism used to describe water interaction in concrete is called self-sealing. It is suggested that this mechanism is related to a combination of phenomena, such as the swelling behavior of concrete under saturation, osmotic pressures, physical clogging and chemical interaction of water with the material. However, experimental evidence attributed mainly self-sealing to the chemical interaction of water with the material by causing the dissolution and deposition of soluble hydrates In order to improve knowledge on water transport in UHPFRC, a research project was launched at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology to study the permeability and the absorption of UHPFRC submitted to high tensile deformations. The objectives were to assess admissible deformations for which the material presents satisfactory transport properties and to evaluate the significance of its interaction with water. UHPFRC specimens were initially submitted to a uniaxial tensile test up to a wide range of predefined levels of deformation at loading ( The unloaded specimens were then introduced in a device to estimate permeability and absorption. In order to determine the significance of the interaction of water with the UHPFRC, the transport properties of water and glycol, reactive and unreactive with cement respectively, were appraised. Glycol presents the advantage of being water-miscible and does not react with cement. Besides, its viscosity is higher than that of water  The experimental program was completed with an UHPFRC called The UHPFRC was prepared and cast horizontally in 50 Afterwards, specimens were stored in a room at 20 °C and 50% relative humidity until the tensile test and subsequent core extraction were performed. The steps of the experimental procedure used to determine the transport properties are listed in  UHPFRC specimens (prisms of 50 The tensile behavior of the UHPFRC is shown in  The liquid permeability of the UHPFRC was determined with permeability cells Preparing the specimen consists in gluing the core specimen of UHPFRC in the aluminum ring to form a disc. Then, the disc is saturated with liquid while under vacuum for 72 h (vacuum saturation). Afterwards, the disc is clamped in the permeability cell and the tanks are filled with liquid. Considering that the specimen is saturated, the main mechanism responsible for transport is the hydrostatic pressure due to the gravity effect. Fluid flow through the specimen is periodically measured by the liquid level in the pipette. Periodically, the level of liquid is brought back to its original level to maintain a nearly constant hydrostatic pressure during the experiment. The limit of detection of the cells, which was evaluated from the accuracy of the measurement system, corresponds approximately to a permeability coefficient of 1 The permeability coefficient for glycol In this experimental program, permeability tests were carried out with both an unreactive permeant (glycol) and a reactive permeant (water). Because the chemical interaction between water and the UHPFRC causes a decrease of the fluid flow in the porous media, water and glycol have a different intrinsic permeability. To estimate the chemical interaction of water with the UHPFRC, a dimensionless parameter (   Moreover, the theoretical estimation of glycol permeability coefficients from the crack opening of UHPFRC specimens was derived from the Hagen–Poiseuille law (Eq. The absorption test is carried out with the device described previously in the permeability testing section. However, the specimen preparation is different. Specimens are dried for 72 h at 60 °C instead of being vacuum-saturated, and the inferior tank is kept empty. The oven temperature (60 °C) was limited to avoid any additional microcracking due to drying and to reduce the activation of hydration of the residual clinker in the specimen. The main mechanisms responsible for fluid transport during the absorption test are hydrostatic pressure due to the gravity effect and capillary suction. If the head pressure (ρgh) remains constant (depth of penetration of the liquid in the material is negligible), the average flow can be estimated using Eq. The significance of each force in the fluid flow depends on the pore radius. For Absorption tests are commonly interpreted via sorptivity S (l/m   The evolution of permeability coefficients over time for various levels of residual tensile deformation in the UHPFRC is illustrated in Water and glycol test results demonstrate that permeability increases with the level of tensile deformation applied to the UHPFRC ( In order to verify the relationship between the crack opening in the UHPFRC and permeability, experimental results where plotted with the theoretical estimation of glycol permeability according to the Hagen–Poiseuille law (Eq.  The water and glycol absorbed by specimens is presented in Test results indicate that absorption of glycol and water increases with the level of residual deformation in UHPFRC specimens. Liquid absorption is also generally higher with water. Besides, the amount of water absorbed by undamaged specimens of UHPFRC is similar to the one measured in reactive powder concrete  The interaction factors calculated with permeability tests increase clearly with the level of damage in specimens. Only one value obtained for 0.88 mm of deformation does not follow the trend (this will be explained in the next section). The interaction factors estimated with absorption tests also increase with damage; however the magnitude of the values is lower than for permeability tests. As expected, permeability results indicate that the fluid flow in the UHPFRC rises with increasing the level of damage of the material. The abrupt increase of fluid flow observed between Previous studies have also reported a rise in permeability with increasing macrocrack opening in concrete One can also observe that the water permeability curves stabilized much more slowly than those of glycol at the beginning of the test. This phenomenon is probably due to the rapid chemical interaction of water with the material. Concerning the comparison of experimental and theoretical estimation of permeability, the best approximation was obtained with a relative low value of Absorption measurements on conventional concrete generally show curves with two slopes. The rate of absorption is high at first and then decreases. As observed in Test results in During absorption tests, water has seeped more than glycol in the UHPFRC. In fact, surface tension and viscosity of water are favorable to measure higher absorption. The analysis in the next section will however demonstrate that absorption of water should be higher if interaction between water and UHPFRC was negligible as likely with glycol. Besides, it was pointed out previously that permeability rises distinctly when residual deformation exceeds It should be reminded that interaction is interpreted here as a modification of the viscosity of water in the UHPFRC. A short-term interaction ( Since the short-term and mid-term interactions rise with increasing the level of damage in the UHPFRC, the interaction is favored by the presence of cracks and their opening. However, the interaction should logically decrease after reaching an optimum, because for an infinite crack the surface effects on water penetration become negligible. This probably explains the reduction of the interaction parameter calculated for Δ On the other hand, the interaction of water with the UHPFRC is greater during permeability tests than during the absorption tests. Considering the properties of permeants, water permeability should be 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher if water was moving freely like glycol in the UHPFRC. Similarly, water absorption represents about 15 to 50% of expectations if negligible interaction was occurring as with glycol. The latter estimations are obtained by using interaction parameters equal to 1 in Eqs. The identification of the mechanisms responsible for the interaction of water in the UHPFRC is not obvious. Concerning the self-sealing associated with the dissolution and the deposition of soluble hydrates, one could say that a very small amount of hydrated lime can precipitate in the porous network due to its previous consumption by silica fumes, but other phases can. Besides, autogeneous healing is certainly active in UHPFRC. The healing generally attributed to calcium carbonate precipitation in cracks can also be due to the hydration of residual clinker at crack surface. Results reported in Although the role played by each mechanism cannot be assessed, it is clear that the chemical interaction of water progressively improves the tightness of the UHPFRC. Depending on how significant the continued hydration of residual clinker is in the interaction process, mechanical properties of the material are expected to increase with time (mechanical strength is proportionate to the degree of hydration). The utilization of strained UHPFRC at serviceability will promote such process. Consequently, strained UHPFRC could present in the long term equivalent properties to those of unstrained material. As a matter of fact, recent research projects have illustrated such phenomenon. Parant The objectives of the research project were to assess the permeability and the absorption of UHPFRC for two permeants, water and glycol, and to evaluate the significance of its interaction with water. Analysis of experimental results has shown: The optimized fibrous reinforcement of the UHPFRC allows achieving a noteworthy tensile strain hardening up to 0.25% on notched specimens, where the maximal tensile strength (10.8 MPa) is reached. Until that level of deformation is reached, UHPFRC integrity is only modified by the development of microcracks and macrocracks thinner than 50 μm, then the material starts to display its softening behavior. Penetration of liquid in terms of permeability and absorption coefficients increases steadily until a residual tensile deformation of 0.13% is reached in UHPFRC. As a basis of comparison, at this threshold value, the water permeability of UHPFRC ( The utilization of glycol and water as permeants, unreactive and reactive with residual clinker respectively, has permitted to evaluate the interaction of water with UHPFRC during the experiments. It was observed that permeability and absorption of water are lower to what could be anticipated if water was moving freely in the material. Hence, the combined effects of self-sealing, self-healing and continued hydration, which are expected to occur with water, reduce absorption by approximately 50 to 85% after 3 days and decrease permeability by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude after 40 days. The interaction phenomenon is thus quite significant. From previous conclusions, in spite of the application of very high tensile deformations, the UHPFRC shows a high capability to seal micro and macrocracks and to improve its water-tightness when exposed to water. It follows for practical consideration that water-tightness or very low permeability is preserved for strained UHPFRC in structures at serviceability. Based on the experimental results, limits of tensile deformation for the UHPFRC under study were suggested according to environmental conditions Besides, further research is required to estimate the impact of key factors concerning water flow in UHPFRC. It is expected that water interaction depends on crack patterns created in the UHPFRC, type of loading, material maturity and environmental conditions. Moreover, chloride penetration in UHPFRC and water interaction to consider in long-term predictions has to be assessed. This project was financially supported by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education and Research (SER) and the Fonds pour la Formation de Chercheurs et l'Aide à la Recherche (FCAR) of the Québec government, in the context of the European project Sustainable and Advanced Materials for Road Infrastructures (SAMARIS). Research was carried out during the postdoctoral project of the first author at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.