Liberation, as an attribute of mineralogy characteristic, whose impacts on finely disseminated Canadian rare earth ore was studied with microwave pretreatment. Samples of a light rare earth ore along with mostly ankerite and biotite as dominant gangue minerals as well as bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite as dominated minerals were exposed to further comminution by ball mill and microwave pretreatment fragmentation. Mineralogical characteristics were analyzed by using a mineral liberation analyzer (MLA). The results indicated that tight association mutually penetrates among dominated minerals in the range size of −300 + 212 μm and −212 + 150 μm and gangue minerals in the form of adjacent type, fine vein type, shell type and packing type. Temperature in the ore samples pre-treated by microwave can rapidly rise to 250 °C with microwave power of 0–1.5 kW and microwave time of 0–2 min. Applying the microwave pretreatment merely reduces the hardness of the ore causing the fracture of rare earth ore, but this does not transform or change the original mineralogy characteristics of the ore samples. On the basis of above study, the liberation value of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite with microwave pretreatment is greater than with conventional comminution when the liberation class is above 75%. The distribution of particle size of rare earth ore samples is better with microwave pretreatment than with conventional comminution for particle size of 7.4 × 10−5 m. With microwave pretreatment, the theoretical grade–recovery of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite in the rare earth ore attains better results than with conventional comminution at a given grade.Mineralogy concentrates on investigating morphology, chemical composition, physical properties, impurities and internal mineral structure of ore. As is known, approximately 70% of the rare earth production might be from bastnaesite which is proven to have an enormous reserve in the world. Conventional comminution, for fragmentation through grinding, has continued to need a high level of energy consumption. As an important sector of processing technology, this constraints future development of the mineral industry chain and compromises the profitability of beneficiation. Rare earth samples selected from Canada, are of low grade ore, which have complicated structure, are of various species, gray and high hardness in physical properties. They comprise bastnaesite, strontianite, and goethite as main minerals as well as ankerite and biotite as dominant gangue minerals. The current processing techniques to recover rare earths are mainly through crushing and grinding processing methods, which makes the treatment process simple and easy to achieve in the industry. However, rare earth ores from Canada, are of low grade, are of complex mineral composition and are high in hardness. This leads to a large loss of energy consumption, consequently, increasing greatly in the cost of rare earth mineral processing. We studied mineralogy characteristic using MLA, X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM). We compared the effects of rare earth ore with microwave pretreatment and conventional comminution on the ore samples from Canada in this research, which expects to realize the occurrence character, varieties of rare earth ore, embedded character, packed relationship, particle size distribution, occurrence character of other valuable elements in the rare earth ore as well as kinds and content of gangue minerals. Mineralogy characteristic, as a theoretic basis, provides a standard parameter for scientific economical evaluation, the technique of reasonable beneficiation. The pre-heating microwave technique can be applied to exploiting rare earth ore in the area of Canada. This reasonably priced beneficiation and recovery method of valuable elements will greatly benefit the industry. The rare earth ore samples selected for this study were a dominant rare earth elements-bearing ore, which came from Canada. The feed size of rare earth ores was crushed to <1 mm for all the test work as the precision of the MLA was optimum around 500 μm. The chemical component of rare earth samples was analyzed by XRF as shown in The ability of minerals to absorb microwave in the rare earth ore is presented in The rare earth samples, obtained from the microwave chamber, were used for quantifying the phase transformation, the intergrowth phase was analyzed quantitatively by XRD (2 The rare earth samples were pre-treated with ball mill (EMERSON Model: S60AAW-6118 in the USA) so that 10 g of the grain size of <1 mm particles were obtained. The particles were placed in process vessel, which was filled with distilled water. The process attained the grinding concentration of 60% while setting the grinding time to 75 s. After ground, the rare earth slurry was filtered through Separatory Funnel with acetone washing preventing the agglomerates. Finally, the rare earth ores were dried with a vacuum oven at a temperature of 70 °C. The quantity of 100 g rare earth samples below the particle size of <1 mm were fed to a quartz crucible with microwave pretreatment and they then placed in microwave oven, with the frequency of 2.4 GHz and the power adjusted in the range of 0–9 kW. The rare earth ore was pre-treated with the microwave power of 1.5 kW and the microwave heating time of 2 min. Afterward, the rare earth samples pre-treated were ground by ball mill with water in the same procedure as above. The MLA employs various measurement methods to analyze the grain sizes, liberation, intergrowth relationship, packed relationship, and associated relationship of ore. It utilizes backscattered electron to qualitatively analyze the distinct phase boundary of particles, combined with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) to analyze elemental composition of minerals to determine the varieties of rare earth minerals. MLA can perform accurate and precise grain pattern and quantitative data results. Liberation is capable of being analyzed by two methods which are calculating the weight percentage of free surface and particle composite. Calculating liberation of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite based on Eq. The equation of particle distribution Theoretic cumulative recovery versus grade The SEM micrographs of rare earth samples obtained using MLA are shown in The association of rare earth ores is described via MLA in The variation of microwave heating is described in The ore phase might be supposed to be shifted with heating methods as microwave pretreatment, as The rare earth ore samples selected contains bastnaesite with the attribute of strong absorption to microwave power, goethite and ankerite with numbers of Fe-bearing elements have weak absorption of microwave capacity. Carbonate minerals (strontianite) and biotite are without absorption capacity to microwave. Based on the characteristic of rare earth minerals absorption capacity to microwave power as shown in Mineral association data generated by MLA gave valuable assistance to estimating the liberation of associated minerals in the two crushing methods. The rare earth ore samples considered having free surface as being liberated, therefore, the more free the surface owned, the higher the liberated minerals were. The liberation curve of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite by free surface ( It was calculated by Eq. Theoretical grade–recovery curves are regarded as the maximal expected recovery of a mineral at a given grade. These curves are relevant to the comminution size of the treatment process and determined from the liberation characteristics. The theoretical grade–recovery curves for bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite in The research on the mineralogy of rare earth ore from Canada and the effect of liberation of rare earth ore with microwave pretreatment by means of MLA, XRD, XRF and SEM was carried out. The process benefits were displayed as follows in The results attained followed The major rare earth resource is bastnaesite whose content accounts for 8.35% in the grade RE The temperature of the rare earth ores was capable of being rapidly raising up to 250 °C in the microwave oven over a time of 120 s and power of 1.5 kW, and the individual separation liberation of rare earth samples were found in an optimum condition when the microwave heating time was 2 min and microwave power was 1.5 kW. The multiphase of rare earth ore could neither be transformed nor generate the new minerals before 350 °C with microwave pretreatment. This is able to alter the hardness of rare earth ore. The amount of free surface of minerals of interest was inversely increasing with microwave pretreatment compared to conventional comminution. The liberation curve of free surface of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite with microwave pretreatment was better than with conventional comminution. With the conventional comminution, the content of cumulative distribution of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite was 60%, 58% and 88% respectively. With microwave pretreatment when the liberation class was above 75% they were 80%, 75% and 95%, respectively. The particle size is smaller with microwave pretreatment than with conventional comminution. The theoretical grade–recovery of bastnaesite, strontianite and goethite in the rare earth ore attain better results with microwave pretreatment than with conventional comminution at a given grade. The obtained data above provide valuable crucial information on quantitative mineralogy, mineral association, particle and mineral grain sizes, as well as mineral liberation and theoretical recovery data. Results illustrate that a MLA system can be used to constrain parameters relevant to assess comminution success in a rapid and reproducible way. Those parameters can assist in optimizing the performance of a processing plant as mineralogy parameters. It is generally used for analyzing feed products to predict the best possible grade that can be achieved for a given recovery of a mineral or element. The author would like to thank Mr. Zhenghe Xu for their assistance in the project.