Tooth wear occurs as a common phenomenon, increases with age, and can become severe, defined as substantial loss of the clinical crown and tooth structure to the point that dentin is exposed. Pathological wear is defined as wear that is atypical for the patient’s age and causes pain or discomfort, functional problems, or a compromised esthetic appearance. It can introduce increasingly complex complications that eventually require restoration. However, severity of the tooth wear should not be the sole reason for interventions. The clinician should conduct a risk assessment and analyze the tooth wear’s pathological aspects specific to the patient. Restorative options are designed to compensate for the lost tooth structure and may need to increase the vertical dimension of occlusion (VDO). Techniques to accomplish this include the use of direct or indirect composite restorations, ceramics, or hybrid materials to build up the worn teeth and reconstruct the occlusion. The effect of these restorations of generalized tooth wear on patients’ masticatory performance was investigated. As part of a larger clinical trial (the Radboud Tooth Wear Project), 23 patients were referred by their general dental caregivers for restoration of tooth wear. All had intraoral three-dimensional (3D) scans of the dentition and complete workups at baseline. In addition, patient age, gender, Tooth Wear Index (TWI) scores, number of occlusal units, and maximum voluntary bite force were documented. A comminution test with artificial test food was used to measure masticatory performance, along with self-report of such function using the Oral Health Impact Profile Questionnaire (OHIP-49). A full dental arch restorative treatment of the worn dentition was done, requiring 3 to 5 sessions with an interval of 1 or 2 weeks between the visits. Patients were recalled 1 month after treatment was complete, when intraoral 3D scans of the restored dentition, maximum voluntary bite force, and masticatory performance were again documented. The median particle size (X50), bite force, and OHIP scores were calculated both at baseline and at 1-month follow-up and compared to determine the effect of the restoration on masticatory performance, both through the measures and as perceived by the patient. At baseline the mean post-canine TWI score was 2.2, the average number of occlusal units per patient was 11.6, and the VDO increase was 2.0. One month after treatment, the median particle size X50 showed no significant change from baseline. A significant decrease in bite force was noted from 388.52 N before the restoration to 323.16 N afterward. A significant decrease in the sum score of the OHIP items related to eating and chewing was also noted, averaging 4 points. All of the 5 outcomes for eating and chewing showed improvement, with the item related to unsatisfactory diet reaching statistical significance. The results indicate that a restorative approach to managing tooth wear does not affect the comminution of food, but patients perceived that their eating and chewing were significantly improved. The perceived improvement reached statistical significance and was clinically relevant. Although no statistically significant improvement was noted in the measured masticatory performance of these patients, their perception and self-reported ability to eat and chew showed a significant improvement. This may reflect their satisfaction with the treatment, with the lack of pain or discomfort, or with the esthetic results, but the fact that patients experienced an improved oral health−related quality of life is what’s important. Providing a restoration using direct resin bonded composite was able to address the pathological level of tooth wear these patients were experiencing and they came away with a highly satisfactory result.