An experimental study on the fine grinding of calcite powder (d
                     50
                     =62.16μm) using a 0.75
                     l laboratory stirred ball mill has been carried out. The effects of various operating factors, such as grinding time (min), stirrer speed (rpm), slurry density (wt.%) and ball filling ratio on fine grinding was studied under batch wet conditions using alumina balls, 95% purity with diameters 3.5–4.0mm. A series of laboratory experiments using 24 full factorial designs was conducted to determine the optimum grinding parameters. The test results showed that the stirrer speed and grinding time have strong effects on the grinding efficiency, based on the value of specific surface area (m2/g).Recently, the need for fine particles in various industrial processes has increased in the field of preparing raw powders. Therefore, the research in fine grinding has gained more importance. Stirred ball mills produce fine and super fine material very effectively, due to their easy processing, simple construction, high size reduction rate and low wear contamination. Over the past decade, stirred mills have begun to be used extensively in many industries, including mineral, coal, ceramic, metallurgy, paint, chemical, agriculture, food, medicine and energy The objective of this study is to investigate the effects of process variables, such as grinding time, stirrer speed, slurry concentration and ball filling ratio on mill grinding performance. For this, batch wet grinding tests were performed in a laboratory stirred ball mill using statistical design. Calcite powder ( In the current study, grinding tests were carried out in a vertical type stirred media mill Standard-01 Model manufactured by Union Process (USA) ( In the current study, the process performance (grinding efficiency) of grinding inorganic powder into fine particles using wet grinding with a stirred ball mill was investigated by examining how specific surface areas of ground products are affected by the process parameters. In other words, the main goal was to establish best set of variables that could be used in grinding for producing the maximum specific surface area. The specific surface area is one of the basic properties of the powder and is generally represented by the total surface area of all particles contained in a unit mass of powder. The specific surface area (m Here In the statistical design of the experiments, the effects of several factors were studied, to determine the primary and interaction effects of each. The effect of a variable is the change produced by varying the level of that variable. When the effect of one variable depends on the level of another, the two factors are said to interact In the present work, the main and interaction effects of four variables on the fine grinding were investigated. All 2 In this study, main and interaction effects of four variables on the specific surface area (m The Yates technique was used for the statistical design of 2  The upper half of column (3) is obtained by adding successive pair responses, and the lower half is obtained by subtracting successive pairs. Columns (4), (5) and (6) are calculated in the same way. Tests are repeated three times at the center points to estimate the error associated with the determination of an individual response which is required to test statistical significance. The ANOVA procedure is applied. The table value of If Statistical models to predict the specific surface area ( The models for the specific surface area (m Here, Here, The primary effects of each variable on specific surface area that are significant at the 95% confidence level are shown in A series of wet grinding experiment using calcite powder in a vertical type stirred mill have been carried out in order to investigate the influence of various experimental parameters, such as grinding time, stirrer speed, slurry density and ball filling ratio on the particle size distribution and specific surface area of the ground products. A series of laboratory experiments using 2 The authors would like to thank the