Dear Sir We refer to the recently published paper: M.L. Bakker, S. Nikolic and P.J. Mackey, ISASMELT™ TSL – Applications for nickel, Minerals Engineering 24 (2011) 610–619. In this paper it is stated that “This paper demonstrates how the features that make ISASMELT™ attractive for copper and lead smelting may be applied equally to nickel smelting and converting operations.”, which in fact is generally true for TSL showing the importance of this technology as an important smelting unit operation. The authors go on to describe pilot scale work for nickel smelting in Xtrata’s Top Submerged Lance (TSL) technology. It is usual in an academic journal to provide a detailed overview of the present state-of-the art with a scholarly overview of the relevant literature, and subsequently put forward a case and arguments for the content and novelty of the proposed paper. The value and scholarliness of the paper would have reached the usual high academic standard of Minerals Engineering had the authors clearly discussed and/or at least referenced the following commercially operating plants using Outotec’s TSL technology for nickel smelting and Ni/Cu matte converting: Jinchuan Nonferrous Metals Corp (Jinchang City, China) producing Ni/Cu Matte from a concentrate feed in excess of 1 Jilin Nickel Group (Jilin, China) producing Ni/Cu Matte from a concentrate feed of 275,000 Anglo Platinum (Rustenburg, South Africa – 2 furnaces with 1 on standby) converting granulated Ni/Cu/PGM matte, which have replaced Peirce Smith converters. Details on Outotec’s TSL commercial nickel smelting and converting solutions have been published and various aspects of TSL slag chemistry are also known. We also refer the authors to the work published on continuous copper converting with regard to slag chemistry, while noting that Outotec TSL copper converting also exists commercially for more than 10 We hope this important detail will find its way into Minerals Engineering to provide its readership with a scholarly overview on the application of the important TSL technology for Ni/Cu smelting and converting. Kind regards Prof. Markus A. Reuter (D.Eng, PhD)    August 9th, 2011 Dear Sir I refer to the Letter to the Editor submission by Prof. Markus Reuter dated 12 July, 2001 for publication in the Minerals Engineering Journal. The intention of the recently published paper: M.L. Bakker, S. Nikolic and P.J. Mackey, ISASMELT™ TSL –Applications for Nickel, Minerals Engineering 24 (2011) 610–619, was to review ISASMELT™ TSL Ni applications as signified by the title of the paper. The paper was clearly not intended to review all TSL applications. If this had been the intention, naturally other published papers would have been included in the list of references. The authors included in the paper a scholarly review of relevant technical data on slag chemistry. For example, Figs. 8 and 9 compare data from four other published sources, and in addition, the authors provided computed data on a range of conditions. We believe that such review does enable the paper to satisfy the journal’s high academic standard. The authors are fully aware of the other commercially operating plants using the JAE and ACP technology as referred to by the writer. Indeed, the ACP plant is specifically referred to in the text of the paper. Sincerely Dr. Martin L Bakker (PhD).  