It was when I was at school that I first came across When I studied for my first degree as an engineering student I was resident in a place called Nowadays, I teach materials to product designers where the emphasis is not on atomic processes but on materials selection and the name The interesting thing is that all these names in italics appear in the book ‘Metals and the Royal Society’ and all are Fellows of the Royal Society (FRS) or Foreign Members of the Royal Society (FMRS). The book, as its title suggests concentrates on the links between the Royal Society, its FRSs and FMRSs and the development of metals and metallurgy. It includes accounts of developments and the main contributors to the work. All the Fellows and Foreign Members mentioned in the book played pivotal roles in developing our understanding of metallurgy and materials science. The book makes most interesting reading, but for dipping into rather than a cover to cover read. This is because of the necessary referencing to the various fellows, which takes away some readability. The first chapter starts with a look at the beginnings of metallurgy (‘a lowly function’ according to Aristotle) and quotes biblical metallurgical references before leading on to the founding of the Royal Society in the 17th Century. The second chapter looks at the early period of the Royal Society where fellows such as Hooke, Boyle, Newton, Priestley, all familiar to schoolchildren, developed the fundamentals of the subject. The next 16 chapters take specific themes, e.g. Non-ferrous extraction metallurgy, Advances in techniques for the study of material's structures and Fundamentals of elastic and plastic deformation, to name only three. In each of the chapters the authors describe developments and the main protagonists. All readers will find the chapters of general interest. Chapter 19 discusses the wider role of the Royal Society in policy making and even purports to tell us the reasons for Britain's industrial decline. Next follows an extensive biography section gathered it seems for a variety of sources and making fascinating reading. All biographies show the dedication of these people (nearly all men) to their work over extended periods. I was particularly interested in the careers of the more recent members like Sir Monty Finneston who started his life in a Glasgow tenement. This was in contrast to earlier FRSs who appeared, unsurprisingly, to come from well to do backgrounds. It is interesting to compare ones own achievements with the great figures from the past. The book is extremely well researched with a name index, an academic and industrial index and a subject index. An extensive bibliography section will allow interested readers to further research specific areas. In addition, there are lists of Royal Society prizewinners, medal recipients and Bakerian Lectures with a metallurgical theme. It is possible that today's engineering students will never hear about these great names and their theories. This is a great shame in some respects. You don't need to understand how a microprocessor works in order to use a computer, but you could probably get more performance out of it if you did. The same is undoubtedly true for the application of metals in engineering situations. However, increasingly now in academia we are concentrating less on trying to explain the fundamentals of metals to our students but more on helping students choose the right material for an application. In that respect, it is gratifying to see that Mike Ashby's contribution in this field is mentioned in the book although he probably got his FRS from his more fundamental work. The book will interest anyone who has studied the subject in the past. The book is a must for the reference section of academic and public libraries. Its modest cover price should help to promote its wider recognition.