Different complexities force mining companies to find efficient ways to respond to demand challenges and ensure long-term sustainability. It explains, in part, the increase in the use of prescriptive analytics to optimize physical-asset life-cycle costs and decrease greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Mining, being an asset-intensive industry, provides huge improvement opportunities. This is especially true for scheduling practices of mine haulage fleet usage in long term planning. Fleet aging implies important cost increases in maintenance and repair (M&R), and overhauls. Fleets are often heterogeneous in term of truck performance, fuel consumption and GHG emissions. Sub-optimal scheduling decisions may induce severe cost over-runs and increased emissions. This paper proposes an original mixed integer programming formulation to optimize mine haulage equipment scheduling in the long term. The model considers the effects of equipment aging, fuel consumption, payload capacity and cycle times. Our formulation handles different aspects that according to author’s knowledge have not been considered in the literature as a whole: (i) joint minimization of fuel, M&R, and overhaul costs, (ii) reduction of GHG emissions, (iii) heterogeneous equipment performance metrics, (iv) increase in cycle times due to mine aging. The case study shows a cost reduction of 13% in the discounted flows associated with fuel, M&R, and overhauls in a time horizon of 10 years. This figure translates into an NPV gain of 13.1 million USD. Additionally, GHG emissions are reduced by an average of 3470 t/year or 11% overall.Cost reduction, productivity increase, and environmental footprint decrease are key to achieving mining operational sustainability and asset management excellence An interesting avenue to catalyze business sustainability is offered by optimizing operational processes. Newman et al. The article is organized as follows. First, we study previous work related to long-term scheduling of mining fleet. Mine long-term production planning and scheduling aim at generating production schedules over several years Scheduling in mining is a subject that has been on the research agenda for many years. Quigley Fleet sizing and equipment selection is crucial to achieving production plans, reduce operational expenditures and optimize usage schedules. Recent examples of studies are Santelices et al. This work proposes an original MIP approach to optimize long-term mine haulage equipment scheduling. The model considers the effects of equipment aging, fuel consumption, payload capacity, cycle times and GHG emissions. Our formulation handles joint minimization of fuel, M&R and overhaul costs. The model is also adapted to minimize GHG emissions. xxx pato, no es isi, es un real aporte? xxxx account for equipment planning subject to breakdowns in production scheduling. A systems simulator and genetic algorithm is to solve a project scheduling problem with simultaneous equipment planning. The authors however do not account for the effect of equipment age on its availability in meeting the production target. The proposed model aims to minimize the haulage cost associated with equipment maintenance and operation throughout the mine life for an open pit mine operation. The constraints regarding the production plan, equipment availability, and GHG emissions are accounted for in the model. The model is based on mixed integer programming methods and uses historical data to define relevant parameters. The proposed MIP model offers a tool for mine planners to decide which truck to dispatch in each period and for how long, guaranteeing the completion of the material movement required by the mine and subject to the availability of the fleet. It can handle a fleet of heterogeneous truck types and ages and costs to provide a schedule that minimizes the overall discounted costs for the entire mine operation. Of course, there is always a level of variability when future decisions are based on historical data that the model cannot foresee, but if the input data proves to be correct, the model offers a global optimization that minimizes operational costs or GHG emissions. The cost of maintenance and repairs of a truck varies throughout its life cycle. Generally, it increases with age (usually measured in operating hours) until the point where a major engine overhaul is performed. After this action costs tend to decrease to a certain extent. This behavior however, is nonlinear and depends on each truck type and may be estimated from historical data. Fuel consumption rate does not vary significantly throughout the life of the truck but tend to increase overall due to the increase of distances to cover as the pit deepens. To assign cost and available hours to trucks an age bin methodology is used in which age bins are defined by a certain number of worked hours. If an age bin is defined in 7000 h intervals, trucks between 0 and 7000 h would be in the first age bin, trucks between 7001 and 14,000 working hours would be in the second age bin and so on. It is usual for operating mines to have fleets containing trucks of different ages as they buy new ones but also used trucks in order to reduce capital expenses. As the trucks are scheduled for production they increase their age, measured in cumulative working hours, at different rates depending on the characteristics of the truck. This continues until the point where high maintenance costs and downtime makes them inefficient to operate and therefore, must be put out of production and possibly replaced Another important input for the model is the available working hours for each truck type in each age bin. This is the maximum hours a truck can work each period depending on its age, taking into account the downtime caused by M&R activities. This can also be obtained from historical data and modeled using a distribution. After obtaining the uptime, the truck capacity and the average cycles per hour, the amount of material each truck can move on each period can be computed. This capacity will vary during the life of mine because: (i) the uptime of the trucks will depend on the age of the truck and, (ii) the number of cycles per hour will change as the travel distance increases with the depth of the mine (for open pits). Other relevant parameters are the age at which the overhaul is needed and the cost of such intervention. This information may be estimated by historical data and manufacturer’s recommendation. In order to model the increase in M&R costs with working age, we consider an imperfect maintenance model based on a step-shaped Non-Homogeneous Poisson Process Fuel consumption was modeled as a constant rate for each truck type. Fuel consumption is assumed proportional to nominal engine power and engine load factor  Truck ID Age bin Time period Age bin at which an overhaul is required  Interest rate Fuel price Operative time unit per age bin Fuel consumption cost per operating time unit for truck Nominal engine power for truck M&R cost per operating time unit for truck Initial age for truck Age at which an overhaul is required for truck Maximum age truck Overhaul cost for truck Available usage (in operating time units) for truck Cumulative operating time units for truck Payload for truck Cycle time of truck Required production for period Maximum amount of GHG emissions permitted on period  Scheduled usage for truck {1 if truck {1 if truck  The initial objective function aims to minimize discounted costs of operation and maintenance of the fleet used in the mine operation. When truck Constraint ( Constraint ( Constraint ( Constraints ( Constraints ( Constraint ( Constraint ( Constraints ( Constraints ( The MIP model can be adjusted to minimize fuel consumption. Given that fuel emissions are proportional to consumption and the rate of consumption remains constant throughout the equipment life cycle, the problem is equivalent to minimizing emissions. Thus, the formulation is equal to the one shown in In large mining operations, it is customary to sign up fuel procurement contracts and in return obtain lower effective prices. The contracts usually impose a lower limit for annual consumption. Constraint ( Another optional constraint could be the implementation of the ability to sell trucks that are not useful for the operation and replacing them by buying new ones. This way the model could determine when and which trucks to change within the fleet. However, this constraint is beyond the scope of this article and is not considered in the analysis. We illustrate the proposed model considering a 10-year time horizon, and we extend the case described in The fleet includes 15 different trucks with diverse payload capacities and with different initial cycles times, as shown in Model parameters are described in As for fuel consumption, its defined proportionally to output power engine for each truck type, as shown in All overhauls take place at age 70  The traditional approach uses newer trucks first and then the older ones. This can be done by sorting the trucks by their age and using the available operating time units of the youngest considering their uptime, then the next older one and so on until the production schedule is met. This procedure must be repeated for each period of the operation The resulting fleet usage schedule is shown in The proposed MIP model explained considers the whole operation to determine a globally optimum schedule solution. The aim is to minimize the discounted costs associated with fuel, M&R and overhauls. The model was solved using a spreadsheet solver given that the case study has a modest amount of inputs. This is an advantage for smaller operations who will not need more complex software to apply the model. The model shows another advantage over the TA as it is sensitive to the efficiency of the truck. The model will seek to minimize overall costs by assigning more work to trucks with a higher capacity of transporting material per hour and per cost of transport. This should result in a decreased fleet usage in comparison with the TA. The fleet usage rate is shown in When comparing the results of the operation with both methodologies, several differences can be observed. First of all, there is a substantial difference in the discounted costs of the fleet. The MIP model shows a reduction of 13.1 The reduction in fuel consumption is equal to 13.1 The profile of final truck ages obtained provides significant insight for decision-making. According to the methodologies it is expected for trucks in the TA to have final ages more evenly distributed among them than the ones in the MIP model for the reasons mentioned above. On the other hand, the maintenance costs vary aggressively and tend to decrease after a major intervention. Thus, it might prove to be a good decision to incur this cost earlier than the TA stipulates. Finally, the total average cost per hour is obtained for each truck in both models at the end of the time horizon. This is calculated by dividing the total cost of operation and maintenance by the total Results of the Both MIP and In the case study, the average fuel cost per hour is approximately 2.9 times the average M&R cost for the first 20 The average ratio between the material movement capacity of the fleet and the production requirement is 1.3 in the years of full production. This means that the capacity is on average 30% higher than that needed, allowing the model to schedule trucks accordingly. Finally, if the traditional approach was modified to assign first the trucks with higher performability (in We have presented an original MIP model to optimize the long term scheduling of a mine haulage fleet. The model includes aging and its effects on overhaul, M&R and fuel costs. We propose two variations of the model. The first minimizes operational costs, while the second minimizes GHG emissions. Our formulation provides an original, asset-management centered approach to consider different elements that interact on fleet scheduling in a non linear way. The formulation not only considers operational decisions (usage schedule) but also maintenance decisions (when to overhaul). This combination allows a substantial fleet-level performance improvement and highlights the importance of constructive interactions between operations and maintenance in an asset-intensive industry such as mining. The formulation also draws attention to sustainability measures that are increasingly important for strategic decision making in a context of increasing concern for global warming. The illustrative case study has shown the importance of appropriate scheduling practices to reduce haul costs and achieve production and GHG emission targets. The comparison with a baseline approach shows that the interaction between operation and maintenance offer huge opportunities for savings, increased fleet productivity and emissions reduction. The case study showed fast convergence to the minimum cost solution and was implemented in a standard spreadsheet application. Potential extensions to the formulation include: (i) increasing/decreasing the number of trucks in the fleet, (ii) selection of trucks to be replaced/introduced, (iii) overhauls for different truck components at different ages and consideration of truck shop capacity limitations, (iv) considering the overhaul limit age as a decision variable to reduce M&R costs (v) joint optimization of mine plans and fleet scheduling, vi) different truck cycle profiles, such as combinations of haulage networks, (vii) truck fleet segregation, that is, trucks assigned to fixed destinations, as crusher or dumps.