The structures and fluid-rock reaction in the Xinli gold deposit, Jiaodong Peninsula, were investigated to further understand their combined controls on the development of permeability associated with ore-forming fluid migration. Orebodies in this deposit are hosted by the moderately SE-to S-dipping Sanshandao–Cangshang fault (SCF). Variations in both dip direction and dip angle along the SCF plane produced fault bends, which controlled the fluid accumulation and ore-shoot formation. Gold mineralizations occurred in early gold–quartz–pyrite and late gold–quartz–polymetallic sulphide stages following pervasive sericitization and silicification alterations. Theoretical calculation indicates that sericitization caused 8–57% volume decrease resulting in the development/enlargement of voids, further increase of grain-scale permeability, and resultant precipitation of the early gold–quartz–pyrite pods, which destroyed permeability. The rock softening produced by alterations promoted activities of SCF secondary faults and formation of new fractures, which rebuilt the permeability and controlled the late gold–quartz–polymetallic sulfide veins. Quantitative studies on permeability distributions show that the southwestern and northeastern bend areas with similar alteration and mineralization have persistent and anti-persistent permeability networks, respectively. These were likely caused by different processes of rebuilding permeability due to different stress states resulting from changes in fault geometry.Vein hosted and disseminated gold deposits associated with faults or shear zone systems are generally controlled both by particular structural geometry, such as fault bends, fault jogs or fold hinge, etc., and by fluid-rock interaction (e.g., Recent studies have recognized the importance of the combined control of structures and fluid-rock reaction on the formation and evolution of rock permeability, fluid flow and mineralization (e.g., The Jiaodong Peninsula contains gold reserve of 4000 t, and is the greatest gold producer in China. Gold deposits in Jiaodong are hosted by Mesozoic granitoids with poor matrix permeability, are associated with regional-scale faults or shear zone systems and are characterized by multiple ore stages and complex spatial distributions of mineralization ( The Jiaodong Peninsula, located along the southeastern margin of the North China Craton (NCC), is bounded to the west by the Mesozoic granitoid intrusions occupy about 43% of the surface area of the Jiaobei uplifted block and either host (>95%) or are spatially associated with all the major gold deposits in the Jiaodong Peninsula ( Two main phases of deformation in Jiaodong have been identified by regional tectonic studies (e.g., The Xinli gold deposit is located ∼30 km northwest of the city of Laizhou. The deposit is spatially related to the SCF zone ( The SCF zone, from its hanging wall to its distal footwall, can be divided into a cataclastic subzone in the hanging wall, a fault core including gouge and mylonite, a footwall cataclastic subzone, and a joint subzone ( Alterations in the Xinli gold deposit mainly include sericitization, silicification, sulphidation, K–feldspar alteration, chloritization and carbonatization ( From our studies of mineral paragenesis, ore structures, and vein geometry, we distinguished five stages of mineralization in the ore-bearing lode systems: (I) pyrite–K-feldspar–sericite–quartz; (II) quartz–pyrite; (III) quartz–polymetallic sulphide; (IV) quartz–galena–sphalerite; and (V) quartz–calcite. Stage I is defined by milky white quartz veinlets or pods, with K-feldspar and variable amounts of sericite in the surrounding alteration zones. Minor grain-scale disseminated, coarse, euhedral and subhedral pyrite crystals occur in this stage with no gold deposition ( Stage III is characterized by large amounts of sulphide minerals (pyrite, galena, sphalerite and chalcopyrite with minor arsenopyrite) and constitutes the major gold mineralization period. Quartz is smoky-grey and pyrite occurs as fine-grained, subhedral and anhedral aggregates. The other sulphide minerals are characterized by fine-grained, anhedral aggregates, typically filling microcracks in pyrite and quartz. Gold mainly fills microcracks within pyrite, and less commonly within quartz, sphalerite and galena ( Stage IV consists of smoky-grey quartz veins containing only galena and sphalerite ( Attitudes of the SCF plane, average gold concentration, and orebody thickness were measured from 97 drifts at −165 m, −200 m, −240 m, −320 m, −360 m, and −400 m underground levels in the deposit ( The distribution patterns of gold concentrations were modeled by the multifractal box-gliding method (MBGM) as described by The multifractal spectrum with an inverse bell shape is composed by the To investigate how parts of gold concentrations correlate at different length scales, the Hurst exponent is used. The calculation procedure for the Hurst exponent can be found in Contour maps of fault attitudes, average gold concentration, orebody thickness, multifractal parameters (Δ The contour maps of dip directions and dip angles of the SCF plane and the orebody thickness and average gold concentration of each drift are illustrated in K-feldspar alteration in the Xinli gold deposit is characterized as replacement of original igneous plagioclase by secondary K-feldspar, as indicated by embayments of K-feldspar in plagioclase and by inclusions of relict plagioclase in K-feldspar ( This metasomatic reaction requires the migration of alkalis to and from the reaction site. The sericite alteration involved the transformation of both K-feldspar and plagioclase to sericite ( The ΔG values for reactions 2 and 3 are −90.016 kJ and −123.994 kJ, respectively. As shown above, these two reactions are characterized by the consumption of H K-feldspar alteration weakens rock due to replacement of plagioclase by relatively weaker K-feldspar (reaction 1, The contour maps of Δ There is lack of spatial correlation between the Δ Based on the spatial distributions of orebodies and alteration zones and their relationship with the SCF zone ( The reactions 1–3 described in The value of ΔV during K-feldspar alteration is +9% ( Veins in ore stages III, IV and V dominantly have NE, E–W and N–S orientations ( Based on the spatial distributions of multifractal parameters and Hurst exponent, the different permeability distributions in areas of southwestern bend, central bend-free and northeastern bend in the Xinli gold deposit can be distinguished. The central bend-free area has high Δ The gold concentrations with anti-persistent distribution in the central bend-free area, together with the narrow alteration halo, thin orebody ( A looped mineralization process with intervening structural and fluid-rock reaction controls can be envisaged from this study: (1) Before mineralization, the SCF with fault bends and its secondary faults were formed. The fault bends, as detected from changes in dip directions and dip angles of the SCF plane, controlled large-volume fluid flow and formation of ore-shoots. (2) When the ore fluid permeated along the SCF, the granitoid wallrock produced K-feldspar and sericite alterations with 9% volume increase and 8–57% volume decrease, respectively. Volume decrease during sericite alteration resulted in grain-scale permeability structures, which later inter-connected with each other to form voids on a larger scale and controlled the formation of gold–quartz–pyrite pods. (3) The rock softening produced by alterations promoted the activities of SCF secondary faults and formation of new fractures controlling the gold–quartz–polymetallic sulfide veins. Evolution of rock permeability in the Xinli gold deposit can be recognized by two periods, i.e., early permeability formation and destruction controlled by sericite alteration and gold–quartz–pyrite precipitation, respectively, and late permeability rebuilding and destruction separately controlled by fracturing and precipitation of gold–quartz–polymetallic sulfide. The southwestern and northeastern bend areas, which have similar alterations and mineralization, have persistent and anti-persistent permeability networks, respectively. They were likely caused by different processes of rebuilding permeability due to different stress states resulting from the changes in fault geometry. We thank Editor Joao Hippertt, the reviewers Alain Chauvet and Tom Blenkinsop and another anonymous reviewer for their constructive comments and insightful guidance. Prof. Stephen Cox and Dr. Jing Chen are also thanked for advice in improving structure explanation. This research was jointly supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at