Rapid grain growth during the early stage of sintering has been found in many nano material systems including cemented tungsten carbide WC–Co. To date, however, there have been few reported studies in the literature that deal directly with the kinetics or the mechanisms of this part of grain growth. In this work, the grain growth of nanosized WC during the early stages of sintering was studied as a function of temperature and time. The effects of other influencing factors, such as the initial grain size, cobalt content, and the grain growth inhibitor VC, were investigated. The kinetics of the grain growth process was analyzed and the evolution of the morphology of WC grains during heating-up was studied using high resolution scanning electron microscopy. The results showed that the grain growth process consists of an initial stage rapid growth process which typically takes place during heat-up and the normal grain growth during isothermal holding. The initial rapid grain growth is at least partially attributed to the process of coalescence of grains via elimination common grain boundary. The preferred orientation between WC grains within the aggregates is considered a favorable condition for coalescence of grains, hence rapid grain growth. The solution–reprecipitation process is considered a mechanism of coalescence.Conventional cemented tungsten carbide with tungsten carbide (WC) embedded in a ductile metal matrix such as cobalt represents a class of composite materials termed cermets. The properties of cemented tungsten carbide depend primarily on cobalt content and grain sizes of WC. Typical cemented tungsten carbide (WC–Co) composites contain 3–30 Cemented tungsten carbide is typically sintered via liquid phase sintering in vacuum at approximately 1400 The rapid grain growth during early stage of sintering has also been observed in many other materials. Malow and Koch Although the rapid grain growth during the early stage of sintering plays a significant role in determining the final microstructure, there has been little reported in the literature that provides details of the process and the mechanisms of this part of grain growth. In classic sintering theories, the grain growth process can occur by either grain boundary migration or Oswald ripening, also termed coarsening, in the case of liquid phase sintering. Many researches have found the grain growth of nanoparticles with grain growth exponent larger than 3 The purpose of this research is to seek fundamental understandings of the mechanisms of the initial grain growth through a comprehensive investigation of the evolution of the nanosized particles during sintering. The grain growth of nanosized WC–Co powders was studied by tracking the changes of grain sizes and morphology of grains during heat-up as well as isothermal hold. The kinetics of grain growth during the early and later stages of sintering was analyzed. The rapid grain growth in the early stage is attributed to the oriented aggregation and coalescence of the nanosized particles. The effects of initial grain size, cobalt and grain growth inhibitor on the initial stage grain growth are discussed. The nanosized tungsten carbide and cobalt (WC–Co) powders used in this study were produced using a high energy dual-drive planetary mill (HE-DPM) in heptane Sintering experiments of powders were carried out at temperatures from 800 to 1400 To study the early stage of sintering, powders were heated to preset temperatures in a vacuum furnace with a heating rate of 10 To determine the grain sizes of as-milled powders and the sintered samples, X-ray diffraction line broadening and quantitative microscopy techniques were applied. The former is used when grain sizes are smaller than approximately 100 High resolution scanning electron microscopy (Philips XL30 ESEM) was used to examine the microstructure evolutions. When grain sizes were larger than 100  The plot of WC grain size of WC–10Co_10 In order to understand the entire grain growth process, isothermal sintering experiments were carried out at 1100  To study the WC grain growth process, high resolution SEM microstructural examinations were conducted to observe the evolution of the grain structure vs. temperature during heat-up, as shown in The effect of the initial WC grain size of the starting powder on grain growth during heat-up is shown in The role of cobalt during liquid phase sintering of cemented tungsten carbide WC–Co is well understood. The role of cobalt on It has been well documented in the literature that the grain growth of WC–Co materials can be mitigated by adding inhibitors such as Cr The experimental results described above demonstrate that the initial stage grain growth during heat-up is an important part of the overall grain growth process and contributes significantly to the final grain size. First, during stage III, isothermal grain growth can be described by the equation: Eq.  However, the isothermal grain growth law as shown by Eq. The grain growth of fine cemented tungsten carbide during heat-up is a fact that is recognized by many in the field. However, there are few reported studies that focus on this issue. A common explanation for the grain growth during heat-up is that it is accomplished by the same classic coarsening process as it is during the liquid phase sintering stage. According to this mechanism, as the samples are heated to elevated temperatures, WC will dissolve in the cobalt that is presumably spread around the WC grains. During isothermal hold and cooling, C and W will reprecipitate as WC from the oversaturated Co onto existing WC grains. This classic coarsening of larger particles at the expense of smaller ones does not explain the layered morphology of WC crystal platelets that were observed at moderate sintering temperatures. Furthermore, based on In the context of the discussion of coalescence, it is also useful to consider grain growth as crystal growth after nucleation. A crystal seed, i.e., a very small grain will grow in either of two ways – amplification or multiplication. Amplification is the steady outward growth of a crystal by deposition of new atoms on its surface. Multiplication describes the “stacking up” and merge of many grains as building blocks. Coarsening in its narrow sense as defined by Oswald ripening, is a process of the amplification, while the coalescence is the multiplication of the crystals. Coarsening is a much more well-established theory It is also important to note that the term coalescence can refer to either the coalescence of particles or that of grains. When coalescence is used to refer to the combination of two particles into one, it is essentially the process of sintering and forming of a neck between them. In this article, the focus is on the coalescence of grains which describes the merge of neighboring grains and the elimination of their common grain boundaries. The coalescence can be accomplished by either conventional boundary migration or direct elimination of common boundaries. Needless to say, the coalescence of grains can occur only if the grains are already bonded to each other and have a grain boundary, or the coalescence of the particles must take place first. There are several indications based on the results of the present study that coalescence plays an important role in the rapid grain growth of WC–Co during heating. Another possibility is that the crystal growth could follow a spiral surface growth mechanism that would also generate a “layered” morphology. However, Furthermore, although Although the results presented in this article do not include any direct evidence of the mechanism for coalescence, the layered morphology of the aggregates provides a clue to understanding the process of coalescence.  The question remains, however, regarding the exact mechanism that causes the change of the orientation of at least one of the coalescing grains. The grain growth process during the sintering of nanosized WC–Co powders can be treated as consisting of an initial slow stage I, a rapid grain growth stage II, and a latter stage III. In the initial stages (I and II) grain growth takes place during heat-up, while the latter stage of grain growth occurs after the isothermal holding temperature is reached. Kinetic grain growth data and evolution of the morphologies and aggregation of WC grains suggest that the initial grain growth of nanoscaled WC occurs by coalescence of neighboring grains, especially those with preferred orientations. The effect of Co demonstrates that the solution–reprecipitation mechanism contributes not only to grain growth by coarsening but also to grain growth by coalescence. This research was supported by US Department of Energy, Industrial Technology Program Under Contract No. DE-FC36-04GO14141. The authors thank Kennametal Inc. and Smith International Inc. for their in-kind cost share support and supplying raw materials.