This paper describes, in detail, the treatment of a copper/molybdenum sulfide ore (0.94% Cu and 0.05% Mo) using emulsified oil extender flotation (Ext-F) at laboratory scale. Results obtained were compared with a “standardized” mill laboratory procedure, measuring concentrate grade and recovery (size by size results included), “true” (bubbles–particles attachment only) flotation recoveries and process kinetics. The Ext-F technique yielded higher metallurgical efficiencies, especially for the fines (<37 μm), than the mill standard with emulsified diesel oil (>60 g t−1). Concentrate recoveries with 60–90 g t−1 Diesel oil droplets (3–6 µm) and their process kinetic values were always of the order of 3–6% higher, at similar concentrate grades, either for copper or molybdenum sulfides. Size by size flotation results proved that metallurgical and kinetic gains can be attributed, mainly, to fines (37–5 microns) and ultrafines (<5 μm) enhancement (8–15% higher). Data obtained are discussed in terms of chemical, physical and physicochemical parameters related to a better oil attachment and capture of particles by bubbles. Thus, it is believed that the emulsified oil droplets interact firstly with the mineral surfaces, then spread out as oil lenses, enhance hydrophobicity and allow aggregation of the very fines. Theses stages do not occur markedly when the oil does not interact properly with the collector-coated sulfides (low chemical affinity) or when the oil was not emulsified. The potential (advantages) of the Ext-F technique for fine ore processing and the practical forms for industrial oil emulsification are envisaged.One of the major (and old) technical challenges in the area of mineral processing is the recovery, by flotation, of the fine (< Some agreement appears to exist in that the actual flotation recovery problem appears to be caused by their physical intrinsic properties of these fine particles: small mass and or/momentum, high interfacial free energy. There is a consensus that main flotation drawbacks are low probability of bubble–particle collision and adhesion, formation of dense froths and low process kinetics. A great deal of fine minerals is discarded as slime prior to flotation due to the lack of effective recovery methods. Regarding metallic sulfide ores, flotation plants have been historically designed to recover mid-sized particles (Cu or Mo) having good liberation and high flotation rate constant. All grinding, classification stages, pulp conditioning, flotation cells, flow-sheets or tailings units have not been properly optimized for the fine fractions, ever! ( For an efficient mineral flotation (recoveries) there must to be an optimal bubble size and bubbles size distribution whereby particles “capture” by bubbles reaches a maximum. Thus, should the ore feed is composed of a wide particle size distribution (fines, mid-sized and coarse fractions) theoretically the flotation cell should have a wide bubble size distribution, including fine bubbles, suitable to catch the fine particles ( Hydrodynamic conditions in the actual conditioners (actually pulp distributors) do not allow intensive particle–particle interaction, leading to fines aggregation, which might decrease the capture problem by bubbles. Different alternatives for enhanced mineral fines recovery have been proposed over the last three decades but unfortunately most of them have not found practical applications yet ( Thus, selective flocculation requires high polymer adsorption selectivity and unfortunately this is the main limiting factor. Most flocculants are not truly "specific" polymers and usually adsorb unselectively onto gangue, middling or valuable particles, flocculating them altogether. All ideas tested to solve these drawbacks have not succeeded ( Yet, some practical alternatives to reduce losses in the fines are under way, namely: Reduction of the fines generation in the mill; Optimization of the “capture” stage; Selective aggregation of the fines; Recovery of the fines in tailings plants. The alternatives for reducing the generation of fines are possible by controlling and optimizing crushing, grinding and re-grinding stages, classification of the flotation feed into fines and coarse circuits. More, Unit and/or “Rougher-flash” operations because separate off (from the conventional flotation circuit) a fairly rich concentrate (as final product) reduce substantially the mass to an eventual rougher concentrate re-grinding. Regarding the optimization of the “capture” (collection) stage, all existing models are addressed to the need for a wide bubble size distribution (100 μm–2 mm) to obtain a better size-by-size flotation ( However, conventional cells do not provide sufficient bubbles in the range < Aggregation of particles, with the use of reagents (surfactants and oils), to solve the problems of fineness has been attempted by many ways ( Non-polar oils have been also used to aggregate (agglomeration, in this case) fine particles at varying oil/solids ratio. The higher the oil concentration, the bigger are the agglomerates being formed. These units may be separated either using air bubbles (low oil/solids ratio) or by gravity when agglomerate sizes are bigger (high oil dosages). The latter is known as oil-agglomeration process or spherical agglomeration ( However, there is a situation, not much explored, whereby the oil interact firstly (as droplets) with the hydrophobic mineral surfaces, then spreads it out as an oil layer. This leads to an optimised flotation, known as “extender” flotation, which appears to combine an enhanced hydrophobicity with some degree of particle aggregation ( More, oils may be added as coarse droplets or as emulsified (micro-droplets) in concentrations of the order of 20–100 g t The aim of this work is to compare, at laboratory scale, standardized flotation tests with flotation techniques based on oil extender using emulsified oils (various kinds). Comparisons were measured through the separation parameters: grade, recovery (global and true flotation) and flotation rate constants included size-by-size results to assess the flotation behavior of the fine fractions (Cu and Mo). Ore. Copper porphyry samples, containing 0.94–0.98% Cu and 0.04–0.06% Mo, were supplied by Codelco—Chile. Yet, the emphasis, in this work, was given to the copper sulfides as they are the main (worthy) minerals in the company ore. About 1/3 of the mass and about 37% of the total copper content is in the fines and ultrafines fractions. Common collectors and frothers mixtures for copper and molybdenum sulfides were used. Lime, as pH regulator to pH 10.5 was added at the conditioning stage together with SF-113 (sodium isopropyl xanthate) at 30 g t Diesel oil has a density of 0.83 g cm Conventional, “standardized” (mill) kinetic flotation tests were conducted in a 3 L laboratory Denver D12 cell. Conditioning of the feed (38% solids content, pH 10.5), at 1000 rpm (no turbulence), was performed in the same flotation cell, during 3 min to allow collector and frother adsorption. Data (quadruplicate) were obtained from concentrates taken at 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 min flotation using a mechanical scrapper and keeping constant the pulp volume. Samples (concentrates and tailings) were then filtered, dried, weighed and analyzed for copper and molybdenum by atomic absorption. The Rinf and Extender flotation. Here, oil-in-water emulsions were prepared using a high free rotational speed stirrer (Turrax) up to 23.000 rpm, during 10 min, at various oil concentrations. These figures show that a D50 of about 3 μm was obtained for the droplets, independently on oil type and concentration. The 15 g L The “extender” oils were used as an extra reagent added after the collector and frother addition during the conventional conditioning. Oil concentrations studied were 30, 60, 90 and 120 g t All concentrates were analyzed by the content of Cu and Mo and the process efficiency was measured by evaluating separation parameter recovery, “true” recovery (  Comparative results of emulsified extender flotation of Cu–Mo sulfides ( Flotation results, not shown here, with the non-emulsified oils, were unsatisfactory and produced a significant froth height reduction (depletion). This problem was minimal for either emulsified DO or K, showing stable and fluids froths. According to    Therefore, it is believed that during oil extender, enhanced hydrophobicity and aggregation of the fines themselves or with coarser particles (carrier) takes place. This may explain, results obtained, higher recoveries, equal concentrates grades and improved process kinetics. Thus, in this oil extender technique, hydrophobic aggregation would occur after the spreading of the oil at the collector-coated particles (fines and ultrafines) improving the capture of either the hydrophobic enhanced particles or the aggregates ( More, the effect is somewhat more effective with oils having aromatics content, below about 40% but with naphtenic fractions, and comprising chain lengths of from about 17 to about twenty-two carbon atoms. These extender oils had to be highly emulsified and are exemplified, in this work by the Diesel Oil and Esso 2600 brand ( This work is being continued, now at pilot plant scale, and results will be published in the very near future. The emulsification system, being employed at pilot plant scale (pictured in Results found in this work showed that “extender” flotation with emulsified diesel oil (> The authors are thankful to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil and Chile. Jorge Rubio would like to thank to all the students who did the hard work.