This paper presents analytical models describing heap leaching. The models are based on the Bernoulli equation, using constitutive equations for different levels, particles, and heaps, to identify the leaching times characteristic of each scale of operation. Since the models are simple in form they can be applied to analytical problems, optimization, scaling, and design. Also, the form in which these models are designed can be used for consideration of other levels or phenomena according to the problem at hand. Of the family of models, the one having first order kinetics has been applied in different situations. The model was first compared with experimental values obtained for different heights of the heap, producing satisfactory results. The model was then evaluated using values obtained from a variation of the model of Dixon and Hendrix, using different particle sizes and superficial velocities; the results obtained by Dixon and Hendrix were reproduced, including extrapolation and interpolation of the variables.Modeling is an objective-oriented activity. Considering that models are used for various reasons, such as in designs, control of operations, planning, optimization, scaling, and analysis, it becomes clear that a series of differently applicable models is required. For example, a phenomenological model, based on a series of partial differential equations, may be useful for bettering our understanding of a system, but this type of model would not be of great help when we wish to make a scaling for purposes of design. Similarly, a steady state model may be useful for the design of equipment, although not be very useful for obtaining automatic control of any given system. Modeling is a fundamental step in engineering, since it allows us to understand or represent the behavior of a system. If we are not capable of adequately representing a system, we may not be able to scale-up, design, optimize, or control the system. Similarly, each model is associated with an intrinsic cost, in terms of parameters to be determined, data necessary, expertise of the modeler, and computational method. If one needs to use a model within a more general computational framework, as in heap leach planning, one can consider simple models; but still accurate enough in relation to its desired objectives. The range of uses of heap leaching has been expanded in recent years by the mining industry and is presently applied in the treatment of copper, zinc, gold, caliche (saltpeter), and other minerals. Several different types of models have been developed with regard to heap leaching, from very simple empirical models using equations with first order kinetics, to complex models which consider various aspects of the operation such as heat transfer and the presence of solid, liquid, and gaseous phases. Thus, for example, early models considered the first order kinetics equation, which could be used on a group of data based on fixed conditions (e.g height of the heap, irrigation rate, particle size, etc.). With the exception of time, this equation was not useful for making interpolations or extrapolations. In contrast, some investigators ( Various researchers have developed phenomenological models for modeling heap leaching, among which the studies by The object of the present study is to develop a series of simple and precise models which can be used to interpolate and extrapolate to the behavior of heaps. The models are developed based on an n-order kinetic equation of the Bernoulli type, complementing these with the intuition obtained from more complex models. We also show how different controlling steps can be incorporated into this type of model. First order models are applied to real and hypothetical cases as examples, but it was not our objective to demonstrate all the alternatives for its application. In this section we develop models based on the In order to solve Eq. An important observation from the mathematical perspective is that if we take the limit when Up until now we have not introduced anything new, because these equations have been employed in various types of kinetic applications. Likewise, we have indicated that Considering that the leaching phenomenon occurs on different scales of size and time, and also in relation to different phenomenon that participate in the leaching process, one can use expressions similar to those presented in Eqs. At the particle level, These authors consider that the leaching heap represented a porous bulk formed of particles through which the leaching solution flowed at a constant rate. Based on this, they defined the dimensionless time of the bulk given by; Based on the time at the level of the heap, Eq. Thus, Eqs. We now assume inclusion of both scales in the processing of the heap, that is, both at the particle and the bulk level. We begin by considering that the total recovery will be the sum of the recoveries on both scales, that is: Considering that each recovery has an asymptotic behaviour with increasing time we also have: Replacing Eqs. As an example, when This particular equation has been shown to be very useful in modeling heap leaching, as will be demonstrated in the following section. Similarly, in the case where It is necessary to indicate that In this section we present applications of the models which were developed. It is not our intention to determine all the parameters for which the models can be applied for any given heap leaching. This task could be difficult to carry out, from the optimization point of view, given that the phenomena which occur in a heap depend on complex characteristics of the mineral. For example, the porosities and diffusivities may change with time and from one heap to another. It is therefore our intention to show how some selected uses can be made of these models. Let us consider that we have a group of leaching data for a mineral from tests which were carried out at different heights, and we wish to develop a model which represents these data and permits their interpolation. For this we will consider other variables such as porosities and particle size as constants. It is then possible to modify Eq. Observe that the independent variables are time ( Using data which represent leaching tests with copper minerals from northern Chile in heaps measuring 3, 6 and 9 m in height, a fit was made to Eq. The values obtained were Let us assume that we have a group of data on the leaching of a mineral, representing tests carried out on particles having different radii and that we wish to develop a model which represents these data. For this we will assume other variables, such as porosities, and particle size to be constant. It is then possible to modify Eq. Observe that the independent variables are time ( It is important to emphasize that the Dixon and Hendrix model was compared with experimental data, giving good results. The data used in the simulation of the model included The fit was carried out following a procedure similar to that previously indicated, but now using MS-Excel for carrying out the fit. Based on the nature of Eq. The results of the fit are shown in Let us assume that we have a group of data on leaching of a mineral representing tests carried out at different superficial bulk flow velocities and that we wish to develop a model which represents these data. For this we assume that the other variables such as porosities and particle size to be constant. It is then possible to modify Eq. Observe that the independent variables are time ( Since no experimental data were available, we again used data from a simulation of heaps following the Dixon and Hendrix phenomenological model. It must be emphasized that the Dixon and Hendrix model was compared with experimental data with different superficial velocities, giving good results. The data used included (same significance and units as above) The capacity for extrapolation of the model was now studied, fitting the parameters using the data with We have proposed a series of models for representing recovery in heap leaching. These models have been developed on the basis of the Bernoulli equation, using different time scales. The form of developing a model can be extended to other scales of time and can be modified according to the kinetics that describe or dominate the operation. We use the model of Dixon and Hendrix to identify the dimensionless times, but the procedure can be applied to other models proposed the literature. Based on the examples used, models with a reaction order Furthermore, these models can be used when we desire to analyze the leaching system, including different heaps available, and the management of solutions where the leaching time and the height of each heap can influence their design and operation as analyzed by LC and EG wish to thank CONICYT for financial support, through Fondecyt Project 1060342. Following To obtain analytical solutions, we consider the transformation, Now, by using the initial and boundary value condition, we obtain the solution, To find the delay in We have shown that