Toward a carbon neutral renewable energy conversion and storage device, we present a novel bio-inspired microbial supercapacitor, utilizing unique pseudocapacitance formed by exoelectrogen, a specific species of bacteria named Geobacter spp. grown on single-layer graphene film and 3D graphene-scaffold electrodes. Charging and discharging the microbial supercapacitor were performed by regulating the respiration of the exoelectrogen. Substantially high maximum current and power densities, 531.2A/m2 (1,060,000A/m3) and 197.5W/m2 (395,000W/m3), respectively, are marked. The microbial supercapacitor demonstrates high cycle stability of over 1 million. A specific capacitance of 17.85±0.91mF/cm2 is demonstrated, which is 4.4 fold to 2 orders of magnitude higher than previously reported supercapacitors having graphene-based electrodes, suggesting a promising alternative energy storage device. Furthermore, the microbial supercapacitor was used to deduce quantitative kinetic parameters of extracellular electron transfer (EET) by fitting discharging curves of the supercapacitor, which is critical to fully understand the EET of Geobacter spp. and determining the rate-limiting mechanism. At the initial-stage biofilm, the acetate turnover is the slowest among individual EET steps, whereas for fully-grown stage biofilm, kinetics of both acetate turnover and electron transfer from inside exoelectrogen to extracellular redox cofactors are rate-limiting. Our results also suggest cytochrome c may not be the main electron storage units of a microbial supercapacitor, regardless of initial- or fully-grown stage biofilms.Supercapacitors, or electrochemical capacitors, are attractive due to their high current and power densities, low maintenance, and high shelf and cycle lifetime In this work, we present a novel high performance microbial supercapacitor with both single-layer graphene and 3D graphene scaffold anodes which can store and release electrons produced by the metabolism of A schematic of the exoelectrogen, A single-layer graphene film prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on a thin film gold (  Charging and discharging current density of the microbial supercapacitor with a fully-grown biofilm were collected ( Cyclic charging and discharging of the microbial supercapacitor was performed for the cycle stability of the supercapacitor with 3D graphene scaffold anode and single-layer graphene film ( The power density and energy density of microbial supercapacitors are compared with other existing renewable and non-renewable batteries in addition to supercapacitors ( To further improve the performance of microbial supercapacitor and other microbial electrochemical techniques, understanding the limiting stage of EET is critical to facilitate the study of fundamental mechanisms within catabolic reactions in exoelectrogen Through non-linear fitting of the discharging curve, quantitative comparison of kinetics between initial and fully-grown biofilms was performed. Initial and fully-grown biofilms exhibited steady-state current densities of 1 Acetate turnover rate would be limited by the diffusion rate of NAD Besides the kinetic constants, it is informative on EET study to perform comparative analysis on the quantity of charges in initial and fully-grown biofilms.  The total charges contributing the discharging current were calculated by integrating discharging current over time ( The amount of We report a novel carbon-neutral, renewable microbial supercapacitor with 2D and 3D graphene-based electrodes. The microbial supercapacitor operates by utilizing unique pseudocapacitance formed by exoelectrogen, a specific species of microbe named The inoculum for the microbial supercapacitor was obtained from an acetate-fed microbial electrolysis cell (MEC) that had a Biofilm was broken into small pieces using a traditional pestle. Total genomic DNA was extracted using a PowerSoil DNA isolation kit (MO-BIO) according to the manufacturer׳s protocol. Amplicon libraries were constructed for 454 sequencing using the primer set 926F (5′–AAACTYAAAKGAATTGACGG-3′) and 1392R (5′–ACGGGCGGTGTGTRC-3′). The amplification of 16 The sffinfo command was used to extract fasta format (sequence data) and quality (quality scores) files from a raw.sff file with –s and –q options, respectively. The following steps were carried out by the QIIME (Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology). Output fasta and quality files were filtered to exclude sequences with lengths (<150 Anolyte/catholyte solutions were pumped into the corresponding chambers at a flow rate of 2 Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was measured by a potentiostat (Gamry Instruments). Anode potential was swept from −0.8 Biofilms were removed from electrodes using a pre-cleaned plastic blade and washed with PBS (phosphate buffered saline). Collected biofilms was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for 20 Biofilm catalytic process is illustrated, including a series of 4 steps We fitted the kinetics parameters of the 4-step EET process to the transient discharging current profile for both initial and fully-grown biofilms. Detailed description of these kinetics parameters is described in As a result, discharge profile for both initial and fully-grown biofilms were fitted through Eq. This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 