This article presents simple method for the OMC-6%Ni-6%Co (ordered mesoporous carbon containing Ni and Co metallic nanoparticles) catalyst synthesis with high surface area and more proper bimetallic nanoparticle dispersion; prepared successfully by soft template hydrothermal method and different zirconium loadings (0.5, 1, 2 wt %) accomplished by impregnation method, which was known as a desired method for the metal dispersion. The catalysts with/without promoter, were characterized by XRD, FTIR and N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms, FESEM, EDS, EDS mapping, HRTEM and TPR techniques and investigated in steam reforming of ethanol (SRE) at 250–400 °C. XRD and BET results indicated that zirconium addition more than 0.5% wt, decreased the average mesopore diameter of catalysts, total pore volume and particles size. Also, it was stated that Ni2+ and Co2+ were caught by the RF/F127 network and further reduced into metallic Ni and Co nanoparticles during the carbonization. The Ni and Co nanoparticles were well-dispersed in the OMC walls. FTIR spectroscopy revealed that F127 left the structure and formed the porous structure. TPR analysis of OMC-6%Ni-6%Co/2%Zr sample, indicated that the sample is reduced easily at low temperatures. FESEM and HRTEM images showed that carbon was precipitated in the CNT form on spent catalyst samples surfaces and confirmed the position of Ni and Co bimetallic nanoparticles on the CNTs tip in the OMC-6%Ni-6%Co/2%Zr sample. 2% Zr-promoted bimetallic catalyst revealed appropriate catalytic performance for SRE, such as high activity, hydrogen yield and proper stability due to the synergistic catalysis of cobalt and nickel. Also, effective factors, such as H2O/EtOH molar ratio and gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) were investigated on the OMC-6%Ni-6%Co/2%Zr catalyst sample.Energy sources, such as oil, coal and natural gas, have been used for construction and living so many years. Hydrogen is known as a reproducible energy source that is environmentally friendly with high yield during incorporation with fuel cells and as a carrier, produced by the steam reforming (SR) of natural gas from fossil-based materials mostly used as chemical raw material in petrochemical, food, electronics and metallurgical industries SRE is a carbon-neutral process too, since during the reforming process dropped carbon dioxide neutralized by the CO In addition, carbon monoxide is converted into carbon dioxide in the presence of water through the water gas shift (WGS) reaction (Eq. This reaction is the main stage for the reforming process due to the carbon monoxide destruction, which toxic noble metal catalysts and promotion of hydrogen produces. On the other hand, ethylene from the ethanol dehydration is decreased to carbonaceous species easily (Eqs. Carbon deposition also happens on catalyst via the Boudouard reaction (Eq. The use of a suitable catalyst not only speeds up this process and allows achieving higher ethanol conversion to hydrogen at lower temperatures, but it also influences the reaction pathway and thus products selectivity and coke formation. Various catalysts have been reviewed in order to maximize hydrogen selectivity and interdict coke constitution and CO production. According to previous reports, catalysts can be arranged into three kinds Another effective solution for enhancing the stability is bimetal catalyst usage All chemical reagents, namely high-purity analytical grade Triblock poly (ethylene oxide)-b-poly (propylene oxide)-b-poly (ethylene oxide) copolymer (Pluronic F127, Mw = 12600 g/mol, PEO106-PPO70-PEO106) (Sigma-aldrich), 1,3-Dihydroxybenzene (Resorcinol, Mw = 110.11 g/mol) (Merck, KGaA), Methanal (Formaldehyde, Mw = 30.03 g/mol) (Merck, KGaA, 36.5–38%), Ethanol absolute (Ethyl alcohol, Mw = 46.07 g/mol) (scharlau 99.9%), Sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH, Mw = 40 g/mol) (Merck, KGaA, 98%), Nickel (II) nitrate (Ni(NO OMC support and bimetallic catalyst supported on the OMC were successfully prepared by soft template hydrothermal route, which initially were used by Dia et al. To identify the structural features, purity and oxide phases formation of the catalysts, low (2θ In order to confirm XRD data and investigation of the absorbed bands, Fourier transformed infrared studies were carried out in KBr medium by a spectrometer (FT-IR, SHIMADZU) in the range of 400–4000 cm N The microstructure of the samples were investigated by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, MIRA3-TESCAN) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and a high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM, PHILIPS-CM3U) with an accelerating voltages of 150 kV approximately. Also for HRTEM observations, the samples were initially dispersed into the ethanol solution by an ultrasonic treatment for about 15 min. For appraising the reduction properties of prepared catalysts, the Temperature Programmed Reduction (TPR) analysis was carried out with Micromeritics TPD/TPR 2000 gas-adsorption equipment. Before the TPR, 50 mg catalyst were heated under an inert atmosphere (He) at 300 °C for 90 min. Next, this sample was subjected to a heat-treatment in a mixture of H The SRE process was investigated for analysis of catalytic performance and stability. The catalytic evaluation of the calcined samples was performed by a quartz tubular fixed bed continuous flow micro reactor at atmospheric pressure and different temperatures. Prior to the loading of the catalyst samples into the reactor, the samples were pressed, crushed and sieved to 40–60 mesh particles. Then 200 mg of the catalyst granules were loaded into the micro-reactor. Prior to each reaction the catalyst was reduced in pure H For studying the effect of temperature, the sample was cooled to 250 °C with N In order to realize the effect of feed ratio, the same gases with different molar ratios of about H For understanding the consequence of various GHSVs, the gases feed ratio, the reaction temperature and the reaction pressure were fixed on the S/E = 12, 375 °C and 1 atm, respectively. These measurements were performed by the GHSVs of 15000, 30000 and 45000 ml g The as-selected proper parameters of GHSV = 15000 ml g The gas composition of reactants (H Also, H XRD diffraction patterns of OMC support and Ni-Co bimetallic catalyst supported on OMC are presented in FTIR spectroscopy was carried out in 400–4000 cm There is a broad and strong band in 3400 cm N FESEM analysis was carried out in order to characterize surface and morphology of 2% Zr-promoted Ni-Co bimetallic catalyst supported on OMC. To obtain more information about Ni, Co and Zr metallic particles on carbon porous support, EDS mapping analysis was performed. Results are presented in In addition to EDS mapping analysis, TEM observations were done for both OMC-6Ni-6Co and OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst samples to investigate the distribution and dispersion of metallic and oxide particles on OMC support surface ( Temperature Programmed Reduction (TPR) of OMC-6Ni-6Co and OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst samples are shown in In unpromoted catalyst sample due to calcination in neutral atmosphere Ni and Co nanoparticles were in the form of metals and no oxide reduction reaction peak was observed. Only one broad peak was observed related to methanation reaction of OMC carbon support at 480–660 °C with the maximum at 540 °C. SRE catalyst performance by OMC-6Ni-6Co and OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst samples in the temperature range of 250–400 °C, atmosphere pressure and the S/E = 3 ratio was studied. For both catalyst samples, active species loadings (Ni-Co) were equal (6 wt%). According to the literature  Based on Since SRE reaction generally occurs significantly at temperatures higher than 400 °C that ethanol conversion is carried out completely. In this paper, because catalytic support is carbon of amorphous-type and evaporates at temperatures of approximately 400 °C or higher, therefore there was a limit for increasing to above 400 °C. Molina et al. The effect of S/E ratio on catalyst performance of SRE was evaluated with S/E = 3, 6 and 12. The effect of GHSV on ethanol conversion and products distribution in S/E = 12 ratio, 375 °C, atmosphere pressure and GHSV = 15000, 30000, 45000 ml g To perform stability test, catalyst performance was evaluated for both OMC-6Ni-6Co and OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst samples at highest S/E = 12 ratio, lowest GHSVE = 15000 ml g There are two types of possible carbon precipitation during SRE, amorphous carbon like coke and carbon nanotube (CNT). Usually, coke is made by ethylene decomposition during SRE while carbon nanotube is formed along with methane decomposition (Eq. It should be mentioned that Ni metal in Ni-Co bimetallic catalyst caused rapid decomposition of methane. Similarly, ethylene selectivity was reduced by increasing S/E and the lowest GHSV value, while it had the lowest sensibility to temperature Since the temperature range was 250–400 °C for catalyst performance and stability tests, formation of carbon nanotube by Boudouard reaction was neglected. Thus carbon nanotube formation was more possible from methane decomposition during SRE reaction. To confirm the formation of carbon precipitation on the surface of catalyst and determination of precipitated carbon type (coke or CNT), FESEM, HRTEM and EDS analysis were necessary. FESEM images for OMC-6Ni-6Co and OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst samples and EDS analysis for OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst sample were taken after stability test in 375 °C; presented in In OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr catalyst sample, Ni and Co metallic nanoparticles are on the tip of the CNTs so it could not surround the nanoparticles and deactivate the catalyst (indicated in the figure). On the other side, HRTEM micrographs were obtained for OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr to confirm the existence of CNTs and Ni and Co bimetallic nanoparticles on the tip of CNTs and results are showed in XRD characterization was carried out on OMC-6Ni-6Co/2Zr and OMC-6Ni-6Co catalyst samples after stability test ( The OMC-6Ni-6Co catalysts with/without promoter were prepared by self-assembly soft template hydrothermal route and impregnation method, and investigated in steam reforming of ethanol. The porous material indicates well-dispersed Ni and Co metal nanoparticles placed inside OMC wall. The Ni The author's thanks the