In this paper, oxidative leaching and electrowinnig processes were performed to recovery of mercury from spent tubular fluorescent lamps. Hypochlorite was found to be effectively used for the leaching of mercury to the solution. Mercury could be leached with an efficiency of 96% using 0.5M/0.2M NaOCl/NaCl reagents at 50°C and pH 7.5 for 2-h. Electrowinning process was conducted on the filtered leaching solutions and over the 81% of mercury was recovered at the graphite electrode using citric acid as a reducing agent. The optimal process conditions were observed as a 6A current intensity, 30g/L of reducing agent concentration, 120min. electrolysis time and pH of 7 at the room temperature. It was found that current intensity and citric acid amount had positive effect for mercury reduction. Recovery of mercury in its elemental form was confirmed by SEM/EDX. Oxidative leaching with NaOCl/NaCl reagent was followed by electrowinning process can be effectively used for the recovery of mercury from spent fluorescent lamps.Waste of electrical and electronic equipment commonly known as e-waste includes various forms of all electric and electronic apparatus which are at the end of its life. Some e-wastes such as televisions, computer monitors and fluorescent lamps contain Hg (mercury) ( Hydrometallurgy process called as leaching had been widely applied for metal recovery from electronic wastes because of its’ flexible and energy-saving characteristics ( In order to recovery of mercury from the leaching solution, it needs to be reduced to its elemental state (Hg In the present study, electrowinning process was applied for convert mercury to its metallic state after oxidative (hypochlorite) leaching of mercury from spent tubular fluorescent lamps. The optimal process conditions for high efficiency of recovery were identified. Spent fluorescent lamps were collected from hospitals, schools and factories in the city center of Isparta, Turkey. T8 and T12 linear (tubular) types of spent fluorescent lamps were selected for study owing to their high rate of consumption around the world ( To determine the initial mercury concentration of lamps, 20 Leaching process was followed by electrowinning and oxidative leaching solution was used as electrolyte in this process. The reaction system was comprised of a 150 Citric acid (C The graphite electrodes were analyzed before and after of electrowinnig process by scanning electron microscope coupled with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrophotometer (SEM/EDX) (FEI Quanta250 FEG) to investigate the elemental compositions. Oxidative leaching tests were carried out to determine the optimal leaching conditions in terms of simultaneous mercury extractions. Mercury could be leached by NaOCl/NaCl reagent with an efficiency of 96% from real spent fluorescent lamps at 2-h contact time, 50 Complex of HgCl ANOVA method was used to evaluate the effect of the main factors on the process of electrowinning and the results were summarized in It was found that current intensity (A) and citric acid amount (B) had positive effect for mercury reduction ( On the other hand, the main effect of electrolysis time (factor C) did not significantly influence mercury reduction. Interaction effects of citric acid amount and electrolysis time (BC) had little negative influence (−8.2%) on mercury recovery ( Overall the results indicated that higher mercury recovery efficiencies could be reached with electrowinning experiments. The optimal process conditions were observed to be 6 SEM/EDX analyses of graphite electrode were obtained before and after the electrowinning process. The oxidative leaching and electrowinning processes were performed to recovery of mercury from spent tubular fluorescent lamps. The experiments were conducted on pulverized mixture samples of T8 and T12 lamp types. Mercury could be leached with an efficiency of 96% using NaOCl/NaCl reagent. The maximum electrowinning efficiency was calculated as 81%. It was found that current intensity and citric acid amount had positive effect for mercury reduction. Electrolysis time did not significantly influence the efficiency of electrowinning process. Recovery of mercury in its elemental form was confirmed by SEM/EDX. The oxidative leaching with NaOCl/NaCl reagent was followed by electrowinning process approach appears to be technical feasibility of the mercury from spent fluorescent lamps. In the future studies, the researchers can focus on using of different types, materials and numbers of electrodes in the process to improve the mercury recovery. Furthermore, the economical evaluations should be conducted prior to each specific application. The authors would like to thank to Erik Zimmerman from Permascand AB for providing the DSA Anodes. This work was supported by research grants from