The scavenging of molybdenum from MnSO4 solution with freshly precipitated “nascent” Mn3O4 is reported. Firstly, nascent Mn3O4 was prepared from MnSO4 solution by adding NaOH and aerating. The aeration time had a significant influence on the preparation of nascent Mn3O4, but other factors such as pH and ageing time had little effect. SEM, XRD, particle size and surface area analysis were used to characterize nascent Mn3O4. A study was then carried out on the effects of time, concentration of Mn, initial pH, temperature and dosage of nascent Mn3O4 on the adsorption of Mo from MnSO4 solution. The results showed that the concentration of Mo in 70–200gL−1 MnSO4 at pH 1–3 could be reduced from about 1mgL−1 to less than 0.015mgL−1 in 30min at 80°C by the addition of about 0.3gL−1 nascent Mn3O4 in suspension. Accordingly, the removal capacity of nascent Mn3O4 can reach 4.42mg Mo/g Mn3O4. This Mo removal exceeds the requirement for special electrolytic MnO2 used in the production of alkaline zinc–manganese batteries.For mercury-free alkaline zinc–manganese batteries, molybdenum is one of the most harmful impurity elements in electrolytic manganese dioxide ( Up to now, sulfide precipitation and adsorption/co-precipitation are commonly used techniques for the removal of Mo from MnSO Some adsorbents, such as hydrous anatase ( Mn All reagents used were analytical grade and the solutions were prepared in distilled water. The self-made nascent Mn A portion of the Mn Each experiment, unless stated otherwise, was carried out using 150 In order to investigate the effects of aeration time, pH of solution and ageing time on the adsorption properties of nascent Mn  To assess the effect of pH on nascent Mn The effect of ageing time ranging from 1 to 6 The X-ray diffraction pattern ( In order to understand and effectively remove Mo from MnSO The effect of reaction time on the Mo adsorption was examined at 50 The effect of MnSO Since the actual MnSO  The maximum adsorption was obtained at pH values between 1 and 3 when the Mo adsorption of the neutral species was >98% and the remaining Mo was under 0.02 The reaction temperature was the other major factor that was investigated under the otherwise same conditions. Clearly the dosage of nascent Mn  In the process of nascent Mn The main factors that strongly affect the adsorption of Mo with nascent Mn This research was supported by the National High-tech R&D Programs of China (863 Programs) (No.2006AA06Z122 and No.2007AA06Z129).