The benefits of bisphosphonates are well documented, but prolonged use has been associated with atypical femur fractures. Radiographic markers for fracture predisposition could potentially aid in safer medication use. In this case–control designed study, we compared hip radiographic parameters and the demographic characteristics of chronic bisphosphonate users who sustained an atypical femoral fracture with a group of chronic bisphosphonate users who did not sustain an atypical femur fracture and also a group who sustained an intertrochanteric hip fracture. Radiographic parameters included were neck-shaft angle (NSA), hip-axis length (HAL) and center-edge angle (CE). Multivariate regression was used to evaluate the relationship between radiographic measures and femur fracture. Receiver-operating characteristic analysis determined cut-off points for neck-shaft angle and risk of atypical femur fracture. Ultimately, pre-fracture radiographs of 53 bisphosphonate users who developed atypical fracture were compared with 43 asymptomatic chronic bisphosphonate users and 64 intertrochanteric fracture patients. Duration of bisphosphonate use did not statistically differ between users sustaining atypical fracture and those without fracture (7.9 [±3.5] vs. 7.7 [±3.3] years, p=0.7). Bisphosphonate users who fractured had acute/varus pre-fracture neck-shaft angles (p<0.001), shorter hip-axis length (p<0.01), and narrower center-edge angles (p<0.01). Regression analysis revealed associations between neck-shaft angle (OR=0.89 [95% CI=0.81–0.97; p=0.01), center edge angle (OR=0.89 [95% CI=0.80–0.99]; p=0.03), and BMI (OR=1.15 [95% CI=1.02–1.31; p=0.03) with fracture development. ROC curve analysis (AUC=0.67 [95% CI=0.56–0.79]) determined that a cut-off point for neck-shaft angle <128.3° yielded 69% sensitivity and 63% specificity for development of atypical femoral fracture. Ultimately, an acute/varus angle of the femoral neck, high BMI, and narrow center-edge angle were associated with development of atypical femur fracture in long-term bisphosphonate users. Patients on long-term bisphosphonates should be regularly radiographically evaluated in order to assess for potential risk of atypical fracture.Nearly half of all women and up to a quarter of men aged 50 Recent publications have identified an association of long-term bisphosphonate therapy with the development of atypical subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femoral fractures Few advancements have been made in either the understanding of the pathomechanics of these injuries and the identification of the patients at risk for atypical femur fractures. There is a paucity of scientific studies focusing on lower limb geometry and those few available have been limited in their scope. The 2013 ASBMR Task Force on Atypical Femoral Fractures argued for an expansion of the knowledge base characterizing the geometric risk factors predisposing to atypical femoral fracture The research protocol and all procedures followed were in accordance with and approved by the Institutional Review Board. Between 2004 and 2013, 69 consecutive chronic bisphosphonate patients, each sustaining either unilateral or bilateral atypical femoral fractures, were treated at our institution after identification of radiographic findings consistent with complete or incomplete bisphosphonate-associated lesions (“Atypical Femoral Fracture” patients, AFF). Patient presentation or referral was based on previous identification of radiographic findings consistent with bisphosphonate associated changes or painful symptomatology which was followed-up with radiographic imaging to confirm the diagnosis. Registry data was collected by trained research personnel from the patient lists of two trauma fellowship-trained orthopedic surgeons For inclusion within this study, the following criteria were applied: history of long-term bisphosphonate use (3 In this case–control designed study, the radiographic measurements of the AFF group were compared with two other patient groups 1) an independent asymptomatic long-term bisphosphonate user group who did not develop atypical femoral fractures (“No Femoral Fracture” patients, NFF) and 2) an independent general population intertrochanteric femur fracture group (ITF). The NFF registry was maintained by our medical endocrinology group and includes patients who were enrolled between 2009 and 2012 and agreed to a regular follow-up regimen with radiographs obtained at each visit (findings published in 2012) During the course of our chart review, we attempted to procure radiographs taken from either or, when available, both femora of all patients. When satisfactory pre-lesion radiographs were available bilaterally, both sides were measured and the mean value was used for our analyses. Proper femoral rotation and radiographic alignment were evaluated based on the prominence of the lesser trochanter. All films used for measurements had been captured as part of a standard of care treatment within the image archiving computerized storage system (PACS, GE Waukeshau Wi, Seimens, Erhlanger, Germany) of our hospital system. The geometric hip measurements obtained included neck-shaft angle (NSA), hip-axis length (HAL), and the center-edge (CE) angle of Wiberg ( Based on the inter-rater evaluation study published by Karanicolas et al. (2010), reliability of NSA and HAL measurements was compared by using triplicate measurements on 30 randomly selected radiographs Basic patient demographics, duration of bisphosphonate use (for AFF and NFF groups), and the radiographic measures described were recorded. Missing data ranged from 1 to 9% for measures of height, BMI, bisphosphonate duration, and the radiographic measurements. Continuous variables (excluding duration of bisphosphonate use) were analyzed between the three-groups by using one-way ANOVA and categorical comparisons were made by using Chi-square analysis. Post-hoc analysis included Tukey pairwise comparisons to look at individual differences between the groups. Comparison of duration of bisphosphonate use was performed between the AFF and NFF groups by using a Student's Among the bisphosphonate users (AFF Fifty-three AFF patients with 63 femora radiographs were identified. Radiographic measurements of the AFF group were compared with 43 NFF patients with 80 femora radiographs and 64 ITF patients with 79 femora films. Patient demographic characteristics and results from statistically significant comparisons are displayed in Mean NSA measurement for all three groups was 129.5 [± Logistic regression model analysis using a grouped AFF With this study we have demonstrated an association between acute (varus) neck-shaft angle proximal femur anatomy and the development of atypical femoral fractures after long-term bisphosphonate use. While no definitive conclusions can be reached regarding the role that altered proximal femoral anatomy plays in the development of atypical fractures, the establishment of an association may help physicians safely manage patients who are prescribed bisphosphonates. There are a variety of treatment options available to the osteoporotic patient and these include bisphosphonates, estrogen replacement, selective estrogen receptor modulators, Denosumab and Teriparatide Unfortunately, the ubiquity of bisphosphonate therapy for the treatment of osteoporotic patients estranges a cohort who may ultimately succumb to a dangerously silent milieu of micro-anatomic changes Several studies have reported the use of proximal femur geometrics as markers for risk of osteoporosis related fragility fracture. In 1999, Gnudi et al. published findings from 111 Caucasian post-menopausal women and 329 Caucasian controls. Their comparison found that valgus NSA (wide-angle) and longer HAL were associated with greater risk of femoral neck and trochanteric hip fracture Our group of patients with bisphosphonate-associated atypical femur fracture seem distinctly different from those identified as at risk in studies of osteoporosis related fractures There are several limitations to this study. While we took as many precautions as possible to de-identify patients during radiographic measurements, surgeons could have recalled the patients they treated, thus leading to bias. There remains the possibility of measurement error during radiographic evaluation. There is also potential for limb rotation to confound radiographic readings even with a standardized technique for positioning and radiographic assessment. Nonetheless, our studies mean measurements, particularly NSA (mean The results of this study demonstrated that chronic bisphosphonate users who developed symptomatic atypical femoral fracture had more varus (acute) neck-shaft angles and shorter hip-axis length. Furthermore, a clear association between NSA and BMI with the development of atypical femur fracture was identified. Patients who are on bisphosphonates and have a more acute (varus) neck-shaft angle as well as those who have higher BMI are more likely to develop symptomatic atypical femur fractures. This study, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to identify neck-shaft angle as a potential geometric risk factor associated with the development of symptomatic atypical femur fracture.