There is a great interest in substances of plant origin, which may exert health-promoting activities in diabetes and its complications. Previous studies suggested that diosgenin may favorably affect both glucose metabolism and osteoporosis. The aim of the study was to investigate the effects of diosgenin on the skeletal disorders induced by experimental type 1 diabetes (T1D) in rats. The experiments were performed on 3-month-old female rats, divided into three groups: I – healthy control rats, II – streptozotocin-induced diabetic control rats, III – diabetic rats receiving diosgenin. T1D was induced by a single streptozotocin injection (60 mg/kg i.p.). Diosgenin administration (50 mg/kg/day p.o.) started two weeks later and lasted four weeks. Serum bone turnover markers and other biochemical parameters, bone mass and mineralization, mechanical properties and histomorphometric parameters were examined. Diabetes induced profound metabolic disturbances and disorders of cancellous bone microarchitecture and strength. Diosgenin did not favorably affect the serum bone turnover markers and other biochemical parameters, bone mass, mineralization and mechanical properties in the diabetic rats. However, it counteracted the effect of diabetes on the growth plate and cancellous bone microarchitecture in the distal femur, indicating some limited beneficial influence on the skeleton.Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is an autoimmune disease characterized by destruction of pancreatic β cells, insulin deficiency and chronic hyperglycemia [ There is a constant interest in substances of plant origin (dietary or used as supplements) which may exert health-promoting activities in diabetes and its complications. Diosgenin, a steroidal sapogenin, occurring as glycosides (saponins) mainly found in plants of the Dioscoreaceae family [ Diosgenin is considered as a potential antidiabetic drug because it has been reported to exert hypoglycemic, antioxidative and anti-inflammatory activity [  Effects of diosgenin on bone changes induced by diabetes have not been investigated so far. Taking into account that a decrease in bone formation and an increase in bone resorption are observed in experimental diabetes [ The study was performed on three-month-old female Wistar rats obtained from the Center of Experimental Medicine, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. The rats were fed a standard laboratory diet (Labofeed B, Wytwórnia Pasz “Morawski”, Kcynia, Poland) and had unrestricted access to water during the 14-day acclimatization period and throughout the experiment. The animals were kept under monitored standard laboratory conditions, complying with the European Union guidelines (directive 2010/63/EU). The following drugs were used in the experiment: streptozotocin (STZ; Cayman Chemical Company, Ann Arbor, MI, USA), diosgenin (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), calcein (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), tetracycline hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), and drugs used as anesthetics: xylazine (Xylapan; Vetoquinol Biowet Sp. z o.o., Gorzów Wielkopolski, Poland), and ketamine (Bioketan; Vetoquinol Biowet Sp. z o.o., Gorzów Wielkopolski, Poland). The experimental model of type 1 diabetes mellitus was induced by a single STZ administration. STZ was administered intraperitoneally ( – healthy control rats (C group), – streptozotocin-induced diabetic control rats (STZ group), – diabetic rats treated with diosgenin at a dose of 50 mg/kg The administration of diosgenin started 14 days after the STZ injection. Diosgenin was administered by an oral gavage, at a dose of 50 mg/kg [ The rats were weighed at the start of the experiment, and then once weekly. In addition, all animals were weighed one day before the sacrifice. Blood samples were collected from the tail vessels of conscious rats (by cutting the tip of the tail) at the start of the experiment, then once a week, and additionally on the day before the end of the experiment. The measurements were performed using an Accu-Chek Performa Nano glucometer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) with Accu-Chek Performa test strips (Roche Diabetes Care, Mannheim, Germany). When the glucose level exceeded the upper limit of detection (600 mg/100 mL), this value was taken into the calculations. The rats were fasted overnight after the last administration of diosgenin or vehicle, and then the animals were sacrificed under general anesthesia (ketamine and xylazine) by cardiac exsanguination. The serum was stored frozen until the biochemical tests were performed. The left and right femurs and left tibias were isolated. The left femurs were weighed, and their length and mid-length diameter were determined using a digital caliper VOREL 15240 (Toya, Wrocław, Poland). The left bones of each animal were wrapped with gauze soaked in the saline solution, and stored at a temperature below −20 °C until the mechanical tests were carried out on the thawed bones [ The serum concentrations of glucose, total protein, creatinine, uric acid, total cholesterol, and calcium, and the activities of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were measured using an automatic biochemical analyzer (Mindray BS-240, Shenzhen, China) with the commercially available kits (Pointe Scientific, Canton, MI, USA). The total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was assayed using a Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) kit, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The serum level of fructosamine was measured spectrophotometrically using a Pointe Scientific (Canton, MI, USA) kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The concentration of advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP) was determined spectrophotometrically according to the Witko-Sarsat method [ Moreover, the serum concentration of the bone resorption marker – C-terminal telopeptide fragments of type I collagen (RatLaps (CTX-I) EIA) and the bone formation marker – osteocalcin (Rat-MID Osteocalcin EIA) was determined using ELISA kits (Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd., Boldon, Tyne and Wear, UK). To determine the dehydrated bone mass of the femur, lyophilization was carried out at the temperature −53 °C under the pressure of 0.03 mBa, for 9 days, in a lyophilizer Labconco FreeZone 6 (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). Lyophilized bones were then mineralized for 48 h at the temperature of 640 °C in a muffle furnace L9/11/C6 (Nabertherm, Lilienthal, Germany). The bone mineral mass and content, bone water content and bone organic substances content was determined. Histomorphometric measurements were performed using an Axio Imager.A1 microscope (Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) with Olympus DP71 camera (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), and OsteoMeasure XP 1.3.0.1 software (OsteoMetrics, Decatur, GA, USA). The histomorphometric data are described according to the standardized nomenclature developed and updated in 2012 by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) [ In decalcified longitudinal preparations of the distal femur, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, the following metaphyseal parameters were examined: bone volume/tissue volume ratio (BV/TV), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), trabecular number (Tb.N) and trabecular separation (Tb.Sp). The width of the reserve, proliferative and hypertrophic zones of the distal epiphyseal cartilage (growth plate) was also determined. In addition, an attempt to determine the periosteal and endosteal transverse growth in the femoral diaphysis was made [ An Instron 3342 500 N apparatus (Instron, Norwood, MA, USA), connected to a computer with Bluehill 2 software, version 2.14 (Instron, Norwood, MA, USA), was used to determine bone mechanical properties. The three-point bending tests were used to determine the mechanical properties of the left femoral diaphysis and proximal tibial metaphysis [ The results are presented as means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Fisher’s Least Significant Difference (LSD) In addition, principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out on the following groups of parameters: I – Serum biochemical parameters: fasting glucose concentration, fructosamine concentration, total protein concentration, creatinine concentration, uric acid concentration, total cholesterol concentration, LDH activity, AST activity, ALT activity, TAC concentration, and AOPP concentration. II – Serum bone turnover parameters: CTX-I concentration, osteocalcin concentration, ALP activity, and calcium concentration. III – Bone histomorphometric parameters: BV/TV, Tb.Th, Tb.Sp, and Tb.N in the femoral metaphysis, the width of the reserve, proliferative and hypertrophic zones in the epiphyseal cartilage, Ma.Ar, Tt.Ar, and Ma.Ar/Tt.Ar in the femoral diaphysis. IV – Mechanical properties of cancellous bone of the tibial metaphysis: the load, displacement, energy and stress for the yield point, maximum load point and fracture point, and Young's modulus. The PCA was performed with PAST 4.01 software (University of Oslo, Norway), based on the correlation matrix [ Development of diabetes induced by streptozotocin (60 mg/kg The rats administered with STZ had non-fasting blood glucose concentrations above 400 mg/100 mL ( Diabetes induced disorders in the biochemical parameters associated with the carbohydrate metabolism (increases in the fasting blood glucose and fructosamine concentrations), lipid metabolism (a tendency to increase the total cholesterol concentration) and protein metabolism (a decrease in the total protein level) in comparison with the healthy control rats ( As far as bone-related serum biochemical parameters are concerned, the serum concentration of the type I collagen telopeptide fragments released during bone resorption (CTX-I) and the activity of ALP significantly increased in the diabetic control rats in comparison with the healthy control rats (C group) ( Administration of diosgenin at a dose of 50 mg/kg The PCA indicated strong differences concerning the serum biochemical parameters between the diabetic rats (STZ and STZ + DIOS groups) and the healthy control rats (C group), as well as slight ( Diabetes did not significantly affect the femoral mass and macrometric parameters ( The development of diabetes induced by STZ administration unfavorably affected the microstructure of cancellous bone in the distal femoral metaphysis. BV/TV and Tb.Th significantly decreased and Tb.Sp significantly increased in the diabetic rats (STZ group) compared to the healthy control rats ( Diabetes significantly decreased the width of the reserve and proliferative zones in the distal epiphyseal cartilage of the femur of the diabetic control rats in comparison with the healthy control rats ( Diabetes increased Ma.Ar and Ma.Ar/Tt.Ar ratio, not affecting Tt.Ar in the femoral diaphysis ( It was impossible to measure the periosteal and endosteal transverse growth in the femoral diaphysis in the STZ and STZ + DIOS groups due to the lack of fluorescent labels in the bone preparations. The lack of incorporation of tetracycline and calcein into the bones in diabetes is consistent with our earlier studies [ The PCA indicated differences concerning the femoral histomorphometric parameters ( Diabetes significantly worsened the mechanical parameters of the tibial metaphysis (mostly built of cancellous bone). Maximum load, energy for maximum load, stress for maximum load and Young's modulus in the proximal tibial metaphysis significantly decreased in the diabetic control rats (STZ group) in relation to the healthy control rats ( The PCA indicated differences concerning mechanical properties of the proximal tibial metaphysis between the diabetic rats (STZ and STZ + DIOS groups) and the healthy control rats ( Due to the occurrence of serious disorders of bone metabolism in diabetes [ The treatment of diabetes leads to alleviation of diabetic complications, including bone deterioration [ The mechanisms of antidiabetic activity of diosgenin suggest its usefulness rather in T2D than in T1D. T1D and T2D have different pathomechanism and exert different skeletal effects in humans. T1D leads to a reduction in BMD, which results in an increased risk of bone fractures [ After the STZ administration, rats developed strong hyperglycemia, which persisted until the end of the experiment, as well as demonstrated decreased body mass, polyuria and polydipsia, consistently with the literature data [ In the present study, diosgenin administration started when diabetes was fully established (two weeks after its induction). The diosgenin dose, used in the present study (50 mg/kg Contrary to our expectations, diosgenin induced slight decreases in hyperglycemia only at the start of its administration (first 2 weeks). The lack of prolonged hypoglycemic effects of diosgenin was confirmed by the lack of the effect on the fructosamine concentration; the fructosamine level is a measure of non-enzymatic glycation of plasma proteins, and reflects changes of blood glucose concentration over time [ Consistently, diosgenin administration did not affect the bone mass, mineralization, and biochemical markers of bone formation (osteocalcin, ALP) and bone resorption (CTX-I). There were no effects of diosgenin on the histomorphometric parameters and the strength of compact bone (the femoral diaphysis). There was also no effect on the strength of cancellous bone of the tibial metaphysis. This is inconsistent with our previous study on estrogen-deficient and estrogen replete rats in which slight favorable effects of diosgenin were demonstrated; diosgenin not only seemed to inhibit bone resorption (similarly to the most anti-osteoporotic drugs), but also increased bone formation [ In the present study, diosgenin favorably affected the histomorphometric parameters of cancellous bone (femoral metaphysis), severely deteriorated by diabetes. Diosgenin induced increases in BV/TV and Tb.N, and a decrease in Tb.Sp in comparison with the diabetic controls. The observed in the present study effects on cancellous bone are consistent with other reports on The most interesting observation of our study is the significant, favorable effect of diosgenin on the epiphyseal cartilage (growth plate) of diabetic rats. We demonstrated that, under the influence of diosgenin, the width of the proliferative zone of the femoral epiphyseal cartilage significantly increased. To our knowledge, this is the first observation concerning diosgenin effect on the epiphyseal cartilage. So far, diosgenin was reported to decrease the inflammatory response in human osteoarthritis chondrocyte culture [ Diosgenin has low bioavailability [ In conclusion, our study provided some new data on the diosgenin biological effects. Although results of the present study do not support the notion on the potential use of diosgenin in the prophylaxis or treatment of diabetes and diabetes complications, they demonstrated its favorable effects on the skeletal system in diabetic conditions. Diosgenin administration at a dose of 50 mg/kg This study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee in Katowice, Poland (permission numbers: 81/2013, 114/2014 and 115/2014). EK-N, SK, PL, MT, AJ, UC and JF performed the experiments and analyzed the data. PL and MT carried out the statistical analysis. PL wrote the draft of the manuscript. JF designed and supervised the experiment and manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved the manuscript. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. 