Flocculation process based on water soluble polymers as flocculating agents is still intensively researched nowadays, despite the introduction of these materials about fifty years ago. Dual polymer flocculation or application of new, more sophisticated macromolecules is proposed as a new approach. Simultaneously, more detailed mathematical models of flocculation are developed. The employment of polymer degradation model in population balance equations (PBE) is proposed in the paper. The suspension of chalk in distilled water was flocculated using three types of ultrasonically conditioned commercial flocculants. The experiments were performed using an apparatus for on-line determination of particle size distribution (PSD). The obtained results were compared with simulations using the Class Method. It was proved that the kinetic constant in the aggregation kernel can be described by a function similar to the one showing a change of mean molecular weight of polymer with sonication time.Water soluble polymers were introduced by Flocculants may be divided into many categories regarding different factors. First of all, flocculants can be divided into natural polymers like polysaccharides (starch, cellulose) or organic colloids (gelatin, casein), and synthetic polymers like polyacrylamides ( The flocculation process running in a stirred vessel is an effect of two competitive phenomena, i.e. aggregation and breakage of particles ( flocculant mixing — polymer water solution is added to the suspension and polymer chains are mixed with solid particles, adsorption — polymer chains adsorb onto the surface of solid particles via hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic forces or electrostatic interactions, reconformation — polymer chains undergo shape reconformation to achieve the lowest free energy, aggregation — at this stage particles are ready to connect with each other, breakage — created particles break due to shear forces within the liquid. The fourth step, aggregation, may occur via three different mechanisms depending on the molecular weight, charge sign and charge density of polymer used as flocculant. The first mechanism is called “charge neutralization”. In this case polyelectrolyte chains adsorb onto the surface of solid particles and neutralize their charge, therefore reducing the repulsive forces resulting from the electric double layer and allowing particles to aggregate. The second mechanism called “charge patching” is a derivative of the first one. In this mechanism polymer chains adsorbed onto the surface of solid particles cannot reduce the charge of the whole particle due to geometrical constraints. They create charge patches through which particles may aggregate. This situation appears when the charge density of the polymer chain is high and the surface's is low. Finally, when nonionic polymers are used or polymers of like sign as the particles in suspension, the bridging mechanism appears. The polymer chains adsorbed on solid particle surfaces create tails and loops extending far beyond these surfaces, and what is more important, far beyond the repulsive electric double layer ( Nowadays, new approaches to the flocculation process are proposed such as e.g.: dual polymer flocculation ( In all these cases described above the molecular weight is one of the key factors determining the process efficiency and it may be controlled by ultrasonic degradation. Unlike chemical or thermal degradation, the ultrasonic degradation of polymers is a non random process. It is reproducible when the reaction conditions are preserved, and moreover, it has a permanent effect ( There are many models ( These models allow one to determine average (by number or viscosity) molecular weight Assuming that the degradation process runs according to the mechanism described above, i.e. by the chain midpoint scission, it can be represented by the following reaction equation Molecular weight distribution (MWD) can be indicated by The degradation coefficient This expression clearly indicates that no further degradation occurs when the limiting molecular weight is achieved and the rate coefficient, Considering the zeroth moment only, which represents the molar concentration One may notice that Eq. It means that the total mass of the system is preserved during sonication. After simple transformation Eq. In this paper the employment of polymer degradation model in population balance equations is proposed. Although flocculants such as polyacylamides were investigated in terms of ultrasonic degradation ( Typical approach describing the behavior of solid particles suspended in liquid is based on the population balance equation (PBE) ( Considering the aggregation and breakage only with no inlet and outlet streams, and omitting the nucleation, molecular growth, creation and fading of aggregates, Eq. Parts Dividing the number density function into finite sections with a defined number of particles, for which the PBE may be written, and providing particles migration between these sections, one can obtain the discrete form of PBE. Unfortunately, a set of these equations still remains unclosed due to the overlapping of stochastic aggregation and breakage processes. However, when the number density function is replaced by appropriate terms expressing a number of particles, the PBE for a case of simultaneous aggregation and breakage may be solved numerically. Introducing a geometrical division of size classes where particles in the class In Eq. In Eq. Therefore, by analogy, Eq. During experiments three different commercial, synthetic, high-molecular weight cationic polyacrylamides used mainly in sewage treatment processes were tested: The experimental medium used was the suspension of commercial chalk ( The experimental research was done in the laboratory setup for on-line PSD measurements during aggregation and breakage process. It consisted of a mixing tank with the Rushton turbine, laser particle sizer Fritsch Analysette 22, peristaltic pump and computer ( The ultrasonic horn VCX 130 by Sonics was used as a source of ultrasounds acting on flocculant. The horn was of 6 After addition of chalk to the mixing tank filled with distilled water the measurement was taken (sample zero). Then 2 The calculations were performed identically as it was presented in the earlier paper ( The sonication constant All details concerning the experiments are summarized in In this paper a quantitative analysis of the impact of flocculant sonication on the flocculation process is presented. The experimental results are described in a qualitative way elsewhere ( All constants are presented in In case of Due to the disagreement between the simulations and experiments two different sets of minimal kinetic constant and sonication constant were determined, considering and not considering the 2nd second of sonication. In the former case the correlation factor Minimal kinetic constants in the aggregation kernels There is no apparent connection between the molecular weight of polymers and the sonication constant in the presented model. Exactly the same feature characterizes the sonication constant in the polymer degradation models ( The possibility of application of a polymer degradation model in the population balance equation was investigated. The equation determining mean molecular weight as a function of sonication time proposed by Madras and co-workers was used to calculate the kinetic constant in the aggregation kernel for ultrasonically conditioned flocculant. In experiments the suspension of commercial chalk in distilled water at pH These research findings can be useful when a flocculation process using a dual polymer system is considered. For such systems ultrasonic conditioning appears to be an attractive alternative. The application of described calculation method allows one to determine the optimal time of sonication.  birth term, m death term, m optimization objective function, m sonication constant (units model depended) number of samples taken in each measurement series molecular weight, g molecular weight under the integral in Eq. initial mean molecular weight, g limiting molecular weight, g constant in number of measurement series for each sonication time number density function in Eqs. (12–16), m number of aggregates in size class molecular weight distribution, mol  inlet and outlet streams m sonication time, s dimensionless time ( vector of changes (units model depended) system volume, m aggregate volume, m aggregation kernel, m kinetic constant in the aggregation kernel, s kinetic constant in the aggregation kernel for unmodified polymer, s minimal kinetic constant in the aggregation kernel, s breakage kernel, s kinetic constant in the breakage kernel, dm stechiometric kernel, mol fragment distribution function, m degradation coefficient, s normalized numerical calculation error standard deviation, m mean standard deviation, m flocculation time, s This research was supported by the