The purpose of the study presented was to develop a Modified Cubic Law (MCL) for single-phase saturated laminar flow in rough rock fractures. Based on the fundamental assumptions made for the Cubic Law (CL), the proposed MCL incorporates modifications to the aperture field by considering flow tortuosity, aperture variation and local roughness effects. We assess the performance of the MCL by applying it to synthetic fractures with different surface roughness and varying aperture and compare the outputs to numerical simulation results from solving the Navier-Stokes Equations and results from previous versions of CL-based models. In general, the MCL performs well in predicting the volumetric flow rate in synthetic fractures with deviations (D) from simulation results ranging from −11.1% to 8.4% and an average effective deviation of 4.7%. The proposed model retains the simplicity of CL models and improves the accuracy of flow prediction in terms of single-phase saturated laminar flow in rough rock fractures and it can be extended to analyse other hydro-related problems.Rock masses commonly include fractures or faults resulting from either tectonic activities or human disturbances. These fractures, at different scales, often act as active conduits for fluid flow (e.g., water). A sound knowledge of the controlling mechanism of fluid flow in rock fractures is of interest in various research fields and engineering applications including groundwater flow, solute transport, enhanced geothermal systems and hazardous waste disposal [e.g., The Navier-Stokes Equations (NSE) are widely accepted as the governing equations for steady-state incompressible flow in rock fractures. The common approach to modelling fluid flow through rock fractures is to assume that a fracture consists of two smooth parallel plates separated by a constant aperture. The CL is widely used for flow prediction in rock fractures in many fields due to its simplicity. However, real fractures are often formed by two surfaces with anisotropic roughness and varying aperture, which lead to a three-dimensional non-uniform tortuous flow field rather than the one-dimensional Poiseuille flow assumed by the CL. The validity of LCL has been questioned in previous studies. It assumes a flat plane for the fracture mid-surface, whereas rough fractures are more likely to have a tortuous mid-surface, To avoid the computational cost of solving the NSE and to improve the performance of the over-simplified CL and LCL, research has been focused on developing alternative models based on modifying the CL and the LCL. Statistical parameters (e.g., relative roughness The purpose in this work is to present a Modified Cubic Law (MCL) with improved performance in terms of predicting the volumetric flow rate in rough rock fractures. The aperture field is modified by considering the effects of flow tortuosity, aperture variation and local roughness. Numerical simulations of fracture flow were conducted for synthetic fractures with varying surface roughness and aperture by solving the NSE to assess the validity of the proposed MCL. Previous models are also used for comparisons to further test the robustness of the MCL presented here. We began by making assumptions for the flow direction field of a three-dimensional fracture with surface roughness. Take a cross-section of a fracture segment, as shown in At the scale of a single fracture, flow tortuosity is defined as the ratio of the three-dimensional flow path length to the straight-line distance of fracture length. The vertical aperture at each location within the approximated segment with walls of averaged straight lines (see When Eqs. Note that the range of local small-scale roughness considered here is from the grid spacing scale to the scale of the segment; roughness on scales less than the grid spacing is not included. The example shown in Once the segments are determined, the set of apertures within each segment can be easily calculated and transferred into a modified aperture field The entire aperture field is a combination of a series of modified apertures from Eqs. As the aperture field has been modified to account for flow tortuosity, aperture variation and local roughness effects, we modify the fracture length Finally, given the discrepancy between the hydraulic aperture and the geometric aperture, an extra factor Three-dimensional synthetic fracture surfaces were generated using the program SynFrac, which has been shown to reproduce the geometric properties of natural fractures and fracture surfaces. Five fracture surfaces were selected with The generated surfaces were duplicated and spaced vertically to form fractures with top and bottom surfaces. To introduce the effects of shear displacement, shifts from 1 to 25 Fracture flow simulations were conducted by solving the NSE using the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code implemented in the finite element software package COMSOL Multiphysics. Here, gravitational effects were ignored and we applied a pressure drop of 0.1 To test the performance of our proposed MCL, we compared the volumetric flow rate calculated from the MCL to that from the CFD simulations; the deviation Results from the standard CL and two CL-based models proposed by Konzuk and Kueper The CL-based model proposed by Konzuk and Kueper The modified CL proposed by Wang et al. The volumetric flow rates calculated using the standard CL and the two CL-based models were compared with To determine appropriate values of Take the middle segment S from a cross-section of one conceptual fracture in which the segment has a half-aperture of Although this assumption becomes more valid as Similar to the aspect ratio, we determined an appropriate range for the local roughness parameter The proportion of the area of identified segments in each fracture was evaluated for As discussed in The distributions of The performance of MCL was tested against the numerical simulation results of fracture flow in terms of the volumetric flow rate. As shown in As the same Results from C1 and O1 were selected for comparison with other models. As shown in The proposed MCL performed well for the fractures used in this study with the deviations of predicted volumetric flow rate within ±11% of the CFD simulation results. The average effective deviation for the fractures used in this study is 5.4% (all four combinations, C1, C2, C3 and C4). The performance of the proposed MCL depends largely on the combined effect of Roughness parameters (e.g., A sensitivity analysis has been conducted to examine the effect of different grid spacing on the general flow behaviour. As the three-dimensional fractures used in this study comprise a series of two-dimensional profiles, we extracted two-dimensional fracture profiles at The major limitation of the current study is in the treatment of non-segmented areas in which it is assumed that the flow direction is governed by each local fracture cell. The validity of such an assumption relies on both the aspect ratio of each cell and the alternation of the centreline orientation between adjacent cells. This assumption may be violated when either the aspect ratio is not small enough for the cell geometry to sufficiently constraint the flow or when the flow behaviour of nearby cells has a dominating impact on other cells. Thus, the non-segmented area should be limited to a small proportion of the total fracture area in order to provide accurate results. In extreme cases when no segment can be formed ( Another limitation is the assumption made for local roughness effect, where The Modified Cubic Law developed in this study has improved the performance (in terms of quantifying flow fields) of the standard Cubic Law by incorporating in the aperture field the modifying factors of flow tortuosity, aperture variation and local roughness effects. Flow simulations were conducted in 45 synthetic fractures with different surface roughness and aperture variation to test the performance of the proposed MCL. In general, the proposed MCL provides improved flow predictions compared with those of the standard CL and previous versions of CL-based models. The deviation ( This work is financially supported by a joint scholarship provided by the