The membrane surface wettability is one of the most important factors influencing the solution-diffusion-controlled pervaporation process. In this work, a novel conceptual methodology for the construction of a superhydrophilic water uptake layer is proposed to overcome the limitation of trade-off effects. Rapid implementation of this strategy is possible by spray-assisted biomineralization of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) onto a (poly(acrylic acid)/poly(ethyleneimine))n/polyacrylonitrile ((PAA/PEI)n/PAN) membrane. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy confirmed the formation of a hierarchical lotus CaCO3 layer with calcite crystals on the outermost layer. The water contact angle dramatically decreased from 74° to 4.2° after biomineralizing CaCO3 micro-nano-particles. In the pervaporation separation of ethanol/water mixtures, the water content could be enriched from 5wt% to 98.8wt% while the permeate flux reached 1317g/(m2
                     h), which is almost five times that of a pure polyelectrolyte membrane without biomineralizing CaCO3. This suggests that the CaCO3 water uptake layer plays a very important role in achieving high flux. These results indicate that biomineralization of micro-nano-particles is a facile strategy to fabricate a superhydrophilic surface and, in turn, improve the membrane performance.Pervaporation has been widely used in the separation of azeotropic mixtures and close boiling point mixtures In recent years, various modification strategies have been developed to improve membrane hydrophilicity, such as blending, coating and grafting. Among the methods available, blending with nanoparticles has been widely used due to its simplicity. Various nanoparticles have been utilized for blending, such as titanium dioxide (TiO The spray assembly technique has recently received increasing attention for the construction of various films because it can be automatically controlled and facilitates fast processes and facile scale up. For example, Schlenoff et al. Herein, we report a novel conceptual methodology to construct a water uptake layer by applying superhydrophilic biomineralized CaCO A PAN UF membrane with molecular weight cutoffs of 100 The automated spray system was constructed in our laboratory as illustrated in The CaCO The performance of the membranes comprising an effective area of 3.2 The membrane surface morphologies were observed via SEM (Hitachi SU-8020, Japan), with the microscope attached to EDS. Wide-angle XRD experiments were conducted on a D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffract meter (Bruker/AXS, Germany). Attenuated total reflectance FTIR spectra (Vertex-70, Bruker, Germany) were used to characterize the chemical composition changes of the multilayer membranes. Water contact angle measurement was performed using a contact angle analyzer (DSA100, Germany). The hardness and module of the membranes were measured by a Nanoindentor (G200). Nanoindentation tests were performed using a Nano Indentor XP system with options for G-Series CSM Standard Hardness, Modulus, and Tip Cal measurements. The allowable drift rate was 0.1 For the biomineralization membrane, the formation of an inorganic water uptake layer exerts significant influence on the membrane properties. Membrane surface wettability was measured by the water contact angle. The chemical structure of the membranes was analyzed using FTIR and XRD. The FTIR spectra of the (PAA/PEI) Compared with the pure polyelectrolyte membranes, biomineralized hybrid membranes showed an improved pervaporation dehydration performance. As shown in The effect of the pre-coating polyelectrolyte multilayer number on membrane pervaporation performance was also investigated. As shown in To evaluate the pervaporation performance of the CaCO  The pervaporation performance of the CaCO Our membrane produced an acceptable water content in the permeate, and the flux was comparable to that of membranes described in the literature ( In the present study, a superhydrophilic uptake layer was successfully constructed by spray-assisted biomineralization of calcium carbonate (CaCO This work was supported by the New Century Excellent Researcher Award Program from