An integrated production of methyl ester and ɛ-polylysine from Chlamydomonas sp. was studied using biorefinery approach. The harvesting efficiency of Chlamydomonas sp. was increased up to 92% by treatment with a flocculant FeCl3 at 100 mg/L for 30 min. The DMC (dimethyl carbonate) mediated enzyme catalyzed in-situ transesterification of Chlamydomonas sp. yielded the maximum methyl ester of 92% under optimized conditions. The valued-added product ɛ-polylysine was produced from hydrolysate obtained from the spent biomass of Chlamydomonas sp. using Streptomyces sp. The key components of sugar and MgSO4 used for ɛ-polysine production were optimized whereby the maximum ɛ-polylysine production was achieved at 50 g/L sugar and 0.3 g/L MgSO4. The ɛ-polylysine production was further enhanced by supplementation of important amino acids (lysine and aspartate) and TCA cycle intermediates (citric acid and α-ketoglutaric acid). The maximum ɛ-polylysine production of 2.24 g/L was found with 4 mM citric acid supplementation after 110 h.Environmental problems coupled with rapid depletion of fossil fuel and its resources prompted researchers to find alternative renewable resources and its commercialization ( For biorefinery, spent biomass (i.e. biomass after being used for in-situ transesterification) has the carbohydrate content which can be further fermented to produce valuable compounds such as ɛ-polylysine and ethanol. ɛ-Polylysine is a basic homopolymer which contains 20–30 residues of Currently there are numerous studies on methyl ester from microalgae; however, there are few studies on integrated production of methyl ester and value-added products. Particularly, no study was reported on combined production of methyl ester and ɛ-polylysine. This work aimed to investigate the potential of lipid and carbohydrate containing biomass from The Harvesting studies using flocculants were carried out in 20 ml cylindrical glass tubes. The algal suspension was mixed and swirled with flocculant and left to sediment. Various concentrations of flocculants were used in the range of 20–140 mg/L. The harvesting efficiency was calculated using the following equation, Lipid content in Various factors affecting methyl ester yield were determined as follows: solvent algae ratio (2:1, 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, 6:1, 7:1 and 8:1), catalyst concentration (2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 w/w %), water addition (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1 and 1.2 w/w %), reaction temperature (35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60 and 65 °C), reaction time (6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and 36 h) and the analysis of by-product (glycerol carbonate, glycerol dicarbonate and glycerol). After the reaction was stopped, the mixture was filtered to separate methyl ester and biomass, the traces of methyl ester present in the residues were collected by solvent (DMC) wash. The recovered samples were centrifuged at 20,000  The determination of methyl ester and glycerol carbonate contents was done by using gas chromatography according to The results obtained are mean of triplicate values and the error bars are standard deviation (means ± SD, n = 3) values. The statistical significance ( The present study involved the production of methyl ester using In the present study, the four different flocculants were tested for their efficiency of harvesting The concentrations of FeCl Different algal cell concentrations were varied to determine the suitable cell concentration for the harvesting (biomass concentration – 0.25–2 g/L) and the absence of FeCl Various process parameters involved in the in-situ transesterification of Lipozyme is an important enzyme and highly preferable for the lipase mediated transesterification ( Water content is another important parameter which can affect the activity and stability of the lipases. The methyl ester yield of in-situ transesterification was increased with the increase in water addition up to 0.8% (w/w of microalgae) ( The reaction temperature also affects the in-situ transesterification of The influence of reaction time on in-situ transesterification of Glycerol carbonate (1.6 ± 0.21%), glycerol dicarbonate (5.1 ± 0.36%) and glycerol (1.2 ± 0.12%) all of which are by products during DMC mediated transesterification were obtained at the optimized conditions ( It is necessary to enhance the ɛ-polylysine production after the methyl ester production. The improved ɛ-polylysine production increases the chance of biorefinery commercialization. Hence, the critical medium compositions were optimized to improve the ɛ-polylysine production. It is very important to obtain the optimal concentration of sugar for the maximum ɛ-polylysine yield. The sugar concentrations in the hydrolysate of spent biomass were varied from 35 to 60 g/L and tested for their effect on ɛ-polylysine production. The results clearly indicate that the sugar concentration in the fermentation plays a vital role in the ɛ-polylysine production. The 50 g/L sugar gave the highest ɛ-polylysine yield. Another critical component in the media is magnesium, which is necessary for the cell division in bacteria. Apart from the cell division, magnesium is important for the activation of the ɛ-polylysine synthetase reaction ( In the ɛ-polylysine synthesis pathway, aspartate family amino acids are primarily involved, which are The important component for the synthesis The influence of citric acid and α-ketoglutaric acid on ɛ-polylysine production is shown in Overall, the concentration of sugar plays an important role in the ɛ-polylysine production and showed the maximum yield at 50 g/L of sugar. The yield was further improved after MgSO The time-course of ɛ-polylysine yield and biomass content is shown in Based on the process design, raw material and many other factors greatly influence the cost of biofuel ($1.65–$33.16 Gal The fatty acid compositions of The present study demonstrated the effective harvesting method of microalgae and integrated production of methyl ester and ɛ-polylysine as a biorefinery approach. The DMC mediated transesterification of R. Sivaramakrishnan is thankful to the Graduate School and Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University (CU), for senior post-doctoral fellowship from Ratchadaphiseksomphot Endowment Fund. A.I. acknowledges the research grant from CU on the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: