Seismic stability of reinforced slopes is investigated using Horizontal Slice Method within the framework of the pseudo-static force. These introduced by constant horizontal or vertical inertial forces and the equilibrium equations for all forces applied to each horizontal slice are considered. A new procedure is introduced which could determine the location and shape of failure surface. The slip surface is a multiplanar surface consisting of a number of inclined linear segments interconnected with various lengths and angles in a plane. The amount of reinforcement forces is used as the objective function in the optimization procedure to determine the shape and location of the critical slip surface. This approach is relatively simple and yields results which are in good agreement with previous findings. Final results revealed that with increase in horizontal seismic acceleration, the reinforcements force increases. With increase in slope angle, the failure surface changes from curve to planar shape.Stability analysis of natural and artificial slopes is an interesting issue in civil, geotechnical and mining engineering. In addition, the design and safety evaluation of reinforced structures subject to seismic loading is an important problem (Richardson and Lee In recent decades, a technique based on limit state approach has been employed in several studies (Ling et al. Horizontal Slice Method (HSM) is a new analytical method based on limit equilibrium proposed by Lo and Xu For coarse-grained soil and also steep slopes, the slip surface is approximately planar Sarma and Tan Therefore, determination of the critical slip surface is one of the key problems in slope stability evaluation. In this study, Horizontal Slice Method is employed to analyze slope stability and also to achieve the position and configuration of the critical slip surface in slopes. The procedure yields a new multiplanar shape as an accurate approximation for the shape of the failure surface. Location of failure surface can be determined eventually. In the comprehensive formulation proposed by Nouri et al. The main difference between the present method and those of previous studies is that no prior configuration is assumed for slip surface. In order to obtain the equilibrium equations, consider a slope with general shape shown in  For the interface forces, two approaches exist in the bibliography: (a) the first assumes that they have fixed inclination and that is defined through a scalar coefficient, and (b) the second obtains the interface inclinations by minimizing the factor of safety. For non-circular slip surfaces, Morgenstern and Price In the method provided by Sarma Earthquake effects can be taken into account by assuming the sliding mass subjected to both vertical and horizontal pseudo-static forces. However, the vertical force is usually ignored in the standard pseudo-static analysis. This is due to the fact that the vertical seismic force acting on the sliding mass usually has negligible effect on the stability of a slope. The moment equilibrium equations require the location of the application of the normal force on the slip surface. The usual assumption of ‘middle of the slice’ is a good and reasonable one  According to Mohr–Coulomb failure envelope, the relation between the shear and normal forces at the failure stage is expressed by Thus we have, The base of the slope is assumed to be sufficiently hard and the critical failure surface does not pass through the foundation material. Also, the slip surface is assumed to pass through the toe of the slope in frictional soils and the effect of facing elements on stability is neglected. Present paper describes a new method based on equations of horizontal slices for obtaining the failure surface. It is assumed that the slip surface consists of The mechanism of segmentation is illustrated in The angle pertaining to each part is obtained as For If Now what remains for finding the slip configuration is a computerized algorithm to search in all possible configurations which have been suggested previously in this paper. MATLAB Program has been used for implementation of the procedure in this study. The flowchart of the procedure is shown in The effects of Some of the more noticeable features of the proposed method can be summarized as: In the proposed method the number of horizontal slices is optimized in accordance with the flowchart shown in Force and moment equilibrium equations are considered simultaneously in each horizontal slice for the new model of multiplanar sliding surface. Multiplanar slip surface used in this study (as well as Nimbalkar et al. The main characteristics of the proposed method are presented in The presented configuration is independent of analysis method and therefore, the configuration presented can be used for vertical slice analytical methods, (e.g. Morgenstern–Price, Sarma and the other classical methods). In this approach, the extremes of possible failure surface boundaries can be determined by two angles of Typically, in many design guidelines, a maximum spacing between reinforced elements is 1 In order to illustrate the capability of proposed method for slope stability analysis, the procedure has been carried out for a homogeneous and cohesionless soil slope with height of 5 The results of the stability analysis for the new model of multiplanar sliding surface are presented in As expected, the total normalized reinforcement force, According to Eq.  In order to obtain the configuration of the slip surface, Eq. In addition, the optimized results of the maximum required reinforcement length on two slope Before attempting to compare the results of the proposed procedure with other similar techniques, the ability of the proposed method to locate the critical slip surface is demonstrated by comparing the safety factor of the optimum setup determined via the proposed method with classical Morgenstern–Price Limit Equilibrium Method. The results are presented in Furthermore, the performance of the proposed method is examined in comparison with a number of other methods (e.g. Ling et al. The results considered in As shown in Based on presented results in The current study can be extended further to work the following: Evaluation of other failure conditions including failure under surcharge. Reinforced slopes stability analysis using together pseudo-dynamic approach and present configuration. Employing new multiplanar configuration for vertical slice analytical methods. Considering current procedure for different inclination angles of reinforcement. Employing the approach for non-uniform slopes or for pore pressures existence. The objective of this paper is to determine the probable multiplanar slip surface in the seismic stability analysis of reinforced 2D slopes using Horizontal Slice Method and pseudo-static approach. The procedure is capable to obtain the maximum total reinforcement force using the comprehensive formulation of horizontal slices. The following results were obtained eventually: Maximum sum of the tension force in the reinforcement indicates that the employed slip surface is critical. With increase in horizontal seismic acceleration, the reinforcements force increases. With increase in slope angle, the failure surface changes from curved surface to planar shape. With increase of the internal friction angle The results of the analysis show that the value of With increase of the specific weight With optimizing the layers, values of The authors wish to thank supports provided by Faculty of Civil Engineering in