Referees comments on the paper electron transfer from mineral to bacteria occurs, which requires bacterial attachment to the mineral surface (and which is essentially ‘direct’!, see definition of intermediate chemical oxidation of mineral is negligible (i.e. neglecting the occurrence of the ‘indirect’ mechanism), Barrett et al. distinguish primary and secondary processes, which are only relevant for the direct mechanism! An objection to the statement of Barrett et al. (the use of the terminology ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ mechanism is inadequate) is that their defending the correct mechanism in bacterial oxidation of pyrite (the ‘direct’ mechanism!) is mixed-up with critique on the terminology. In essence, their argument seems to be that the terms ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’ are inadequate because the ‘indirect’ mechanism is rejected. This statement about terminology implies that it is no longer allowed to consider chemical pyrite oxidation with Fe(III) as an important step in bacterial pyrite oxidation. The fact that the problem of a ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’ mechanism is still discussed in a recent review This class consists of those processes in which sulphide minerals are oxidised and solubilised. (…) The enhancement of the overall rates of bacterially catalysed oxidation reactions is because of the direct involvement of the iron(III) in the primary oxidation process. It is not due to a purely chemical interaction (Barrett et al., p. 9). The primary process of the bacterial oxidation of a mineral involves the adsorption of the bacteria onto the sulphide mineral surface (…), the rate-determining step essentially consisting of the electron transfer from the mineral to the electron transport chain of the bacterium. This may be mediated by the presence of Fe(III) species either on the mineral surface or on the bacterial surface or both. In the presence of bacteria, iron(III) accelerates the oxidation of practically all sulphide minerals (Barrett et al., p. 56). Primary processes are those occurring at the mineral surface and lead to the oxidation and/or solubilization of the mineral (Barrett et al., p. 110). The primary processes include the bacterially mediated oxidation of the (…) pyrite substrate by oxygen and/or iron(III) to give (…) sulfur(VI) as products, with the solubilization of the iron(II) content (Barrett et al., p. 119). The primary processes may be described by the equations: This class consists of the processes in which secondary minerals (oxides and carbonates) are solubilized (Barrett et al., p. 9). Secondary processes occur mainly in the bulk of the solution and are concerned with the fates of intermediates (Barrett et al., p. 110). The secondary processes are best represented by the following equations: Because the equation: The equation: In a more recent review, (1) Bacteria want to be attached, or as close as possible, to sulphide mineral surfaces to maximize their efficiency of substrate utilization. The close adherence reduces the time needed for diffusion of iron between the mineral and the bacterium, it does not necessarily require a separate mechanism for sulfide mineral degradation. (2) All available evidence is consistent with a chemical oxidation of sulfide minerals with aqueous catalysis by iron- and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. (3) No other processes need to be invoked to explain the available data. This statement is another expression of However, the argument these authors provide in favour of the indirect mechanism, is not very clear or convincing: p. 370, “The conventional approach to distinguish between the direct and indirect oxidation mechanism would be to compare the rate of pyrite oxidation by iron-oxidizing bacteria with that obtained abiotically but in the presence of ferric ion. This analysis, however, is more complicated. It is known that acidophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria will generate Fe(III) from Fe(II). The question that should be addressed is: what are the relative rates among (1) oxidation of pyrite by Fe(III), (2) oxidation of Fe(II) by bacteria, and (3) oxidation of pyrite by bacteria independent of their oxidation of Fe(II)? If there is a direct mechanism of bacterial pyrite oxidation other than by the regeneration of Fe(III) then for that rate to be significant, it would be as fast or faster than the rate of Fe(II) oxidation and there should be a plausible mechanism to explain it. Under those circumstances, the bacterial pyrite oxidation would have to be faster than the abiotic rate by Fe(III). With these concepts in hand, let us look at the evidence.” Although testing this hypotheses turns out in favour of the direct mechanism (Table 3 on p. 370), Nordstrom and Southoam somehow(?) decide in favour of the indirect mechanism. p. 371 “A review by Sand et al. (1995) summarized recent literature and provided further evidence for the indirect oxidation mechanism.” Their arguments in favour of the Between 1990 and 1992, I have carried out very extensive review of literature data, which focused on mechanisms and kinetics in bacterial oxidation of sphalerite, chalcopyrite, and pyrite On the other hand, there were two strong arguments against the direct mechanism: In the traditional idea about the direct mechanism, bacteria consume pyritic sulfur. However, the bacterial growth yield on pyrite is close to the yield on ferrous iron, whereas the yield should be at least a factor of two larger if bacteria consume sulfur compounds (thesis, pp. 12–13). A simple calculation shows that by assuming that bacterial pyrite oxidation is due to pyrite oxidation by (irreversibly) attached In addition, my experimental work let to results contradictory with the direct mechanism. Experiments were carried out with My test to distinguish between direct and indirect mechanism was the assumption that, while bacterial oxidation involves oxygen, in the case of a direct mechanism a significant amount of O I also applied I was able to construct a kinetic model, which consisted of the description of the kinetics of the only two processes involved: the bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron (which was independently measured), and the chemical oxidation of pyrite (which was measured in the presence of The hypothesis in the paper ( Most phenomena described in the literature can be explained with the proposed mechanism. The only strong contradictory phenomenon was the high bacterial growth yield of