The introduction of cyclonic circulation method is one of the most important developments in column flotation technology in the last years. In this study, effect of a cyclonic flotation column on the flotation performance of a siliceous phosphate ore was evaluated by the experiments on circulation pressures and circulation methods. The feed and flotation products were characterized by size fraction, X-ray diffraction and X-ray fluorescence. The results showed that both of the P2O5 grade and recovery of the concentrate increased with circulation pressure under the condition of cyclonic circulation. Under the optimal circulation pressure 0.24Mpa, Flotation comparison results at different circulation methods showed that the P2O5 recovery for cyclonic circulation reached 86.03%, which was increased by 4.9 percentage points comparing with that of direct flow circulation. The size analysis of the products demonstrated that cyclonic circulation method promoted the recovery of fine particles. Theoretical analysis results show that centrifugal force field can reinforce the mineralization of fine particles as well as decrease the lower limit for efficient flotation.Phosphate rocks are important nonrenewable resources and are essential components in agricultural fertilizers and phosphorous-based industry ( Currently, the common method of treating intermediate-grade phosphate ores is flotation ( In this paper, the flotation of siliceous phosphate ores from southwest China was conducted in the laboratory-scale FCSMC system specially designed for the study. The effect of centrifugal force field in the flotation column on the flotation performance of siliceous phosphate ores was evaluated. Siliceous phosphate ores from a marine sedimentary deposit located in southwest China were used for this study. The sample contains approximately 24% P 120 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a D/Max-3B (Rigaku) unit. Results of mineralogical analysis obtained are shown in  The experiments were conducted with a laboratory flotation column, as shown in The column was made of Plexiglas of 100 Batch column flotation tests were carried out at room temperature. The samples were wet ground with a rod mill to obtain approximately 92% minus 74 The principle of FCSMC separator is shown in The cyclonic circulation in an FCSMC separator provides two functions. One is the repetitious mineralization of particles contained within the circulating pulp and the other is a surface flotation function provided by the high intensity centrifugal force field formed at the bottom of the column. Furthermore, this centrifugal force field can also decrease the lower limit for efficient flotation. Assuming that the shape of the particle and mineralized bubble are spherical, forces exerted on the particles and mineralized bubbles in the cyclonic zone of FCSMC are shown in Dynamic equations of the mineralized bubble in the radial direction can be expressed by: When the radial velocity of the mineralized bubble remains constant, the forces acting on it are in the condition of equilibrium. And this condition can be defined as: Substituting Eqs. Similarly, the radial velocity of the particle ( It is known to all that the bubbles travel in a direction opposite to that of the particles. Therefore, the relative velocity between mineralized bubbles and particles can be defined as: For a given mineral and flotation operation parameters, the values of The inefficient flotation of fine particles is a weak link in flotation designs. This is also why studies on improving the separation efficiency of fine particles are always hot research topics (  Stokes number serves as a criterion of inertial collision probability between the particles and the bubbles. The value of Stokes number quoted by This formula demonstrates that there is a strong correlation between the lower limit for efficient flotation and the centrifugal acceleration. In the conventional flotation process, fine particles typically lack the inertia to collide with air bubbles and instead follow the liquid streamlines. It can be shown that solid particles will follow the liquid streamlines if ( For an order-of-magnitude estimate, Eq. Eqs. XRD results reported in It can be clearly seen from the chemical analysis results of different size fractions reported in The tests about different circulation pressures were conducted on the flotation column operated in cyclonic circulation. The pressures were adjusted between 0.18 and 0.30 Based on the tests of circulation pressure, the flotation experiments were performed to evaluate the effect of circulation method on siliceous phosphate flotation performance. The circulation pressure was arranged at the level of 0.24  Size analysis of the products was used to investigate the performance of different circulation methods. The results are provided in  Also determined during the size analysis of the products were size-by-size recovery data as presented in The following major conclusions can be drawn from this study: Mechanistic analysis of cyclonic circulation indicates that the relative velocity between bubbles and particles increases and the lower limit for efficient flotation decreases with the increasing of centrifugal acceleration. The circulation pressure has an important effect on flotation performance of FCSMC separator. The recovery of P Flotation comparison at different circulation methods showed that the P This research was supported by the