Renewable distributed electricity generation can play a significant role in meeting today's energy policy goals, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving energy security, while adding supply to meet increasing energy demand. However, the exact potential benefits are still a matter of debate. The objective of this study is to evaluate the life cycle implications (environmental, economic and energy) of distributed generation (DG) technologies. A complementary objective is to compare the life cycle implications of DG technologies with the centralized electricity production representing the Northeastern American context. Environmental and energy implications are modeled according to the recommendations in the ISO 14040 standard and this, using different indicators: Human Health; Ecosystem Quality; Climate Change; Resources and Non-Renewable Energy Payback Ratio. Distinctly, economic implications are modeled using conventional life cycle costing. DG technologies include two types of grid-connected photovoltaic panels (3kWp mono-crystalline and poly-crystalline) and three types of micro-wind turbines (1, 10 and 30kW) modeled for average, below average and above average climatic conditions in the province of Quebec (Canada). A sensitivity analysis was also performed using different scenarios of centralized energy systems based on average and marginal (short- and long-term) technology approaches. Results show the following. First, climatic conditions (i.e., geographic location) have a significant effect on the results for the environmental, economic and energy indicators. More specifically, it was shown that the 30kW micro-wind turbine is the best technology for above average conditions, while 3kWp poly-crystalline photovoltaic panels are preferable for below average conditions. Second, the assessed DG technologies do not show benefits in comparison to the centralized Quebec grid mix (average technology approach). On the other hand, the 30kW micro-wind turbine shows a potential benefit as long as the Northeastern American electricity market is considered (i.e., oil and coal centralized technologies are affected for the short- and long-term marginal scenarios, respectively). Photovoltaic panels could also become more competitive if the acquisition cost decreased. In conclusion, DG utilization will represent an improvement over centralized electricity production in a Northeastern American context, with respect to the environmental, energy and economic indicators assessed, and under the appropriate conditions discussed (i.e., geographical locations and affected centralized electricity production scenarios).Distributed generation from renewable technologies can play a significant role in meeting different energy policy goals, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving energy security, and adding supply to meet increasing energy demand Renewable energy production performances using small-scale technologies are still under continuous investigation The first one consists in assessing the life cycle performance of small-scale renewable technologies (i.e. less than 50 The second one consists of exploring the potential benefits and limitations of distributed generation in a Northeastern American context. A sensitivity analysis was performed characterizing different potentially affected centralized energy systems, based on average and marginal (short and long-term) values. This article is structured as follows: Section This section presents the selected small-scale renewable systems and their energy output under different climatic conditions prevailing in the province of Quebec (Canada). Many configurations exist to produce renewable energy through small-scale grid-connected technologies. These configurations depend on many technical specifications such as photovoltaic panel types, micro-wind turbines power, inverter power and connection configurations. Keeping in mind the purpose of this study was not to assess all possible combinations, the most common configurations for a North American context were selected Slanted roof mounting systems were selected because of the frequency of their installation  Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a widely used and recognized tool for evaluating potential environmental impacts of a product or a service over its lifetime: from the extraction of resources to the end-of-life The three micro-wind turbines differ according to the power rate (1 Inverter (DC/AC) and electric cables data were also obtained from the ecoinvent database The two grid-connected photovoltaic systems differ following the panel types (mono-crystalline and poly-crystalline). The two systems have the same power rate and the same mounting type ( The cumulative energy demand (CED) is the amount of primary energy consumed during the life cycle of a product or a service Even if the CED has been developed to simplify the LCA model Besides environmental and energy assessments, the investigated systems are also compared using life cycle costing (LCC) methodology. As the results are used in parallel to environmental ones (i.e. LCA), there is no need to internalize the environmental impacts for the LCC modeling. Therefore, to avoid double counting, applying conventional LCC is justified Trade-offs are easier to make when several life cycle aspects are assessed separately. This section aims at comparing the studied systems to reduce their environmental and economic impacts while reaching a good energy performance. Section The comparison between centralized energy production systems and distributed generation systems is a relevant step as it provides a better picture of distributed generation potential benefits for the Northeastern American context. Based on a recent LCA practitioner exchange The average approach is based on the assumption that an increase in electricity supply from an alternative source on the grid will result in a drop in production from the centralized plants proportionally to their time-averaged contribution to the grid. The average approach could entail the use of the national or regional average data for the electricity production The comparative results are presented in Section The average approach is considered as ideal but less realistic The affected technologies (i.e. marginal) are here defined as the centralized energy systems affected by the small changes due to the energy supplied by small-scale renewable technologies. As the assessed systems lifetime is at least 20 years ( The short-term affected technology (i.e. the short-term marginal technology) is defined as an existing technology changing its output due to small changes in electricity supply As the energy supplied by small-scale renewable systems also occurs during non-peak consumption periods, the oil power plant is not the only affected centralized energy system. Hydropower will not change its output due to the small increase of electricity supply. In fact, hydropower is generally utilized to its maximum because of its very low production cost Before identifying the affected technologies in the identified markets, it is important to respectively describe their electricity situation. In case of a small increase in NB electricity consumption, the actual NB power plant that will be used to produce this additional electricity is also an oil power plant The long-term affected technology (i.e. the long-term marginal technology) is defined as the technology installed or dismantled due to expected long-term changes in electricity supply In the province of Quebec, the technologies which have the potential to be the affected electricity sources by fulfilling the condition of being unconstrained are wind and hydropower The logic is similar for the bordering markets. Once again, it was assumed that the most affected markets by a small change in electricity supply are those receiving the higher percentage of total Quebec electricity exports. Referring to the forecasted share of total Quebec electricity exports Uncertainty can arise from political constraints (i.e. future limits on GHG emissions) which could reduce the competitiveness of coal This sections highlights when distributed generation can improve the life cycle performance of electricity production in a Northeastern American context. To do so, the affected centralized energy systems were compared to the selected small-scale renewable technologies. Thus, the centralized energy systems impacts were subtracted by those of the selected systems. The lower limit was defined by the most suitable technologies for the below average conditions (i.e. 3 This section discusses the obtained life cycle results (Sections  In addition,   One of the main applications of this study's results is to inform different stakeholders of the potential benefits and limitations of distributed generation to achieve today's energy policy goals. To meet this objective, the selected small-scale technologies were compared to the affected centralized energy systems (Sections First, electricity production potential from small-scale renewable technologies does not show a potential benefit in comparison to the centralized Quebec grid mix due to the high percentage of hydropower energy system. Therefore, the specificities of the Quebec electricity mix make it difficult to justify renewable distributed generation Even if the simultaneous use of different life cycle methods is often suggested It can be stated that distributed generation can have the potential to improve the life cycle performance of electricity production in a Northeastern American context. However, this will depend on both the geographical locations of the small-scale renewable technologies and on the affected centralized electricity production. First, it has been shown that the life cycle system performances are very sensitive to climatic conditions (i.e. geographic location): micro-wind 30 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the industrial partners of the 