Chlorite is one of the representative iron-bearing silicates gangue minerals existed in the specularite ores which the traditional depressants are incapable of action in specularite/chlorite separation flotation. An attempt was conducted for the separation of specularite/chlorite with chitosan as a novel depressant through microflotation tests, Zeta potential measurements, adsorption tests, FT-IR, and XPS analysis. The microflotation results show that chitosan selectively depresses chlorite while specularite still keeps in high floatability. Zeta potential measurements and adsorption tests indicate that chitosan mainly adsorbed on chlorite surface, hindering the subsequent adsorption of dodecan-1-amine and leading the hydrophobicity distinction. The FT-IR spectra of chlorite validate the adsorption of chitosan on chlorite. The results of XPS illustrate that electrons partially transferred from chitosan to the aluminum, iron, magnesium, silicon, and adjacent oxygen atoms of silicon atoms in chlorite during the adsorption process.Steel is an alloy consist of iron and carbon that is vital to the global economy. Its unique combination of strength, formability, versatility, recyclability, and low cost makes it an ideal material for the construction, railway transportation, heavy industry, and engineering applications, et al. ( Flotation selectively concentrates target minerals based on their physicochemical properties and differences resulting from the intrinsic properties of ores and modification of flotation reagents, which is one of the most efficient and widely employed mineral processing methods in the separation of iron ores ( As a consequence of the problems as mentioned above, depressants are added before collectors either in direct flotation or in adverse flotation; therefore, the depression effects of depressants, such as depressing ability and selectivity, play a vital role to obtain a satisfactory production in iron ore flotation. In recent years, there has been extensive research on the depression performance and action mechanism of all description depressants. Starch is the most widely used depressant in reverse flotation of iron ore ( Chitosan is a natural polyaminosaccharide produced from the deacetylation of chitin, and the basic structural units of chitosan are shown in The outstanding properties of chitosan were primarily due to the chelation reactions between the amine and the hydroxyl groups in the polymer structure ( Up to now, very few studies have investigated chitosan in any systematic way in specularite/chlorite separation. Motivated by such an idea, we have attempted to find out whether chitosan could act as an effective depressant in specularite/chlorite flotation and examine the prospective selective adsorption mechanism. Several surface analysis techniques, including Zeta potential measurement, FT-IR analysis, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, were applied to investigate the mineral surfaces after treatment with chitosan. It was observed that chitosan selectively depressed chlorite while specularite could be floated by dodecan-1-amine. This result is useful for extending the depressant selection range and providing auxiliary ideas for novel reagents synthesis for the research of iron ore flotation. The pure specularite and chlorite samples were obtained from the Lilou Mine, Anhui Province, and Jianshan Mine, Shanxi Province, China, respectively. The specularite and chlorite lumps were crushed and handpicked for removing minor inclusions. The isolated samples were further carefully ground in a porcelain ball mill with porcelain grinding balls. Both products were sieved to obtain particle size fractions in the range of −74 + 37 μm and −37 μm, which were employed for further analyses. Chitosan with 80 mesh, 90 % degree of deacetylation, and average molecular weight of 2 × 10 The composition of specularite and chlorite samples was analyzed by ARL Advant’X Intellipow XRF analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The samples were ground to −37 μm and pressed into solid discs before analysis. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface areas of specularite and chlorite for the size range of -74 + 37 μm were 0.27 and 0.61 m Microflotation experiments were conducted using an XFG-5 flotation machine operating at 1460 rpm with a 40 mL flotation cell. 30 mL water and 2 g single mineral or mixed mineral sample with weight ratio 1:1 was added to the flotation cell. The slurry pH value was adjusted to the desired value by adding either HCl or NaOH solutions. A certain amount of chitosan and 6 × 10 The Zeta potential measurement is a common electrochemical test used to detect the reaction process on mineral surfaces and adsorption behavior of flotation reagents. The Zeta potential measurements were conducted with ZetaPALS potential analyzer (Bruker Instruments Ltd., Germany). The −37 μm size fraction specularite and chlorite samples were grounded to −2 μm. 5 mg of −2 μm specularite or chlorite was added into 50 mL 1 × 10 Ultraviolet spectrophotometry was performed to measure the adsorption amount of chitosan on the specularite and chlorite. 1 g of a mineral powder (−74 + 37 μm) and 100 mL water were mixed in an SI-600 shaking incubator (Jeio Tech, USA) operating at 150 rpm, pH 7, and 25 ℃, to which a given amount of chitosan solution was added. The conditioned suspension was placed in the shaking incubator and shaken for 1 h. After filtering, the residual amount of chitosan in the supernatant was collected by using a UV3600 spectrophotometer (Shimazu, Japan). The adsorption amount of chitosan on the mineral surface can be calculated as follows: Contact angle measurements were conducted in a JC2000A contact angle analyzer (Powereach Instruments, Shanghai, China) with of 6 × 10 1 g of −37 μm specularite or chlorite sample was grounded to −2 μm in an agate mortar, then placed into a conical flask (250 mL) with 100 mL of 0.5 g/L chitosan solution. The pH value of the suspension was modified to 6 with HCl or NaOH and then shaken for 1 h. The fully interacted sample was filtered and washed twice with the corresponding pH solution. The obtained solid was dried for 24 h in a vacuum oven at 25 ℃. The FT-IR spectra of chitosan, untreated and treated minerals were collected with Nicolet 6700 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). In a typical measurement, 2 mg of the solid sample was mixed with 50 mg of KBr in an alumina mortar. The spectra range was 4000−400 cm X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out using a Thermo ESCALAB 250XI X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by monochromatic Al Kα radiation as excitation source with 100  eV pass energy and 1 eV energy step size. Both survey and high-resolution spectra of O 1s, Fe 2p, Al 2p, Mg 1s, N 1s, and Si 2p were recorded and calibrated to the binding energy of C 1s at 284.6 eV. In a typical measurement, a 250 mL conical flask with 100 mL of 0.5 g/L chitosan solution was charged with 1 g of −2 μm size fraction specularite or chlorite at pH 6. The modified suspension was shaken for 1 h, then was filtered and dried for 24 h in a vacuum oven at 25℃. The XPS tests were conducted by pressing the samples on a double side conductive adhesive carbon tape. Chemical composition analysis results of two minerals were illustrated in XRD results of two minerals were illustrated in  Further separation tests of the mixed mineral were conducted to confirm chitosan as a selective depressant for chlorite in specularite flotation. Because both chlorite and specularite consist of iron (67.02 % for specularite and 11.45 % for chlorite), it is inappropriate to judge the separation efficiency by the content distribution of iron in concentration and tailings. As shown in It is conspicuous that the grade and recovery of SiO The zeta potential of specularite and chlorite under different pH values and their shift after the addition of chitosan were illustrated in As shown in The contact angle results of specularite and chlorite in the presence and absence of DD1A or chitosan were shown in  XPS analysis of chlorite and chlorite after chitosan adsorption was also employed to identify the interactions between the surface of chlorite and functional groups of chitosan. High resolution of XPS spectra of Al2p, Fe2p, Mg1s, N1s, O1s, and Si2p, as well as their deconvoluted fitting curves, are demonstrated in Based on these measurement results and analysis, a possible adsorption model of chitosan on the chlorite surface was proposed in Due to the surface property difference between specularite and chlorite, and particular affinity to Si/Al/Mg, chitosan was chosen as a novel depressant for specularite/chlorite separation via microflotation, Zeta potential measurements, adsorption tests, FT-IR and XPS analysis. The microflotation results of single mineral and mixed mineral both indicated that chitosan is an effective depressant for chlorite while the floatability of specularite is hardly affected. Zeta potential, contact angle, and adsorption tests revealed that the positively charged chitosan mainly adsorbed on chlorite surface hindering subsequent adsorption of DD1A. Vibration peaks of chitosan were observed on the FT-IR spectra of chlorite treated with chitosan validating its adsorption on chlorite. Electrons provided from chitosan were partially transferred to adjacent oxygen atoms of silicon atoms in chlorite, besides, Al, Fe, Si, and Mg all receive electron during the adsorption process of chitosan.  This work was support by the