The concept of the mixtures can be used not only in composites but also in materials with precipitates and matrix. In this investigation, a finite element method of axisymmetric unit cell model and the rule of mixtures of Voigt model and Reuss model are used to analyze the overall mechanical response of composites with homogeneously distributed particles. The calculations have been carried out by taking the materials as a hardening material and a perfectly plastic material. The elastic and plastic properties are predicted for various volume fractions of the soft and hard particles. The computational results are compared with the results of the rule of mixtures. It is found that the plastic flow curves agree well with the Voigt model for a high volume fraction of the particles and exist within the Voigt model and the Reuss model for a low volume fraction of the particles.As the applications of composites in industry continue to increase, lot of research is being conducted to evaluate the mechanical properties of the composites The purpose of the present paper is to analyze the effective mechanical properties of the composite using FEM and investigate the results with the ROM. The elasto-plastic FE analysis for the mechanical properties of the composites with homogeneously distributed second phase particles has been carried out. The method is expressed by displacement based on the incremental theory. The updated Lagrangian FE approach in which the standard state during deformation is based on the current state comes from the theorem of virtual work In order to investigate the difference of the mechanical properties of the matrix and the particle, two cases (hard matrix with soft particle and soft matrix with hard particle) were analyzed. 304SS was taken for the hard material and Al1100 was taken for the soft material. Elastic moduli of 304SS and Al1100 are 3.336×10 Since the flow stress of 304SS is over 10 times higher than that of Al1100, as can be seen in Even though the FE analysis gives satisfactory results in case of problems with complex geometry and the nonlinearity of the material properties, a simple and fast solution for the simplified model is also useful. For this purpose, the well-known “ROM” is a possible solution. The equal strain treatment described as a “Voigt model” (    Another interesting observation is that the deviation from the Voigt model is large due to the small deformation of the hard phase when The flow stress calculated by the different models corresponding to 8% strain, which can be used in stress–hardness relationship, is shown in The FEM of axisymmetric unit cell models and the ROM of the Voigt model and the Reuss model are used to analyze the overall mechanical response of composites with homogeneously distributed particles, and the elastic and plastic properties are predicted for various The flow curves of the particle fits well with the Voigt ROM of the equal strain for high The effective elastic modulus is between the Voigt model and the Reuss model for all The effective stress at 8% effective strain satisfies the Voigt model in SPC. It satisfies the Voigt model for high