Mechanical properties and material removal characteristics of mercury cadmium telluride (Hg0.84C0.16Te) single crystals were investigated by the use of indentation and single point diamond turning. The nanoindentation tests showed that the average values of elastic modulus and hardness were 40 and 0.55GPa, respectively. The fracture toughness estimated by Vickers indentation fracture toughness test was 0.200MPam1/2, in the predicted range of 0.204–0.235MPam1/2 by the Bifano model. The diamond turning experiments revealed that there was a threshold value in depth of cut that was responsible for the transition from ductile to brittle removal modes during the cutting of the Hg0.84C0.16Te single crystals. The measured critical depth of cut was between 1.5 and 2μm, in agreement with that of 1.541μm calculated by the Bifano model.Single crystal substrates of II–VI semiconductor compound, such as mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe), possess a much lower hardness, but at the same time exhibit significantly higher fragility Single crystals of HgCdTe are usually produced using the specially designed growth process for alloys In this paper, the mechanical properties, including elastic modulus, hardness and toughness, of single crystal Hg Single crystal HgCdTe wafers of 15 Nanoindentation experiments were performed on a Hysitron Triboindenter where Fracture characteristics of the HgCdTe specimen were investigated using microindentation. A microhardness tester (Matsuzawa MMT-X3) with a Vickers indenter was used. The indentation load was varied from 100 to 5000 where Single point diamond turning was performed on a 3-axis ultraprecision lathe (Precitech Optimum 4200). The instrument has a positioning resolution of 10  The hardness ( To examine the fracture characteristics of this material, micro-indentations were performed. This enabled the increase of indentation peak load to 5  The SEM micrographs of the machined surfaces are shown in  Values of surface roughness ( From the surface characteristics generated by the cutting process shown in The previous studies have demonstrated that during machining of some brittle materials, there exists a critical depth of cut ( where On the other hand, if assuming that the Bifano model is true for the removal of Hg The experimental results showed that there existed a threshold value in depth of cut for the transition from ductile to brittle removal modes during the diamond cutting of wafers of Hg The elastic modulus and hardness of the Hg The authors would like to thank Dr. Yueqin Wu and Ms. Mingyuan Lu from the University of Queensland (UQ) and Mr. Shaw Kah Chuan, Mr. Goh King Liang and Ms. Ng Fern Lan from Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology (SIMTech) for experimental assistance and useful discussion. This work was financially supported by