In our latest study, it was reported that the effective flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar could be achieved using a mixture of the anionic collector, sodium oleate (NaOL) and the cationic collector, dodecylamine hydrochloride (DDA). This study is an extension of the previous work to provide further details of the coadsorption and association states for the NaOL/DDA collector mixture at selected spodumene and feldspar surfaces using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), sum frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS), density functional theory (DFT) calculations, contact angle measurements, and micro-flotation experiments. An important finding from the results was significantly improved collector adsorption at the spodumene (001) surface with small addition of DDA which was responsible for improved spodumene flotation using NaOL as the dominating collector. In the absence of DDA, oleate adsorbed as a well packed monolayer at the spodumene (110) surface, while poor adsorption of oleate with gauche defects was observed at the spodumene and feldspar (001) surfaces. A certain amount of DDA significantly enhanced the collector adsorption at the spodumene (001) surface, but had little or no effect on adsorption at the spodumene (110) surface and the feldspar (001) surface. Under these circumstances, an excellent separation of spodumene from feldspar can be achieved, as confirmed by contact angle and micro-flotation results. On the other hand, good adsorption and ordered structures of DDA and its dominative mixtures were observed at all selected surfaces. DFT calculation indicates that the association of DDA ion with oleate is preferred and accounts for the variations in collector adsorption states at these selected surfaces.As the primary ingredient of the li-ion batteries (LIB) to power the upcoming generation of electric vehicles (EVs), lithium is dubbed “the world’s hottest” commodity [ Spodumene, a principal economic mineral containing lithium, is considered as a crucial resource of lithium. Spodumene generally occurs in lithium-rich granite pegmatites and aplites [ Anionic and cationic collectors are prevailingly used in spodumene flotation [ One important research reported that a mixed cationic/anionic (NaOL/DDA) collector is found to be a selective collector for increasing the separation efficiency in spodumene flotation [ In short, a positive synergistic effect of anionic collector oleate with cationic collector amine on the flotation of spodumene from other silicate gangue minerals was recognized by both research and industrial practice, but the mechanism of improved flotation selectivity using collector mixtures remains unclear. To further understand the adsorption characteristics of the collectors at spodumene as well as its main gangue minerals such as feldspar, SFVS, an interface sensitive technique for probing molecular structure at interfaces, FTIR, DFT calculations, contact angle measurements, and micro-flotation experiments were used in this study. The possible coadsorption states of oleate with DDA at selected mineral surfaces were also proposed. Deionized (DI) water with a resistivity of >18.2 MΩ cm from a Nanopure Infinity Ultrapure water purification system was used in the experiments. Dodecylamine hydrochloride (DDA) (99%) from ACROS organics, sodium oleate (NaOL) (>97.0%) from TCI, and NaOH (98%) from Mallinckrodt were used as received. The spodumene and feldspar crystals for FTIR, SFVS measurements and contact angle measurements were obtained from Koktokay, Xinjiang Province, China. The spodumene single crystal with the desired surface planes of (110) and (001), and the feldspar single crystal with desired surface plane of (001) were confirmed by X-ray diffraction analysis. Before each experiment, the crystal surfaces were polished with a microcloth with a MasterPolish II Alumina suspension purchased from Buehler, cleaned with acetone (99.6%) from Fisher Chemical, methanol (99.8%) from Sigma-Aldrich and DI water, blow dried with high-purity nitrogen, and finally treated with plasma. The hand-picked high-grade spodumene and feldspar samples were firstly crushed with a hammer, and then by a corundum jaw crusher to −3 mm. The samples passed through a wet high gradient magnetic separator (1.9 T, modeled CRIMM from China Minmetals Corporation) to eliminate iron contamination. The samples were ground in a porcelain mill with lab-scale size. The mill was filled with 500 g of mineral samples and 250 mL of DI water for each run. Ground products were sieved in a stainless steel sifter to obtain samples of a 105 × 38 μm size fraction for the following micro-flotation experiments. The chemical compositions of samples are listed in The measurements were conducted with a Thermo Scientific Nicole iS50 FT-IR spectrometer. The mineral crystal samples were prepared by conditioning in 6 An EKSPLA, Ltd. sum-frequency vibrational spectrometer was used for the measurements. The laser system has been described in our previous publication [ The crystal structure of spodumene was obtained from the American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database [ The NaOL and DDA molecules were sketched and optimized using the DMol3 Model. The optimized NaOL and DDA molecules were placed at the surfaces and the initial configuration of the collectors at the surfaces was orientated with possible interactions of the NaOL and the DDA with surface atoms taken into consideration. Approximately 30 initial conformations were calculated, and the most stable conformation of molecules with minimum energy was found. The relative affinity of interaction of the collector molecules with the mineral surface was computed using the binding energy shown as follows: The sessile drop technique was used for the contact angle measurements at mineral surfaces using a Rame-Hart goniometer (Succasunna, NJ). The mineral crystal samples were prepared by the same procedure as in FTIR and SFVS measurements. After the attached sessile drop reached equilibrium, the advancing contact angle was read. The measurements were repeated at least 10 times, and the average values were the final results. The maximum variation in contact angle values was about ±1° Micro-flotation experiments were conducted in a laboratory self aspirating flotation machine at 1700 rpm. 2 g of the samples and 20 ml of DI water were used. The pulp pH was adjusted by HCl and NaOH solutions prior to the addition of collectors. Thereafter, the system was conditioned for 2 min, and next, the collection time of froth products was 3 min. Finally, the products were filtered, dried, and weighed for the calculation of mineral recovery. In order to evaluate details of adsorption states of oleate in the presence and absence of DDA at selected spodumene and feldspar surfaces, FTIR and SFVS measurements were carried out. Due to the lack of available mineral crystals for the specific requirement of SFVS experiment, the ex-situ SFVS study (at the solid/air interface) was carried out. As the surfaces of spodumene particles are primarily consist of the prominent cleavage (110) plane and the basal (001) plane, the (110) and (001) planes were chosen for study. The mineral crystals with selected surfaces were conditioned in the collector solutions for 40 min, and then dried out in the air for the SFVS experiment. The structure of collector molecules at the interface can be described by the gauche defects present in the alkyl chains. If the molecules at the interface are predominantly in the all-trans conformation they should have a high degree of order, while if the molecules have many gauche defects the collector molecules are considered to have a lower degree of order [ The FTIR and SFVS spectra from spodumene (110) surface are given in In the case of SFVS spectra, the oleate spectrum is predominated by two peaks which have been assigned to the CH With regard to the spodumene (001) surface, the FTIR and SFVS spectra are shown in In the case of SFVS spectra, compared with the (110) surface, considerably different spectra from the NaOL used alone is observed, with few or no peaks found, showing that there is few or no oleate adsorbed at the spodumene (001) surface. When NaOL is mixed with DDA, even at the addition of 10% DDA, the adsorption peaks become pronounced. Furthermore, four peaks attributed to CH In the case of FTIR spectra at the feldspar (001) surface, the intensity for As discussed in the spectroscopy study, a small amount of DDA will significantly affect collector adsorption at the spodumene (001) surface, but has little or no effect at the spodumene (110), and the feldspar (001) surfaces. To further understand the adsorption configuration of oleate and DDA at these surfaces, the interaction of collector mixtures and mineral surfaces was studied by the DFT calculation. The species distribution of sodium oleate solution has been reported that different types of species such as oleate (RCOO The minimum binding energies for the five typical interaction modes for different surfaces are shown in Furthermore, for spodumene (both (110) and (001)) surfaces, the (b) mode, which is oleate adsorbed on Al associated with DDA ion, has the highest negative binding energy, indicating that this conformation is the most stable one as compared with the other four conformation types. It is obvious that for the spodumene (110) and (001) surfaces, oleate adsorbed on Al associated with oleic acid molecules are also possible due to a relatively higher negative binding energy. Other possible modes follow the order of oleate adsorbed on Al and DDA ion adsorbed on O, and then the mode of oleate adsorbed on Al associated with DDA molecule. In the case of the feldspar (001) surface, the (b) and (a) modes have nearly the same binding energies and therefore are the most possible adsorption configurations. To further confirm the stability of the conformation modes of mixed collectors, the Mulliken charges of Based on DFT calculations, it can be concluded that the most likely coadsorption state is that the DDA ion associates with the oleate, and then oleate adsorbs on the Al site at surfaces. As calculated in our previous work [ Based on the above analysis, the possible adsorption states for collectors are proposed in The SFVS spectra indicated that NaOL, DDA, and their mixtures adsorb on the spodumene (110) surface as a well packed monolayer, which would give a good hydrophobicity as shown by the results from contact angle measurement at the spodumene (110) surface in For the spodumene (001) surface, weak oleate adsorption is observed, but in the presence of DDA, even a small amount of DDA, good collector adsorption is observed. These results are also supported by the contact angles in In the case of feldspar, due to lack of available Al sites at the surface, the poorest adsorption and disordered structure are observed for oleate at the feldspar (001) surface. As the proportion of DDA increases in the mixture, the contact angle slightly increases at low contents of DDA and further increases to be 65° at higher contents of DDA (about 65%). Even at 50% DDA, large gauche structure and small contact angle values can be observed. This implies that at lower fractions the DDA ions associate with oleate and they do not adsorb at feldspar surface because the adsorption depends on the interaction of oleate with Al sites at the surface. From above discussions, the most significant effect of NaOL mixed with DDA on the adsorption structure and contact angle is at the spodumene (001) surface. With the addition of 10% DDA, the adsorption state is improved, and the contact angle is significantly increased (from 37° to 66°) at the spodumene (001) surface. After the grinding process, the particles are mainly consist of the (110) cleavage plane and (001) basal plane. Therefore, improved hydrophobicity and adsorption at spodumene surfaces will improve the recovery of spodumene particles. In addition, this small amount of DDA addition (say 10%) will not significantly affect the collector adsorption and hydrophobicity at the feldspar surface as revealed by the spectroscopy and contact angle measurements. Thus, improved flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar will be achieved as shown in Oleate adsorbed as a well packed monolayer at the spodumene (110) surface, while poor oleate adsorption with gauche defects is observed at the spodumene and feldspar (001) surfaces. With small addition of DDA (10% DDA), collector adsorption at the spodumene (001) surfaces becomes considerably better while there is still a poor collector adsorption at the feldspar surface. Only when the amount of DDA dominates (larger than 50%), good collector adsorption with more ordered structures occurs at the feldspar surface. The contact angle results are consistent with the spectroscopy results. Under these circumstances, the collector mixture of 90% NaOL and 10% DDA is expected to be favorable to separate spodumene from feldspar, as confirmed by micro-flotation results. The association of DDA ions and oleate is most preferred, and enhances the bonding of oleate with Al sites, as revealed by the DFT calculation. The increased adsorption of complexes (DDA ion/oleate) at the spodumene (001) surface increased the surface coverage and therefore improved the ordering of collectors as observed by spectroscopy results. The association of oleate and DDA has no significant effect on oleate adsorption at the spodumene (110) surface, because of sufficient available Al sites at the surface. For the feldspar (001) surface, even at higher DDA fraction in the mixture, the adsorbed collector structure is not an ordered monolayer, which may be due to that some DDA are associated with oleate which is not adsorbed at the feldspar surface due to lack of available Al sites, and this supports the hypothesis of the association of DDA/oleate to some extent. In the case of the coadsorption states of the collector mixture, the most likely coadsorption state as revealed by DFT calculation and SFVS results is that DDA ions associate with oleate, and then oleate adsorbs on the Al sites at mineral surfaces. The oleic acid ion-molecule complex could be formed as this conformation is relatively stable as well. A small portion of oleate associating DDA molecule also seems reasonable. None. The support of