The largest part of phosphorus (P) in soil is bound by the soil solid phase; its release to the soil solution therefore often does not meet the demand of plants. Since global P fertilizer reserves are declining, it becomes increasingly important to better utilize soil P. We tested whether earthworm activity can increase P availability to grass (Lolium perenne L.) in a 75-day greenhouse pot experiment in a soil with low P availability. The full factorial design included two factors: P fertilization (control without P; phytate; and inorganic P) and earthworm population (control without earthworms; Lumbricus rubellus Hoffmeister, Lr; Aporrectodea caliginosa Savigny, Ac; and Lumbricus terrestris L., Lt). At four times during the experiment, aboveground plant growth and P uptake were determined. In a separate incubation experiment, earthworm casts and bulk soil were analyzed for inorganic and organic P in water extracts. We observed higher levels of dissolved P pools (p < 0.001) in the water extracts of earthworm casts compared to those of the bulk soil. The magnitude of the difference differed between earthworm species, with the largest levels for Lr: from <0.02 to 8.56 mg L−1 for inorganic P (p = 0.007) and from 0.18 to 1.30 mg L−1 for organic P (p = 0.007). After three harvests, presence of Lt significantly increased P uptake by grass to 44.1 mg per pot compared to 41.8 mg per pot for the control (p = 0.010). Plant growth increased from 15.68 to 16.85 g dry biomass per pot (p < 0.001). We conclude that earthworms casts contain higher levels of plant available P than the bulk soil, and that this might translate into increased plant P uptake. It is well-known that maintaining soil faunal biodiversity is important for a variety of ecosystem services; our results show that these ecosystem services may include improving the utilization of soil P in a world with rapidly declining P stocks.Phosphorus (P) is an essential nutrient for plant growth and it is taken up by plants from the soil solution in the form of orthophosphate (ortho-P) ( Most agricultural soils are unable to supply sufficient amounts of P to plants to realize an optimal crop yield, due to their low native soil P contents and strong P binding to the soil solid phase ( A hitherto little studied topic is the role of soil macrofauna in the soil P cycle in relation to plant growth. Especially earthworms may play an important role in this respect, as they are considered “ecosystem engineers”. They can to a large extent affect soil carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) cycles as well as physical–chemical properties of soils (e.g. soil aggregation and aeration) ( Earthworms ingest their food selectively and especially feed on fresh organic matter or further decomposed organic matter associated with the soil solid phase ( The effects earthworms can have on soil properties differ between earthworm species. Observed differences are often attributed to variation in their feeding and burrowing behavior ( In many studies, positive effects of earthworm presence on plant growth have been observed ( The objective of the present study was to examine whether earthworm activity can improve the utilization of soil P by grass, through increasing the fraction of ortho-P in the soil solution. Our hypotheses are: P availability in soil water extracts, which are used as a proxy for soil pore water ( The topsoil (0–20 cm) of a Umbric Gleysol ( We set up a 75-day pot experiment consisting of 48 pots ( Each pot was filled with 6 kg of air-dried, sieved (5 mm), and homogenized soil. All pots were fertilized with 133 kg N ha For both the plant and cast experiments, 4 g of perennial ryegrass ( Pots were watered every 1 or 2 days, depending on the weather conditions. Once a week, the water content of each pot was gravimetrically adjusted. During the pre-growing phase, water was applied through a watering tube placed in the middle of each pot. After earthworm addition, water was applied to the entire surface of the pots to simulate rainfall, in order to allow surface casts to deconstruct and let the nutrients they contained leach into the soil. Grass was cut five times and after each grass cut, all the pots were fertilized with N (86 kg ha In order to keep soil temperature optimal for temperate earthworms ( In the plant experiment, grass was harvested five times, i.e. 28, 46, 64, 82, and 103 days after sowing (T0, T1, T2, T3, and T4 respectively). The first harvest was prior to the actual start of the pot experiment, just before addition of the earthworms. The data of T0 are, therefore, not reported here. At T0-T3, the grass was cut approximately 5 cm above the soil surface to facilitate rapid regrowth, dried for 48 h at 70 °C, and weighed. At day 103 after sowing the final harvest (T4) was cut. At this harvest, the grass was cut close to the soil surface, including stubbles. Earthworms were collected and rinsed with tap water to remove any adhering soil particles. The moist bulk soil was homogenized, sieved (2 mm), and stored at 4 °C until further chemical analysis. Earthworm casts were collected by leaving the earthworms for 48 h in 100 mL polyethylene cups with an inert glass fiber filter (GF92, Schleicher and Schuell) at the bottom, pre-wetted with UPW. The cups were gently shaken by hand every day to activate the earthworms. Since the amount of collected cast was limited, cast samples collected from the 4 replicates of each treatment of the plant experiment were pooled for chemical analysis. The cast experiment started at the same date as the plant experiment, but the earthworms were collected 71 days after sowing. Earthworm densities of the 6 pots in this experiment were increased 8 days prior to the final harvest by a factor 10 (Lr and Ac) or 5 (Lt) to generate a sufficient amount of cast for chemical analysis. In the cast experiment, collection of the cast and bulk soil samples was carried out similar to the methods described for the plant experiment. The dry weight of the cast and bulk soil samples from the plant and cast experiments was determined by drying subsamples for 24 h at 40 °C. The remaining material was sealed and stored at 4 °C to prevent the samples from desiccation. The moist cast and bulk soil samples were used to generate water extracts as a proxy for soil pore water ( For the cast and bulk soil samples from both experiments, moist material was suspended in UPW in 50-mL polypropylene tubes at a solid to solution ratio of 1:10 (w:v) based on the dry weight of the material. The suspensions were gently shaken for 24 h in a horizontal position on a reciprocating shaking machine with 75 strokes min Total P and N contents of the shoots was measured after drying of the shoots at 70 °C and grinding and homogenization of the dried material. Digestion was done using a mixture of H Statistical analyses were carried out in SPSS version 20. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with earthworm species, P treatment, and block as independent factors was used to determine significance. For all analyses, The soil used for the plant and cast experiments has a P-AL value of 26 mg P kg For all earthworm species, the DIP concentrations in the water extracts of the earthworm casts were significantly higher than those in the water extracts of the bulk soil ( For all earthworm species, the Al, Fe, and Si concentrations in the water extracts of the casts were higher than those in the water extracts of the bulk soil ( Earthworms are often reported to accumulate OM, fine soil fractions and nutrients in their casts by selective feeding ( For all earthworm species, the pH levels in the water extracts of the casts were on average 1.7 units higher than those for the bulk soil ( The increase in pH may have contributed to the elevated levels of DIP in the water extracts of the earthworm casts. Adsorption of ortho-P to reactive metal oxides is known to be pH-dependent, with adsorption decreasing with an increase in pH due to a decrease in the positive charge of metal oxides ( Enhanced mineralization of organic matter may have contributed to the elevated DIP levels measured in the water extracts of the casts. The conditions in the earthworm gut are known to be favorable for microbial activity ( Increased mineralization of organic P has been reported before for casts by The DOC concentrations in the water extracts of the earthworm casts were much higher than those for the bulk soil ( The difference in DOC concentrations between the water extracts of the casts and those of the bulk soils can have an important consequence for DIP. Since negatively charged DOC compounds can compete with ortho-P for the same binding sites on reactive metal oxides, the higher DOC levels can possibly explain the elevated DIP concentrations in the water extracts of the casts ( Earthworm survival in the plant experiment was on average 90%, with no differences between earthworm or P fertilization treatments (results not shown). In contrast to the cast experiment, the plant experiment contained treatments with and without earthworms, which allowed us to test whether earthworms affect P availability in the bulk soil (H2). However, the DIP concentrations in the water extracts of the bulk soils with and without earthworms remained below the detection limit for all treatments ( Total P uptake was lowest for the control treatment and highest for the pots fertilized with inorganic P ( The averages for the calculated N/P ratios of the grass for the different P treatments in the plant experiment are shown in In T1–T3, total P uptake by the grass in the treatment with Lt (44.3 mg P per pot) was significantly higher than the total P uptake in the treatment without earthworms (42.0 mg P pot Another important factor when considering the effects of earthworms on total P uptake and plant growth is the aging of the earthworm casts. The availability of P in earthworm casts has been demonstrated to change over time; after initial high levels of plant available P, the P availability in earthworm casts decreased with time ( The earthworm effect on total P uptake and plant growth described above disappeared when the final harvest taken at T4 was included ( In order to test H4, we assessed the effect of earthworm presence on total P uptake and plant growth separately for each P fertilizer treatment for the harvests taken at T1–T3. For the treatment with phytate, there was no significant increase in total P uptake by the grass in the pots with earthworms ( Both DIP and DOP concentrations were significantly higher in the water extracts of earthworm casts than in those of the bulk soil. These results differed for the three earthworm species, with the largest differences observed for Lr. In the bulk soil, no significant effects of the presence of earthworms on P availability were observed. After three harvests, the presence of Lt significantly increased total P uptake by the grass as well as plant growth, as compared to the control treatment, but an earthworm effect was not present for Lr and Ac. For plant growth, the effect of Lt was larger for the treatment with phytate than for the treatment with inorganic P. Inclusion of grass stubbles at the fourth and final harvest is likely to have contributed to the absence of a significant effect on grass P uptake and plant growth after the final harvest. More research is needed to further understand and quantify the processes which are responsible for these earthworm-induced effects. Such research should focus on (i) unraveling the mechanisms through which earthworms influence P availability, and (ii) assessing the spatio-temporal dynamics of these effects on a bulk soil level, and the accompanying implications for plant uptake. Maintaining soil faunal biodiversity is known to be important for a variety of ecosystem services ( This research has been made possible thanks to a donation by De Heus b.v., on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the company. We are grateful to Arjan Reijneveld for his assistance in the location and collection of the used soil, and to Jaap Nelemans, Willeke van Tintelen and Gerlinde Vink for their assistance with laboratory work. We would further like to thank Bastiaan Molleman for helpful discussions on data interpretation, and Lucas Pecci Canisares, Maartje Vos, Klaas De Jong, Anupol Chareesri and Ingrid Lubbers for their assistance with harvesting the experiments. Finally, we gratefully acknowledge suggestions by Lijbert Brussaard on an earlier version of this manuscript, and thank two anonymous reviewers for their useful comments. The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at