This work evaluated the influence of nanobubbles (150–200 nm, mean diameter) on the visual adhesion of microbubbles (70 μm mean diameter) and macrobubbles (1 mm mean diameter) onto selected mineral particles (quartz and apatite) and on the flotation of both minerals, at bench scale. The adhesion of bubbles to high purity grains of quartz and apatite was monitored using a specially designed photographic technique. The results showed that the highest adhesion of bubbles onto the mineral grains occurred only after “conditioning” with nanobubbles. The nanobubbles appear to adhere to hydrophobic surfaces and confined to the rough surfaces of the grains, probably due to the dissipation of the free surface energy of the solids. As a result, the nanobubbles appear to serve as nuclei for enhanced adhesion of micro and/or macrobubbles, assisting the flotation of both minerals. In the case of quartz (D50 = 290 μm), the recovery increase was about 23% compared to a standard test of flotation with macrobubbles only. Furthermore, flotation kinetics was rapid and quartz recovery, at the first min, was double that obtained in the absence of nanobubbles. In the case of a fine apatitic ore (35% < 37 μm particles), best results were obtained with a combination of nano, micro and macrobubbles, with a 500–1000 g t−1 saponified soybean oil collector and a 300–600 g t−1 gelatinized corn starch depressant of iron bearing minerals. The P2O5 recoveries increased about 9% compared to flotation with macrobubbles only, and separation also occurred at a higher rate. The total recovered phosphate (4 min standard test) was obtained in the first 1.5 min, after conditioning with nanobubbles, followed by injection of and microbubbles. Results validated the reported high potential for nanobubbles in “surface conditioning”, the first stage of mineral flotation and were explained in terms of the solution and interfacial phenomena involved.Froth flotation is believed to be the most efficient and cost-effective unit operation in mineral processing (Fuerstenauet al., 2007). Yet, separation efficiency decreases for particles less than 37 µm and fall sharply for the ultrafines fractions (<13), due to the low probability of bubble-particle capture (poor attachment). Yet, it has been reported that fine particle recovery in flotation is enhanced by using microbubbles (MBs - 30–100 μm diameter) and/or nanobubbles (NBs of 120–800 nm diameter) ( Mechanisms involved while employing microbubbles are related to a higher residence time for bubble-particle adhesion at the film-thinning and disjoining pressure stage ( Regarding nanobubbles in mineral flotation, recent studies reported advantages regarding the enhancement of the contact angles after their capture by particles, assisting the probability of flotation (and its rate) by larger bubbles (>1 mm) ( Furthermore, recent studies by our research group have revealed two other phenomena: i. Nanobubbles are able to aggregate particles (ultrafines) and improve their floatability ( Distilled water treated in a reverse-osmosis cartridge and modules of ion-exchange resins and activated carbon was employed for the particle-adhesion studies. The conductivity of the water was 3 µS cm High purity lumps of apatite (Ca Fatty acid soap from soybean oil was used as the collector for phosphate and gelatinized corn starch was used as gangue mineral depressant. A 10% NaOH solution was used for pH adjustment. In the quartz flotation studies, the collector was the commercial reagent Flotigam EDA 3B (Clariant®), an alkyl ether monoamine. The P The experimental setup, shown in Nanobubbles (NBs - mean diameter 150–200 nm) and microbubbles (MBs - mean diameter 40 μm) were generated by the depressurization of DI water, previously saturated with air at various saturation pressures for 30 min (Psat; Psat = 2.5 bar for NBs and Psat = 4.0 bar for MBs). The steel saturation vessel was equipped with an internal container made of glass (40 cm high, 10 cm diameter, and 0.5 cm thickness; 0.7 L effective capacity). The concentration, mean size and size distribution of the NBs were measured in quadruplicate in a nanoparticle-tracking analysis (NTA) instrument (NanoSight LM10 & NTA 2.0 Analytical Software, Malvern Instrument Ltd, Salisbury, UK) at room temperature. The microbubbles, were measured using the LTMBSizer following the technique developed, in our group, by The depressurization-cavitation stage was performed at a 2-mm internal diameter needle valve (Globo 012-Santi®, São Paulo, Brazil) and MBs and NBs were generated in a glass column, as described by During the studies, conditioning with nanobubbles was carried out with the mineral grains by contact for 3 min before the injection of the other bubbles ( The studies were conducted with the combined injection of NBs, MBs and MaBs, compared to standard tests (STD) where only MaBs were used. The combinations of the types of bubble distributions evaluated were: (i) NBs + MaBs; (ii) MBs + MaBs; (iii) NBs + MBs + MaBs. A factorial experiment evaluated two concentrations of reagents (  The tests were performed in a mechanical cell, Darma-Denver, model D12 (2 L), with pulps containing 28% (w/w), under agitation (1000 rpm) for 4 min. Reagent conditioning was performed in the same flotation cell. The pulp, at 60% solids (w/w) and pH 9.5, was conditioned for 5 min with the depressant and 1 min with the collector at 1000 rpm. Flotation was started with the injection of air (5–7 L min  Tests with NBs were performed following the procedure of the STD test, but an aqueous dispersion of NBs was used, rather than tap water.  These tests were similar to the STD, but with MBs injection via a hose connected from the discharge valve of the saturator vessel, used to generate MBs, to the side entrance of the flotation cell. 400 mL of the volume of the adjusting water for solids concentration was replaced with an aqueous dispersion of MBs. In addition, another 4 injections of 100 mL each, were performed at the following times: 0.5; 1.0; 2.0 and 3.0 min.  In these studies, the water for pulp preparation, conditioning, dilution and cell level control were replaced by aqueous dispersions of NBs. MBs were injected according to the conditions described in the previous item. Standard flotation tests were conducted similarly to those described for phosphate flotation studies. However, the pulp contained 12% solids, pH was kept at 6.2, the quartz conditioning time with Flotigam EDA 3B (0.5 mg g  After the interaction between apatite or quartz grains and nanobubbles, although adhered, the photographic technique cannot (as expected) visualize them in the microscope. However, the population of macrobubbles increased greatly after conditioning both minerals with nano and microbubbles. This enhancement reinforces the role of nanobubbles as “activators” or “collectors” of particles in flotation ( Results also showed that the combination of NBs + MBs + MaBs provided the highest bubble capture by the apatite grain, while that of NBs + MaBs was responsible for the increase of bubbles adhered to quartz. This large population of bubbles should contribute to increase the probability of flotation since the density of bubble-particle aggregates should decrease considerably. In addition, the roughness of apatite and quartz grains, because of their surface cavities, porous surfaces and etching, appear to allow micro and nano sized bubble entrainment/entrapment, inside the holes of the surfaces, probably as a result of the high superficial free energy. The micrographs in   Moreover, using half of the reagent concentration, P  Results for the kinetics of phosphate ore flotation validate the results of rapid bubble attachment observed in the photographic study and the recoveries obtained during the first minute and a half were higher than the standard test. Moreover, the presence of nanobubbles, allowed a higher recovery of fine fractions (37% of feed was less than 37 μm). Studies showed that after conditioning with nanobubbles, higher flotation recoveries than those with the standard (∼23%) were obtained. More, similar to flotation in the apatitic ore, the quartz conditioning with nanobubbles increased about two times the mass recovered in the standard, with only macrobubbles ( The results of the present work reinforce the theory of “surface conditioning” provided by nanobubbles, causing better (and rapid) adhesion of coarser bubbles, highly improving flotation recoveries and kinetics. Moreover, before flotation, the finest particle fraction appears to aggregate and trap nanobubbles inside these aggregates. All these mechanisms are illustrated in Summarizing, the role of nanobubbles appears to be significant for mineral flotation. As nanobubbles have far-reaching application in mineral and environmental science, a thorough understanding and mastery of the stability, interfacial properties and potential applications of nanobubbles is the premise of future research. Nowadays, there appear to be reliable technologies to generate nanobubbles at a high rate with sustainability, a great challenge that might facilitate the industrial use of nanobubbles in flotation ( The technique of bubble visualization of surfaces of apatite and quartz grains showed nucleation and growth of microbubbles (70 μm mean diameter) and an increase of the population of macrobubbles (1 mm mean diameter) but only after conditioning with nanobubbles (150–200 nm, mean diameter). This study validated the theory of “surface conditioning” whereby bulk nanobubbles appear to attach rapidly at pulverized mineral surfaces mainly if they are hydrophobic surfaces. Herein, the nanobubbles enhanced the attachment of larger bubbles and, as a result, increased flotation recovery and process kinetics. Accordingly, almost 95% P The authors would like to thank all the