Fractures of the distal end of the radius represent a common and varied set of injuries. Management of unstable fractures of the distal radius continues to evolve. External fixation with or without secondary augmentation has been used with success in the treatment of these difficult injuries for some time. When considering the best management option for a particular patient and injury, it is important to understand the indications and varied techniques that are available. External fixation continues to be used with frequency and can result in good functional outcomes. It is important for surgeons who are managing these injuries to have a good understanding of external fixation and its proper applications.External fixation is an established treatment in the management of unstable fractures of the distal radius. The role of external fixation, with or without Kirschner (K)-wire augmentation, has been influenced by the development and use of fixed-angle plating systems. However, external fixation remains a valuable technique in the management of these fractures. It is important for treating surgeons to have an understanding of the indications, principles, and techniques of external fixation, as it applies to the treatment of distal radius fractures. Closed fractures of the distal radius that show significant displacement can be initially managed with closed reduction and splinting. If fracture reduction cannot be maintained with closed means alone, then surgical stabilization is indicated. Patient-specific management decisions should be made with a good understanding of the specific injury. This would include a radiographic assessment as well as an evaluation for injury to the carpus or soft tissues around the wrist. Other important conditions to consider and rule out are compartment syndrome or neurovascular compromise. It is critical to have a good understanding of the patient’s social history, handedness, and future activity demands. External fixation alone may be contraindicated when insufficient soft tissue is attached to the fracture fragments or intra-articular extension is noted, rendering closed reduction unsuccessful. In general terms, external fixation consists of pins or wires inserted into the bone and connected externally by a frame. There are several types and designs of external fixators. Two main types of external fixators used for the treatment of distal radius fractures include bridging and nonbridging fixators. A bridging technique spans the radiocarpal joint. The nonbridging designs span the fracture and but do not span the radiocarpal joint, and therefore allow motion at that joint. Both bridging and nonbridging techniques of external fixation have been shown to have satisfactory clinical outcomes. Closed reduction of a displaced distal radius fracture is done via ligamentotaxis, which allows for indirect reduction of the fracture fragments. Soft-tissue attachments to the boney fragments are helpful in allowing for indirect reduction in this manner. Indirect reduction of the fractured fragments can be done with initial distraction before the application of the external fixator, or the fixator can be applied first and distraction of the fracture fragments with the fixator in place can be performed to initiate reduction. Longitudinal traction alone is often sufficient to correct radial length but may fail to correct proper volar tilt or radial inclination. Augmentation with accessory K-wires, pins, and the use of bone graft material or bone cement is often necessary to provide structural support for the subchondral bone or stabilizing intra-articular fracture fragments and can offer improved clinical outcomes. The preferred technique for the authors when proceeding with external fixation to treat an unstable fracture of the distal radius is to use a bridging external fixator with augmentation as needed. The patient is placed in supine position and a tourniquet is used on the extremity. Initially, the proximal fixator pin sites are exposed with a small incision made via a mini-open technique on the dorsal radial aspect of the radial shaft. It is important to identify the superficial branch to the radial nerve (SBRN) and protect it before pin insertion as the SBRN is susceptible to injury during this step. Proximal pins can be placed in the interval between the extensor carpi The fixator construct is then secured to the pins and closed reduction is performed using longitudinal traction as well as hand and wrist manipulation to provide satisfactory restoration of radial length as well as restoration of volar tilt and radial inclination. This typically will require slight palmar flexion and ulnar deviation but may also benefit from translation of the distal fragment in a volar direction. Further stabilization of fracture fragments, including intra-articular fragments can then be performed using accessory K-wires as indicated. In addition, bone graft can be inserted through a small dorsal incision to enhance the stability at the fracture site and provide support for subchondral bone. Satisfactory alignment is confirmed with fluoroscopy. Over distraction should be avoided. This can be gauged radiographically by noting excessive widening at the radiocarpal or mid-carpal joints. Also, passive motion of the fingers can be assessed as overdistraction will decrease the ability to flex the fingers to a full fist. The wrist position is also important as excessive flexion at the wrist could lead to compression of the median nerve. Ideally, the final wrist position in the fixator frame should be neutral to slightly dorsiflexed. Techniques for nonbridging fixators have been described. The use of external fixation for the management of distal radius fractures has been used for several decades. Its current use has decreased somewhat secondary to the advent of locking plating technology and fragment-specific open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). The published studies, in general, have not been conclusive in showing a significant clinical difference in long-term outcomes when comparing external fixation with open reduction and internal fixation techniques. In 1979, Cooney et al The specific components of external fixation with and without pinning as well as supplemental bone graft have been analyzed in various studies. Two prospective studies comparing Kapandji-type pinning and trans-styloid pinning techniques have been published. There have been increasing comparative studies, including external fixation with other various treatments (especially ORIF with locking or fragment-specific fixation) over the past decade. Kapoor et al Prospective studies further examining outcomes between groups have also emerged. Egol et al Studies comparing bridging to nonbridging external fixation have overall been inconclusive. In summary, external fixation, in its various forms, remains a valuable surgical treatment option tool in the management of unstable distal radius fractures. It has been successfully used for many years in the treatment of these injuries. Although its indications continue to evolve, proper application of the principles of external fixation can lead to excellent clinical and functional patient outcomes.