Using a panel of 3 serum proteins (PC-1, PC-2 and PC-3) on archival serum samples, Li et al (page 1782) from Baltimore, Maryland found 76% sensitivity of the new markers, at a selected specificity of 45%, which was significantly better than prostate specific antigen, which had a sensitivity of 52%. ( The side specific probability of extracapsular extension in radical prostatectomy specimens was evaluated by Ohori et al (page 1844) from New York, New York. The authors showed that standard clinical features of prostate cancer in each lobe—prostate specific antigen, palpable induration and biopsy Gleason sum—did predict side specific probability of extracapsular extension. Survivin expression in prostate cancer correlated with various pathological and biochemical parameters related to progression and aggressiveness of prostate cancer in a study by Kishi et al (page 1855) from Izumo, Japan. Survivin is a new member of the inhibitor of apoptosis family and has been shown to correlate with poor survival in other cancers. A multicenter trial of the German Testicular Cancer Study Group to evaluate prognostic parameters of necrotic residual tumor after chemotherapy of advanced germ cell tumors, documented by Albers et al (page 1835) showed that patients with seminoma after adequate chemotherapy do not need to undergo residual tumor resection. However, in nonseminoma cases α-fetoprotein values less than 20 ng/ml before chemotherapy and a high percentage of shrinkage during chemotherapy reliably predicted only 19% with necrosis. Patients with bladder cancer who underwent a nerve and seminal sparing cystectomy had better outcomes in terms of urinary, urodynamic and sexual function compared to those treated with standard cystoprostatectomy in a study by Colombo et al (page 1819) from Milan, Italy. Radio frequency ablation of small renal tumors showed no contrast uptake on computerized tomography in 23 of 24 cases at 1-year followup in a study by Hwang et al (page 1814) from Bethesda, Maryland. ( Fludeoxyglucose F 18 positron emission tomography was limited in its detection of renal cell carcinoma by low sensitivity (60%) but specificity was high (100%) in a study by Kang et al (page 1806) from Charlotte, North Carolina. ( Heimbach et al (page 1797) from Bonn, Germany and Durham, North Carolina found that appropriate chemical treatment of urinary calculi before shock wave therapy improved stone fragility. ( Fine needle percutaneous biopsy with computerized tomography guidance of small (less than 4 cm) renal masses had a 92% accuracy for histopathological tumor type and a 69.8% accuracy for Fuhrman nuclear grade in a study by Neuzillet et al (page 1802) from Marseille, France. ( Bubanj et al (page 1876) from Serbia and Montenegro found that sexual behavior and sexual function were not significantly affected following hypospadias surgery. On page 2015 Kavoussi reviews