This work shows the technical feasibility to recover uranium and molybdenum from industrial copper leaching solutions (PLS). Both were obtained as by-products from hydrometallurgical operations of the Chilean copper mining industry, using the ion exchange technique. This process recovered uranium and molybdenum, without disturbing or changing the normal operation of the overall copper production process. Uranium concentration was 17 mg/L, while molybdenum concentration was 50 mg/L. Four different anionic resins were tested, along with the influence of impurities over the breakthrough and saturation points achieved. In a first instance, two resins were chosen based on their Langmuir parameters, namely, maximum load capacity (Qmax) and separation factor (RL): L-MP62 and M43. The overall dynamic process consisted in a pre-conditioning step for the resin, using a weak hydrochloric acid solution. Next, the copper PLS solution feeds the fixed bed of the ion exchange column. Once the PLS solution saturates the anionic resin, a hydrochloric solution extracts uranium, and a sodium hydroxide solution extracts molybdenum. The final products were purified elution solutions with 500 mg/L uranium and 800 mg/L molybdenum, respectively.Several Chilean copper mining companies have shown interest in reducing production costs, through the exploitation and benefit of by-products present in acid leaching solutions from their productive plants. In the case of the large copper mining industry in Chile, there are porphyry copper deposits containing several species of interest. From 2008 to 2012, the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission (CCHEN) completed a cooperation agreement with the National Copper Corporation (CODELCO North) for the geological and metallurgical research of occurrences of natural atomic materials. From 2009 to 2012, they completed an agreement on activities for the recovery of uranium and molybdenum from copper ore leaching solutions ( The overall process used for conventional uranium recovery through the ion exchange technique is given in For uranium extraction, the ore is leached with 50 g/L H The ion exchange process used to extract uranium from the leaching solution is based on the high binding constants of the anionic sulfate complexes of uranium relative to the anion on the anion exchange resin (chloride), primarily due to their higher negative charge. The major species in solution is the uranyl trisulfate tetra-anion. The overall process is fairly efficient, but the poor capacity of the resin and the large amount of the expensive nitric acid needed for stripping, make this process noncompetitive ( For Molybdenum, the most common method used to obtain it is in the molybdenum trioxide form, MoO This document shows the technical feasibility, results and analysis of the experiences made at laboratory level, for the recovery of uranium and molybdenum from industrial copper PLS solutions in Chile, using the ion exchange technique, with anionic resins. The concentration of these solutions and the working conditions are very different from the typical uranium and molybdenum process. High concentrations of impurities, like chloride ions, and low concentrations of both uranium and molybdenum, requires the application of a new process, capable of recover them in separate ways. The method to determine the process to recover these species is to find out their chemical form in solution. This was done by chemical speciation. The speciation of uranium in sulphuric medium is shown in Molybdenum concentrations was 50 mg/L. Under these working conditions, With this information, the main hypothesis to prove in this work is that an anionic exchange resin is technically capable of recovering both uranium and molybdenum from the copper PLS solutions, without disturbing the normal performance of the copper leaching – solvent extraction – electrowinning industrial plant. This paper shows the methodology and the results obtained at laboratory scale for the proposed task.  To select the best resin for both uranium and molybdenum recovery, four available resins were studied. LANXESS (Lewatit) and DOW Chemical Company (Dowex) donated the samples. Batch load tests were performed to determine the adsorption parameters of each resin, using synthetic solutions with the same concentrations of uranium and molybdenum, and the same pH value. These tests consisted in contacting 200 cm With two resins, ion exchange tests were carried out, in dynamic conditions, for a bed volume (BV) of 125 cm  This procedure includes the following stages. Preconditioning, with the same 4% hydrochloric solution used in the batch load tests. Saturation: Feeding the ion exchange resin using the PLS solution, until the resin reaches its maximum adsorption capacity. Acid elution: A hydrochloric acid (0.9 M NaCl + 0.1 M HCl) solution extracts uranium adsorbed by the resin. First wash. Due to constant pH changes of the inlet solutions, a washing step prevents the precipitation of impurities by the occurrence of acid – base reactions inside the column. Basic elution: a sodium hydroxide (5% According to the Pourbaix diagrams and the speciations for the PLS solution ( The conditioning was done using a hydrochloric solution, according to reaction (1): The separation reactions involved in the process are the following: Uranium recovery: Molybdenum recovery: According to Langmuir models were used as analytical technique to study the sorption process in the removal of uranium and molybdenum ions from aqueous solution with the resins as adsorbent ( The influence of isotherm shape on whether adsorption is favorable or unfavorable had also been considered. For a Langmuir type adsorption process, the isotherm shape can be classified by a dimensionless constant separation factor (R The value of R Using the lineal regression shown in Eq. (5), the four resins were studied under static conditions. The obtained results were the following ( The high correlation factor shows a good fit for the Langmuir equation. Based on their main parameters, two resins were chosen, the best for uranium and molybdenum. In this case, the maximum load capacity and the separation factor. The two resins chosen for the following tests were the L-MP62, for its favorable separation factor for uranium recovery, and M43, for molybdenum recovery. With this information, two additional tests were performed with the industrial PLS sample, at the same static conditions: 200 cm Another important property of the resins was the selectivity. Zinc and iron are common contaminants for the upcoming uranium purification process, using TBP and kerosene. For this reason, their extraction must be decresed as far as possible. ( To determine the selectivity of the resins, the concentrations of the main impurities were also measured. The extraction of Fe and Zn with anionic-type resins was because under the proposed conditions, both ions are similarly complexed, as shown in the speciation diagram of From the speciation diagrams, both iron and zinc have ionic complexed forms as anions in the industrial copper PLS solution and both decrease the extraction efficiency of uranium and molybdenum. However, there is an important difference between them. In the case of iron, the value of the potential in solution is very important, since, according to With both resins, dynamic load tests were carried out directly from the industrial copper PLS solutions. The operational parameters used were the following: Resin volume: 125 cm In According to Eqs. (2) and (3), high chloride concentrations decrease the recovery of both uranium and molybdenum. To analyze the influence of this impurity, additional tests were performed with synthetic solutions of the same concentrations of uranium, molybdenum and pH values as the industrial PLS, with different chloride ion concentrations. The results were the following:  Finally, elution solutions must recover uranium and molybdenum selectively, during two elution stages. The acid solution extracts uranium, and the basic solution extracts molybdenum. The solution flow was one BV/h, for both solutions. The best results were obtained using, for the case of uranium, at 0.9 M NaCl + 0.1 M HCl solution, and for molybdenum, a 5% According to the speciations of Finally, to evaluate the selectivity of both elution solutions,  The main conclusions of this work were the following: The proposed ion exchange process allowed recovering uranium and molybdenum selectively from industrial copper PLS solutions simultaneously, without modifying the main parameters of the industrial copper cathodes production processes. The results achieved maximum recoveries of 25.2% for uranium, and 26.5% for molybdenum, under static conditions. All resins showed Langmuir adsorption model during the static load tests, based on the high correlation numbers obtained. The main parameters of the Langmuir equations, Q The typical impurities from the hydrometallurgical process of copper cathodes production, in this case, iron and zinc represent the main impurities present. Under these working conditions, they show anionic behavior, similar to uranium and molybdenum. Zinc recovery was 39.8%, while iron was 8.2%. This was because the anionic resin adsorbs zinc over high pH intervals, while electrochemical potential controls iron adsorption, if ferric ion concentration proves to be low. Chloride ions strongly decrease the overall performance of the process. High concentrations in PLS solutions, inhibit the global transport reactions of uranium and molybdenum, decreasing the resin's adsorption capacity, from an initial saturation point of 750 BV, with low chloride concentrations, to 100 BV, for 15 g/L of chloride ions.This effect is much more prominent for molybdenum, because the dynamic test reaches the saturation point at 50 BV. This means higher reagent quantities, such as hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide, which make the process economically noncompetitive. The elution process allowed recovering uranium and molybdenum selectively because of their different speciations. At low pH values (pH < 2), uranium is present as an anionic complex, while molybdenum is present as MoO On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. The authors would like to thank the