An investigation has been carried out for arsenic removal from a silver–copper ore. The copper ore was roasted in air, in nitrogen atmosphere and in vacuum at high temperature. It was found that arsenic was more easily removed in vacuum at lower temperature with shorter time. By suitably adjusting the main reaction conditions, almost 98.97% arsenic could be removed, while most of the sulfur was particularly retained in the copper ore. It was illustrated that arsenic could be completely removed on anaerobic conditions. After arsenic was removed, the copper ore with higher economic value could be used for feeding to the smelter.Tennantite ((CuFe) In wet pretreatment of arsenic removal, the fact that tennantite prevails among the copper bearing minerals combined with the high arsenic content strongly undermine their economic value. For this reason the possibility of the removal of arsenic contained in the concentrates prior to roasting has been explored by means of alkaline leaching with a mixture of sodium sulfide and sodium hydroxide In roasting pretreatment of arsenic removal, the arsenic element could be somewhat removed at higher temperature in air, but the vast majority of the sulfur element could also be removed. For the imperfect removal of arsenic or the majority of the sulfur removal, the concentrate roasted in air could not be well used for feeding to the smelter. However, arsenic could be perfectly removed and most of sulfur satisfactorily be retained at higher temperature in the nitrogen atmosphere, the concentrate could be used for feeding to the smelter Processing of future copper ores is likely to involve dealing with more complex, fine-grained minerals containing increased levels of toxic and minor elements. In this paper, arsenic was perfectly removed, while most of sulfur was satisfactorily retained at lower temperature in vacuum Copper–silver ore used in this work was from Canada. Mineral is black powder, particle size under 60 mesh.  In the copper–silver ore, arsenic exists in compound tennantite (Cu The experiments were carried out on a vacuum tube furnace. The porcelain boat loaded with raw ores was placed at the appropriate position in the furnace, and then heated to the desired temperature which was controlled by a temperature controller connected with thermocouple Initial evaluation of arsenic removal was respectively performed using copper–silver ore with arsenic content of 7.81% for 3 h in air at temperatures ranging from 973.15 K to1323.25 K, in the nitrogen flow at temperatures ranging from 923.15 K to 1123.15 K, in vacuum at temperatures ranging from 923.15 K to 1073.15 K. The effect of temperature on arsenic removal in air, in nitrogen flow and in vacuum was showed in As temperature increases from 973.15 K to 1323.15 K, the arsenic removal ratio increases from 35.6% to72.1% in air. It is obviously that the removal of arsenic is not ideal in air. It can be seen that the arsenic removal ratio increases with temperature in It is obviously that the temperature of arsenic removal was lower compared to that in nitrogen atmosphere. At the same temperature, the arsenic removal was easer in vacuum compared to that in nitrogen atmosphere. As the temperature increases from 923.15 K to 1073.15 K, the arsenic removal ratio increases rapidly from 6.79% to 98.98%. Even the arsenic removal ratio in vacuum at 1023.15 K is close to that in the nitrogen atmosphere at 1123.15 K. Therefore, the energy consumption in vacuum is less than that in nitrogen atmosphere.   The experiments were conducted by holding the roasting time from 0.5 h to 4 h in nitrogen atmosphere and in vacuum with the pressure of 300 Pa at 1023.15 K. The relationship between the removal ratio of arsenic and sulfur and roasting time is summarized in It can be seen in The weight of the residue is 79.9% of the original silver bearing copper ore roasted at 1053.15 K for 3 h. The result of the chemical analysis is: Cu: 22.08 wt%, As: 0.10 wt%, S: 26.11 wt%. It is obvious that the grade of the valuable copper is increased. The content of harmful arsenic is only 0.10 wt%. Although some of the sulfur is also evaporated, but the grade of sulfur is increased to certain extent due to the reduced weight of the roasted product. The processed silver–copper ore can well meet the requirement for feeding to the copper smelter where the grade of arsenic should be less than 0.5 wt%. The great amount of sulfur retention in the residue could provide large amount of heat when the processed silver–copper ore is used to get copper matte. Therefore, the economic value is also improved.  The oxygen content is a decisive condition for arsenic removal and sulfur retainment during the roasting process of the silver bearing copper ore. Arsenic is not completely removed in air as we expected while much sulfur is removed. The pretreated concentrate in air can not meet the requirement of feeding no matter in pyrometallurgy process or in hydrometallurgy process. Arsenic is removed and most of sulfur is retained at higher temperature in nitrogen atmosphere. The method for the treatment of arsenic-rich and sulfur-rich copper–silver ore in vacuum at high temperature is developed in this work, by which arsenic could be removed from copper–silver ore while most of sulfur could be retained satisfactorily. The experimental results showed that the removal ratio of arsenic is 98.97% and the removal ratio of sulfur is less than 16% with the residue containing 22.08 wt% of copper, 26.11 wt% of sulfur and 0.10 wt% of arsenic when the experiment was carried out at 1053.15 K in vacuum for 3 h. Compared with the roasting process in nitrogen atmosphere, arsenic could be easily removed in vacuum at lower temperature with shorter time. This work was carried out with financial support from