In this study, the torsional aeroelastic effects are investigated for high-rise buildings by carrying out a series of forced vibration wind tunnel tests. In these tests nine building models with different side ratios and structural eccentricities are considered, where the structural responses and surface pressures for each model are measured. The method used to determine the torsional aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios from the experimental data is introduced. The effects of the vibration amplitude, side ratio, and structural eccentricities on these two ratios are examined. The results show that the amplitude of the vibration does not have a significant effect on the torsional aeroelastic effect. Also, the torsional aerodynamic stiffness ratio can be neglected in the absence of structural eccentricity. However, the side ratio has a significant effect on the aerodynamic damping ratio where it decreases with increasing side ratio. Although the cross-wind eccentricities are found to have no significant influence on the aeroelastic effects, the along-wind eccentricities greatly influence the aeroelastic effects. Furthermore, a windward eccentricity can increase both the aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios, whereas a leeward eccentricity can decrease these ratios.Driven by the developments in the construction material and technology, high land costs and increased urban population, buildings in cities are becoming increasingly taller and more flexible. The natural frequencies of these buildings approach the dominant frequency of the wind loads, while their damping ratios become increasingly smaller. As a result, high-rise buildings are more vulnerable to wind loads and the resulting wind-induced dynamic response can be large when these lightly-damped and flexible structures are subjected to strong wind ( For high-rise buildings, the core of the aeroelastic effect is due to self-excited forces as a result of the structural motion, i.e., aeroelastic forces. The aeroelastic forces can be expressed as a superposition of the forces caused by aerodynamic stiffness and aerodynamic damping ( High-rise buildings usually experience three dimensional (3D) vibrations in the along-wind, cross-wind, and torsional directions when subjected to strong wind. Most of the modern buildings experience 3D coupled vibrations due to their irregular shapes and complex structural systems ( The aeroelastic effect is usually investigated by using the aeroelastic model and forced vibration wind tunnel tests. In the aeroelastic model wind tunnel test, the wind-induced responses of the aeroelastic model are directly measured and then these measurements are used to assess the aeroelastic effects through parameter identification. However, fabricating the downscale structural model for this method is complicated, expensive, and time-consuming. In addition, it has been seen in the previous studies that the aeroelastic parameters of tall buildings identified by this method are usually scattered ( In this study, nine rigid models of high-rise buildings with different cross-sections and different arrangements for eccentricities will be considered for the forced vibration wind tunnel test. Torsional aeroelastic parameters for each case are then determined based on the forced vibration theory. The variations of the aeroelastic stiffness and damping ratios are systematically examined for different vibration magnitudes, wind speeds, and side ratios. The effects of structural eccentricities on these two aeroelastic ratios are investigated in detail to estimate the wind performance of each configuration with a different structural eccentricity. The key findings are summarized in the conclusion section. In this study, nine different down-scaled rigid models of high-rise buildings are considered as listed in The wind tunnel tests are carried out in the WD-1 boundary layer wind tunnel at the Wuhan University. The wind tunnel has a test-section length of 16 ​m with a width of 3.2 ​m, and a height of 2.1 ​m. Terrain category C in China’s code of practice ( The torsional vibration amplitude and frequency are adjusted by a forced vibration device shown in In addition to the structural displacement response, wind pressure on the structure model is another key parameter to determine the wind-induced torsional forces on the model. To achieve this, a synchronous multiple pressure measurement system is used to measure the surface pressure on each model during the wind tunnel test. Six levels of measurement taps are distributed along the structural surfaces, and each level has 32 taps on the four sides. In total there are 192 pressure taps for each model. The arrangements of the pressure taps in each case are shown in Similar to the equation of motion for the translational vibration of a structure subjected to fluctuating wind loads, the equation of motion for the first-mode torsional vibration can also be expressed by a second-order differential equation as The forced vibration at the top of the model is harmonic and can be expressed as Substituting Eqs. Assuming the moment of inertia It should be mentioned that in the wind tunnel test, the torsional mode is constant, rather than a linear one, because of the difficulty of achieving a linear torsional mode shape. Considering a constant mode shape, Eqs. Therefore, the aerodynamic stiffness ratio Using the relationships provided in Eqs. Cases 1, 2, and 5 are considered to investigate properties of the torsional aerodynamic stiffness coefficient The identified aerodynamic stiffness ratio Aerodynamic damping is another important property to assess the aeroelastic effects, and hence in this section the aerodynamic damping identified by Eqs.  The variation of aerodynamic damping ratio For cases 1 and 2 shown in Two types of structural eccentricities have been considered in this study: cross-wind eccentricity shown in  The effects of the along-wind eccentricity on the aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios are shown in The forced vibration wind tunnel test was conducted to investigate the torsional aeroelastic effects of high-rise buildings. The torsional aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios were identified for nine models of buildings with different side ratios of cross-section and arrangement of structural eccentricities. The effects of vibration amplitude, side ratio, and structural eccentricity were examined in terms of torsional aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios. The vibration magnitude has no significant effect on the aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios, and hence its effect can be neglected when estimating the aeroelastic effects of wind-excited torsional responses of high-rise buildings. For the cases without eccentricity and The aerodynamic damping ratio The cross-wind eccentricity has no significant effect on the aerodynamic damping ratio, but a large eccentricity can decrease the aerodynamic stiffness ratio. For the along-wind eccentricity, a windward eccentricity tends to increase both the aerodynamic stiffness and damping ratios, while a leeward eccentricity decreases them. It can be concluded that a windward eccentricity is likely to improve the torsional performance of the structure, whereas a leeward eccentricity can worsen the performance. In summary, if the orientation of the building is not fixed, to achieve a better performance of the torsional wind-induced response it is favorable to align the face with the long side perpendicular to the dominant wind direction. If the orientation of the long side face of buildings has already been designed by architects to be along the dominant wind direction, a windward eccentricity can enhance its torsional dynamic performance while a leeward eccentricity exacerbates it.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work described here was partly supported by