Different industries have explicit applications of Aluminum Metal Matrix Composites (AMMCs). However, porosity, wettability and Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) are important factors that need to consider while fabricating AMMCs. This paper focuses on identification of the most significant parameters for low porosity and high ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of hybrid aluminium metal matrix composite. Significant as well as non-significant factors were identified from the literature survey and trial experiments. Without considering the significance of given responses, identified factors were represented graphically by the fishbone diagram. FMEA (Failure Mode and Effect Analysis) was used to find out significant parameters from all the parameters that represented by fishbone diagram. Afterwards, Plackett-Burman design was used to screen the most significant parameters out of the significant parameters. Stirring speed, stirring time, preheating temperature and reinforcement amount was found the most significant parameters to attain high UTS and low porosity. However, because of the unfavourable combination of parameters % porosity increased beyond 7% during screening design based experiments. Subsequently, these parameters were optimized by factorial design. The result shows optimized parameters stirring speed 650 rpm and stirring time 12 minutes provides low porosity and high UTS. UTS improved up to 310 MPa due to an optimized range of stirring speeds and stirring time. However, porosity increased beyond 3% due to excess stirring in cast composites during factorial design based experiments. Moreover, studies were carried out to understand the effect of stirring, fluxing, degassing and moulding methods on porosity, UTS, clustering and surface finish of the cast composite. It was observed from a supplementary study that permanent mould reduces surface roughness below 3μm, compared to the sand casting process. The porosity was reduced below 3% by degassing and fluxing. Low agglomeration was observed in specimen prepared with automatic stirring process compared to the manually stirred specimen. Compared to others, in specimen 4, UTS was improved beyond 150 MPa because of permanent mould, automatic stirring, degassing and fluxing.As pointed out by      Therefore, authors, from this current study want to explain the sequence of methods to find out the most significant parameters for the given responses of the composite material. This would help the researchers to make the composite research more economical at the laboratory and industrial scale. Therefore, following methods are discussed in the current paper; (a) the way to find out the parameters that affect the responses irrespective to their significance for the responses; (b) the method of representation for these factors; (c) the method of screening to find out the significant parameters out of these factors; (d) method of further scanning to find out the most significant parameter to make the research economical and; (e) the method of optimization to optimize the most critical parameters.  As shown in the Plackett Burman design was used to segregate most significant factors out of significant factors derived from FMEA. However, the feasibility of stir casting process and availability of the resources were considered during the selection of the factors for screening design. Statistical software Minitab®™17.0.1 was used for the data analysis. Stirring speed, stirring time, stirring position, holding time, holding temperature, reinforcement particle size, reinforcement percentage, preheating temperature and mould temperature are the independent variables (i.e. obtain from FMEA) for the screening design while porosity and UTS are the responses. Furthermore, levels for each factor were selected based on literature availability. Composites were prepared using the levels suggested in  Initially, % wt of reinforcement powders was converted into an actual weight using After completion of the fabrication process, specimens were placed in the furnace for 2 hours at 500 °C and afterwards quenching was done in hot water at 50–80 °C. Then the specimens were placed in the open furnace at 200 °C for 2 hours. After completion of the heat treatment process, the tensile specimens were prepared as per Indian standard IS 1608 which is equivalent to ASTM The specimens as shown in After a literature survey and initial experimentation with composite materials, Further sorting of parameters in the present study was performed using a Plackett-Burman design. It was used to get the most significant parameters out of the significant parameters obtained using FMEA. Some of the parameters like pressure, ambient temperature etc. that considered significant based on FMEA but not viable for the manufacturing process utilized were dropped from the list. In the end, 2 The overlying plot shown in  Fishbone diagram was used for graphical representation of the factors that affect responses. Type of reinforcement, % of reinforcement, the particle size of reinforcement, preheating of reinforcement, stirring speed, stirring time, degassing, holding time, pressure and holding temperature were identified as the significant parameters for UTS using FMEA analysis. Correspondingly, type of reinforcement, % of reinforcement, the particle size of reinforcement, preheating of reinforcement, the temperature of the liquid melt, stirring speed, stirring position, stirring time, mould temperature, degassing, holding time, mixing time, pressure, ambient temperature and holding temperature were found significant factors for porosity. Furthermore, the most significant parameters from the list of significant parameters were identified using a screening design. The percentage reinforcement, stirring speed, stirring time and preheating temperature were considered significant parameters for porosity while percentage reinforcement, preheating temperature, stirring speed and stirring time were considered the significant parameters for UTS. However, because of the unfavourable combination of parameters % porosity increased beyond 7%. It was concluded from the optimization study that the optimized range of stirring speed 600–900 rpm and stirring time 10–15 minutes generates low porosity and high UTS for given composite. UTS improved up to 310 MPa due to an optimized range of stirring speeds, stirring time, preheating of reinforcement and heat-treatment. However, the porosity increased beyond 3% in cast composites due to excess stirring. It was observed from a supplementary study that permanent mould reduces surface roughness below 3μm, compared to the sand casting process. The porosity reduced below 3% by degassing and fluxing. Low agglomeration was observed in specimen prepared with automatic stirring process compared to the manually stirred specimen. Compared to others, in specimen 4, UTS was improved beyond 150 MPa because of permanent mould, automatic stirring, degassing and fluxing. However, it was not improved beyond the point and absence of heat treatment was considered responsible for this phenomena. Jigar Suthar: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Wrote the paper. Kaushik Patel: Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.