In this paper, an integrated study of micro-fractures is carried out in Sarvak Formation. To achieve this goal the data from three wells (A, B and C) in one of the southwestern Iranian oil fields were used. In this study petrographic thin sections, porosity-permeability core data, image logs, Dipole Shear Sonic Imager (DSI) log, Velocity Deviation Log (VDL), Hydraulic Flow Units (HFU) concept, resistivity logs and drilling mud reports were used to identify and analyze micro-fractures in Sarvak Formation. The micro-fractures were first detected in thin sections and image logs directly, then the results of other methods in micro-fracture zones were investigated. The results show there is an abnormal trend of porosity-permeability in core data which is compatible with micro-fracture zones. Also, the relationship between micro-fractures and flow units was studied. Eight HFUs were recognized using porosity-permeability core data and FZI* (Flow Zone Indicator-Star) method. Later each of the HFUs was divided into two sub-HFUs; one of them is well-matched with the micro-fracture zones. The negative parts of VDL were in good agreement with the micro-fracture zones. The slowness anisotropy was mainly affected by the micro-fracture zones, but the energy and traveltime anisotropies were under the influence of the other phenomena such as solution seams, shale layers and borehole washouts. The fast shear wave azimuth was mainly aligned with the SHmax (maximum horizontal stress) direction, however, in micro-fracture zones, the direction suddenly changes. It was also observed that the micro-fractures do not have a considerable effect on Stoneley wave reflection, while the borehole washouts and shale layers have a great impact on this. The mud loss and mud invasion were very low in micro-fractured zones, which is related to the lack of lateral continuity of micro-fractures in the formation. The measured fracture apertures using thin section and image logs are often less than 0.1 mm, but the calculated values using Pezard-Anderson equations are very high.More than 60% of the world's oil and 40% of the world's gas reserves are in carbonate reservoirs ( Despite its importance, few studies have addressed the fractures in Sarvak Formation. Those few studies often included only large scale fractures. Moreover, Fracture Measure (FM) method was used to estimate fracture parameters using fullset logs and the neural network ( In general, studies on micro-fractures have focused mainly on their genesis ( Identifying micro-fractures commonly requires a detailed study of cores. However, their identification with other less costly methods is also of particular importance. In this study, the main goal is to investigate the application of different identification methods for micro-fractures in a carbonate reservoir. Moreover, this study addresses the effect of micro-fractures on reservoir quality. Detailed fracture analysis needs a complete dataset, including core and petrophysical data, which are not always available. Due to lack of necessary data, the role of fractures (and especially micro-fractures) is still unknown in most of the Iranian reservoirs. For current study, an exceptionally comprehensive dataset from three wells (A,B and C) enabled us to characterize various petrophysical aspects of micro-fractures, delineate their effect on reservoir quality and investigate their effects on the petrophysical logs of the Sarvak Formation in one of the supergiant oilfields of southwestern Iran. In this study, according to The studied oil field is located in southwest Iran (80 km to the western of Ahvaz city) in Abadan Plain ( The Abadan Plain shows three main structural trends: NE–SW, N–S and NW–SE which are related to deep-seated fault activities and the geological structures along these trends are believed to be related to the basement-rooted faults ( The Sarvak Formation was deposited in upper Cretaceous during late Albian to early Turonian ( The Sarvak Formation is divided into 13 zones in the studied oil field. From top to base, Sar_1 to Sar_12 are its reservoirs and the lower 13th zone, Sar_Intra, is not a part of the reservoir. The upper part of the Sarvak Formation (Sarvak Reservoir) is dominated by bioclastic wackestone and packstone of shallow marine origin ( For the well-A, in total, 687 porosity-permeability data from core-plug samples were used from Sar_1 to Sar_10 (except Sar_2 which its main lithology is shale) reservoir units. Moreover, 834 thin sections were analyzed. The fullset log data such as CAL (Caliper), BS (Bit Size), GR (Gamma ray), RHOB (Bulk Density), NPHI (Neutron Porosity), DT (Compressional Sonic Slowness), PEF (Photoelectric Factor), HRLA (High-Resolution Laterolog Array) and MSFL (Micro-Spherically Focused Log) and advanced log data such as FMI (Fullbore Formation Microimager) ( In the well-B, 210 porosity-permeability data from core-plug samples (from Sar_3 and Sar_4 reservoir zones), fullset log data, OBMI (Oil-Base Microimager)-UBI (Ultrasonic Borehole Imager) ( The FMI, OBMI and UBI image logs of the studied wells were quality-controlled and corrections, such as speed, bad button, swing arm and gain, were applied to the raw image data. The corrected image was equalized and normalized (statically and dynamically), and then the static and dynamic images were used for the interpretation. Different borehole events such as fractures, breakouts, bedding surfaces, solution seams and stylolites were extracted using image log. Solution seams and stylolites (diagenetic features) are products of chemical compaction in sedimentary rocks and are common in carbonate rocks (  In which FZI* is in μm, ϕ is porosity in fraction and k is permeability in md. This index is equivalent to the famous RQI (Reservoir Quality Index). VDL is used for separation and characterization of different pore types in carbonate reservoirs. In this method, using Wyllie equation, a synthetic sonic velocity is constructed and compared with real velocity. The velocity deviation groups are: Positive deviation (VDL > +500): vuggy/moldic porosities are privilege. Zero deviation (−500 < VDL < +500): interparticle, intercrystalline and micro-porosities. Negative deviation (VDL < −500): borehole washouts, free gas and fractures can create a negative VDL curve. The mode3 (Stoneley mode) and modeX (cross dipole) of DSI ( Wellbore wall irregularity (like washouts), bedding and natural fractures reflect Stoneley wave. The reflected Stoneley wave creates chevron patterns in Stoneley full waveforms, which could be used as an indicator for natural fracture detection and characterization after appropriate processing and filtering ( Anisotropy can be resulted from structural events such as aligned fractures, thinly-layered beds and unequal stress distribution within the formations ( The DLL (Dual Laterolog) tool operates by focusing electrical currents into the formation to create a deep (Laterolog Deep = LLD) and shallow (Laterolog Shallow = LLS) measurement in water-base drilling mud condition ( In order to use resistivity logs, natural fractures are divided into two categories: horizontal fractures, with the dip angle less than 60° and vertical fractures, with the dip angle more than 75°. There are different resistivity log separations for the two categories. Several studies have been performed to investigate the relation between mud loss and natural fractures in hydrocarbon reservoirs ( In this study, micro-fractures were first identified directly using the thin sections and image logs. Then, the capabilities of different methods for micro-fractures evaluation were investigated. For example, in the case of DSI log, it is believed that the presence of natural fractures increases the anisotropy and creates chevron patterns in Stoneley waveform. In this work, we examined this assumption for the micro-fractures and how the other geological and wellbore phenomena affect it. It is also believed that considerable mud loss and mud invasion is happened in natural fracture zones. In this regard, the mud loss and mud invasion was checked for the micro fractured zones. In this study, the capability of Pezard-Anderson method for fracture aperture calculation using electerical logs was investigated. Finally, in this study, the methods whose results are more consistent with the direct identification methods of micro-fractures were specified and the limitations of other methods were expressed. This well has the most complete data in the studied oil field. Hence, its dataset were thoroughly evaluated and the results were compared with each other. First, the wellbore wall events were picked using FMI image log. Some of the picked events by FMI are shown in Totally 52 open natural fractures (all hairline type) were picked using FMI image log along the Sarvak reservoir (Sar_1 to Sar_12). The hairline fractures mainly exist in Sar_4 to Sar_7 reservoir zones ( Commonly there is no good correlation between porosity and permeability in carbonate reservoirs due to their complicated digenetic processes ( The porosity-permeability cross plot was separated for the Sarvak reservoir zones, and the zones that show the above-mentioned trend were marked ( In this study, the concept of HFU was used to determine whether micro-fracture zones could be associated with one or a few specific HFUs or not. The HFU concept was used to separate porosity-permeability data into the more coherent groups. The FZI* was calculated for the porosity-permeability from cores using Equation The statistical properties of the mentioned eight HFUs are summarized in The porosity-permeability data were segregated based on the recognized HFUs ( The porosity of the samples with micro-fractures range 1.3–19%, and 79% of them have 5–14% porosity. Moreover, based on the same mean hydraulic radius for each HFU, the left side of each HFU (with lower porosity) may have micro-fractures. According to Moreover, fractures identified using FMI are located in Sar_1, Sar_4 to Sar_7, Sar_9, and Sar_10 zones ( The A and B portions for each of the Sarvak reservoir zones are shown in the Considerable number of micro-fractures with various shapes and fillings were found in thin sections. Some of the recognized micro-fractures are shown in Some of them are branched (the open micro-fractures in The negative quantities of VDL are the indicators for the presence of open fractures. The presence of free gas and washouts also can move VDL to negative parts, but there was not any report of free gas in the studied field, hence only borehole failures and natural fractures can make this curve negative. In In For the Sar_3 and Sar_8 zones the VDL is mainly positive, accordingly negligible quantity of micro-fractures were detected in thin sections and no fractures were picked in FMI image log. The positive values of VDL can be attributed to large pore sizes such as vugs and moldic porosities. Correspondingly, thin section study showed that such large porosities are dominant in Sar_3 and Sar_8 reservoir zones ( The Stoneley wave is generally very sensitive to borehole washouts ( There are some weak chevrons in the middle of Sar_4 ( Solution seams and stylolites are common in Sarvak reservoir in this well (  The cross plot of maximum minus minimum energies versus solution seams and stylolite densities is shown in The shear slowness anisotropy is a function of fast shear wave travel-time (DTS_Fast) and slow wave travel-time (DTS_Slow) differences. The slowness anisotropy increases in the main micro-fracture (Sar_4 to Sar_7) and the washout (Sar_2) zones. The slowness anisotropy curve was shaded by green for the quantities more than 4%. It was observed that shaded parts are in good agreement with the micro-fracture zones ( The direction of AZIM_FAST (fast shear wave azimuth) curve in the Sarvak reservoir is not fixed, and in some depths, it has sudden and severe changes (spikes). These spikes in AZIM_FAST curve are mainly located in Sar_4 to Sar_7 and Sar_2 zones, where the slowness anisotropy is also high. Therefore, these spikes might have relation with the micro-fracture zones and washouts ( In the Sar_2 a strong peak exists in the traveltime anisotropy which is related to washouts and the shale layer ( In this well, the orientations of horizontal stresses were determined using the borehole breakouts ( Mud loss and mud invasion were evaluated in micro-fracture zones ( Unexpectedly the mud loss in Sar_4 to Sar_6 (zones with higher presence of micro-fractures) was the lowest (0.5 bbl/hr), whereas plug samples have considerable permeability in these zones (perm track in On the other hand, mud loss in lower part of Sar_11, and Sar_12 were highest (5.5 bbl/hr). These zones were not cored, since they were mainly water-saturated. Moreover, in these zones the VDL curve is strongly positive, secondary porosity curve is high and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) T2 distribution is mainly situated to the right part of the track, hence in these zones pore sizes are large which may increase the mud loss. Sar_8 has positive VDL and T2 Distribution is situated to the right which shows the large pore size of this unit. However, pores in this zone were smaller than Sar_11 and Sar_12 zones. In this study, in addition to the thin section and the FMI, Equations The apertures estimated by Equations The invasion diameter (DI curve) in Sar_3 and Sar_8 is more extended than Sar_4 to Sar_7. This caused more separation between RLA3 and RLA5, hence based on Equations (4) and (5), larger fracture apertures are calculated for Sar_3 and Sar_8 ( In Sar_4 to Sar_7 zones, RLA3 and RLA5 are proximally coincident and far from RXO, therefore the invasion is low ( The average calculated fracture aperture using thin sections, FMI image, Pezard-Anderson equations for high and low angle fractures are 0.023, 0.050, 1.96 and 41.70 mm, respectively ( In this well, only 7 micro-fractures were identified in Sar_Intra zone using the image logs ( In well-B, the VDL is mainly positive, however, at the 4241–4267 m depth interval, VDL is negative. The main washouts and micro-fractures are present in this interval. In addition to the fractures, borehole washouts also cause a negative VDL. Core is taken only in Sar_3 and Sar_4 zones in this well. The porosity-permeability cross plot of this well shows a fairly linear trend ( The mud loss was 0.5–5 bbl/hr for the Sarvak Formation drilling in this well, which is in seepage range ( The major chevron patterns have been created in Sar_2 and Sar_Intra ( Horizontal stress directions in the Sarvak Formation of this well were determined using 242 bore hole breakouts ( In this well only two micro-fractures were identified in Sar_Intra zone using FMI image log. The average aperture of the two recognized micro-fractures is 0.05 mm. Whereas the calculated average aperture using Pezard-Anderson equations for high and low angle fractures are 2.76 and 199.542 mm, respectively ( In the well-C, like well-B, the VDL is mainly positive, but in Sar_Intra in front of wellbore washouts and micro-fractures, VDL is negative ( The mud loss was reported as 2 to 6 bbl/hr, for the Sarvak Formation in this well, which is in seepage range. There is also no conciderable mud invasion in the Sar_Intra zone where the micro-fractures are detected. Like well-B the major chevron patterns are present in Sar_2 and Sar_Intra ( The direction of the horizontal stresses in the Sarvak Formation of this well were determined using 112 bore hole breakouts ( In this study, the micro-fractures of the Sarvak reservoir were evaluated in the three wells of one of the Abadan Plain's oil fields. In the well-A micro-fractures were initially detected and characterized using FMI image log and thin sections. Sar_4 to Sar_7 reservoir zones have the highest micro-fracture density. Using HFU concept and probability plot, eight HFUs were recognized from the porosity-permeability core data. The HFUs were divided into two portions (using the porosity cut-offs): A and B. The A-portion has a high compliance with micro-fracture zones. The VDL log had satisfactory compatibility with micro-fracture zones and its negative parts indicate the presence of micro-fractures. DSI data analysis revealed that the Stoneley wave reflections and chevron patterns cannot be linked to the presence of micro-fractures, while borehole washouts have a definite impact on them. The traveltime anisotropy was also mainly affected by borehole washouts and lithology changes. Energy anisotropy had a significant relation with the density of solution seams and stylolites. On the other hand, slowness anisotropy and sudden changes in fast shear wave azimuth, had meaningful relation with the micro-fracture zones. Based on the picked borehole breakouts, the direction of S In the well-B and Well-C, using fullset logs, porosity-permeability core data, image logs and drilling mud data, it was found that micro-fractures presence are negligible. According to the results, VDL, slowness anisotropy and fast shear wave azimuth spikes are suitable for identification of micro-fracture zones, while energy and traveltime anisotropies, Stoneley wave chevron patterns, mud loss and mud invasion might not help to detect micro-fracture zones. The existing fractures in the reservoir do not necessarily have effect on improving the quality of the reservoir. The length of these fractures may be limited and only affect the data obtained from the plugs. In order to have a considerable effect on reservoir quality, the fractures must create a network. In general, it could be stated that micro-fractures in the well-A does not have a considerable effect on the quality of the reservoir and in the wells B and C the presence of micro-fractures are very limited. Dr. Hamzeh Mehrabi, Mr. Vahid Bolandi and Mr. Hedayat Olfati are thanked for their help and useful comments. Dr. Abouzar Mirzaei-Paiaman is acknowledged for his invaluable comments. The authors appreciate  fracture aperture form Pezard-Anderson equations in horizontal condition fracture aperture form Pezard-Anderson equations in vertical condition maximum resistivity of the nearby non-fractured rock mud resistivity resistivity from Laterolog Deep (LLD) resistivity from Laterolog Shallow (LLS) Porosity slowness anisotropy traveltime anisotropy fast shear wave azimuth Bit Size Caliper Invasion Diameter, depth of penetration of mud filtrates into the formation Dual Laterolog Dipole Shear Sonic Imager Sonic Slowness shear wave slowness fast shear wave slowness slow shear wave slowness Open Fractures plus Partially Filled Fractures Filled Fracture Fullbore Formation Microimager Flow Zone Indicator Flow Zone Indicator-Star Gamma ray Hydraulic Flow Units High-Resolution Laterolog Array Permeability Deep Laterolog Shallow Laterolog maximum cross energy minimum cross energy Mud loss Micro-Spherically Focused Log Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Neutron Porosity Open Fracture Pezard-Anderson fracture aperture for low angle fractures Pezard-Anderson fracture aperture for high angle fractures Photoelectric Factor Partially Filled Fracture Bulk Density Reservoir Quality Index shallow resistivity from MSFL solution seams and stylolites densities Secondary Porosity maximum horizontal stress minimum horizontal stress Velocity Deviation Log Cross Dipole mode of DSI tool