Atomic force microscope (AFM) has been used to investigate the mechanism of gibbsite crystallization on all the morphologically important faces. Growth on single crystal faces has been observed by a series of ex situ experiments, in which the same area was repeatedly located and imaged after growth had occurred in synthetic solution. At the same supersaturation level and temperature, the ex situ experiments have revealed a variety of growth modes: (1) Continuous birth and spread on a flat surface, the nuclei forming as approximately circular features that develop into elongated features, indicating anisotropic growth, followed by restoration of the flatness of the original area after further growth. (2) Step growth followed by rough growth on a surface that contains growth hillocks. (3) Two-dimensional nucleation on a surface that contains a surface defect (tilt boundary). The results are used to establish a clearer picture of the growth mechanism of gibbsite, and the effect of the seed surface structure. On the prismatic faces of gibbsite, steps parallel to the (001) face and block formation were imaged. Step growth was observed in both the [001] direction and parallel to the (001) plane. No nucleation was observed, and no emergent screw dislocations have been resolved.Gibbsite, one of the three polymorphs of aluminium trihydroxide, Al(OH) Gibbsite has a sheet structure, crystallizing usually in pseudohexagonal platelets or prisms with monoclinic symmetry. Gibbsite consists of double layers of OH ions with Al ions occupying two thirds of the octahedral interstices within the layers. Each double layer is located with respect to its neighbours so that OH ions of adjacent layers are situated directly opposite to each other. Hydrogen bonding operates between the OH ions of adjacent double layers. The space group is P2 Growth of crystal faces can be divided into the following two steps: volume diffusion of growth units toward the crystal faces, and incorporation of these units at kink sites on the surface. Either the diffusion or the integration steps may control the crystal growth process, or both of these steps may contribute to the process rate. In the case of the growth of gibbsite in the Bayer process, it is generally accepted (see, for example, Ref. The integration controlled process can be classified into rough or layer growth. Within the layer growth type, two mechanisms can be distinguished for perfect and imperfect crystals For imperfect crystals, the growth can be described by the Burton Cabrera Frank (BCF) model The growth of gibbsite is reported by some authors Recently, AFM has been used to investigate the growth and dissolution of crystal surfaces in contact with aqueous solutions The present paper reports the results of ex situ AFM investigations of the growth of synthetic gibbsite crystals from highly caustic solutions, with emphasis on the effects of morphology and topography on growth mechanism. Gibbsite crystals were grown from synthetic Bayer liquors, which were prepared by dissolving aluminium wire (99.9%, BDH Laboratory Supplies), previously degreased by washing in acetone and deionized water, in a ca. 4 Conditions typical of those obtaining in the precipitation circuit of an industrial plant are an For the preparation of seed crystals in a form suitable for AFM growth studies, stainless steel disks with a diameter of 1.5 The basal or prismatic faces of the seed crystals were imaged and then grown in 30 AFM investigations were carried out in air with a Digital Instrument Multimode AFM, using a 15 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were taken using a JEOL JSM-6400R operated at 10 An SEM image of a typical basal face of gibbsite is shown in In Images of other areas on the same crystal and on other crystals on the same sample disk, taken at the same time, confirmed the typical nature of the nucleation. The image taken after 60 The resultant surface smoothness may be a result of the initial spacing between the nuclei having been on average uniform, the coalescence of the nuclei on the surface thus leading to the formation of the same number of layers overall. This proposal is in agreement with the findings of Keller In a previous work Growth on the basal face of a different crystal that contains a hillock formed due to crystal imperfection (indicated by The average growth rate of nuclei on this surface calculated using the computer aided analysis  Two-dimensional nucleation is observed on the surface of a fourth crystal, and is shown in After 9 From all of the above results, we can conclude that, in terms of classical theories, the supersaturation of the solution is relatively high, such that surface nucleation occurs even in the presence of a source of steps (emergent defects). There is also the possibility that sodium cations adsorb preferentially at some locations (step edges), thereby blocking them for further growth. When the growth units arrive at the crystal surface, they form clusters that grow into nuclei on the surface. The growth by nucleation on the basal face of gibbsite may explain the presence of several defects, following the mechanism proposed by Strickland-Constable An SEM image of typical prismatic faces of a gibbsite crystals is shown in The AFM image in  The results of the growth experiments on the prismatic faces are in agreement with the suggestion in previous work For the case of gibbsite crystals grown on a disk, where most of the crystals are hexagonal plates with some prisms, the monomeric species will agglomerate to form higher molecular weight growth units (because there are few available crystal sites into which they can incorporate), thus decreasing the concentration of monomeric species available and required for growth onto the prismatic faces; however, once the nuclei are formed, large area of prismatic faces become available, and growth onto these sites will start, thereby indirectly lowering the concentration of “basal active” species, thus preventing further nucleation on the basal faces until, once again, the availability of prismatic faces is decreased. Under the same conditions of relative supersaturation and temperature (i.e. the same crystallization driving force), the ex situ AFM growth experiments on the basal faces of gibbsite crystals have revealed a variety of growth modes: (1) Continuous birth and spread on a flat surface, where the nuclei form as approximately circular features that develop into elongated features, indicating anisotropic growth, and the subsequent restoration of the flatness of the original area after growth. (2) Step growth, and nucleation at step edges on a growth hillock. (3) Two dimensional nucleation on a surface containing one or more surface defects (emergent tilt boundaries), leading to hill formation. Growth rate dispersion of gibbsite was observed as the lateral growth rates on the basal faces ranges from 0.3 to 7.2 These results demonstrate the importance of morphology and surface structure of the basal faces in controlling the crystal growth of gibbsite from alkaline aluminate solutions. AFM images of the prismatic faces of synthetic gibbsite crystals show steps parallel to the (0 Ex situ AFM growth experiments on the prismatic faces of gibbsite crystals showed that growth proceeds by step growth in the [0 On the prismatic face of gibbsite, the growth rate measured in one experiment in a direction perpendicular to the (0 The operation of different crystal growth mechanisms on the different morphologically important faces of gibbsite (basal and prismatic) and the effect of emergent defects demonstrate the importance of the surface structure. This work is currently being extended to investigate the effect of supersaturation value (by varying This work has been supported by the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) program and the Australian Alumina Producers, and this support is gratefully acknowledged. In particular, we would like to thank Queensland Alumina Limited, Worsley Alumina Pty Ltd, and the Minerals and Energy Research Institute of Western Australia, whose support made purchase of the AFM possible. We thank the Western Australian Centre for Mcroscopy for making the electron microscopy facilities available.