Most radial head fractures are stable, nondisplaced injuries that can be successfully treated without surgery. Displaced fractures and fractures that are a component of a more complex pattern of elbow injury are best treated with surgery. Fractures that can be reconstructed with a stable construct are best treated with open reduction and internal fixation, whereas more severe or comminuted injuries are best treated with prosthetic radial head replacement. In cases of symptomatic malunion, nonunion, or failure of fixation, radial head prosthetic replacement or radial head excision offers viable options for salvage.Fractures of the radial head are one of the more prevalent fractures about the elbow and proximal forearm. The key to determining the correct treatment for a radial head fracture is evaluating the fracture’s stability and displacement, and several classification systems have been devised based on the essence of these criteria. Stable, nondisplaced, or minimally displaced fractures can be effectively treated nonoperatively, whereas fractures that are unstable, displaced, or part of a more complex injury pattern are best treated with surgery. Operative fractures of the radial head are treated with either open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or radial head prosthetic replacement. The precise indications for which fractures can be adequately reconstructed with ORIF and which fractures are best treated with prosthetic replacement are unclear; however, the authors argue that with contemporary small-fragment implants, most fractures can be repaired. If there is a failure of fracture fixation, then the elbow can be salvaged with prosthetic replacement or with radial head excision. Radial head fractures are one of the most common fractures about the elbow, accounting for approximately 30–50% of arm fractures and approximately 5% of all fractures. Most of these injuries are simple injuries, not associated with any other fracture or dislocation about the elbow or proximal forearm. The incidence is in the range of 20–40 The radial head articulates with the capitellum. The radial head has an elliptical shape, which is oriented perpendicular to the sigmoid notch. The radial head is aligned at approximately 15° with respect to the radial shaft. The radiocapitellar articulation contributes to the stability of the elbow, with ligamentous structures also playing a significant role. Laterally, the most important ligamentous structures are the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex. The LCL complex consists of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament, radial Fractures of the radial head are some of the more prevalent fractures about the elbow. The clinical and radiographic evaluation of patients with radial head fractures follows that of all patients with an orthopedic injury. The focus of the exam is on the elbow, but the entire upper extremity proximally and distally should also be examined. A specific clinical feature that must be assessed in patients with radial head fractures is passive pronation and supination. Whether there is a block to these motions can potentially influence treatment. An apparently stable, minimally displaced fracture that nevertheless impedes passive pronation and supination of the forearm could potentially require surgery. Some authors, with a valid argument, suggest that this clinical test is of little utility given distracting pain from the acute injury. The classification of radial head fractures is based on the initial classification devised by Mason in 1954. In classifying these injuries, the authors prefer to place less emphasis on precisely and rigorously classifying a fracture and more emphasis on approaching the fracture with a treatment algorithm. The authors’ first decision in the algorithm is as follows: “Is the fracture to be treated nonoperatively, or operatively?” This decision is based upon fracture alignment and displacement, and if the fracture creates a block to forearm rotation. Fractures with small degrees of malalignment, minimal displacement, minimal comminution, or greater degrees of comminution but good alignment are treated nonoperatively. Fractures with fragment(s) that are significantly displaced, unacceptably aligned, highly comminuted, and/or part of a more complex injury pattern to the elbow are indicated for surgery. If the fracture is indicated for surgery, then the second decision of the algorithm is “Should the fracture be reconstructed or the radial head replaced?” Fractures that are deemed reconstructable are treated with ORIF, whereas fractures that are deemed unreconstructable are treated with radial head replacement. In progressing through this algorithm, the line at which a fracture changes from being treated with surgery to when it is treated without surgery is not well defined in the literature. In addition, the line at which an operative fracture changes from being best treated with ORIF to being best treated with prosthetic replacement is not well defined in the literature. However, philosophically, the authors argue that most fractures of the radial head can be successfully treated nonoperatively. In addition, we argue that if a fracture is indicated for surgery, we aggressively attempt to reconstruct the fracture fragments, favoring ORIF over prosthetic replacement. The advent of progressive pitch screws, headless screws, pins, and other low-profile implants allows for more secure fixation in fractures that previously would have been unreconstructable with older implants. Fractures with minimal displacement, moderate displacement but good alignment, or comminution but overall good alignment are treated nonoperatively. Fractures with more than a few millimeters of displacement and/or malalignment of more than 20° are at a risk for poor outcomes if treated nonoperatively. Although some argue that a short period of immobilization can be beneficial, most studies suggest that the duration of immobilization and position in which the elbow is immobilized has no significant effect on overall outcome. Overall, patients with minimally displaced, well-aligned radial head fractures can expect minimal pain, full or nearly full range of motion, excellent function, and minimal degenerative change. For operative treatment of isolated fractures of the radial head, the preferred surgical approach is posterolateral. The Kocher approach, exploiting the interval between the extensor carpi ulnaris and the anconeus, can also be utilized. However, the posterolateral approach allows for a more extensile approach if a broader surgical exposure is required. Once the fracture is adequately exposed, the specific pattern and “personality” of each fracture dictates the specific construct. Numerous contemporary small-fragment implants are available for fixation of the radial head and neck. Simple patterns can be repaired with any number of headless screws and/or pins. Fractures with extension in the radial neck can be repaired with a combination of articular surface reconstruction and extension of fixation to the radial neck with the use of precontoured plates. Bone graft can also be applied to osseous defects caused by impaction or comminution. Implants must be applied to the “safe zone” (i.e., the lateral aspect of the radius that does not directly articulate with the ulna). Outcomes after ORIF of the radial head fractures are mixed, with the overall trend being poorer outcomes with increasing severity, displacement, and comminution of the fracture. In the event of a fracture that is truly unreconstructable, or in the case of a malunited or nonunited fracture, radial head arthroplasty is indicated. The exposure for radial Proximal radial prosthetic replacement has shown acceptable outcomes for fractures that are unreconstructable. However, the long-term durability and longevity of the prosthesis, as well as potential complications and issues as a result of the prosthesis, remain unclear. The treatment of radial head fractures can fail in many different ways. Nonoperative treatment of seemingly stable fractures can lead to malunion; these injuries are often asymptomatic, but they can also cause pain and loss of function. Fixation of radial head fractures can fail or require further intervention by not providing a stable enough construct to allow for successful union of the fracture, by causing symptoms from prominent hardware, or by the development of heterotopic bone or radioulnar synostosis. Fractures treated with radial head arthroplasty can cause symptoms as a result of technical errors during insertion. In simple and complex fractures, heterotopic ossification (HO) can create a situation in which a fracture unites, but the elbow and forearm are left with diminished range of motion. When the treatment of radial head fractures fails, specific salvages can diminish pain and improve function. Seemingly stable, nondisplaced, well-aligned fractures of the radial head and neck that are initially treated nonoperatively can progress to malunion or nonunion. Transverse fractures of the radial neck have an increased risk of nonunion because of their lack of inherent rotational stability. If interval fracture displacement, articular migration, or post-traumatic arthrosis develop, then these situations can in turn cause symptoms of pain, diminished motion, and decreased function. Radial head replacement or radiocapitellar arthroplasty can effectively diminish pain and restore function and motion. Fractures treated with ORIF can also lead to symptomatic malunion or nonunion. Fractures with severe comminution, impaction with resulting bone loss, osteopenia, and/or significant displacement can prevent the achievement of a stable fixation construct and lead to failure of union. Tobacco use, medical comorbidities, and poor patient compliance can cause an otherwise stable construct to prematurely fail and lead to fracture displacement. Finally, implants placed outside of the safe zone HO is a well-recognized complication after operative treatment of trauma about the elbow. The development of HO after simple fractures of the radial head is rare. As with all surgery about the elbow, stiffness and infection can complicate an otherwise successful operation. Capsular release, either open or arthroscopic, can aid in restoring motion to a stiff elbow. Aggressive surgical debridement and judicious administration of antibiotics can eradicate a postoperative infection. Implants placed outside of the safe zone can lead to diminished range of motion and function, necessitating reoperation and implant removal. Overzealous retraction or imprecise surgical dissection can lead to posterior interosseous nerve palsy. Most radial head fractures are stable, nondisplaced injuries that can be successfully treated without operation. Displaced fractures and fractures that are a component of a more complex pattern of elbow injury are best treated with surgery. Fractures that can be reconstructed with a stable construct are best treated with ORIF, whereas more severe or comminuted injuries are best treated with prosthetic radial head replacement. In cases of symptomatic malunion, nonunion, or failure of fixation, radial head prosthetic replacement or radial head excision offer viable options for salvage. Modern low-profile screws and anatomically contoured implants have allowed fractures that would previously have been unreconstructable to be repaired. Well-designed clinical trials are needed to more precisely discern criteria and indications for ORIF versus prosthetic replacement. For fractures requiring arthroplasty, further refinements in implants will allow for more durable prostheses that more accurately replicate native anatomy and function.