Wastes formed during the production and processing of marble and granite cause problems for the leading countries in natural stone production because they result in environmental pollution, negative conditions for health and cause economic losses. Decreasing the formation of waste materials and studies on their reusability are important to provide environmental and economic benefits. The main purpose of this study is to determine the reusability of the waste material formed during granite production as conventional artificial abrasive in the marble abrasion process. Accordingly, three different marble samples commercially available in different areas of Turkey were studied. Böhme abrasion test was carried out with Al2O3 and granite waste, which are used as common abrasives in marble abrasion operations. The waste of granite was classified in three different grain sizes after processing it with solid-cutting, crushing-grinding and screening operations and then used in Böhme abrasion test run. The performance of abrasion process was evaluated as the decrease in the surface roughness of marble samples and the increase in the surface gloss. As a result of tests, the performance of granite wastes and Al2O3 abrasives were compared. Test results showed that granite wastes caused a relative decrease in marble surface roughness and an increase in gloss especially in high CaCO3 and low MgCO3 containing soft rocks such as travertine.Turkey, located in the Alphine-Himalaya belt, is one of the world’s oldest marble producers ( It is important to recycle the materials in industries are getting important issue. Previous works showed that granite waste could be used in self-compacting concrete, bricks-tiles, cement concrete as aggregate and filler materials. Marble and granite wastes have been used as aggregate in asphalt pavements, clay-based ceramic products etc ( While there are numerous studies in the literature investigating the reusability of marble and granite wastes in the concrete, ceramic as an additive, there are limited studies on the reusability of these wastes as an abrasive material. This study forms the first step of investigating the reusability of granite wastes as abrasives. As seen in the literature, there have been published researches on the reusability of marble and granite wastes in the cement, concrete and ceramic manufacturing. However, in the present study, unlike others, the reusability of the waste materials formed during granite production as an abrasive for marble was investigated. Accordingly, the marble-abrasion performances of granite wastes (surface roughness, surface gloss) were compared with those of Al Granite particles are examined in point of the sufficiency as an abrasive material in the Böhme abrasion test. Additionally, based on some performance outputs such as surface roughness and glossiness, the grinding performance of granite particles is checked against with Al Grinding is a final machining process in the production of materials requiring smooth surfaces natural or synthetic abrasive materials are used in this process. Abrasives are either natural or synthetic substances that are used to grind, polish abrade, scour, clean or otherwise remove solid materials usually by rubbing action. Natural abrasives include aluminum oxide (natural corundum and emery), garnet and diamond. Synthetic abrasives are grinding wheels based upon either aluminum oxide (Al This study investigates the utilization of granite waste as an alternative abrasive material in marble grinding-polishing applications. For this purpose, granite waste and Al Two abrasion cycles were carried out on three different marble samples and three main measuring instruments were used: a gloss meter, roughness meter and Böhme abrasion loss. Three marble samples were investigated. The marble samples are calcareous stone origin and sedimentary rock. The samples are widely used as building stones in Turkey and they were obtained from marble factory located in Adıyaman, Elazıg and Konya from Turkey. The commercial names, views and codes of the samples are given in Abrasion wear rate of building stone is one of the necessary technological tests in all natural stone standards. Böhme (Boehme) method has been utilized since the 1950s in the rock mechanics and dimension stone laboratories to determine abrasion resistance ( A: is the surface area of the samples (50 cm V V The samples were examined in two groups. The first group was treated with classified granite waste; the second group was treated with classified Al The gloss measurements were made Q TQC GL0010 60° solo gloss meter at 60° angles for each stone samples. Gloss-meter sends light at a certain angle to the surface and determines the surface gloss numerically. Gloss values are expressed in GU (gloss units). Another performance output considered is the surface roughness. The roughness average (Ra) was determined. The measurements were made using a Mitutoyo SJ 210 roughness meter. Totally five glossiness and roughness measurements were taken at the grinding zone of the marble surface and the average were taken as the surface roughness and glossiness. Abrasives are materials, which are used for grinding, polishing, abrading, cleaning or otherwise removing solid materials by rubbing action. These materials are either natural or synthetic. The most important properties determining the quality of the abrasives used in the marble industry are the hardness, strength, grain shape, size and fracture characteristics ( For marble grinding-polishing processes, Al Al The granite wastes were obtained from granite processing plant in Malatya (Turkey). The granite waste abrasive particles were prepared following the process depicted in As can be seen in the One of the major physical property of abrasives is grain shapes. Blocky and nearly equidimensional grains are identified strong-shaped, less friable than slivery or flaky grains are considered weak-shaped ( The abrasives were examined under the scanning electron microscope for determination of their shapes. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) pictures of the granite and alumina particles were given in When the SEM images of Al The abrasive shape also affects the grinding performance. Abrasives are existing in many particle shapes and sizes such as semi-angular, angular and sphere. Abrasive grain size and shape affect the removal of material from marble surface ( Böhme abrasion test result by thickness reduction was given in Different values were obtained as a result of Böhme abrasion tests performed using standard size Al The comparison of Böhme abrasion loss values of Al In Bohme abrasion loss experiments made with standard size Al In this study one of the performance output is decreasing ratio of surface roughness. Roughness values of the marble samples at the end of the Böhme abrasion test with Al Examining Δ m m As can be seen Examining As can be seen in In the ET and KO samples Al In this study other performance outputs are increasing ratio of surface glossiness. Gloss values of the marble samples at the end of the Böhme abrasion test with Al Examining Δ m m As can be seen in According to  When The elimination of significant amounts of waste materials formed during the production process of marble and natural stone, as well as the investigation of their use as raw materials in obtaining various products will prevent environmental pollution and contribute to the prevention of natural resources by decreasing their use as raw materials, which in turn will make positive contributions to economy. This study investigates the usage of granite waste as an alternative abrasive in marble grinding application and includes important results for natural stone processing plants if the results obtained are taken into consideration. If alternative materials are used as abrasives in the grinding process, the manufacturing costs can be reduced. This study can be expanded by performing similar attempts with other types of rocks. In the subsequent step of the study, the abrasiveness of granite waste will be tested on an industrial scale. In the light of the data obtained from the study, the reusability opportunities of wastes formed during the production of granite and other natural stones in processing natural stones with low hardness values can be investigated. The main conclusions drawn from this study are: According to abrasive grain size, changes in roughness and glossiness are different in three samples. As the grain size of the abrasives gets smaller the decreasing the surface roughness and increasing the brightness performances are decreased. Coarse-size abrasives are more productive. More successful results were obtained in the softest samples ET. The ET sample, which is softer than the others, gained more glossiness because surface roughness decreased more easily, although it contained more open pores. As a result of abrasion with 1st dimension abrasive, the reduction in roughness and the increase in gloss achieved in the second dimension abrasive treatment are more pronounced than in the first dimension. The gloss values obtained from the treatment of size 3 abrasive are reduced for both abrasives. Examining the roughness and gloss values of samples obtained as a result of abrasion experiments, it was seen the general trend of the surface roughness and gloss change was such that the roughness reduction and gloss enhancement performance decreased with decreasing abrasive grain size. The best results were obtained in the sample having the lowest hardness value and the highest CaO content. The most important result of the study is that granite waste can be effectively used as an abrasive material for sedimentary rocks with low hardness and high CaO content. The use of granite rejects as the abrasive can be a great way of the waste recycling.