The contribution of fly ash to the physical properties of cementitious mixtures has received considerable attention since its inclusion as an essential ingredient of High Performance Concrete (HPC). However, the chemical contribution to the overall structure development has not been fully understood because of the masking of its hydration products by those of cement. In a mixture of class-F fly ash and lime (Ca/Si=2), portlandite diminishes and C4AH13 forms due to addition of Al to solution. The latter converts to hydrogarnet and C3ASH4. CSH is detected at 3 days and continues to increase in intensity. The 29Si magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MAS NMR) showed that the Al/Si ratio is 0.24 and the average chain length is 10 units. The presence of Al as approximately one-fifth of the Si in a chain length of 10 units suggests that Al tetrahedra may be present in bridging positions.With the introduction of High Performance Concrete (HPC), and inclusion in a variety of building products, fly ash has become an essential ingredient in concrete mixtures. It improves workability and reduces water and water reducing admixture demands. It reduces cracking due to autogenous and plastic shrinkage. It increases the packing density of the cementitious system, thus creating a less permeable structure. It significantly reduces concrete's permeability to chloride, water, and oxygen and increases concrete's resistance to alkali silica reaction, sulfate attack, and other chemical attack. In addition, as a pozzolana, it consumes calcium hydroxide and creates more calcium aluminate silicate hydrates. Fly ashes are also used in mixtures with industrial by products (such as kiln dust), in Aerated Autoclaved Concrete (AAC), and were claimed to be useful in producing zeolite like structures in blends containing them. Although the physical contribution of fly ash to concrete is very well documented, the chemical contribution to the overall structure development has not been fully understood. Part of the problem is the small extent of the hydration products produced from fly ash, which lets them be masked by the hydration products of cement. The purpose of this paper is to report on mechanisms of hydration of fly ash/lime mixtures. The hydration reaction was monitored by zeta-potential and X-ray diffraction at various ages. Solid-state In this study, Micron 3 class-F fly ash (Boral Material Technologies, San Antonio, TX) was used. The chemical composition of the fly ash, as provided by the supplier, is as follows: 50.77% SiO Calcium hydroxide was added to aqueous suspensions of the fly ash so that the Ca/Si ratio in the mixture was equal to 2. The suspension was stirred continuously, in sealed containers, for 28 days at 42 °C. At designated ages (1, 3, 7, 15, 21, 28 days), the containers are taken to a glove compartment flooded with nitrogen gas to avoid carbonation, and a drop of the suspension was withdrawn and diluted with the filtered solution at the same age so that the composition of the interface is not altered, and subjected to zeta-potential measurement. The zeta-potential was measured using Brookhaven Phase Analysis by Light Scattering (PALS) zeta-potential analyzer. The technique depends on determination of the phase change of laser scattered light as a result of the particle movement under the effect of an alternating current At the end of 1, 3, 7, 15, 21, 28 days, the solid residues were collected, freeze dried, and characterized by X-ray diffraction to monitor the phase changes in hydration products as a function of time. A computerized search/match program was used to identify the nature and quantity of each hydration product. The solid-state The Zeta-potential of fly ash particles (before mixing with lime) was found to be −27 mv. The zeta-potential of the fly ash/lime mixtures shows a sharp change to more positive potentials during the first few minutes of reaction due to adsorption of Ca The variation in X-ray peak intensities of fly ash/lime mixture ( The mechanism of hydration can be explained as follows. The first step is the adsorption of Ca The solid-state The NMR pattern of fly ash/lime mixtures shows a small peak at −107 ppm, which is assigned to the unreacted fly ash. In addition, peaks at ∼−79 and ∼−85 ppm are attributed to Q The deconvoluted peak areas are used to calculate average Al/Si from the formula The Al/Si ratio was found to be 0.24. The average chain length is 10 units. The presence of Al as approximately one-fifth of the Si in a chain length of 10 units suggests that Al tetrahedra may be present in bridging positions. The mechanism of hydration of class-F fly ash/lime mixtures was monitored by X-ray diffraction at various ages where the changes in phase composition were studied. Solid-state This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0096965.