In this research, extraction and purification of molybdenum from a leach solution of molybdenite dissolution was performed. Cationic polyelectrolytes were used for the first time in this study for selective recovery of molybdenum. For this purpose, some water-soluble coagulants of KlarAid PC products were employed and the experimental results in terms of recovery percentages, optimum value of needed polyelectrolyte and their performance were investigated. In order to evaluate the extraction and purification process, the precipitated molybdenum compounds were studied by ICP-OES, XRD, FTIR, and SEM. The results showed that about 88% of molybdenum could be recovered in one step with a final estimated purity of 100%. Afterward, a relatively pure MoO3 product with a layered-structure was successfully synthesized by a simple heat treatment. Finally, the results showed that the proposed novel method, polyelectrolyte extraction (PX), could be an efficient alternative to other processes (i.e. ion exchange resins and solvent extraction) for selective recovery of metals from acid solution.Very simple process Inexpensive Without any special equipment requirement Relatively fast method Impure final product Needs more purification processes Needs different chemical agents for pH adjustment or reductive/oxidative treatment Relatively inexpensive process Relatively simple equipment Small capacity Low selectivity Time consuming process Relatively complex process More selective than the carbon adsorption process Relatively simple operation and equipment Recyclable component Relatively expensive Small capacity Time consuming process More effective More applicable Selective Relatively simple operation and equipment Recyclable component More production capacity High purity final product Expensive solvents with huge inventories Large volume of solvents Different kinds of chemical compounds (diluting solvents, organic extractants, modifiers and stripping agents) High operation costs Large equipment (several mixer-settler system) High residence time Possible formation of emulsions Crud formation at interphase Sometimes inapplicable economically, for waste leach solutions with low content of molybdenum High selectivity Combine extraction and stripping into one single stage No limitation by the conditions of equilibrium (Uphill Transport Characteristic) More efficient process due to high Interfacial area per unit volume Smaller equipment than classical solvent extraction systems Rare industrial application due to membrane instability (leads to the reduction of solute flux and membrane selectivity) Membrane resistance to mass transfer (more operation time) Lack of research Very simple process Inexpensive Without any special equipment requirement Relatively fast method High purity final product Simple phase separation No need to inorganic materials and different chemicals Very low operation cost Applicable even for solutions with low content of molybdenum Only applicable for recovery and purification purposes in the solutions containing target element as anion and impurities as cations and vice versa (using cationic or anionic polyelectrolytes) Molybdenum is a strategic metal which is widely used in industrial processes. It is an important alloying element especially in steels, producing corrosion resistance and excellent toughness and strength at high temperatures which makes it suitable for use in aircraft engines. It is also used in pigments, lubricants, and catalysts. Molybdenum compounds are important components of catalysts in a variety of industries such as oil and petroleum refining, polymers, plastics and resins making and alcohol synthesis ( Molybdenum is extracted usually from molybdenite, the most common mineral of molybdenum in nature which is associated with copper porphyry ores( There are many routine separation methods in hydrometallurgy. These methods have also been employed for molybdenum recovery from solutions, including chemical precipitation usually with pH adjustment and cementation ( In the present study, the results of a new process for separation and recovery of molybdenum from solution is present. It involves the use of soluble polymers (polyelectrolytes) that have found applications for solid-liquid separation in a variety of industries such as papermaking, water treatment and mineral processing. They also have some applications in drug delivery, food sciences, cosmetics and fabrication of nanofilms and nanostructures ( As mentioned above, these polyelectrolytes are mainly used in sedimentation of solid particles, but they have never been used in molybdenum hydrometallurgy. According to the results of this study, when this water soluble extractant is used, high purity solid product containing metal ion can be precipitated. Then, the high purity solid particles are easily separated by filtration. The method is similar to general precipitation but does not need pH adjustment or addition of inorganic materials that can considerably affect the purity of precipitated particles. This will be an ideal process to metal ion recovery from the leaching solution due to very simple equipment. The only needed equipment is a mixing and filtration system, instead of a large number of devices required for solvent extraction process (i.e. mixer-settler systems and columns for countercurrent extraction. In addition, the stripping stage from pregnant phase will be completely omitted. It should be noted that polyelectrolytes have also been used to remove heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions of wastewaters. In these cases, heavy metal binding with a chemical agent was initially allowed to occur and then the polyelectrolyte was added to initiate the complex precipitation ( So, this paper reports a novel method for simultaneous selective recovery and purification of molybdenum from leach liquor in one step. A comparison of main advantages and disadvantages of already existing processes on Mo recovery and the polyelectrolyte extraction is shown in The initial solution for purification experiments was prepared by dissolving some molybdenite (MoS The leaching experiment was performed for 3 h in a 0.2 M nitric acid solution using a cylindrical water jacketed vessel (borosilicate glass, 1 l) under magnetic stirring (500 rpm). A digital bath with a circulating pump (CRIOTERM 10–80 Thermostat) was used to control the temperature at 78 °C ( The most probable reaction for nitric acid leaching of molybdenite is as follows ( Solid to liquid ratio of 1.3 g/l was selected to prevent saturation of molybdenum in solution ( For molybdenum extraction, several CPE water-soluble coagulants of KlarAid products (KlarAid PC 1182, KlarAid PC 1192, KlarAid PC 1194, KlarAid PC 1195, KlarAid PC 1196 and KlarAid PC 2712) were employed. The purification experiments have been performed by adding specified amounts of CPE to the initial solution. Their addition have determined the coagulation/precipitation of molybdenum ions. A vacuum filter was used after each experiment to separate the solid from the liquid phase. Filter cake underwent a washing step using distilled water and finally, it was dried at 105 °C for 6 h. Molybdenum, copper and iron content of the solutions were analyzed by an Inductively Coupled Plasma spectrophotometer (ICP-OES 5100 Agilent Technologies) and recovery efficiency was calculated by mass balance. The dried precipitates were analyzed by a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR, Thermo Nicolet) with KBr pellet technique in the range of 400–4000 cm ICP analysis showed that Mo, Cu and Fe content of as-received leach liquor is 615.3, 7.4 and 15.7 mg/L, respectively. Hence, molybdenum content is 96.4 wt%, considering the three elements concentration. Iron and copper sulfides dissolve as cations while molybdenite dissolution in nitric acid resulted in the formation of molybdic acid producing MoO4 In order to investigate the effect of CPE on the extraction and purification of molybdenum ions from solution, some experiments were performed at different values of CPE. For instance, According to the results of  The suitable value of CPE is the lowest level which leads to Mo recovery as high as possible in one step of extraction. Therefore, considering the linear relation of Mo recovery versus CPE value (17.5 vol% for KlarAid PC 1182 in As claimed by In order to investigate the performance of CPEs, the efficiency factor is quantitatively defined. The aforementioned parameter is obtained by dividing molybdenum recovery to the used value of CPE. In fact, the efficiency factor expresses the recovered Mo (grams) per unit volume of CPE (liter) as follows:  Concerning  The obtained precipitates after coagulation and filtration were washed using distilled water which improved the purity of the product by removing more Cu and Fe ions. It is evident that the purity increased, especially for KlarAid PC 1182, KlarAid PC 1194 and KlarAid PC 1195 with complete removal of Cu and Fe impurities ( In the coagulation process, the rate of phase separation and sedimentation is different for various kinds of CPEs. Naturally, at a faster rate of solid/liquid phase separation, the process is simpler, time-saving and consequently more economic. Therefore, the aforementioned parameter was studied for different CPEs (  XRD patterns of dried precipitates after the coagulation process are shown in In order to get more details, all samples were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy.  The residual constituents after thermal treatment using DTA-TGA analysis were evaluated by X-ray diffraction. The obtained MoO In this research, the effectiveness of cationic polyelectrolytes in selective precipitation and purification of Mo ions from leach liquor containing Fe and Cu was proven. The mechanism of coagulation of Mo ions can be expressed based on the charged nature of ions and polyelectrolytes in solution. From a theoretical point of view, positively-charged molecules would be able to attract anions and repel cations. Cationic polyelectrolytes on the other hands forms positively charged molecules by ionization in water. So, they would be able to selectively attract anions of molybdenum ([MoO4] A remarkable point is the simplicity of the proposed method. So that coagulation occurs as soon as polyelectrolytes are added to the solution and molybdenum ions are precipitated in the form of small flakes. Therefore, it is possible to separate the solid phase quickly, by a simple filtration step. A glassy and amorphous phase is obtained by drying the filter cake which is transformed into layered crystals of pure MoO In summary, we investigated the extraction and purification of molybdenum from a leach liquor containing iron and copper ions as impurities using some cationic polyelectrolytes for the first time. The outstanding results are as follows: recovery and purification of Mo from Fe and Cu ions was performed by using relatively low values of polyelectrolytes concentration in a single step; there is an optimum concentration for any polyelectrolytes. The recovery percentage of molybdenum is low at lower values of cationic polyelectrolytes. On the other hands, phase separation is not possible at values higher than the threshold concentration; in order to investigate the recovery efficiency of precipitated molybdenum based on used polyelectrolyte, the efficiency factor was defined. The aforementioned parameter was used to evaluate the performance of polyelectrolytes; using of various polyelectrolytes led to different rates of coagulation and precipitation, ranging from 10 min to more than 200 min in experimental conditions; for cationic polyelectrolytes of KlarAid PC 1194 and KlarAid PC 1195, the best conditions of Mo extraction and purification were obtained. The highest value of the efficiency factor with an estimated purity of 100% and a mid-range rate of precipitation were achieved in both cases; XRD and SEM investigations showed that a glassy and amorphous phase is obtained after drying of coagulants. Finally, relatively pure MoO This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. None. Authors kindly acknowledge Mr. Marcello Centofanti for the ICP analyses, and Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex for supplying the molybdenite concentrate.