The aim of the present study was to characterize the dynamics of the bolus formation that take place during mastication of commercial cooked ham samples. In addition, the relationships between these properties and texture perception were studied. Five commercial samples which presented different mechanical properties and moisture contents were studied. Ten participants were asked to chew the cooked ham samples normally and to expectorate the bolus after different chewing periods. Oral activity measurements (chewing time and number of chewing strokes), moisture content, saliva uptake and particle size distribution in the boluses were obtained. Seventeen participants evaluated the sensory perceptions generated over the sample consumption time, using the Temporal Check-All-That-Apply (TCATA) method. The results revealed that the duration of mastication and number of chewing cycles through to swallowing varied significantly among the cooked ham samples and were mainly related to instrumental texture parameters. The pattern of fragmentation under mastication also varied greatly between samples. Sensations of softness and hardness during ham consumption were again linked to instrumental texture parameters (TPA hardness, TPA chewiness and shear force). The perception of fibrousness was related to the degree of fragmentation of the ham in the mouth, and juiciness seemed to be related to the amount of saliva taken up by the product.Eating food involves different oral processes, such as comminution, insalivation, and mixing, to form a well-lubricated and cohesive bolus that can be swallowed safely and comfortably. During this process, food products undergo a series of changes, which determine their further behaviour in the digestive tract. In addition, sensory perception of food occurs during this step. The characterization of bolus properties at different stages of eating or just before swallowing can provide insights into the relation between food structure and the dynamics of texture perception in the mouth ( Approaches have been developed to analyse the properties of the bolus, obtained either in vivo or in vitro. They are mainly based on measuring bolus water content, bolus rheology, or bolus particle size ( Saliva is essential in food bolus formation, acting as an agent that favours bolus cohesiveness and lubrication, which are key requirements for triggering safe swallowing. The amount of saliva incorporated into the bolus can determine a number of bolus characteristics. The amount of saliva (which is usually measured gravimetrically) varies between individuals and/or according to the food characteristics. Some of these characteristics are the initial water content, water absorption capacity, and mechanical properties of the food ( The study of the breakdown path and fragmentation of the solid food product bolus is also relevant. A variety of methods to measure particle size distribution in the bolus have been applied, including sieving methods ( Texture sensations have usually been related to the initial structure and mechanical properties of food, but in recent years increasing attention has been paid to how this structure is transformed during food mastication and swallowing and during the in-mouth cleaning procedures after swallowing. This knowledge can explain the sensory perception of some specific texture attributes ( In the case of meat products like cooked ham, oral processing transformation occurs through the compression and shear forces generated by chewing and biting, leading to the formation of a cohesive bolus where saliva is present along with liquid released from the meat itself ( Thus, it could be of great interest to study a processed meat product such as cooked ham in order to establish the links between in-mouth sensory perceptions and the evolution of properties of the bolus at different mastication stages. The aims of the present study were 1) to characterize the bolus properties during mastication of commercial cooked ham samples, and, 2) to relate these properties to perceptions of the ham's texture. Five commercial cooked pork ham products (A, B, C, D, and E) were used in the present study. The samples were bought both in block form, for instrumental texture analysis, and sliced (2 mm thick) for the other analyses. The lists of ingredients on the label of each product are shown in Ham sample blocks were cut into cylinders (20-mm height, 20-mm diameter) and kept at 4 °C for 24 h before applying Texture Profile Analysis (TPA) and Warner-Bratzler shear tests. Both tests were conducted with a TA-XT.plus Texture Analyser equipped with Texture Exponent version 6.0 software (Stable Microsystems, Godalming, UK). Six replications of both methods were conducted for each sample. TPA was performed using a 75-mm diameter flat aluminium disk probe (SMS P/75) at a test speed of 1 mm/s up to 20% compression of the initial height. From the force-time curves, hardness (N) and chewiness (N) were obtained. The Warner-Bratzler blade was used with a slotted blade insert in the HDP/90 Heavy Duty Platform. The samples were cut with the blade perpendicular to the muscle fibres, using a speed of 2 mm/s and a blade displacement of 40 mm in order to cut all the way through the sample. The shear force was determined as the maximum force (N). The moisture content of the samples was determined by a gravimetric method, according to standard 950.46 to determine moisture in meat ( Ten subjects with good dental health status participated in the mastication experiments. Cooked ham slices (2-mm thick) were cut into rectangular pieces (40 × 10 mm) and rolled up; the weight of the rolls was about 7 ± 1 g, a normal and comfortable portion size for the participants according to preliminary tests. The samples were identified with random three-digit codes and were served at 4 °C to the participants. Each participant was asked to place the entire sample in his/her mouth and chew it as usual but without swallowing. The participants were asked to spit the bolus out into a sealable plastic cup after different chewing periods (after 5, 10, and 15 strokes, and after full mastication when the need to swallow was felt). Over three sessions, one bolus per sample, chewing period and subject was collected for particle size image analysis. The order of sample presentation and the bolus collection time were varied randomly across subjects. The collected boluses were stored at 4 °C before further analysis. In a separate session, additional boluses were obtained to determine the amount of saliva uptake after 10 chewing strokes and at the end of the mastication. In this session, oral activity parameters (the chewing time for these two periods and the number of chews to reach complete mastication) were recorded by the researcher. The subjects had a 3 min rest and were provided with still mineral water for rinsing between samples. The 10-stroke and complete chewing rate were calculated. The boluses collected for particle analysis were rinsed with distilled water, filtered (73 g/m The water content of each bolus was determined immediately after collection to prevent evaporation losses. The method employed for this determination was the same as described for the cooked ham samples in The sensory perceptions during consumption of the five ham samples were evaluated using the Temporal Check-All-That-Apply (TCATA) method with the fading option. TCATA is a temporal sensory method for characterizing dynamic product properties; the subjects have a list of terms and select the attributes they consider applicable to describe the sensations they perceive ( Seventeen subjects (including the ten subjects who participated in the bolus collection experiment) performed the sensory evaluation of the samples. Four training sessions of 30 min each were conducted with the participants to generate and select the most representative sensory attributes and to familiarize them with the methodology. The attributes selected were salty, smoked flavour, ham flavour, soft, hard, fibrous, and juicy. The serving size and sample presentation were as described in For each sample, the participants registered the sensations perceived during consumption using the TCATA test. They were asked to place the whole sample in their mouths and simultaneously click the “start” button and start chewing. During the consumption time they had to select (and re-select if necessary) all the terms that described the sensations they perceived at each moment of the evaluation and to click the “stop” button when they did not perceive any further sensation. A maximum test duration time of 40 s was established. The time each panellist took to complete the task was recorded for each sample, as well as the duration of each attribute selected during the evaluation. Between samples, the participants were asked to clean their palates with still mineral water. Three replicate evaluations per sample were carried out in three different sessions. The order of sample presentation and the order of attributes in the TCATA list were varied among the subjects, following a Williams Latin square design, but for each participant the list of attributes was kept in the same order for all the samples. Sensory evaluation took place in standard sensory booths designed in accordance with ISO 8589 ( One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to test for significant differences between the instrumental texture parameters and mean moisture values of the different ham samples. A mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA), considering sample and subject (random), was conducted on the oral activity values (chewing rate and time and number of strokes). A mixed ANOVA considering sample, chewing period and subject (random) and the interaction of sample x chewing was performed on the bolus particle characterization data (number of total particles and median particle area (a50) (area at 50%)). The significance of the differences between average values was determined by the Tukey test (α = 0.05). Additionally, a principal component analysis (PCA) was run to analyse the variability in instrumental texture parameters of cooked ham samples, oral activity and bolus properties values. These analyses were performed with XLSTAT statistical software (version 2016, Microsoft Excel®, Adinsoft, Paris, France). The terms each participant selected for each sample throughout the evaluation were obtained every 1 s. For each sample, the aggregated data across all participants and replicates were represented using line plots. The Fisher-Irwin test ( As shown in The times and chewing rates during the two mastication tasks (at 10 strokes and at end of mastication) in The duration and number of strokes until swallowing varied significantly among the ham samples (F = 4.62, The water content of the boluses increased during chewing, as expected, and in general, at the end of mastication all the boluses had reached similar moisture values (78–80%), which indicates that in order to form a cohesive and swallowable bolus, insalivation compensated in part for the initial differences in water content of the ham samples. Similarly, During chewing, the ham material was fragmented until it was transformed into a bolus ready to swallow. In order to characterize this fragmentation, the changes in the size and number of particles were studied by analysing the scanned images. As an example, The median particle area found in the boluses was lower for sample C, which is consistent with a high degree of fragmentation. The particles in the sample D and E boluses presented higher median area (a50) values, indicating that there was less fragmentation of these samples, and even at the swallowing point the particles were bigger than in the rest of the samples. Previous studies comparing different food categories have shown that differences in bolus particle size at the swallowing point are mainly related to differences in the hardness of the food product, with harder foods presenting smaller particles ( A PCA was carried out to summarize the variations between samples regarding their instrumental texture, oral activity and bolus particle size distribution and moisture ( The TCATA curves, presented in TCATA trajectories summarizes the dynamic profile of the cooked ham samples ( The TCATA curves could also be expected to provide information on how similarities and differences among sample sensory attributes evolved over the consumption time. However, in the present case the perceptions of the sensory sensations elicited by the cooked ham were not strongly time-dependent. Especially in the case of texture, the attributes that characterized a sample remained the same over most of the consumption period. The low temporal complexity registered in this case could be due to the nature of the product, which is indeed quite neutral, with no salient attributes and no marked changes, or to the nature of the TCATA technique and the type of data collected. For instance, an attribute cited by all the participants, but at different times, could be overlooked or not be considered. This could be the case of the flavour attributes (except As commented above, each sample elicited one or two texture sensations that clearly differentiated it from the rest. It could be interesting to analyse which of the samples' properties are related to these sensations and how they changed during consumption.     It should be mentioned that the present study is merely an attempt to establish relationships between texture sensations and bolus properties. A statistical analysis could not be applied because of the different procedure in data collection (time vs number of strokes) which is limitation of the study. Additionally, the fact that samples in the study are commercial products, together with the low number of samples, limits the possibility of arriving at stronger associations or conclusions. In commercial cooked ham samples, many factors could affect the product properties (raw meat, brine composition, mechanical treatment and cooking/cooling treatment, among others) ( The dynamics of bolus formation and sensory perception during consumption of commercial cooked ham products were characterized. Measuring the particle size distribution of in vivo boluses at different chewing times provides valuable information about the fragmentation patterns of cooked ham in the mouth, which differed among commercial products. Sensory perceptions of The present study is a first attempt to relate dynamically assessed texture sensations elicited by cooked ham products with the properties of the bolus formed during their consumption. To the