A process for zinc sulphate recovery from the spent pickling liquor of a hot-dip galvanizing plant is developed. Two solvent extraction steps are used, the first with tributyl phosphate to selectively extract zinc chloride from the spent liquor and the second with di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) to transfer zinc from a chloride to sulphate media. The final product of the process is found to meet the specification of low chloride concentration required for electrowinning when the loaded D2EHPA was washed with water. Mathematical simulation was used to further develop the process. Based on a feed concentration of 120g/L Zn, 60g/L Fe(II) and 1mol/L HCl, the simulation predicts that 99.2% zinc can be recovered, yielding a product with 106g/L Zn.In the hot-dip galvanizing industry, pickling baths are used to remove rusts and scales from metal works before they are galvanized. However, the pickling liquor becomes ineffective as the concentration of dissolved metals, mainly iron and zinc, in the bath increases. The highly contaminated spent pickling liquor (5 to over 200 Zinc is the most valuable component of the waste liquor. This zinc can be easily recovered as zinc chloride and used as a fluxing agent within the galvanizing plant. However, only a small quantity of zinc chloride is required for this purpose. Zinc sulphate would have a greater commercial value as it can be readily sold to electrowinning plants for zinc metal production. The development of a process to recover zinc as zinc sulphate is the focus of this paper. Authors have previously considered the recovery of zinc sulphate using a combination of solvent extraction and evaporation ( Another option is to use a second solvent extraction step to transfer the zinc cations from the chloride to sulphate media, as noted by By substituting the secondary amine with an extractant suitable for processing spent pickling liquor, such as TBP, and keeping the second solvent extraction step with D2EHPA, zinc sulphate can be produced from spent pickling liquor. This option is viable especially since both extractants are commercially available and well understood. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this process scheme has not been previously examined. As such, there are many processing parameters that require study, such as the composition of the stripping solution for the first solvent extraction step and the appropriate aqueous-to-organic ratio for each stage. Hence, this paper aims to examine and develop this process of zinc sulphate recovery from spent pickling liquors via a two step solvent extraction process. Additionally, a simulation of this process is included to demonstrate that both high purity and recovery can be achieved using this arrangement. The extractants TBP (Consolidated Chemical Co., purity 99.0%) and D2EHPA (Albright & Wilson Specialties, 97%), were used as supplied and ShellSol 2046 from Shell Chemicals (69 Aqueous phase compositions for experiments using model solutions were determined using titration. 0.05 Shake tests were conducted to obtain the necessary equilibrium isotherms. An orbital-shaker/incubator (Ratek OM15C) was used for consistent mixing at a set temperature. Since TBP and D2EHPA solutions extract water, the organic phase is first contacted with water before use in experiments ( The aqueous and organic phases were mixed in a separating funnel at an aqueous-to-organic (A:O) ratio of unity and preheated to 30 In stripping experiments, the organic phase was loaded by contacting the organic phase with an aqueous solution of 1.2 Modelling of the solvent extraction process conducted in this work follows the method outlined by A generic scheme of the process under study is depicted in From Effective stripping of both zinc and HCl from loaded TBP can be achieved using water ( Two options relating to such recycling was examined. In the first case, alkali (NaOH) is added to a portion of the raffinate from SX2 to produce a mixture of NaCl and NaOH. Preliminary experiments showed precipitation, crud formation and poor phase separation when the concentration of NaOH was above 0.1 In the second case Raffinate 2 is recycled without neutralizing the acid. In this case, the composition is essentially diluted HCl. The concentration of acid in the stripping solution examined is 0.1 Shake test stripping experiments were carried out on zinc loaded TBP solutions to examine these options ( From Stripping with HCl solution yielded less zinc in the aqueous phase than when H The amount of acid stripped from the loaded TBP using alkaline or acidic stripping solutions yielded comparable results to that of water and 1 While zinc extraction by D2EHPA has been extensively researched and implemented in commercial processes, additional experimental work was included here to confirm the applicability of the process and examine the quality of the final product. With TBP extracting both ZnCl As expected, better zinc extraction occurred when the initial acid concentration was lower (0.03 Stripping of loaded D2EHPA is usually achieved using an acid solution. In this instance, sulphuric acid is used in order to produce zinc sulphate; typical concentrations used in the literature vary between 100 and 200 The product specification for sales to electrowinning plants requires that the chloride-to-zinc weight ratio be less than 0.015 (i.e. for 65 Having determined that the final zinc sulphate solution can meet the specification used in electrowinning applications, the process is then simulated in MATLAB to determine the optimum aqueous-to-organic ratio, extraction and stripping stages and estimate the stream compositions. The equilibrium reaction model for zinc and HCl extraction by TBP presented in earlier work ( An extraction isotherm for SX 1 obtained from the model is shown in The McCabe–Thiele method is used in Section 3.1 showed that the stripping is dependent on the stripping solution used, particularly when HCl and NaCl are present. To simulate these effects, the HCl concentration in the aqueous stripping solution was varied from 0.01 to 1.0 An increase in HCl concentration showed the expected decrease in zinc stripping especially below 80  In With an A:O ratio of 1:1 and two stages, 93% zinc from the loaded TBP is stripped, resulting in Product 1 having 18.8 The McCabe–Thiele method is useful as an initial estimate to quickly determine the appropriate A:O ratio for the extraction and stripping processes and also the corresponding theoretical stages. However, this method only accounts for the extraction and stripping of zinc. Since both HCl and zinc are extracted and stripped simultaneously, the change in zinc and HCl concentrations along the solvent extraction stages need to be calculated iteratively; this was conducted in MATLAB. The concentration profile for both zinc and acid extraction simulated in MATLAB is shown in From The extraction simulation shows that 56% of the HCl The Zn-D2EHPA equilibrium isotherm was constructed for varying conditions using the model by In SX 2, the choice of equilibrium aqueous phase pH (pH However, the equilibrium isotherms shown in At pH At pH  The overall simulation is conducted using MATLAB. The resultant simulation of the process is shown in Factors affecting the operation of a proposed process for zinc sulphate recovery from spent pickling liquor have been investigated. The use of dilute acid or alkali solutions as stripping solution does not affect either zinc or acid stripping significantly. Chloride concentration in the stripping solution has a notable effect on zinc stripping, but not acid stripping; increased chloride content decreases zinc stripping. This indicates that acid is easily stripped even with stripping solutions containing elevated chloride concentration. The performance of the D2EHPA extraction step (SX 2) has been shown to be dependent on the acid concentration of its feed (product from SX 1). pH control of the aqueous phase in SX 2 is necessary to ensure maximum zinc recovery especially if the aqueous zinc concentration is high. With respect to the chloride constraint in the final product, incorporation of a scrubbing stage is needed to remove entrained aqueous solution. With a single scrubbing stage, the chloride content can be reduced well below the required limit. The simulations of the proposed zinc recovery process show that quantitative zinc can be recovered using two solvent extraction circuits (TBP and D2EHPA). Based on a feed concentration of 120 The authors are grateful for support from the Australian Research Council through Linkage grant LP0989575, the Industrial Galvanizers (Australia) and the Particulate Fluids Processing Centre, a Special Research Centre of the Australian Research Council. The technical support given by Dr. Peter Hetherington of Industrial Galvanizers (Australia) is also greatly appreciated.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at