Implant surface modification has been used to improve osseointegration. However, evidence regarding improved new bone formation (NBF) and osseointegration with the use of collagen–chondroitin sulfate (CS) matrix coated implants remains unclear. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of collagen–CS matrix coating on the osseointegration of implants. The focused question was “Does the incorporation of collagen–CS matrix in implant surfaces influence osseointegration?” To answer the question, indexed databases were searched up to July 2017 using various combinations of the key words “collagen”, “chondroitin sulfate”, “osseointegration”, and “implants”. The initial literature search identified 497 articles, of which 18 reporting experimental studies fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Thirteen of the studies included (72%) reported that implants coated with a collagen–CS matrix presented higher NBF, bone-to-implant contact, and/or bone volume density. The strength of this observation was supported by meta-analysis results. Nevertheless, the results should be interpreted with caution due to the lack of standardization regarding the dosage formulation of collagen–CS, short-term follow-up, and lack of assessment of confounders. On experimental grounds, the incorporation of collagen–CS matrix into implant surfaces appears to promote osseointegration. From a clinical perspective, the results from animal models support phase I studies in healthy humans.Dental implants are a well-established and predictable treatment option for the replacement of missing teeth in edentulous patients Different biological, physical, and chemical techniques of implant surface modification have been developed with the aim of stimulating osteogenesis and enhancing peri-implant bone formation in systemically healthy, as well as immunosuppressed patients Type I collagen constitutes approximately 90% of the ECM and is an important structural component of the bone cellular network It has been suggested that incorporating the glycosaminoglycan chondroitin sulfate (CS) into a collagen matrix may promote interactions with tissue growth factors In an experimental study on male rats, Rammelt et al. investigated the effect of collagen–CS matrix incorporated into titanium surfaces on implant osseointegration The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to assess the efficacy of collagen–CS matrix coating on the osseointegration of implants. This systematic review was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) original clinical and experimental (animal model) studies; (2) presence of a control group (osseointegration around implants without collagen–CS matrix); (3) intervention: effect of collagen–CS matrix on osseointegration; (4) evaluation of parameters that influence osseointegration (BIC, NBF, and/or BV/TV) in subjects with and without implants coated with collagen–CS matrix. Qualitative and/or quantitative reviews, laboratory-based investigations (in vitro studies), case reports/case series, commentaries, letters to the editor, and interviews and updates were excluded. The international prospective register of systematic reviews in health and social care (PROSPERO) and the Cochrane Register of Systematic Reviews were searched in March 2017. No existing reviews assessing the efficacy of collagen–CS matrix coatings on implant osseointegration were registered at that time. In order to identify studies relevant to the focused question, a systematic and structured literature search without language restriction was conducted by two authors (FJ and SVK) using the PubMed (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda), Scopus, Embase, Google Scholar, and Web of Knowledge databases. The databases were searched up to and including July 2017 using different combinations of the following medical subject heading (MeSH) terms: (1) dental implants, (2) chondroitin sulfate, (3) collagen, (4) osseointegration, (5) extracellular matrix, and (6) glycosaminoglycan. Other related non-MeSH terms were used in the search strategy to detect articles discussing bone formation around implants coated with collagen and chondroitin sulfate. These included: (7) implants, (8) new bone formation, and (9) bone to implant contact. Boolean operators (OR, AND) were used to combine the key words mentioned above: (a) 1; 4 OR 7; AND 2 OR 5 OR 6; (b) 1; 4 OR 7 AND 2 AND 3; (c) 1 OR 7 AND 8 OR 9; AND 2; 5 OR 6. To minimize the potential for reviewer bias, the titles and abstracts of studies identified using the protocol described above were screened independently by two authors (FJ and SVK) and checked for agreement. Full-text articles of those judged by title and abstract to be relevant were read and evaluated independently for the stated eligibility criteria. After the initial electronic search, the reference lists of the studies identified were hand-searched to identify further potentially relevant studies. Any disagreements in the study selection process were resolved by discussion and consensus between the authors (FJ and SVK). Cohen’s kappa was used to determine the inter-reviewer reliability (κ The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias was used to perform a qualitative assessment of the studies included Meta-analyses to answer the focused question were conducted for BIC (nine studies Through the initial search, 497 potential articles were identified. After title and abstract screening, 466 publications that did not answer the focused question or were duplicates were excluded. In the second step, 13 more articles that did not answer the focused question were excluded. In total, 18 prospective in vivo studies were included and processed for data extraction Dogs were the study subjects in three studies, with female dogs in two The role of collagen–CS matrix in the promotion of NBF around implants was assessed in healthy animals in 16 studies Thirteen studies investigated titanium implants and reported the number used (range 36–224) The implants were placed in the mandible in eight studies Cylindrical implants were placed in eight studies The collagen coatings on the Ti substrate were prepared by fibrillogenesis with bovine skin type I collagen, at a concentration ranging between 1 Eleven studies incorporated CS from bovine trachea during the fibrillogenesis process Osseointegration was assessed using histomorphometric analysis in 13 studies The results of 11 studies showed that collagen–CS coated titanium implants enhanced NBF, BV/TV, and/or BIC around implants Two studies prepared a fiber-reinforced composite with calcium-deficient carbonated hydroxyapatite (originated from the setting of calcium phosphate bone cement in simulated body fluid), freeze-dried mineralized type I collagen (2.5 Osseointegration was assessed using histological and histomorphometric analyses in both studies Both studies involving hydroxyapatite implants modified with collagen–CS reported higher BIC and NBF compared with hydroxyapatite implants modified with collagen alone Meta-analyses were performed of the nine studies reporting mean and standard deviation BIC values With regard to BIC, the sample sizes were comparable in all of the studies. The reported mean BIC value in the test group was higher than that in the control group in eight of the nine studies. The With regard to NBF, the reported mean NBF value was higher in the test group than in the control group in all five studies. The Eleven studies reported an adequate method of randomization or method of allocation concealment This study assessed the efficacy of collagen–CS matrix incorporation into implant surfaces in enhancing osseointegration. Thirteen of the studies included (72%) reported that implants coated with a collagen–CS matrix presented higher NBF, BIC, and/or BV/TV Quantitative analysis has been used to pool data from human clinical studies, and it has been reported that this is applicable in animal research as well There was also a lack of standardization in the selection of implants for the control groups in the studies included. For example, in the study by Schliephake et al., machined surface titanium screws were used as controls It is proposed that additional studies with the following groups are needed: (1) machined surface implants without collagen–CS matrix coating (control group 1); (2) rough surface implants without collagen–CS matrix coating (control group 2); (3) machined surface implants with collagen–CS matrix coating (test group 1); and (4) rough surface implants with collagen–CS matrix coating (test group 2). From the literature reviewed, only Schliephake et al. used a similar protocol to that proposed here It is pertinent to mention that the follow-up period among the experimental studies included was relatively short (up to 24 weeks) In conclusion, on experimental grounds, the incorporation of collagen–CS matrix into implant surfaces appears to promote osseointegration. From a clinical perspective, the results from animal models support phase I studies in healthy humans. The authors declare no funding. The authors declare no competing interests. Not required. Not required.