Openings including their size, shape and distribution in rock play a significant role in the performance of rock related structures. The well-established knowledge in this area can contribute to the engineering practices, for example, underground space design, planning and optimisation in Civil and Mining Engineering and wellbore stability in Drilling Engineering, among others. Thus, understanding the failure mechanism of rock with openings is theoretically and practically meaningful. Laboratory testing on rock or rock-like materials with openings have been studied extensively in the literature, which, however, primarily focuses on the cracks/fractures. In this paper, a comprehensive numerical study on the effect of non-banded openings, i.e., circular, rectangular, and triangular opening, on the rock mechanical behaviour is performed using a hybrid continuum-discrete element method. It is revealed that the proposed simulation method can reproduce reasonably the crack initiation and propagation, and predict well the change of the mechanical behaviour due to the openings. In addition, the influence of the opening shape and opening ratio (=area of opening/specimen area) on the mechanical behaviour is also investigated.Rocks are heterogeneous and normally contain defects. The defects in rock, for example faults, joints, beddings, and openings, can propagate, interact and coalescence under internal and external stresses, leading to damage or failure of rock. The influence of these defects particularly affects in two aspects: (1) rock mechanics properties (e.g., compressive strength and stiffness) decrease seriously due to existing defects; (2) defects may propagate or coalesce with other defects under loading, leading to a further degradation in stiffness and strength A number of investigations to the failure of rock/rock-like materials were performed during the past two decades The numerical methods used are dominant by finite element method (FEM) The main objective in the paper is to numerically study the influence of openings on the stiffness, strength and fracture pattern of rock. The numerical simulations are compared with the experimental work of The hybrid continuum-discrete element method, can model the interaction of discrete materials, the solid continuum within discrete bodies and the fracturing process. Similar to typical DEM, in the hybrid continuum-discrete element method, the material mass is represented by an assemblage of discrete grains The motion equations describe the translation and rotation of the grain about its centroid. In one dimension, Newton’s second law of motion can be written in the following form Taking Eq. With velocities stored at the half-time step, it is possible to express displacement as In two dimensions, grains can be loaded by multi-directional forces. Therefore, the velocity equations become Finally, based on the velocity equations, the grain location can be determined according to the following equations Deformable grains are discretised into finite-difference triangular zones ( The stress in Eq. For large deformation treatment allowing for rigid body rotation, Jaumann stress rate was adopted to Eq. Once all the forces are defined, each node of the zone is accelerated according to the finite-difference form of Newton’s second law of motion. In the current numerical method, the crack or flaw in the material (or potential crack or flaw) is represented numerically using a contact surface (i.e., bond). The constitutive law of contact is based on the techniques of contact detection during calculation. There is a limiting tensile strength ( When the shear stress is smaller than the ultimate value (i.e., The material used in the study is Hong Kong granite with grain size ranging from 0.3 to 3 Five specimens prepared in It is also noted that enlarging the width of specimen can increase the crack initiation stress which is 17, 18.2 and 22 For the specimens with identical width (i.e., 10 It is also found that larger hole radius induces lower crack initiation stress. The influence of the hole radius on the compressive strength is quantified in The effect of the multi-holes on the mechanical behaviour of rock is investigated based on the laboratory testing of The modelled stress-strain curves for the horizontal alignments (H1, H2, and H3) are shown in It is noted that the row number is varied but the number of holes in each row is fixed in the specimens with horizontal alignment (i.e., H1 to H3). The vertical alignment both changes the number of holes in one column (V1 and V2) and the number of holes column (V2, V3). From the simulations, it is found that increasing the number of holes can slightly decrease the Young’s modulus but increase the compressive strength (e.g., V1 and V2 in For diagonal alignment, the simulated Young’s modulus and compressive strength both decrease with the number of holes, from 31.19 GPa and 84.75 Both the simulated Young’s modulus and compressive strength decrease in random alignments ( The fracturing progress of the horizontal and vertical alignment is shown in To understand the failure mechanism, the stress distribution within the specimens is investigated. The principal stress distribution for H1 is shown in For natural rocks, the openings inside rock can be of any shapes. It has been reported that there are openings with different shapes, sizes and distributions in Yucca tuff in Nevada, USA The triangular and square openings are also rotated to investigate the orientation effect as shown in the right two models in In this section, opening ratio change is accomplished through two approaches in this paper: changing the number of openings, as shown in For the first approach, in order to avoid the possible impact of opening alignment on the simulation result, all the openings are aligned vertically and spaced evenly as shown in Comprehensive investigation on the effect of openings on rock mechanical behaviour is performed using UDEC. In the simulation, all the rock specimens are discretized using Voronoi tessellation grains. A special technique, which establishes each model by cutting the original uniaxial compression model, is adopted to build the numerical models. The technique can help to remove the influence of mesh bias in model construction. The numerical models built by the technique therefore have same heterogeneity. The models with single opening and multi-opening are simulated. Three different opening shapes are also considered to investigate the shape and orientation effect on the rock mechanical behaviour. In addition, the relationship between the opening ratio and the rock mechanical behaviour is studied. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method using UDEC is appropriate and applicable by comparing the simulation results with the experimental results and theoretical analysis. The main conclusions can be drawn as follows: The opening in the rock has significant effect on the rock mechanical behaviour and generally decreases the rock strength (compressive strength) and stiffness (Young’s modulus). First cracks majorly start from the opening boundary, especially the north and south poles (if the loading direction is along north-south direction), since the major principal stress is in tension near the poles. The crack initiation is started before the peak of the stress-strain curves. The propagation of the first crack is mainly vertical. The specimen width has positive influence on the mechanical behaviour: increasing the width of specimens can ascend the Young’s modulus and compressive strength. However, the hole size has negative influence on the mechanical behaviour: increasing the hole size can descend the Young’s modulus and compressive strength. For horizontally aligned holes, the simulated Young’s modulus and compressive strength are both reduced with increase of the number of holes. However, for the specimens with the vertically aligned holes, only the simulated Young’s modulus is decreased with increase of the number of holes. Opening shape and orientation as well as opening ratio can affect the simulated Young’s modulus and compressive strength significantly. The influence of opening on the mechanical behaviour of rocks has been explained by the principal stress, especially its distribution and concentration around the openings. The open fund (No.