Co-production of high-value biobased products in biorefineries is a promising option for optimized utilization of biomass. Lignocellulosic materials such as agricultural and forest residues have been identified as attractive alternative feedstocks because of their high availability and low resource demand. This study assessed the greenhouse gas (GHG) performance and energy balance of ethanol co-production with biogas and electricity in biorefineries using straw and forest residues. Two calculation methods were used: Method I (ISO), which applied the international standard for life cycle assessment, and Method II, which applied the EU Renewable Energy Directive (RED) methodology. These methods differed in allocation procedure, functional unit and system boundaries. Analysis of the importance of significant methodological choices and critical parameters showed that the results varied depending on calculation method, with co-product handling and the inclusion of upstream impacts from residue harvesting explaining most of the differences. Important life cycle steps were process inputs in terms of enzymes and changes in soil organic carbon content due to removal of residues. Ethanol produced from forest residues generally gave lower GHG emissions than straw-based ethanol. The GHG savings for both feedstocks were 51–84% relative to fossil fuel. Omission of upstream impacts from residue recovery in agriculture and forestry in the RED method means that it risks overlooking important environmental effects of residue reuse. Furthermore, the default allocation procedure used in the RED method (energy allocation) may need revision for biorefineries where multiple products with different characteristics are co-produced.Ethanol production is predicted to double globally in the coming decade ( Biofuel production currently uses approximately 65% of the vegetable oil produced in the EU, 50% of Brazilian sugarcane and 40% of US maize ( The cellulose and hemicellulose in lignocellulosic material can be converted to sugars through hydrolysis and these sugars can then be further fermented to ethanol. However, sugar production from lignocellulosic materials is more complex than the well-known process of starch hydrolysis involved in producing ethanol from e.g. maize and wheat. To enable efficient hydrolysis, pretreatment to modify the structure and chemical composition of the material is required ( The advantages of lignocellulosic biomass include its abundance ( The biorefinery concept, defined by International Energy Agency (IEA) Task 42 on Biorefineries as: “…the sustainable processing of biomass into a spectrum of marketable products and energy”, is gaining increased interest. Co-production of commodities such as energy, food and chemical products in biorefineries can be a viable commercial and practical option in future optimized utilization of biomass ( Although lignocellulosic ethanol in general is considered to have a lower environmental impact than first-generation ethanol, it is important to evaluate fuels produced from lignocellulosic material using a systems approach. The life cycle assessment (LCA) method allows the environmental impact of products and services to be evaluated from cradle to grave ( The EU Renewable Energy Directive (RED) ( The aim of the present study was to analyze the GHG performance and energy balance of ethanol co-production with biogas and electricity in a biorefinery. Two methods were used, one applying the international standard of life cycle assessment, referred to as Method I (ISO), and one applying the RED ( Life cycle assessment was used to evaluate two large-scale hypothetical biorefinery systems, one utilizing straw as feedstock (straw scenario) and one using forest residues (forest residue scenario). Technical data on process performance and input requirements were taken from technical/economic studies by Two calculation methods were used. In Method I (ISO), ethanol was considered to be the main product and the multi-functionality was treated by system expansion, following the recommendations in the ISO standard for LCA ( The energy balance was calculated as primary fossil energy over ethanol production use in the production processes. Factors for fossil fuel emissions and primary energy differ between the methods. In Method II (RED), values of 83.8 g CO Collection of feedstock, transportation to the biorefinery and biorefinery inputs such as enzymes, chemicals and nutrients were included in both calculation methods. Infrastructure, machinery and buildings were excluded, as were storage of substrates and end use of the fuels.  Both the feedstock production system and the biorefinery are multi-output processes. Choice of method to use in LCA to handle multi-output situations is not straight-forward. In studies of bioenergy systems, choice of method has been shown to have a strong impact on the results ( Avoiding allocation by subdivision was not feasible in the present case, since the processes in the biorefineries were highly interlinked, so system expansion was used in Method I (ISO), in line with the ISO standard. The environmental impact of the main product was calculated as the emissions from the main production system minus the avoided emissions from the production systems replaced by the co-products on the market ( In Method I (ISO), an alternative fate for the feedstock of being left at the field or forest site rather than being harvested and used in a biorefinery was considered. The impact of biomass removal was accounted for by using a land use reference with no straw and forest residue harvesting considering the SOC changes and nutrient compensation. In Method II (RED), energy allocation is based on LHV and excess electricity can be handled in two ways. Credit (decreased emissions) is accounted for in some cases, although not when the electricity is produced from a co-product, e.g. the de-watered lignin-rich residue in this study. Then the principle of allocation based on energy content also applies for electricity (point 16–18 in Annex V of Diesel use for collection and handing of the straw up to unloading from storage was estimated using data from The straw harvest was assumed to be 2 t ha The ash remaining after incineration was assumed to be returned to cultivation to recover some of the nutrients (particularly phosphorus and potassium, but also magnesium and particular micronutrients). Therefore, nutrient compensation included only the nitrogen lost during combustion. In Method I (ISO), all nitrogen removed with straw and forest residues was assumed to be replaced using mineral fertilizer. Nitrogen content in straw is approx. 0.5% of DM for cereal straw and 2.3% of DM for oilseed straw ( GHG emissions from nitrogen fertilizer production were estimated to be 5.1 kg CO In the straw scenario, an annual SOC loss of 150 kg C ha For all road transport, a lorry with load capacity 33 t and a maximum load volume of 110 m  The GHG performance with Method I (ISO) is shown in In Method II (RED), emissions were allocated based on energy content, so the impact of 1 MJ ethanol was the same as for 1 MJ biogas or electricity ( The energy balance shows the primary fossil energy required to produce 1 MJ ethanol. The energy content of the biomass was not included. Again, enzymes had a significant impact in both calculation methods and proved to be the most significant contributor to both scenarios when Method II (RED) was used ( The impact of heat utilization and the life cycle stages with the largest impact on GHG performance ( Enzyme dose varies significantly depending on enzyme activity, substrate and process design. In the sensitivity analysis, enzyme dose was varied ±50%. These doses were within the initial trial doses (1–6 g enzyme product/100 g cellulose) recommended for determining the optimal dose ( Using straw and forest residues for bioenergy removes biomass from the soil, altering the balance between inputs and outputs of soil carbon. In the long-term, a new equilibrium of soil carbon is established. The total amount of soil carbon depends on factors such as soil type, climate, moisture and agriculture or forest management ( The alternative product and production system avoided via co-product generation is often difficult to identify and the choice can have a large impact on the results. Therefore, assumptions of avoided processes in the substitution method were changed in the sensitivity analysis to include alternative fossil energy sources and renewable energy sources, such as wind power. Heat utilization of 50%, e.g. in district heating systems, where the heat replaces other energy sources, was also analyzed. The forest residue scenario generated more co-products, so it was more affected by the changed assumptions than the straw scenario. Similarly, more heat was produced in the forest residue scenario, leading to larger benefits when the heat replaced other heat production systems. This study assessed the GHG performance and energy balance of ethanol co-production with biogas and electricity using two different calculation methods. Calculation method used greatly influenced the results, with most of the difference explained by handling of the co-products and the inclusion of upstream impacts from residue harvest. Process inputs, mainly enzymes, and changes in the SOC content were the most important life cycle steps, while harvesting operations and transport of the feedstock were of minor importance. Similarly to this study, previous studies have identified enzymes as a potentially significant contributor to GHG emissions ( In our study the SOC changes greatly affected the GHG performance when using the ISO method. Similarly, in a study by In the present study the digestate was assumed to be combusted to obtain process electricity and heat. To decrease the impact of SOC change, the digestate remaining after fermentation and anaerobic digestion could be returned to the field or forest site. The digestate is rich in lignin, which is more resistant to decomposition than cellulose and hemicellulose. The carbon in the digestate can therefore be expected to be more stable in the soil and replace some of the carbon removed with the residues ( Returning digestate could also be a way of maintaining a good nutrient balance. Nitrogen deficiency due to removal of forest residues could result in a lower growth rate, equivalent to 2–4 years of normal growth in one rotation ( The choice of allocation method can have a major influence on the results, as shown by The production mix of the biorefinery was also very important, e.g. relatively large production of co-products resulted in significant GHG credits in the forest residue scenario in the present study. Previous studies on lignocellulosic ethanol production have largely focused on stand-alone processes in isolation from other system processes ( Owing to uncertainties in the data, the changes made in the sensitivity analysis had a great impact on the final results. However, the total GHG emissions per MJ ethanol were higher than in a fossil fuel reference (83.8 g CO Ethanol produced from forest residues generally showed lower GHG emissions than ethanol produced from straw, although the difference was small when Method II (RED) was used. Two factors highly influenced the GHG performance, enzymes used in the process and the reduction in SOC due to residue removal. Consequently, to lower the GHG emissions from lignocellulosic ethanol, it is crucial that the enzyme dose is lowered and/or that the impact from enzyme production is decreased. In addition, the residues should be managed in such a way that the effect on SOC is minimized. The resulting GHG performance and energy balance varied significantly depending on calculation method used. The most influential factors were choice of allocation method and the inclusion of upstream impacts in the form of SOC losses. The ISO calculation method showed significant advantages for forest residue-based ethanol compared with straw-based, whereas the RED calculation method showed almost similar results. As an increasing share of biofuel can be expected to be produced in biorefineries and from lignocellulosic biomass, policy instruments, such as the RED calculation method, have to be compatible with these systems. This will involve careful consideration of allocation methods and the handling of agricultural and forestry residues in calculations. We believe that including upstream impacts from residue harvesting in the RED is recommended and justified and that inclusion of SOC changes due to residue recovery should be carefully considered. The authors acknowledge