This paper attempts to quantify the effect of backfilling on pillar strength in highwall mining using numerical modelling. Calibration against the new empirical strength formula for highwall mining was conducted to obtain the material parameters used in the numerical modelling. With the obtained coal strength parameters, three sets of backfill properties were investigated. The results reveal that the behavior of pillars varies with the type and amount of backfill as well as the pillar width to mining height ratio (w/h). In case of cohesive backfill, generally 75% backfill shows a significant increase in peak strength, and the increase in peak strength is more pronounced for the pillars having lower w/h ratios. In case of non-cohesive backfill, the changes in both the peak and residual strengths with up to 92% backfill are negligible while the residual strength constantly increases after reaching the peak strength only when 100% backfill is placed. Based on the modelling results, different backfilling strategies should be considered on a case by case basis depending on the type of backfill available and desired pillar dimension.Highwall mining is a mining method that produces coal from the base of highwall in surface mines as illustrated in Backfilling technology has been widely used in the mining industry. In metalliferous mining, backfilling is typically used to provide a working platform, usually in cut and fill mining, or a support to the pillars and walls for higher productivity With the wide application of backfilling in the mining industry, research was carried out in the late 1990s to investigate the possibility of utilizing backfilling in highwall mining for the purpose of increasing coal recoveries A number of forms of backfilling for highwall mining were proposed and relevant filling methods and indicative costs were presented in the past studies This paper aims to quantify the effect of backfilling in highwall mining on pillar strength using numerical modelling. While few numerical analyses of the effect of backfilling in highwall mining can be found, a limitation of the studies was the modelling of coal pillars used in highwall mining Numerical models that are calibrated against empirical pillar strength formulae can be a reliable way to explain the average behavior of a pillar model This new formula has been developed using the maximum likelihood method, which is similar to how the UNSW pillar strength formulae were originally derived It is considered that as the new formula has been developed from an actual database of highwall mining, it represents the best in-situ behavior of coal pillars in highwall mining. Due to the nature of long pillars in highwall mining conditions, plane strain analysis was conducted using the two-dimensional numerical software FLAC  In this study, the roof and floor were considered to be an elastic material with the stiffer material property After generating the grid and assigning the boundary conditions and material properties, the model was stepped to an equilibrium state to develop in-situ stresses. The second equilibrium was then achieved by excavating the entry. The entry width was fixed at 1.75 The coal pillar stress was estimated by taking the average of vertical stresses generated in the elements located at the mid-point of the pillar. The vertical strain was calculated based on the ratio of the difference between the average vertical displacements at the top and bottom of the coal pillar and the mining height. The input parameters for coal were calibrated against Eq. While the peak strengths were modelled, the validation of the post-peak behaviors of the modelled pillar was attempted by constructing coal pillar models with It is worthy of note that the obtained set of parameters may not be the unique because different constitutive models, different combinations of material parameters and different boundary conditions can produce the same calibration results A few types of backfill, such as a dense fluid of unconsolidated rejects, a partially consolidated deposit of rejects and a saturated cement backfill paste were proposed for the application of backfilling in highwall mining For each type of backfill, the percentage fills from 8% to 100% of the pillar height were placed into the entry and the coal pillar strengths with varying amounts of backfill were monitored. While using the same pillar model and modelling process as in the preceding section, the entry was backfilled and the model was equilibrated right before applying the increasing load in the model. The geometry of the coal pillar model with backfill is provided in The peak strengths of pillars with varying amounts of backfill are listed in In almost all of the cases, the peak strength significantly increases with 92% backfill height compared to 83% backfill. When the entries are completely filled with backfill (i.e., 100%), the pillars show an elastic behavior. The stress-strain curves of the pillars with The residual strengths of pillars with varying amounts of backfill were also monitored, as shown in Considering the range of residual strengths without backfill, in the order of 0.5 In case of non-cohesive backfill, only 100% backfill is effective while the changes in both the peak and residual strengths with 8% to 92% backfill are negligible. Moreover, the peak strength even hardly increases with 100% backfill while the residual strength constantly increases over strain as shown in Galvin stated that the confinement by backfilling is primarily generated in response to lateral expansion of pillar As can be seen from Eq. It was also suggested by Galvin that the height of backfill should be more than two-thirds of the height of pillar as the lateral expansion is largest at mid-height of pillar As predicted by numerical modelling in Section If a significant increase in peak strength is targeted, generally 75% backfill using cohesive material may be enough to stabilize the pillars. The pillars with The effect of the cohesive backfill with UCS of 0.5 When non-cohesive backfill is considered, full height of pillar should be backfilled. Non-cohesive backfill may be preferred over cohesive backfill as cement doesn’t need to be added and it can be injected properly into the entry due to flowability The property of backfill material typically changes with time. It is noted that this numerical study is not on a real time basis and the modelling results assume that the property of backfill is settled over time. In reality, the strength and the corresponding curing time of the chosen backfill property should be checked. The effect of backfilling in highwall mining was investigated by numerical analysis. Calibration of coal parameters was conducted against the new empirical pillar strength formula. Three sets of backfill including cohesive backfill with UCS of 0.5 The modelling results indicate that the behavior of pillar varies with the type and amount of backfill as well as their Based on the results, different backfilling strategies should be considered on a case by case basis depending on the type of backfill available and desired pillar dimension.