Peri-articular knee fractures in osteoporotic or osteoarthritic bone present a challenge to fixation, mobilisation or non-operative management. We present a series of 15 proximal tibial and 11 distal femoral fractures treated with total knee arthroplasty at over mean follow-up period of 38.8 months. The mean age of the patients was 80 years. The choice of the implant and level of constraint was determined as per the nature of injury and preference of the surgeon dealing with the fracture. Patients were allowed rapid mobilisation with immediate full weight-bearing. Good clinical results were achieved with fracture healing, sound fixation and well-aligned flexible knees. Mean Knee Society knee score was 90.2; Knee Society function score was 35.5; Oxford Knee score was 39.5; and Short Form (SF)-36 physical function score was 37.3 and mental score 50.6. Good correlation was noted between Knee society knee score and SF-36 physical function score (Pearson's 0.76, p
                     =0.001), suggesting that generic health would dictate the final function achieved, whilst high knee scores suggest the satisfactory results of the operation. Analogous to arthroplasty for hip fractures, this technique should be considered as a treatment option in elderly peri-articular knee fractures with osteoporosis and/or osteoarthritis.Peri-articular knee fractures in the elderly are difficult to deal with because of poor bone quality, pre-existing arthritis, comminution and osteochondral damage at time of injury. Any intervention in this category of patients should ideally allow immediate fracture stability for early mobilisation and early return to pre-injury functional level. Total knee replacement (TKR) is one viable option for this group of patients. We analysed our early results of primary TKR for peri-articular knee fractures with underlying osteoarthritis/osteoporosis in patients above the age of 65 years. Between May 2000 and December 2008, 26 patients with peri-articular knee fractures and evidence of osteopenia or arthritis or osteoporosis were treated with primary total knee arthroplasty. Patients were identified from theatre records and operative data obtained from their medical notes. Fractures were classified according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) system. As per hospital protocol, patients were reviewed postoperatively in the clinic and scored according to the American Knee Society Clinical Rating Score, The data obtained from the medical notes were categorised into demographic data, short-term outcome measures and medium-term outcome measures, as outlined by Pearse et al. Medium-term outcome measures were patient satisfaction, the range of knee movement and the various clinical scores measured at assessment. The American Knee Society Clinical Rating Scoring system has two components: the Knee score rating the knee itself and the Functional score that assesses the patient's ability to walk and climb stairs. Physical and mental functional assessment was also carried out by the SF-36 health score. The mean age of the patients at the time of surgery was 80 years (67–92). The mean follow-up was 38.8 months (12–104), with minimum follow-up of 12 months. Left: right knee ratio was 16:10 and the female: male ratio was 25:1. The proximal tibia was fractured in 15 patients and the distal femur in 11 cases. All patients presented after a low-energy injury resulting in the fracture, except one patient who was involved in a road traffic accident. The fracture distribution is as shown in All patients had a midline skin incision and medial parapatellar approach. Choice of the implant and level of constraint was determined as per the nature of injury and preference of the surgeon dealing with the fracture. Wedges, augments and bone graft were used when appropriate. Patients were allowed rapid mobilisation with immediate full weight-bearing. Mean (and median) time to walking postoperatively was 6 (4) days (1–31 days, 31 days was in the patient with bilateral knee operations). Mean (and median) time to independent walking was 24.1 (18.5) days. One patient died on the first postoperative day from acute left-ventricular failure because of ischaemic heart disease. Mean surgical delay was 4 days (1–16), and mean discharge duration to appropriate facility was 33 days post surgery (7–93). One patient developed wound-healing problems, which ultimately healed but with a dysfunctional extensor apparatus. There were no long-term infections. A further four patients had died at the time of follow-up assessment, all at more than 90 days after surgery. Two patients had dementia, and therefore it was not possible to complete the Oxford knee score and SF-36 score. One patient was not able to attend the clinic, because of medical reasons but was otherwise doing well as regards the knee. Complete functional scores were, therefore, available for 18 patients. Other medium-term follow-up data were available for 21 surviving patients. At last assessment, one patient was wheelchair bound, five used Zimmer frames, five used sticks/crutches and rest walked independently without any external aids. Seventeen of 21 (81%) patients returned to their preoperative functional level (as per the ability to walk independently or with help of various aids) after surgery. Nineteen of 21 (90%) patients were satisfied with the outcome (excluding two patients with dementia, one of whom had developed wound problems after surgery). Mean range of movement was 87.3°. Correlation analyses revealed that the SF-36 physical function score showed good correlation with the Knee Society function score (Pearson's 0.76, There was no radiographic evidence of loosening. Fracture healing was seen in all cases. There was no change in the alignment of the prostheses with no evidence of migration. TKR for peri-articular knee fractures is not a new concept but is seemingly under reported. We have demonstrated good results in these complex fractures in a challenging group of patients. TKR is a good pain-relieving operation with mean Knee Society knee score of 90.2. However, the overall functional status of these patients remained suboptimum as reflected by low Knee Society function score and SF-36 physical function score. This was possibly because of lower functional ability of this group of elderly, frail patients. Peri-articular fractures around the knee in the geriatric population are associated with a high incidence of postoperative complications and poor results. Nonunion, loss of fixation and malunion of these fractures occur with all types of treatment. The postoperative treatment after fixation of these fractures demands a lengthy period of limited weight-bearing that can increase the rate of medical complications. TKR allows elimination of fracture-healing issues, early mobilisation and immediate weight-bearing. Over the past decade, locking plates have become popular for the treatment of complex fractures of the distal femur and proximal tibia. There are several reports in the literature with satisfactory results after primary knee replacement in a select group of patients. Some concern has been expressed with regard to technical difficulties associated with the use of post-stabilised implants for the procedure, especially with respect to soft-tissue balancing and bony cuts. Rosen et al. Pearse et al. Appleton Experience of using hinged knees for peri-articular knee fractures, as seen from the studies mentioned above, has been satisfactory with respect to immediate stability and early mobility. Some studies in the past, however, have shown poor results with hinged knee replacements for degenerative disease, especially with respect to increase incidence of loosening. In our series, the knee range of motion ranged from 45 to 110° (mean 87.3°). There was 90% patient satisfaction with 81% return to pre-injury level of function. The average time to independent walking was around 18 days. Except for the patient who died, there were no major medical complications in the immediate postoperative period. The overall functional status is determined to a large extent by the general health status of the patient, as shown by the good correlation between SF-36 physical function score and Knee Society functional score (Pearson's correlation coefficient 0.76, The study is an observational study with no control group, but despite these limitations, the medium-term results are very encouraging and have influenced our practice for this select group of patients. We agree with the previous authors that, for distal femoral fractures, some form of hinged knee replacement to account for the loss of bone stock and ligamentous support is essential. These prostheses have stemmed tibial and femoral components. As for the proximal tibial fractures, a posterior stabilised modular prosthesis with stemmed tibia has, in our hands, produced good results, although we have noted equally good results with cemented rotating-hinge type of implant (LINK None. None.