In order to investigate the mechanism of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) influencing sludge characteristics, variations of extractable EPS from municipal sewage sludge by acid/alkaline pretreatment and gamma-ray irradiation were studied. The changes in constituents of EPS were analyzed by UV–vis spectra and SEM images. The effects of alkaline pretreatment and gamma-ray irradiation on the functional groups in EPS were investigated by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Results showed that the extractable EPS increased clearly with increasing irradiation dose from 0 to 15kGy. UV–vis spectra indicated that a new absorption band from 240nm to 300nm existed in all irradiated samples, apart from acid condition. The results of FTIR spectroscopic analysis indicated that, irradiation influenced major functional groups in EPS, such as protein and polysaccharide, and these effects were clearer under alkaline condition. SEM images provided that after alkaline hydrolysis, gamma-ray irradiation was more effective in resulting in the sludge flocs and cells broken, compared with acid pretreatment (pH 2.50).Sludge extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) is a predominant sludge flocs component. It accumulates on bacterial cell surfaces and is regarded as “cells′ small house” ( There are a few views on the effects of EPS on sewage sludge.  The sewage sludge was obtained from a municipal wastewater treatment plant with A The Acid/alkaline pretreatment: 2 These samples were cultured at 50 Extraction and analysis of EPS: sewage sludge samples by acid/alkaline pretreatment and gamma-ray irradiation were centrifuged at 3000 SEM analysis: the variations of EPS were provided by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta-200, USA) before and after EPS extraction under different conditions. After acid/alkaline pretreatment and gamma-ray irradiation, the UV–vis spectra of EPS are shown in After irradiation, absorption peak in UV–vis spectra of EPS all appeared at 260 When pure water or aqueous solutions, such as sewage sludge is irradiated by gamma-ray irradiation, the following chemical species are formed (Eq. The output of radiolysis products Irradiation at pH 2.5. Under strong acid condition (pH<3), e Irradiation at pH 7.52 and 9.8. The output of Irradiation at pH 11.8. Under strong alkaline condition (pH>11), the output of Apart from the transformations among radicals species under strong alkaline condition, it could be postulated that alkaline treatment could make sludge components become more vulnerable when accepting attraction from free radicals, including flocs scattering and stereo macromolecule spreading ( In addition, according to the solubilization rate of COD (SCOD), when compared alkaline hydrolysis effects among KOH, NaOH, Mg(OH) FTIR spectra of EPS extracted under different irradiation conditions are shown in After irradiation, compounds with POH groups which were in 2517 The SEM images showed a distinct difference in the appearance of the sludge flocs and cells ( The results of the study showed that an alkaline pretreatment and a gamma-ray irradiation treatment could solubilize a lot of EPS from sludge flocs and cells, leading to enhancement of sludge characteristics. The research was supported by