At the Boliden's concentrator in Aitik, bulk flotation constitutes an important part of the process for extracting valuable minerals from the ore. A series of flotation cells consists of five tanks connected in cascade with control valves between the tanks and a slowly varying flow of mineral slurry into the first tank. This paper deals with a comparative study of control strategies for level control in a flotation series in Aitik. The aim is to show the potential performance improvements taking into account couplings between the process state variables. Two control strategies are considered; a decoupling controller and a Linear quadratic (LQ) optimal multivariable controller. Experiments with both structures show a significant enhancement of the level control performance as compared to the original SISO design.This work deals with level control of flotation tanks at the Boliden's concentrator in Aitik. The background to the project is an article ( Today, the control strategy for many industrial plants is to employ PID controllers working in isolated SISO loops, and the concentrator in Aitik is no exception. This approach can be appropriate as long as the control loops are independent of each other. However, there are often interactions between process state variables which cannot be ignored if high control performance is to be achieved. In the present case, with a number of tanks coupled in cascade, the interaction between the process states via material flow is obvious. The goal of this work is to show the advantages of a multivariable control strategy in front of single control loops for the control of the pulp levels in a flotation series. Aspects such as complexity and implementation difficulties are also considered in determining which of the strategies is the best. In the following sections, a discussion of different control strategies for level control of flotation tanks is given. The outline of the paper is as follows. In The mine in Aitik is an open pit and was put into operation in 1968. The value mineral in the ore is CuFeS There are four main steps in the procedure of extracting the value mineral from the ore. These are crossing, grinding, flotation and dewatering. Without going deeper into a description of all those steps, it can be stated that the flotation step plays a very important role for the overall function of the concentrator. Flotation roughly means that valuable mineral particles, that are dispersed in the pulp, are made to cluster to air bubbles which then bring them up to the surface. Most minerals, though, are naturally hydrophilic for which reason air cannot attach to them. For the purpose of eliminating this hydrophilic property, chemical substances called collecting reagents are added to the pulp. The bubbles are generated through air injection via rotors situated at the bottom of each cell. In order to decrease the surface tension and make up a froth coating on the surface, strong enough to bear the mineral particles, further reagents are added. By means of adjusting the pulp levels, froth, which contains the value minerals, is made to flow over the edge of the flotation cells for further concentration. It is then important to maintain correct and stable pulp levels in the tanks to assure that a sufficient part of the valuable froth will flow out from the cells without causing pulp to follow the stream. A general treatment of the principles of flotation is given in e.g. Of course there are many other factors that will affect the efficiency of the flotation stage as well. However, tight and reliable level control is a fundamental part of the whole process. The problem at hand is to evaluate and test multivariable control designs in order to improve the level control of a flotation series at the concentrator in Aitik. The controller has to maintain stable levels in all tanks despite flow variations into the first tank. Further, set point changes in a tank are to be handled fast and without causing excessive influence on the levels for the rest of the series. An improved controller should then be implemented into the existing control system and evaluated practically. The derivation of a mathematical model for the tank process is based on The mathematical relationships for the input and output signals are derived from physical modeling of incoming and outgoing flows under consideration of Toricelli's principle ( The nonlinearities in these equations are derived from the valve functions describing the relationship between flow rate and level difference over the valve. The relationship between flow rate and control signal is however, linear. Practical identification experiments have shown that this is a good approximation in the normal working range. The complete model has also been verified against logged data with good agreement of the dynamic properties. In one of the design methods described in the next section, it is necessary to have linear state-space description of the process. Therefore, the nonlinear model (1) is linearized around a working point. The resulting state-space model is In In this section, the existing control strategy is first explained, and thereafter two controller design methods intended to improve the existing strategy are presented. These are the decoupling controller and the LQ optimal multivariable controller. The resulting controller from both these design methods is a MIMO controller. As already mentioned, the existing control strategy is a SISO design with a single PI controller for each of the five tanks. The pulp level is measured by a float sensor and, after lowpass filtering, the signal is sent to the PI control algorithm. It is also possible to let the control signal pass a look-up table before acting on the valves in order to compensate for nonlinearities that may occur there. The initial tuning of the PI controllers was done using the ABB product The principle of the decoupling controller, as treated in for example For this process, a decoupling controller has been designed based on the nonlinear process model (1). In the derivation of the decoupling algorithm, only three tanks at a time have to taken into consideration, according to To handle flow variations into the first tank, the decoupling controller is combined with a flow feedforward, which is also based on (1). Due to the decoupling, the feedforward has only to affect the control valve of the first tank. The advantages and disadvantages of the decoupling controller in short are the following:  Simple structure which is easy to implement. Good performance if the model is correct. The existing PI-controllers can be used.  The control performance is sensitive to model uncertainties as discussed in The LQ controller is a linear multivariable state feedback controller that is optimal in the sense that it minimizes the loss function It can be shown, see for example To reject constant disturbances, integral action is included in the controller. The model (6) is therefore augmented with five states describing the integral of the control error according to The advantages and disadvantages of the LQ controller can be summarized as follows:  The controller takes into consideration the interactions in the process. It is possible to design the controller to give a tighter control in a single tank (for example in the last tank) for the price of weaker control in other tanks. This is often desirable for process technical reasons. The controller is, due to the feedback, more robust to model uncertainties compared to the decoupling controller.  The controller is difficult to implement in certain PLC systems. The performance with the nominal model seems to be somewhat poorer than for the decoupling controller if one considers the series as a whole. It is however important to bear in mind that the LQ controller was not designed to achieve a decoupling of the tanks. The results from practical performance tests of the LQ controller are given in After design and simulations, the two control strategies have been tested in practice. The decoupling controller has been implemented in the existing PLC system, ABB Master, and the LQ controller has been implemented by means of an external PC communicating with the ABB Master system, due to implementation difficulties in PLC. To compare the control performances under similar conditions, a test script has been used. The test script changes the set points in the tanks and the flow into the series according to a certain scheme give in It is obvious from these figures that both the decoupling controller and the LQ controller provide a substantial improvement in the level control compared to the SISO strategy. It is also clear that the tightest control in the last tank is obtained with the LQ controller designed with a larger weight of control error in the last tank. The conclusions drawn from this work are that the original SISO control strategy cannot even come close to the performance delivered by any of the MIMO controllers discussed above. This depends on the strong interactions between the tanks which are not taken into consideration in a SISO design. If a comparison is made between the two MIMO controllers the following conclusions can be drawn: The decoupling controller has good performance if one considers the series as a whole. The condition though is that the process parameters do not change with time because of rather high sensitivity to modeling errors. The LQ controller is preferable if the demand for good level control in one tank is higher than for the other tanks. Implementation difficulties in, for example, PLC based systems are however a drawback. The decoupling has been implemented permanently into the ABB Master control system and has, when this article is written, been in operation for about five months without any problems reported so far. The authors would like to thank Boliden Mineral AB for making the flotation series at the concentrator in Aitik available during the experiments. Particularly, special thanks to Dan Rönnqvist who helped with practical details that had to be solved for performing the experiments and Urban Olofsson who helped with the implementation of the controllers and gave valuable feedback during the work. Financial support of the Center for process and system automation (ProSA) at Luleå University of Technology provided by