Dear Sir, With reference to the paper Cilek, E.C., Umucu Y. 2001. A statistical model for gangue entrainment into froths in flotation of sulphide ores. Min. Eng. vol. 14(9), pp. 1055–1066. Eq. (6) p. 1063 is clearly wrong and does not produce the values of    Kind regards, Martyn Hay, 25th June 2009. Dear Editor, The author thanks Mr. Martyn Hay for his interest in the paper, and I will attempt to answer his queries as follows: The equation is not flawed. Building of the entrainment equation (Eq. (6)) was clearly described in the paper. I checked out the equation again and I am sure that the correct form of the equation was presented in the paper. However, a flawed value of the estimated gangue recovery is determined in Table 4, which can be happen accidentally. The estimated gangue recovery calculated by Eq. (6) for the additional test 1 in Table 4 (first line of the calculated gangue recovery column in this table) read 4.931%. It should have read 0.4931%. I have to express that I have been unaware of this mistake in Table 4. For this reason, The author thanks Mr. Hay. But other gangue recovery calculations presented in Table 4 can be correctly calculated by using Eq. (6). At this point, it should be noted that input of In addition, Mr. Hay stated that “ It must be noted that similar discussions and conclusions can be found in the literature. For example, Thank you for the opportunity to respond. Yours sincerely, Emin Cafer Cilek, 2nd July 2009. Dear Dr. Cilek, Thanks for a copy of your letter. However I feel it is unsatisfactory and skirts around the real problem regarding the confusion of using Eq. (6). A simple straightforward statement should be made that “x” (% solids) is incorrectly stated in the paper as being in% whereas it should be input into Eq. (6) as a fraction. Also that no units are specified for An error has been made. Rather state it clearly, then state the correction and finish. Writing a long letter over such a simple thing just confuses the readers and the issue and serves no purpose. My advice is keep it simple. Martyn Hay, 3rd July 2009. Dear Mr. Hay, Thank you for your advice. But, you have to sure that I did not write the letter to confuse the readers. I just try to attempt your comments. Therefore, I think it did not skirt around the real problem. Yes, an error has been made in the paper about units of the parameters used in the equation and you have found it. I appreciate you for this. It was corrected in the letter. However, your correspondence is not only related the error in the equation but also it contains some other comments. As you remember, your letter say: “ Emin Cafer Cilek, 3rd July 2009.