This study has been made of the leaching process to reduce carbonate content in calcareous phosphate rock using lactic acid. The samples mineralogical constituents were apatite, calcite, quartz and dolomite. In this study, the effect of important variables such as reaction time, acid concentration, liquid/solid ratio, particle size and temperature in laboratory scale was optimized. It was found that the leaching rate of carbonate material increased with increasing the acid concentration, temperature, reaction time and decreasing solid/liquid ratio and particle size. The experimental data were tested through graphic and statistical methods and a shrinking core kinetics model was presented to describe the dissolution and to analyze the data. The activation energy for leaching was found to be 43.58kJ/mol and, consequently, the rate of the reaction based on a chemical reaction-controlled process could be expressed as 1−(1−
                     α)1/3
                     =6.05×106
                     e−43.58/RT
                     
                     t.Phosphate rocks are vital nonrenewable resources and essential components in fertilizers and phosphorous-based chemicals. It is neither substitutable nor recyclable. Therefore, the total demand must be provided through the mining, beneficiation and chemical processing of natural resource. Phosphate rock requires processing to reduce the content of gangue minerals such as carbonates, silicates, feldspar, mica, calcite, dolomite and clays to meet the requirements of the phosphate industry. Also, they should not contain more than 8% carbonates in order to be economical ( For igneous phosphate ores, flotation is the best approach, but in the sedimentary phosphate ores, the separation of phosphate from carbonate using flotation is extremely complex due to their similarities in physico chemical and surface properties of constituent minerals ( Depending on the reaction conditions, nature, and size of the particles, organic acids can be used as promising leaching agents for the phosphate rock beneficiation ( This investigation is focused on the application of the leaching method to process the samples taken from Dalir phosphate ore mine, which is located in Chaluse, Iran. Dalir mine is a low-grade phosphate ore with high carbonate content. It has about 81 million tons of phosphate ore reserves and is the largest phosphate deposit in Iran ( The objectives of this study were to investigate the main factors involved in the leaching process and also to determine what mechanism controls the rate of dissolution of carbonate minerals and which kinetic model can be applied.  The chemical analysis of representative sample taken from Dalir phosphate mine was carried out for each collected fraction to determine P The +24 mesh (+0.701 In addition, after leaching, for each experiment, the recovery of P For leaching studies, the phosphate samples were crushed and then sieved. The 100–140 A known amount of 1.2 molar (M) lactic acid with liquid/solid (L/S) ratio of 8:1 was slowly pipetted into the reactor vessel containing 4.0 Then, the products were analyzed for P The reaction between lactic acid and calcareous materials is presented as follows: A number of experiments were performed to see the effect of leaching reaction time on the dissolution of calcareous material at varying acid concentration, liquid/solid ratio, particle size and reaction temperature as shown  As shown in Any increase in the acid concentration to more than >1.2 The leaching rate of calcareous material and its efficiency increased with a decrease in particle size as shown in The leaching process overall efficiency increased by further size reduction and fine grinding of the phosphate feed but the problems related to handling, filtration, and marketing of fine phosphate may not allow grinding to exceed a certain limit. On the other hand, higher amount of energy for grinding and size reduction would cause an extra cost to the process. To see the effect of reaction time on the dissolution of calcareous material, at various reaction temperatures, a number of experiments were carried out at specific reaction conditions as shown in Depending on acid concentration, liquid/solid ratio, reaction temperature and particle size used in the leaching process, a number of experiments were carried out to study the effect of reaction time on P After 60 In solid–liquid heterogeneous reactions, the soluble reactants diffuse across the interface and/or through the porous solid layer and then chemical reactions occur. In a fluid–solid reaction system, the shrinking core model considers that the leaching process and its rate is controlled either by the diffusion of reactant through the solution boundary layer, or through a solid product layer, or by rate of the chemical reaction at the surface of the core of unreacted particles. The rate of the process is controlled by the slowest of these sequential steps ( The reaction model between a fluid and a solid may be written as ( In order to determine the kinetic parameters and rate controlling step, the experimental data was analyzed on the basis of Eq. These results indicate that the dissolution rate of carbonates was controlled by surface chemical reactions. At various reaction temperatures, using a specific size range of particles and the acid concentration under known liquid/solid ratio, the plot of 1 This value of activation energy clearly suggests the chemical reaction control for the process ( The value of activation energy in the dissolution process may be characterized to predict the controlling step. The activation energy of a diffusion-controlled process is typically from 4 to 12 In this experimental investigation, the factors that might affect the leaching of Dalir phosphate mine samples using lactic acid and the dissolution kinetics have been studied. The following conclusions can be drawn: Leaching of the Dalir samples in the optimum selective leaching conditions, −140 The dissolution kinetics of the calcareous material with lactic acid solution was found to fit the shrinking core model for a reaction-controlled process. The activation energy was found to be 43.58