In this study, the effect of cationic guar gum in the flotation separation of galena from sphalerite when diethyldithiocarbamate acted as galena collector was investigated, mainly through flotation tests and ToF-SIMS analysis. The flotation results showed that the cationic guar gum could selectively depress the sphalerite flotation and enhance the preferential flotation of galena only when it was added after collector diethyldithiocarbamate. The ToF-SIMS analysis found that addition of cationic guar gum after diethyldithiocarbamate exhibited no effect on the collector adsorption on galena surface but could selectively inhibit the collector coverage on sphalerite surface, and further result in the floatability difference.Galena and sphalerite usually coexist closely in polymetallic sulphide ores. The flotation separation of Pb-Zn sulfides has been largely achieved by depressing sphalerite using inorganic depressants, such as ZnSO GG is a typical kind of polysaccharide widely existed in the plants. There exists a number of hydroxyl groups in its molecule, which has the potential of bonding the metal sites on mineral surface and being used as modifiers in the field of flotation. However, there is no published papers about utilizing GG as depressant in the separation of galena and sphalerite, especially on how the addition order of the depressant GG and collector affects the separation result. In this study, guar hydroxypropyltrimethylammonium chloride (cationic guar gum, CGG), which was prepared by etherification of GG and quaternary ammonium cationic etherifying agent, was introduced as a depressant for sphalerite in the flotation of galena using sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (DTC) as galena collector. The flotation behaviour of galena and sphalerite with different addition order of DTC and CGG was studied, coupled with adsorption difference of CGG on galena and sphalerite surface characterized by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) analysis. Galena and sphalerite samples used in this study were obtained from Tieling, China. The −74 + 38 μm size mineral samples were prepared by crushing, dry grinding and sieving. The purities of the galena and sphalerite samples were 98.02% and 96.13% respectively, according to the X-ray diffraction results and the chemical analysis results. The CGG used as the depressant was provided by BGRIMM Technology Group, Beijing, China. DTC used as collector and pine oil used as frother were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China. All the above flotation reagents used were chemical pure. Deionized water (Resistivity = 18.2 MΩ·cm) was used for all tests. Micro-flotation tests were conducted by using an XFG flotation machine (Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, China), equipped with a plexiglass flotation cell (40 mL) at an agitation rate of 1800 rpm. For single mineral flotation test, the flotation slurry was prepared by adding 2.0 g of mineral samples into the cell and dispersing with 40 mL deionized water at 1800 rpm. After 1 min conditioning, the CGG and DTC were added at a desired concentration and order. The conditioning time for each reagent was 2 min. The flotation began 1 min after pine oil was added and lasted for 3 min. After flotation, the concentrate and tailing were collected, filtered, dried and weighed, respectively. The flotation recovery was calculated based on the weight distributions between the two flotation products. For the mixed binary mineral flotation tests, the mass ratio of galena and sphalerite was 1:1 in the flotation feed (1.0 g galena + 1.0 g sphalerite). The flotation operation was the same as the above introduction. After flotation, the froth products and the solids remained in the cell were separately collected, weighed and assayed for Pb and Zn, based on which the product grade and flotation recovery was calculated. ToF-SIMS depth profiling were performed using a ToF-SIMS V (ION-TOF GmbH, Münster, Germany) spectrometer, equipped with 15 keV Bi The flotation performance of galena and sphalerite with different reagent addition order at pH 8 (natural pH of the slurry), as a function of CGG dosage was studied, and the results are shown in As shown in The flotation results of single mineral samples have implied that it is possible to separate galena from sphalerite by using CGG as depressant with suitable reagent addition order. Therefore, the separation tests on mixed binary minerals were performed and the results are shown in In order to explain the effect of the addition order on the separation results reflected in the aforementioned flotation tests, the adsorption difference between different addition order on galena and sphalerite surfaces was studied by ToF-SIMS depth profiling. In the 3D images shown in The NI results and the 3D images of the fragments ions shown in CGG was explored to be a selective sphalerite depressant in the flotation separation of galena from sphalerite when DTC acted as the collector. The addition order of these two reagents could exhibit significant influence on the separation efficiency. Only when CGG was added after DTC could realize the preferential flotation separation of galena from the galena-sphalerite mixed minerals. The ToF-SIMS analysis preliminarily found that there existed remarkable adsorption difference between CGG and DTC on both mineral surfaces as the addition order varied. For galena, addition order of CGG after DTC could exhibit more collector adsorption on galena surface than CGG before DTC, while for sphalerite, both addition order presented weak collector coverage on its surface, and further resulted in the flotability difference. The adsorption difference might be dominated by the interactions between reagents and galena/sphalerite on the water/particle interfaces, and need further investigations.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: