In the present study, influence of different stages of recrystallization process and subsequent aging treatment on the superelastic properties of Ni-rich NiTi shape memory wires is investigated. Characteristics of transformation temperatures were determined using differential scanning calorimetry. Results indicate that annihilation of cold work effects after annealing results in changes on the features of DSC curves. The amount of residual strain is higher in the samples with cold work value of ε
                     =0.6 compared to the samples with ε
                     =0.4. The combination of annealing and aging treatment leads to improve in the superelastic properties. Results showed that different stages of the recrystallization process would affect the precipitation process in subsequent aging treatment.Nickel–titanium alloys have great utilization in technology and medical applications due to unique functional properties such as shape memory effect (SME) and superelasticity accompanied with good biocompatibility and high corrosion resistance It is well known that, Ni-rich NiTi alloys are capable of developing Ni It is declared that cold deformation up to 40% results in work hardening while more increase in the cold work amount does not significantly affect the mechanical properties of NiTi alloys Finally, it seems that different density of lattice defects that varies during recrystallization and development of precipitates during subsequent aging treatment could strongly affect the superelastic properties. NiTi wires with nominal composition of 50.9 In order to better understanding the recrystallization process, electrical resistance was measured at 600 Optical microstructural evaluation was performed after grinding, electro-polishing and chemical etching of the samples. Electro-polishing treatment was carried out using a 21% perchloric acid and 79% acetic acid at 10.5 Tensile tests were carried out at 37 Differential scanning calorimetry was performed in helium atmosphere with a cooling and heating rate of 10   In order to clarify the different annealing stages, in situ electrical resistance measurements were performed on the cold drawn NiTi wires. According to the previous work Optical micrographs of the samples A  As shown in As it can be seen from Increasing the annealing time from 10 to 90  As it can be seen from Another reason for appearing the second and third peaks in the DSC curves might be the formation of Ni The DSC curves of the samples  It is well known that in the presence of fine and coherent Ni In the samples Finally, it seems rational that the change in grain size and homogeneity during the recrystallization process would affect the subsequent precipitation process. As a result, by controlling the recrystallization process, the transformation temperatures could be controlled more efficiently in the subsequent aging process. In the present study, the samples were divided into two series. Both series were annealed at 600 In the sample with Grain size and chemical composition heterogeneity leads to the multi-step transformations during cooling stage of the samples in long-time annealed samples. Superelastic behavior of the annealed samples can be significantly improved by post aging treatment and controlled recrystallization process could result in more controlled transformation temperature.