Thin films of undoped and Ca-doped SnO2 were deposited by ion beam sputtering (IBS). The films annealed at 650°C possess good adhesion and only SnO2 single-phase. The CH4 sensitivities of a thin film sensor are mainly affected by surface roughness together with agglomeration of primary particles of SnO2. The highly dense, single-phase SnO2 film sensors exhibit greatly excellent long-term stability. Differently from the sensing behaviors for a sintered or a thick film sensor, Ca addition to SnO2 as a crystallite growth inhibitor causes lower sensitivity for the thin film sensor.Recent development of fabrication process for gas sensors is focused on miniaturization, low power consumption, and integration. Thin film type gas sensor has these advantages, as thin solid film deposition techniques are very compatible with standard microelectronic technology. Thin oxide film on a nonconductor for gas sensors is formed by various technologies Ion beam sputtering (IBS) offers significant advantages In this work, thin films of undoped and Ca-doped SnO Pure SnO 0.1 The target, from which the films were deposited, was made by sintering a cold isostatic pressed (CIP) sample of SnO A cross-section of a sensor is illustrated in Adhesive coatings are essential for the fabrication of a miniaturized device. Adhesion strength between thin film and substrate can be qualitatively measured by adhesive tape pull test Adhesion strengths deposited by ion beam sputtering and RF magnetron sputtering were compared using the cross-cut and the Vickers indentation tests. 3 Sensing characteristics of a thin film gas sensor are significantly influenced by chemical and physical structures of the film. As-sputtered films are amorphous and insensitive to a reducing gas. Thus, the films were annealed at various temperatures for 5 Annealing of as-sputtered film was performed in air to produce large specific surface area that is essential to highly sensitive sensors.  Gas sensitivity of a SnO Variation of gas sensitivity with operating temperature was investigated. Gas concentration characteristics of SnO It has been reported that gas sensitivity of SnO  Gas concentration characteristics are given in  Undoped and Ca-doped SnO Differently from the sensing behavior of a sintered thick film sensor, Ca addition to SnO The highly dense, single-phase SnO This research was supported by the Yeungnam University research grant in 2003.