The photocatalytic transformation of the pesticide 4,6-dinitro-o-cresol (DNOC) over irradiated TiO2 suspensions was investigated in aerated aqueous solutions. Complete and relatively fast substrate degradation was achieved after irradiation with simulated solar light, being the reaction rate dependent on the initial pH. The slower evolution of the mineralization process, which can be accomplished after longer irradiation times, was evidenced by monitoring the dissolved organic carbon decrease and the formation of nitrogen inorganic products.
                  Both the analysis of the reaction end-products and the HPLC–MS characterization of the organic intermediates are consistent with a reaction mechanism where the hydroxylation of the aromatic ring and the oxidation of the methyl group can play a major role as initial reaction steps and occur at comparable rates. The direct reduction of nitro groups at the semiconductor surface to form ammonium ion, inferred from the MS analysis of minor aromatic intermediates, appears to be another viable reaction path.
                  The nearly quantitative mineralization of the pesticide has been observed after long term (3h) irradiation, time after which no aromatic products were detected.For several decades in the past century, 4,6-dinitro- Due to its relatively low p The removal of DNOC from aqueous media can be performed using different techniques including biological treatments, physical phase-transfer methods or application of destructive techniques leading to the decomposition of the pollutant molecule. Heterogeneous photocatalysis, a very promising advanced oxidation process (AOP) developed in the past years, allows to perform the efficient degradation and in most cases the complete mineralization of a great variety of organic pollutants present at low concentration levels in aqueous wastes The fundamentals of photocatalysis, abundantly described in the literature, can be summarised as follows: irradiation with light of wavelength of energy higher than the band-gap causes electron excitation from the semiconductor valence band to the conduction band, generating electron–holes pairs. Both electrons and holes migrate to the surface of the semiconductor particles, where they can react with water, dissolved oxygen and surface OH groups to form various oxidising species, including the highly reactive hydroxyl radicals, whereas superoxide and perhydroxyl radicals are formed from the reaction of excited electrons with oxygen. The reactive oxygen-containing species can attack and oxidise the organic molecules, generally leading to a complete mineralization of the substrate. To our knowledge, no studies on photocatalytic degradation of DNOC have been reported in the literature until now, although other molecules having similar structures (in particular nitrophenols In the present work, we investigated the photocatalytic degradation of DNOC, present in anionic or in undissociate form in aqueous solutions. The effect of initial pH on the kinetics of DNOC abatement was examined, together with the formation and evolution of the end-products arising from the substrate mineralization. In order to give insight into the mechanism of the crucial initial steps of the reaction, subject often disregarded in most similar studies, particular attention was devoted to the identification of the organic intermediates formed before the aromatic ring opening. DNOC (purity 91.5%; water 9 The photocatalyst was TiO Acetonitrile (Lichrosolv, Merck) and acetic acid (Merck) were employed as LC eluents. Na A Milli-Q water purification system (Millipore) provided the water used for all solutions and suspensions. All irradiations were performed in stirred cylindrical closed cells (40 The samples were filtered through a cellulose acetate membrane (HA 0.45 The substrate degradation was followed by HPLC, employing a Merck-Hitachi instrument, equipped with a L-6200 pump and UV–vis L-4200 detector. A column RP-C18 (Lichrospher, 4 The formation of ionic products was followed by a suppressed ion chromatography, employing a Dionex DX 500 instrument equipped with a conductimeter detector (ED 40, Dionex). The anions (nitrate and nitrite) have been analysed by using an AS9HC anionic column (200 The evolution of the dissolved organic carbon (DOC) during the photocatalytic runs was followed using a Shimadzu 5000 TOC analyzer (catalytic oxidation on Pt at 680 The analysis of intermedies were performed on 20 Solvent A was an aqueous solution of acetic acid 1% (w/v) and solvent B was CH Solvent A was an aqueous solution of triethylamine 0.1% (w/v) and solvent B was CH The mass spectrometer was operated in the negative scan mode; mass number ( All LC elutions were carried out using a Lichrospher Merck RP 18 column (250.0 Before to start with the photocatalytic runs some blank experiments on DNOC were performed in the dark, in the absence of TiO The possible adsorption of DNOC on TiO The photocatalytic degradation was investigated at different initial pH values: 3.0, 5.4 and 8.0; these conditions were chosen in order to consider different possible interactions between the substrate and the active semiconductor particles. Taking into account that the measured isoelectric point of the employed TiO At pH 3.0 the semiconductor particles are positively charged and the substrate is present in its undissociated form, whereas at pH 5.4 and 8.0 DNOC is mainly present in its anionic form, being the charge of TiO  The analysis of the primary process reveals a progressive increase of the degradation rate with increasing initial pH, From the above pH data, the absence of attractive interactions between DNOC and TiO In addition to its expected major role on substrate adsorption, the pH can also influence the occurring electron transfer processes However, This radical gives rise to the formation of H The observed increase of DNOC degradation rate with increasing pH can be justified taking into account that the unfavourable repulsive effects between negatively charged TiO It is well known from the literature  Nitrite concentration increases until a maximum value, but decreases rapidly and vanishes with subsequent irradiation due to further oxidation of this product to NO As far as the formation of NO If the release of total inorganic nitrogen is considered (see The perusal of Anyway, the nitrogen mass-balance at longer irradiation times confirms (within the uncertainties of the analytical methods employed) the almost stoichiometric mineralization of this component, also taking into account that the formation of low amounts of gaseous products such as N  Also here the observed incomplete DOC elimination after the DNOC abatement (the measured residual DOC is ca. 30, 40 and 50% at pHs 5.4, 8.0 and 3.0, respectively) can be attributed to the presence of residual organic compounds, which are in turn degraded more slowly. The appearance and evolution of some transient chromatographic peaks has been observed during the HPLC monitoring of the primary process. The investigation of the nature of these intermediates was performed via HPLC–DAD–MS analysis on solutions irradiated at the three pHs values examined. Samples were taken after 5 and 10  The MS analysis showed the presence of three main peaks, corresponding to the more abundant intermediates having 231, 213 and 211  It can be noticed that all the described intermediates are aromatic in nature, as confirmed by the diode-array analysis of the corresponding peaks, and most of them are consistent with structures still keeping one or two nitro groups. The chromatographic retention times of some of the observed peaks ( If the more abundant intermediates are considered, compound (8) corresponding to For the third abundant intermediate, corresponding to Since the presence of two nitro groups favours the oxidation of methyl group in respect to ring hydroxylation, the formation of compound (7) should be more probable. This hypothesis is supported by the identification of compounds (8) and (9), both confirmed through the analysis of the corresponding authentic standards. From compound (9), decarboxylation and hydroxylation processes can lead to the formation of the hypothesised compound (5). As far as the minor components is concerned, for The above discussed part of the Scheme evidenced therefore two possible degradation pathways: (i) the The formation of substrate derivatives still having one or two nitro groups before the break of the aromatic ring, sustained by the above discussed MS data, suggests that the elimination of nitrous acid as leaving group in DNOC is not so easy as mentioned in the case of simpler nitrophenolic molecules A third degradation path (iii) can lead to the elimination of one nitro group, accompanied by the hydroxylation of the molecule. This pathway, which is in agreement with the observed nitrite formation, lead us to propose the formation of compounds having the possible structures (11a), (11b) and (12); the same sequence of reactions could be reasonably invoked to justify the formation of the hypothesised derivatives (13a) and (13b) starting from the intermediate (8). The degradation path (iii) can further originate compounds (14a) and (14b), having Since compounds from (11) to (14) were detected at very low concentration levels, they have been discussed in the frame of a general possible mechanism without consider in detail which isomer could be effectively present. It must be noted that for each The photocatalytic degradation of DNOC is relatively fast (within 50–90 At reaction times corresponding to the end of the primary process the abatement of the aromatic transient intermediates was found to be complete, whereas the transformation of residual products coming from the ring opening into the inorganic end-products takes place more slowly. The nature of these compounds, as inferred from the analytical data is basically non-aromatic and then non-toxic. The evolution of inorganic nitrogen and DOC with time allows to estimate in more than 3 The authors thank Prof. M. Vincenti for helpful discussions about the MS data. Financial support from MIUR (Rome) is gratefully acknowledged by D.F., A.B.-P. and E.P. L.S.V and A.L.C thank CONICET (Grant PIP 2470/00) and ANPCyT (PICT 06-12610) and UNLP for the financial support.