Objective
                  We sought to evaluate the long-term C1-C2 fusion rates, fracture healing, and functional outcomes in geriatric patients with type II odontoid fracture treated with posterior fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-one consecutive patients between 2005 and 2011 with Anderson and D'Alonzo type II odontoid fracture underwent a posterior atlantoaxial fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws. A long-term clinical and radiologic follow-up was achieved in all patients with a mean follow-up period of 53.28 ± 15.41 months (range 38−91 months).
               
                  Results
                  All 21 patients had bilateral C1 lateral mass screws and bilateral C2 pars screws. Correct positioning of the C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws was observed in all 42 placements by postoperative computed tomography scans. No vascular or neurologic complication was noted. At the last follow-up, 20 patients (95.24%) had a solid fusion (defined as Lenke fusion grade A or B) while 1 patient (4.76%) had a partial fusion (Lenke fusion grade C). Overall, no hardware failures occurred in any patient. Odontoid fracture healing was achieved in 18 patients out of 21 (85.71%). The mean postoperative Neck Disability Index score was 12.73%, and neck motion was within normal physiologic limits at 12 months.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study adds to the evidence that posterior atlantoaxial fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws is a safe and effective surgical option in the treatment of odontoid fractures including long-term stability.Odontoid fractures are the most common cervical spine injuries in the elderly, accounting for 9%−15% of all fractures in this population. However, biomechanical studies have demonstrated that C2 pedicle screws provide greater rigidity and have higher load failures than pars screws. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term C1-C2 fusion rates and functional outcomes in geriatric patients with type II odontoid fracture treated with posterior fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws. The study includes a consecutive series of 21 patients, 15 male and 6 female, from 68−85 years old (mean 76.04 ± 4.69 standard deviation [SD]) who underwent posterior fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws. The patients were referred following cervical trauma resulting in Anderson and D'Alonzo type II odontoid fracture between January 2005 and December 2011. At admission the diagnosis was made radiographically, including standard anteroposterior, lateral, and open-mouth radiographs. In addition, a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan of the atlantoaxial complex with 3-dimensional reconstruction was performed to assess the individual fracture anatomy. All patients had a mixture of acute displaced (9/21) Anderson and D'Alonzo type II fracture of the dens or inveterate fracture (12/21) in which conservative treatment by external orthosis for a maximum of 3 months, as well as closed reduction, failed. The 9 patients with acute fracture were treated immediately because the fracture presented at least 1 of these conditions: posterior fracture displacement, displacement >5 mm, 10° of angulation, and fracture comminution. The first 8 patients presented pedicle hypoplasia or aberrant VA course that precluded C-2 pedicle screw placement, and we started to use C2 pars screws. In the remaining patients with normal anatomy, given the good interim results, we continued to use short pars screws. Age, sex, type of fracture, presenting symptoms, preoperative and follow-up American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale (ASIA), hospitalization length, operative time, lengths of screws, posterior fusion and construct stability, fracture healing, complications, and follow-up were evaluated in this study and are summarized in Patients were placed in a prone position on the operating table with the head fixed in neutral position in a Mayfield clamp. In cases of displaced odontoid fractures, no preoperative skeletal traction was applied and closed reduction was performed in the operating room. In these cases, after the patient was turned to a prone position on the operating table, the reduction was achieved by traction and flexion-extension of the Mayfield device under fluoroscopic control before initiation of the surgical procedure. According to the Harms and Melcher technique, Then the medial border of the C2 isthmus is exposed bilaterally. The starting point for C2 pars screw is located 5 mm inferior to the superior border of the C2 lamina and 7 mm lateral to the lateral border of the spinal canal. Starting more caudally in the lateral mass and using a steeper trajectory (not dissimilar to the trajectory of subaxial cervical transarticular screw) offers the longest length of bony purchase. The electric drill bit is advanced to 14–22 mm into the C2 pars. As suggested by Ebraheim et al., The laminae and joint surfaces of C1 and C2 are decorticated, and autologous bone graft obtained from the iliac crest is placed between the arch of C1 and the spinous process of C2 to promote fusion. The patients are mobilized on the first postoperative day in a Philadelphia collar, which is worn for 3 weeks. A postoperative CT scan is performed within 3 days to assess the position of the C1 and C2 screws, as well as the reduction of the dislocation. Twenty-one patients were treated with posterior fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws. Fifteen were men, and 6 were women. The average age of the patients was 76.04 ± 4.69 (SD) years with a range of 68−85 years. Nine patients presented displaced acute type II odontoid fractures ( A long-term clinical and radiologic follow-up was achieved in all patients with a mean follow-up period of 53.28 ± 15.41 months (range 38−91 months). In our series, 20 patients (95.24%) had a solid fusion (defined as Lenke fusion grade A or B) across the C1-C2 joints and/or at the posterior graft site while 1 patient (4.76%) had a partial fusion (Lenke fusion grade C). Overall, no hardware failures occurred in any patient and construct stability (defined by the absence of radiolucencies at the screw-bone interface, absence of hardware breakage or displacement, and displacement of bone fragments according to Payer et al At the last follow-up, all patients except 2 with a Neck Disability Index, respectively, of 60% and 40%, returned to their normal activities with either no neck pain or limited pain that resolved with OTC medications. Two patients with preoperative neurologic deficits had an improvement of 1 grade on the ASIA scoring system at the time of last follow-up evaluation. Four complications occurred in this elderly population. These complications included 1 transient hyponatremia (resolved), 1 hospital-acquired pneumonia, 1 urinary infection, and 1 wound infection (treated with antibiotic therapy). One patient experienced dysesthesia in the C2 dermatome. All these results are summarized in The technique of C1-C2 fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws is not new. The best management for type II geriatric odontoid fractures remains controversial and has been the topic of numerous studies in the past 20 years. Although surgical treatment is widely used in the clinical setting, the choice among different surgical procedures is still under debate. A posterior atlantoaxial fusion procedure with instrumentation has been a common surgical method for treating odontoid fractures. Although the use of this treatment does not directly address the fracture location, the same provides stability of the atlantoaxial complex with high rate of fusion and fracture healing. In our experience, the screw placement in C2 pars is a safe technique, especially in aging patients in which the peduncular bone was usually abnormal and frail due to osteoporosis with high risk of VA injury. In this regard, no screw malposition or VA injury occurred in our patients. The use of this technique was also associated with a short operative time and allowed an early mobilization with subsequent shorter hospital stay and complication rate related to immobilization. Another import issue is the fact that the published studies about the use of C2 pars screw reported various forms of atlantoaxial instability (and not only odontoid fractures) and a limited follow-up (mean 24 months). This study adds to the evidence that posterior atlantoaxial fixation with polyaxial C1 lateral mass screws and C2 pars screws is a safe and effective surgical option in the treatment of odontoid fractures including long-term follow-up. The use of C2 pars screws was associated in our experience with high rates of fusion and stability of the construct.