Groups of 8 lambs were allocated to one of five concentrate diets supplemented with all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate containing 30 (C30), 60 (C60), 120 (C120), 250 (C250) and 500 (C500) mg/kg dry matter. Two other groups were fed grass silage and 400g/day concentrate with 60 (S60) or 500 (S500) mg α-tocopheryl acetate/kg dry matter. Within diet, vitamin E level did not affect growth performance or carcass characteristics. Basal diet did not affect final live weight, conformation and fatness scores. M. semimembranosus from S lambs contained more α-tocopherol than that of C lambs on the same intake and by day 6 in MAP (75%O2/25%CO2) chroma and a* were below acceptable levels in C30 lambs. TBARS were higher in C30 and C60 muscle than in other treatments (P<0.001) after 3 and 6days display. Muscle fatty acid composition varied with basal diet but lipid oxidation depended more on vitamin E concentration with an initial concentration of 1.9μg/g muscle preventing significant lipid oxidation.Vitamin E is an essential nutrient that protects animals against oxidative damage to tissues ( The positive effects on meat quality of supplementing diets with vitamin E, usually as all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate, have been extensively studied in lamb, ( Only two studies of lamb have determined the optimum muscle concentration of vitamin E to protect against lipid and colour deterioration using a full dose response curve ( The work described in this paper was conducted in accordance with the requirements of the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. Five groups of 8 Suffolk At the end of the feeding period, the sheep were transferred to the University of Bristol abattoir, and, after an overnight lairage, sheep were slaughtered and eviscerated following the EU approved procedure. The pH of the At the end of the ageing period, steaks were removed from the vacuum-packs and subsequently repackaged in modified atmosphere packs (MAP). Leg steaks were placed individually on polystyrene trays, inserted into pouches with the same specifications as those used during ageing, flushed with a food grade modified atmosphere gas mixture (BOC Gases, Manchester, UK) of 75% O The leg steaks in MAP were subjected to simulated retail display (700 Lipid oxidation was determined by modifications to the method of Muscle vitamin E (α-tocopherol) was determined using a modification of the procedure described by Feed fatty acids were determined by a modification of the method of The fatty acids were methylated with a solution of diazomethane in diethyl ether and were analysed by gas liquid chromatography using a 50 Fatty acids were quantified by adding methyl heneicosoanate as an internal standard prior to hydrolysis of tissues or lipid extracts ( The individual animal was the experimental unit. One-way analysis of variance was used to analyse differences between treatments. The effects of diet, vitamin E level and the interactions between diet and vitamin E supplementation level were also analysed with two-way analysis of variance. Post-hoc analysis was undertaken using Tukey's test at a 5% level of significance. Pearsons correlations were calculated where necessary. Statistical software package SPSS version 13.0 (2004) for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used. Regression trend lines for figures were calculated and plotted using Microsoft Excel 2007. All samples were analysed in duplicate. Lambs fed the S diet started the trial approximately 8 As with animal performance, carcass characteristics were mainly unaffected by the dietary vitamin E level. The levels of vitamin E in SM at slaughter are presented in Tissue vitamin E levels were very variable between sheep on the same treatment ( The beneficial effects of S on vitamin E concentrations are difficult to explain. The larger proportional effect at 60 vs. 500 After two days of simulated retail display in the high-oxygen MAP, the colour saturation (chroma) and redness (a*) of the SM started to decrease and continued to fall until the final measurement on day 6 ( The concentration of α-tocopherol in the SM of C30 lambs was 0.73 Lipid oxidation, measured as TBARS, was significantly altered by the level of vitamin E in the diet, particularly in the SM from the lambs fed C. As muscle α-tocopherol concentration decreased in both diets, TBARS increased at both 3 and 6 The relationship between TBARS, rancidity and meat acceptability has been investigated in pork and beef ( To evaluate the relationship between fatty acid composition and oxidative deterioration of muscle during display, the intramuscular lipids were separated into neutral and phospholipid fractions. The aim was to increase the sensitivity of the measurement of the highly unsaturated and oxidatively unstable C20 and C22 PUFA that are concentrated in the latter. Because the intramuscular fatty acid content was not different between treatments, ( Within diet there were no significant effects of the level of tocopherol supplementation on fatty acid composition of the neutral lipids, except for a slightly higher ( In the phospholipid fraction, there were higher ( The beneficial effect of high α-tocopherol concentrations on muscle is not expressed similarly in both myoglobin oxidation and lipid oxidation (i.e., sometimes higher muscle vitamin E levels are required to improve the colour shelf life of meat, whereas lower levels are required to restrict the extent of lipid oxidation and vice versa). The sensitivity of fatty acids to oxidation increases as their degree of unsaturation increases and raising the level of PUFA in ruminant meat results in increased susceptibility to oxidation at similar intakes of α-tocopherol ( The inflexion point in the plot of TBARS (rancidity) versus vitamin E is considered to indicate the minimum tissue vitamin E concentration required to protect against quality deterioration under the conditions applying in each study in which time, temperature, illumination, comminution, etc. may differ ( The results of the present trial have shown that vitamin E supplementation at levels of 250 The authors acknowledge the financial support from the