The evolution of amorphous and nanocrystalline phases in mechanically alloyed Mg1.9M0.1Ni (M=Ti,Zr,V) was studied under different milling conditions by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. It was found that the presence of air (oxygen and nitrogen) accelerates the nanocrystallization reaction, but has no influence on the amorphous phase formation during ball milling. The mechanochemical work necessary to obtain a certain degree of amorphization or nanocrystallization in the Mg2Ni-based alloys was determined and it was found to control the end product of milling.It is already well known that during high energy ball milling (BM) or mechanical alloying (MA) of Mg–Ni alloys an amorphous phase forms, which nanocrystallizes during subsequent milling Our recent studies An interesting result of the previous investigation Being a continuation of a previous study, the aim of the present work is to follow quantitatively the formation and evolution of the amorphous phase and its further nanocrystallization during continuous milling of Mg Pure elemental powders of magnesium, nickel, titanium, zirconium and vanadium were used as starting materials. The ball milling was performed with planetary mills (Fritsch P5 and P7) with different frequencies and ball to powder (B/P) mass ratio. Handling procedures were performed in a glove box under argon atmosphere. Modified vials were used in order to allow milling under different gas atmosphere at controlled pressure. The vials and the balls were made from stainless steel. Small amount of the powder was taken from the mill at regular periods of time for structural, morphological and thermal analysis. The phases and the microstructure were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Philips 3050 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The diffraction data were analyzed by a full pattern fitting procedure (Rietveld method) using the program MAUD Differential scanning calorimetry analysis, using a Perkin-Elmer DSC-7 calorimeter, was performed in order to study the thermal behavior of the as-milled alloys. Thermal stability of the amorphous and nanocrystalline microstructures obtained by ball milling as well as crystallization of the amorphous alloys were investigated, too. Continuous milling of the elemental powders leads to the formation of nanocrystalline Mg Both the B/P mass ratio and the frequency of the mill were changed in order to study their influence on the formation and evolution of amorphous and nanocrystalline phases in Mg The increase of the B/P mass ratio and the mill frequency generally cause faster amorphous phase formation and further nanocrystallization, as they both lead to an increase of the intensity The influence of the contamination of the powders, coming from the gas atmosphere (mainly oxygen and nitrogen) and from the abrasion of the vial and balls, on the formation and evolution of amorphous and nanocrystalline phases in Mg The mechanically induced crystallization of amorphous MgNi during continuos milling was carefully studied Formation of a crystalline phase is reported during milling of Ti–Al powders after the formation of amorphous phase and is attributed to the appearance of crystalline TiN by nitrogen contamination of the milled powder In our previous and present studies, the contamination with Fe was found to be very small and cannot be considered as a possible reason for the formation of the amorphous phase and its further crystallization. Although the sample milled in Ar+air contains oxygen and nitrogen, nitrides and oxide phases were not detected by XRD, except in the case of long-time milling. A Rietveld refinement analysis was performed for 11.5 and 23.5 Both alloys, milled in pure Ar and in Ar+air reveal, however, distinct differences in the evolution of the amorphous phase and its crystallization during milling. In order to study the influence of the temperature (ball temperature) on the evolution of the amorphous and nanocrystalline phases (during MA of Mg The evolution of amorphous and nanocrystalline phases in mechanically alloyed Mg The work has been supported by the EU HPRN-CT-2002-00208, MAT2003-00780 and CeRMAE projects.