Semiconductor photocatalysis often leads to partial or complete mineralization of organic pollutants. Upon irradiation with UV/visible light, semiconductors catalyze redox reactions in presence of air/O2 and water. Here, the potential of a common semiconductor, ZnO, has been explored as an effective catalyst for the photodegradation of two model dyes: Methylene Blue and Eosin Y. A 16W lamp was the source of UV-radiation in a batch reactor. The effects of process parameters like, catalyst loading, initial dye concentration, airflow rate, UV-radiation intensity, and pH on the extent of photo degradation have been investigated. Substantial reduction of COD, besides removal of colour, was also achieved. A rate equation for the degradation based on Langmuir–Hinshelwood model has been proposed.Wastewater from textile, paper, and some other industries contain residual dyes, which are not readily biodegradable. Adsorption and chemical coagulation are the two common techniques of treatment of such wastewater. However, these methods merely transfer dyes from the liquid to the solid phase causing secondary pollution and requiring further treatment Semiconductors (such as TiO A lot of studies have been reported on the photocatalytic degradation (PCD) of refractory organics. Bhatkhande et al. Literature reports on PCD of dyes are not many. Sunlight mediated photocatalysis of Reactive Blue 4 was reported by Neppolian et al. The aim of the present work, is to investigate the potential of ZnO as a photocatalyst under UV radiation for the oxidation of textile dyes in aqueous solutions. Model dyes used were: Methylene Blue and Eosin Y. Effects of parameters like catalyst-loading, initial dye concentration, airflow rate, pH, and UV radiation intensity on the rate of degradation were studied. These are the major variables governing the efficiency of the process. An irradiation time of 2 The model dyes were Eosin Y and Methylene Blue. The ZnO catalyst was a GR grade material of 99% purity (LOBA Chemie, India) and was used without any further treatment. The dye concentrations in a sample were determined, using a Shimadzu-160A UV-Visible spectrophotometer against standard calibration curves at appropriate dilutions. Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) was determined by the open reflux method, using standard K Optical intensity was measured by digital optical power meter, Advantest TQ8214. The reactor was a borosil glass vessel of 4 in. diameter and 12 in. length. A sintered glass disk was fitted at a height of 2 in. from the bottom to disperse air in the liquid. Four 4 400 The surface area, particle size, morphology, and other characteristics of ZnO catalyst were determined. The BET surface area was found to be 3.23 Since, the photo-assisted degradation of the dyes occurs predominantly on the photocatalyst surface, studies on the adsorption of the dyes from aqueous solution onto ZnO particles are relevant and important. The equilibrium concentration of the dye ( Adsorption (dark) experiments were carried out for both Methylene Blue and Eosin Y under gentle air agitation in the same experimental set up, taking dye solutions of different initial concentrations. For both the dyes, ZnO loading was 0.4 There are quite a few common isotherms used for correlating adsorption equilibrium data The constants of both the isotherms were obtained by least square fitting of the experimental adsorption equilibrium data. Data for Methylene Blue fit better to both the isotherm equations compared to that of Eosin Y. The Langmuir isotherms calculated, using the values of these constants, and the experimental isotherms are shown in The effect of molecular structure and functional groups on PCD was studied by various researchers Both the dyes were treated at the same experimental conditions, viz. catalyst loading = 0.4 As adsorption is a prerequisite for photocatalysis, this may be due to the higher extent of adsorption in case of Methylene Blue than in case of Eosin Y. Some dyes are degraded by direct UV radiation. Therefore, it should be examined to what extent the dyes are ‘photolyzed’ if no catalyst was used. In other words, it is important to estimate the contribution of direct ‘photolysis’ in the overall PCD. Blank experiments were carried out for both the dyes without catalyst for this purpose. It is also interesting to determine, the minimum amount of catalyst required to decolorize the maximum amount of dye at a particular experimental condition. For this, experiments were carried out varying the amount of ZnO-photocatalyst for both the dyes. In the absence of the catalyst, Eosin Y was photolyzed only up to 4% in 2 In case of Methylene Blue, the experimental conditions were nearly the same as in case of Eosin Y except airflow rate, which was 6.13 The increase in the amount of catalyst increased the number of active sites on the photocatalyst surface, which in turn, increased the number of hydroxyl, and superoxide radicals. When the concentration of ZnO catalyst increased above the limiting value, the degradation rate decreased due to the interception of the light by the suspension. The influence of initial concentration of the dye solution on the PCD is an important aspect of the study. One can calculate the initial rate of reaction, and thus, the rate constant for the PCD from these data using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation. Initial concentrations were varied in the range 25–60 For both the dyes, the PCD decreased with increasing initial concentration of the dye solution. In case of Eosin Y, percentage-removal decreased from 93 to 63% in 2 With the increase in the concentration of a dye solution, the photons get intercepted before they can reach the catalyst surface, decreasing the absorption of photons by the catalyst. This is what causes reduction in the PCD. Oxygen required for scavenging electrons generated by UV radiation came from the air bubbled through the liquid. The airflow rate was also sufficient to keep the ZnO particles in suspension. It is therefore, pertinent, and useful to study the effect of airflow rate on the rate of PCD. For both the dyes, the extent of PCD increased with increase in the airflow rate. An increase in the airflow rate increased the supply of oxygen by way of enhanced turbulence, gas holdup, gas–liquid interfacial area, and the mass transfer coefficient. Therefore, the number of hydroxyl and superoxide radicals produced also increased. Hence, the degree of photodegradation increased with an increase in the airflow rate. Also, possible breakage of the particles because of attrition at a larger airflow rate may generate a larger catalyst surface area, thereby, increasing the rate of degradation. However, we did not check the breakage of catalyst during use. For both the dyes, the extent of degradation in the absence of air when the catalyst was kept in suspension by magnetic stirrer, was about the same for the case where a low airflow was used to keep the catalyst in suspension. Disintegration of the catalyst by stirring increases the catalyst surface area and simultaneously increases the rate of degradation. But catalyst disintegration is unlikely to occur when kept in suspension by airflow. Also a small air rate does not supply adequate oxygen in solution to generate enough hydroxyl radical to carry out the dye degradation. The above factors together explain the fact that a low air rate does not enhance the degradation rate above that attained in the absence of air but with magnetic stirrer. Because of the amphoteric behaviour of most semiconductor oxides, an important parameter governing the rate of reaction taking place on semiconductor particle surfaces is the pH of the dispersions, since, it influences the surface-charge-properties of the photocatalysts For Methylene Blue, the extent of photocatalysis increased with increase in pH. As the pH increased from 5.5 to 9.7, the percent destruction increased from 49 to 62 in 2 The decrease in the PCD at acidic pH may be due to a very high adsorption at low pH. As the catalyst surface was covered by the dye molecules, the absorption of UV radiation on the catalyst surface decreased. At higher pH, there was excess of OH UV irradiation generates the photons required for the electron transfer from the valence band to the conduction band of a semiconductor photocatalyst. The energy of a photon is related to its wavelength and the overall energy input to a photocatalytic process is dependent on the light intensity. Therefore, the effects of both intensity and wavelength are important. Here, we have studied the effect of lamp intensity only keeping the wavelength (356 A 6 For Eosin Y, extent of photo degradation decreased from 93 to 82% as the light intensity decreased from 0.1919 to 0.1048 But in case of Methylene Blue, the degradation percent increased from 58 to 74 in 2 Photocatalysis is a clean technology, which normally does not involve any waste disposal problem. The catalysts can be recycled. TiO The photodegradation efficiencies of the two recycled catalysts RC-1 and RC-2 were examined. RC-1 achieved 21% and RC-2 achieved 23% removal of Eosin Y dye compared to 39% obtained with the fresh catalyst under the same experimental conditions. The used catalyst was regenerated to get RC-1 first by treating with boiling distilled water till a colorless wash liquid was obtained and then by drying it in a hot air oven at a temperature of 90 to 100 The decrease in the efficiency of the recycled catalyst may be attributed to the deposition of photoinsensitive hydroxides (fouling) on the photocatalysts surface blocking its active sites. This is a major problem of working with photocatalysts like ZnO and CdS. Turchi and Ollis For engineering purposes, it is useful to find out a simple and easy-to-use rate equation that fits the experimental rate data. Since, adsorption is considered critical in the heterogeneous photocatalytic oxidation process, the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model was used to describe the photo-oxidation kinetics of dyes by a few previous researchers Langmuir–Hinshelwood pseudo-first order kinetic model, modified to accommodate reactions occurring at a solid-liquid interface is as follows This may be linearized as follows: Experimental data on It is noteworthy that the Langmuir adsorption constants obtained from the dark experiments are significantly different from that determined from the Langmuir–Hinshelwood equation. This is due to the photoadsorption and very rapid photoreaction of the dyes on the catalyst surface The PCD of Methylene Blue and Eosin Y with ZnO was effective in the removal of these dyes from aqueous solution. In addition to the removal of colors, the reaction simultaneously reduced the COD suggesting that the dissolved organics were at least partially oxidized. The oxidation process required air, water, a photocatalyst, and UV radiation. The PCD efficiency has been generally, found to increase with increase in catalyst loading up to a limiting value, decrease in initial concentration, increase in airflow rate, pH, and UV light intensity. Of the two dyes, Methylene Blue was degraded faster. The rate equation for the PCD followed pseudo-first order kinetics and the rate-constants were determined, using Langmuir–Hinshelwood model. The kinetic model was based on hydroxyl radical attack. The efficiency of the once-recycled catalyst was reduced to 58.9% of the fresh catalyst. Therefore, this simple technology of PCD of the colored effluents has the potential to improve the quality of the wastewater from textile and other industries. The economy may be further improved using certain modifications. Financial Grant from All India Council for Technical Education (Grant No. 8018/RDII/BOR (157)/99-2000 dated 24/03/2000) and some facilities extended by the Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Calcutta-32 and Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay are gratefully acknowledged. SC thanks Development Consultants Private Limited, Calcutta for granting her leave to undertake this research work.