 Infective endocarditis Aortic dissection—predisposing and associated conditions Hypertension Marfan syndrome Congenital bicuspid aortic valve Coarctation of aorta Ehler-Danlos syndrome Turner syndrome Chest trauma Rupture of a myxomatous valve Systemic connective tissue disorders Ankylosing spondylitis Systemic lupus erythematosus Granulomatous diseases Tertiary syphilis Giant cell arteritis Takayasu arteritis  Valve dysfunction causing heart failure symptoms (class I) Left-sided infective endocarditis caused by highly resistant organism ( Heart block, abscess, or destructive penetrating lesion (class I) Persistent infection (persistent bacteremia or fevers lasting longer than 5–7 days despite appropriate therapy; class I) Recurrent emboli and persistent vegetations despite appropriate antibiotic therapy (class IIa) Large (>10 mm) mobile vegetation on native valve (class IIb) Indication for surgery but with complication of a stroke with no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage or extensive neurologic damage (class IIb)  Relapsing prosthetic valve endocarditis (recurrence of bacteremia after completion of antibiotic course with subsequent negative blood cultures (class I) Complication of major ischemic stroke or intracranial hemorrhage and hemodynamically stable, delay surgery for at least 4 weeks (class IIb)  Myocardial infarction Chordal or papillary muscle rupture Myxomatous disease Infective endocarditis Rheumatic heart disease Acute cardiomyopathy Prosthetic valve dysfunction Trauma Iatrogenic  Valve degeneration—usually associated with leaflet calcification and tear  Ball or disk variance—change in ball or disk size and function due to infiltration by lipid Strut fracture (particularly with the older Bjork-Shiley valves)  Perivalvular leak Thrombosis or pannus formation Embolization Hemolysis Prosthetic valve endocarditis Early (≤60 days postsurgery)—occurs before endothelialization of valve, usually caused by Late (≥60 days postsurgery)—occurs after endothelialization of valve; caused by typical endocarditis organisms (viridans streptococci, enterococci, etc.)  Etiology, Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, Treatment,  Etiology, Treatment,    Etiology, Pathophysiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, Treatment, Ischemic Mitral Regurgitation,  Etiology and Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, Treatment,     Etiology, Clinical Presentation, Diagnosis, Treatment,  Acute deterioration in valvular function represents a tremendous challenge to the practicing clinician. The presentation of valvular emergencies is usually dramatic; a thorough knowledge of predisposing etiologies, hemodynamic abnormalities, and therapeutic modalities is essential to making appropriate management decisions. Despite an increasing population of patients with prosthetic valves, a resurgence of rheumatic fever, and the continued rise in intravenous drug use–associated infective endocarditis, the overall incidence of valvular emergencies in cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) settings is low. However, the consequences of a missed diagnosis or a delay in therapy can be devastating. Therefore, an important guideline is to always entertain the possibility of acute valvular dysfunction in a patient presenting with hemodynamic instability or acute congestive heart failure. This review focuses primarily on acute dysfunction of the aortic and mitral valves leading to severe regurgitation and aortic valves leading to acute stenosis. The unique valvular complications associated with prosthetic valves and acute tricuspid regurgitation will also be discussed. Finally, valvular complications associated with mechanical assist devices will be addressed. Aortic regurgitation occurs as a result of either dilation of the aortic root and annulus or disruption of the valve leaflets. The most common etiologies of acute aortic regurgitation are infective endocarditis and aortic dissection. The presentation of acute, severe aortic regurgitation differs significantly from that of chronic aortic regurgitation owing to the dramatic hemodynamic changes that occur when the unadapted left ventricle (LV) is suddenly required to augment total stroke volume in order to maintain normal forward flow while simultaneously being exposed to a substantial increase in volume overload. The basic function of the heart is to maintain cardiac output commensurate with body demands. In the normal setting, it does so while operating on the flat portion of the curvilinear LV diastolic pressure-volume relationship and filling pressures remain low. Cardiac output is the product of heart rate and forward stroke volume. Forward stroke volume is the total stroke volume minus the regurgitant volume. Under normal circumstances, the latter is negligible so that total and forward stroke volumes are synonymous. In acute, severe aortic regurgitation, the large regurgitant volume imposed on the unprepared LV markedly reduces forward stroke volume and shifts the LV diastolic pressure–volume relationship to the steep ascending portion of the curve. Because the LV and its surrounding pericardium have limited distensibility, acute increases in LV end-diastolic volume due to regurgitant flow result in an abrupt rise in LV end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) ( Coronary ischemia can complicate acute aortic regurgitation as a reduction in diastolic coronary flow leads to a decrease in myocardial perfusion, while elevated LVEDP and tachycardia increase myocardial oxygen demand. Diastolic coronary flow may be reduced by a reduction in diastolic blood pressure in the aorta, elevation of diastolic pressures in the LV, and by the adverse effects of regurgitant flow on forward flow into the coronary vessels owing to the Venturi effect. The supply-demand mismatch that develops in the setting of acute aortic regurgitation is worsened further if obstructive coronary lesions are present or when aortic dissection impairs coronary flow. To further complicate the picture, reflex sympathetic activation, in response to a reduction in cardiac output and systemic blood pressure, produces tachycardia and increases systemic vascular resistance (SVR). This rise in SVR further worsens regurgitant flow and impedes ejection of blood from the LV to the aorta so that a rise in aortic systolic pressure is inhibited. In some cases, the LV and aortic diastolic pressures are equalized. As opposed to chronic aortic regurgitation, aortic diastolic pressure usually does not fall significantly in the acute setting for two reasons: (1) the rapid increase in LVEDP reduces the driving gradient between the aorta and LV and (2) peripheral runoff is limited by an increase in SVR. The clinical features of aortic regurgitation are profoundly different in the acute compared to the chronic setting. These differences include the presence of markedly elevated LVEDP and absence of a wide pulse pressure in patients with acute severe aortic regurgitation. Because compensatory structural changes in the LV develop gradually over time, the presentation of an additional volume load imposed by acute aortic regurgitation on the unprepared LV may lead to the rapid onset of severe congestive heart failure or cardiogenic shock. Patients with acute aortic regurgitation typically present with severe dyspnea, weakness, or hypotension. They are often tachycardic. The LV impulse may be normal in both location and duration. Owing to early mitral valve closure from the rapid elevation of LVEDP and consequent reversal of pressures between the LV and LA in late diastole, the first heart sound is often soft or inaudible. Occasionally, mitral valve closure may be heard during diastole and accompanied by diastolic mitral regurgitation. The diagnosis of acute aortic regurgitation should be considered in the differential of any patient presenting with acute pulmonary edema or circulatory collapse. A history of known valvular disease, evidence of infective endocarditis, long-standing hypertension, Marfan syndrome, or chest trauma should make one particularly suspicious. Initial diagnostic testing in patients suspected of having acute aortic regurgitation includes an electrocardiogram (ECG), chest radiograph, blood cultures (if infective endocarditis is suspected or if the patient has a prosthetic valve), and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE). An ECG is required in all patients with pulmonary edema, primarily to rule out acute myocardial infarction (MI). The ECG can also be helpful in the patient with acute aortic regurgitation to identify evidence of myocardial ischemia or injury that results from the hemodynamic perturbations that adversely affect the myocardial supply and demand ratio. The ECG in acute aortic regurgitation may be normal with a left axis deviation. With early LV volume overload, there can be Q waves in leads I, aVL, and V In the absence of preexisting heart disease, the chest radiograph generally reveals a normal cardiac silhouette with evidence of pulmonary edema ( Aortic dissection should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any patient having acute aortic regurgitation. This diagnosis can be confirmed either by computed tomography (CT), TEE, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These imaging modalities have largely replaced aortography, the previous gold standard. TTE can be a very useful and quick tool for identifying aortic valve dysfunction and may screen for abnormalities in the proximal 4 to 8 mm of the ascending aorta and a short segment of the descending aorta. The sensitivity for diagnosing aortic dissections with a TTE is only 59% to 83% and the specificity is 63% to 93%. Its sensitivity is higher for type A aortic dissection at 78% to 100%, but for type B, the sensitivity is only 31% to 55%. Patients with acute severe aortic regurgitation are often desperately ill with both systemic hypoperfusion and pulmonary edema; not surprisingly, many of these patients require urgent surgery. However, medical therapy has an important role in optimizing hemodynamics perioperatively. In the presence of severe hemodynamic compromise, admission to the CICU is clearly indicated. The principles of management include recognizing the degree of hemodynamic impairment, reducing pulmonary venous pressure, maximizing cardiac output, and initiating therapy for any underlying disorder. Medical therapy for congestive heart failure owing to acute aortic regurgitation includes both loop diuretics and intravenous vasodilators. The objectives are to maximize cardiac output while reducing intracardiac filling pressures. The hemodynamic response to medical therapy in large part determines the urgency of surgical intervention. In patients with acute aortic regurgitation, intravenous vasodilator therapy can significantly reduce pulmonary artery pressures and increase forward cardiac output. Nitroprusside is the vasodilator of choice. The drug is started at 0.25 µg/kg per minute given intravenously and gradually uptitrated by increments of 0.25 to 0.5 µg/kg per minute with the goal of achieving optimal hemodynamics or until systemic hypotension supervenes. In general, inotropic agents do not play a significant role in management of acute aortic regurgitation because most cases occur in the setting of normal or even accentuated LV contractile function. However, if preexisting myocardial dysfunction exists, agents such as dobutamine at a dose of 5 to 15 µg/kg per minute may assist in maintaining cardiac output. If, despite medical therapy, hemodynamic instability persists, emergent surgical valve repair or replacement represents the only definitive option for cure. Indications for surgery in the presence of infective endocarditis are outlined in Based on the recent International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (1995–2013) analysis, there has been a decline in overall mortality for type A aortic dissection from 31% to 22% driven mostly by a reduction in surgical mortality from 25% to 18%. Aortic stenosis presents as a slowly progressive disorder characterized by narrowing of the aortic valvular orifice resulting in dyspnea, angina, or syncope. Several conditions may lead to an acute deterioration in aortic stenosis patients. To discern the inciting events leading to acute decompensation in valvular aortic stenosis, it is important to understand the underlying pathophysiologic state. Progressive valvular aortic stenosis leads to increasing LV systolic pressure and wall stress. In an effort to normalize this afterload mismatch, the LV hypertrophies. Initially, this normalizes wall stress, but it also results in a shift of the LV pressure-volume curve upward and to the left. This necessitates higher filling pressures for a given ventricular volume, leading to elevated pulmonary venous pressures with consequent dyspnea on effort. Because of this abnormal LV pressure-volume relationship, any diminution in preload will seriously impair stroke volume. Therefore, conditions that lead to acute volume shifts (e.g., dehydration or acute blood loss) will result in a significant impairment of cardiac output. The altered LV pressure-volume relationship reduces passive LV filling, making LV preload critically dependent on atrial contraction. Physical examination of the patient with aortic stenosis reveals a small-volume, slowly rising, sustained pulse. The apical impulse of the heart may be displaced downward and to the left with a marked presystolic impulse or “a” wave. The harsh ejection systolic murmur of aortic stenosis is best heard at the base and is transmitted to the carotids but may also be heard at the apex, particularly in patients with age-related calcification of a tricuspid valve (Gallavardin phenomenon). In general, late peaking murmurs of longer duration signify more severe stenosis. The treatment of patients who present with acute manifestations of aortic stenosis is targeted toward correcting the underlying problem that led to acute decompensation. In cases of volume depletion due to dehydration or blood loss, volume replacement must be judicious to avoid precipitating pulmonary edema. Cautious use of an inotrope that can also constrict peripheral resistance vessels, such as dopamine, may be useful in volume-depleted hypotensive patients. If pulmonary congestion occurs, loop diuretics can be used cautiously to decrease pulmonary capillary pressure. Atrial fibrillation should be treated with urgent synchronized cardioversion, particularly if systemic hypotension or pulmonary congestion has been precipitated by the arrhythmia. Atrioventricular conduction abnormalities should be managed with temporary pacing followed by a dual chamber permanent pacemaker if the conduction disturbance persists. Once the patient is stabilized, urgent valve replacement should be undertaken. If there is a question of coronary artery disease, cardiac catheterization should be performed to define coronary anatomy. Occasionally, when the patient is gravely ill from LV failure, it may be necessary to proceed directly to valve replacement without preoperative coronary angiography. Valve replacement for aortic stenosis includes surgical or transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR). Based on the updated 2017 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines for severe and symptomatic (stage D) aortic stenosis, surgical AVR is a class I recommendation for low-risk and intermediate surgical risk patients. TAVR is a class IIa recommendation for intermediate surgical risk patients. For patients with high surgical risk, surgical AVR and TAVR are both class I recommendations. For patients with a prohibitive risk for surgical AVR, TAVR is a class I recommendation. Mechanical circulatory support approaches have emerged as a rescue therapy in critical aortic valve stenosis with or without cardiogenic shock or as a bridge to TAVR. Currently, the use of mechanical therapies has a class IIb recommendation for cardiogenic shock in ST elevation MI; however, there have been case reports and small institutional studies in which the use of TandemHeart (CardiacAssist) and Impella (Abiomed) has been tried in patients with critical aortic stenosis. The TandemHeart is an extracorporeal left ventricular assist device that is placed in the femoral vein with the cannula traversing across the atria septum into the LA, where oxygenated blood is aspirated and pumped into the femoral arterial system at a rate of 4.0 L/min. The Impella is a percutaneous ventricular assist device that is inserted via the femoral artery and passed across the aortic valve. Blood is aspirated from the LV and pumped into the systemic system. The Impella 2.5 can generate 2.5 L/min of cardiac output; a larger device, Impella 5.0, can maintain a cardiac output of 5.0 L/min. In 2009, Gregoric et al. The recent increase in percutaneous valve replacement has been accompanied by an increase in complications that lead to acute valvular disease. TAVR is now a well-established procedure performed for patients with surgically intermediate or high-risk or inoperable severe aortic stenosis. Because the heart valves are implanted without the use of sutures and use oversizing to anchor the prosthetic stent frame at the level of the aortic annulus, incomplete circumferential apposition can lead to perivalvular aortic leak or regurgitation. This is different from central aortic regurgitation, which is most commonly seen in diseased native valves or damaged prosthetic valves. Conversely, perivalvular aortic regurgitation (PAR) is a complication only of aortic valve prostheses and occurs most commonly following TAVR. Several studies have shown that up to 85% of all patients after TAVR have PAR after the procedure. Approximately 12% have PAR graded moderate or severe at discharge. PAR develops by three main mechanisms: (1) suboptimal placement of the prosthesis that leads to incomplete sealing of the annulus by the skirt; (2) incomplete apposition of the prosthesis owing to calcification of the annulus, native leaflets, or LV outflow tract; (3) and/or mismatch between the size of the annulus and the size of the prosthesis owing to undersizing of the replacement aortic valve. Valve sizing is one of the strongest predictors of PAR. Appropriate sizing using multidetector CT is the gold standard and has been associated with reduced rates of significant PAR. Risk factors for PAR include degenerative calcification of the native aortic valve or cusp and functional bicuspid aortic valve with heavy calcification of the fused commissures. Intraprocedural imaging with a TEE is useful for detection and assessment of acute PAR. Using the biplane mode or a single-plane, short-axis view, the valve deployment, stent positioning, shape, leaflet motion, and presence and severity of AR can be quickly evaluated. For PAR, the short-axis plane of imaging should be just below the valve stent and skirt and just within the LV outflow tract. To evaluate PAR, recent TAVR studies have shown that qualitative assessment with angiography of PAR correlated well with echocardiography. Intraprocedural imaging is important in establishing the diagnosis and severity of PAR and can be used to help guide the management of PAR when it occurs. Corrective techniques include using balloon post-dilation for frame underexpansion, valve-in-valve implantation for a malpositioned transcatheter heart valve or central regurgitation, and snare technique for valves implanted too deeply. In cases of properly placed valves with good expansion, if a localized AR jet can be identified, transcatheter device closure can be attempted to close the perivalvular leak. Acute circulatory collapse is a very rare but serious complication that may develop during or after TAVR. Causes include coronary ischemia, severe aortic regurgitation, cardiac tamponade, valve embolization, and LV failure. For mild hemodynamic disturbances related to PAR, medical therapy may be sufficient. However, for refractory cardiogenic shock due to severe valvular regurgitation, mechanical support may be required. Use of an IABP is contraindicated when severe PAR is the cause of shock. The TandemHeart has been placed successfully in a case report study in which the left main stem was occluded after a TAVR. The use of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) is increasing rapidly as both bridge to transplant or as destination therapy. As many patients fall into a gray zone in which their candidacy for transplant is uncertain, MCS devices are increasingly being used as a bridge to decision. During implantation of LV assist devices (LVADs), an incompetent aortic valve is treated by oversewing, repairing, or replacing the valve. This strategy is employed to prevent formation of a circulatory loop where a portion of the LVAD output is immediately returned to the pump. The development of de novo aortic valvular disease, however, may occur in LVAD patients. The clinical significance of AR in this setting and its optimal treatment is still being defined. Based on observational study, de novo development of aortic regurgitation is common and can occur early after LVAD placement. The management of aortic regurgitation post-LVAD implantation is mostly anecdotal. Medical therapy targeting afterload and preload with vasodilators and diuretics to reduce volume overload is the mainstay of treatment. Inotropic support can be used when there is refractory heart failure or cardiogenic shock. There have been case reports regarding the use of TAVR to treat patients with impending hemodynamic collapse from progressive aortic regurgitation. Both the CoreValve and SAPIEN (Edwards Lifesciences) transcatheter aortic valves have been successfully implanted to improve cardiac hemodynamics in this setting. The presentation of acute severe mitral regurgitation is not unlike acute aortic regurgitation as both valve lesions result in sudden, severe LV volume overload. To better understand the underlying pathophysiologic states leading to acute mitral regurgitation, it is important to first recognize the functional components of the mitral valve apparatus. These components include the LA, mitral annulus, mitral valve leaflets, network of chordae tendineae, papillary muscles, and the subjacent LV wall. All these structures must work in concert to produce effective mitral valve leaflet apposition during systole, and abnormalities of any one can be the cause of mitral regurgitation. Not surprisingly, given the multiplicity of moving parts, there are numerous etiologies of acute mitral regurgitaton, listed in Infective endocarditis may cause acute mitral regurgitation by mechanisms including leaflet perforation, alteration of mitral valve annulus secondary to abscess formation, or chordae tendineae rupture. Coronary artery disease is another common cause of acute mitral regurgitation. The onset of myocardial ischemia/injury due to coronary artery disease can affect valvular function in a number of ways: (1) papillary muscle rupture after myocardial infarction, The severity of mitral regurgitation depends on the volume of regurgitant flow, LA compliance, and preexisting LV function. The volume of regurgitant flow is a function of the size of the incompetent valve orifice and the pressure gradient between the LV and LA. The clinical features of acute mitral regurgitation reflect both the pathophysiology and pathoanatomy of the mitral valve apparatus as described earlier. A wide spectrum of clinical illness may be seen, ranging from complete papillary muscle rupture with cardiovascular collapse to mild dyspnea after rupture of a secondary or tertiary chordae. The general appearance of the patient may provide important diagnostic clues regarding the underlying etiology of mitral regurgitation. A specific phenotype, such as that associated with Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, may suggest a diagnosis of chordal rupture. Alternatively, peripheral manifestations of vascular (emboli, Janeway lesions) or immunologic (Osler nodes, Roth spots) findings consistent with the diagnosis of infective endocarditis may be present. Finally, the presence of anginal-type chest pain leads one to suspect myocardial ischemia or infarction, with resulting papillary muscle disease as the underlying etiology of acute mitral regurgitation. Most patients with acute mitral regurgitation demonstrate tachycardia, which represents a compensatory mechanism to maintain cardiac output in the presence of declining forward stroke volume. The jugular venous pulse may be elevated, with 50% of patients having a prominent “a” wave. Cardiac auscultation reveals a normal S As in the case of acute aortic regurgitation, accurate assessment of intracardiac filling pressures becomes critical, especially in the patient who is hemodynamically unstable. Initial noninvasive diagnostic tests include a chest radiograph, which typically reveals a normal cardiac silhouette with pulmonary venous congestion or edema. The ECG often reveals sinus tachycardia; however, atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response is another common presenting rhythm. A large negative terminal deflection of the P wave in lead V Because the underlying pathoanatomy of the mitral valve influences prognosis and determines the type of therapeutic intervention, rapid assessment of the mitral valve apparatus is an essential component of the management approach. Echocardiography is the most commonly used imaging modality in patients with acute mitral regurgitation. In the presence of good echocardiographic windows, transthoracic imaging can be performed quickly and safely at the bedside to accurately determine the underlying etiology and severity of mitral regurgitation. In addition, overall LV function and wall motion abnormalities indicative of ischemia or infarction can be assessed. Finally, structural cardiac disorders that mimic mitral regurgitation, such as ventricular septal rupture, can be ruled out. Depending on the etiology of acute mitral regurgitation, a variety of echocardiographic abnormalities may be seen. There may be an obvious flail leaflet, chordal rupture, or vegetation ( If diagnostic studies, including ECG and echocardiography, suggest that ischemia or infarction is the underlying etiology of acute mitral regurgitation, then urgent cardiac catheterization should be considered, with the timing dependent on the hemodynamic stability of the patient. Coronary angiography defines coronary anatomy and may delineate a culprit lesion amenable to catheter-based or surgical intervention. The management of acute severe mitral regurgitation is similar to that of acute aortic regurgitation. The principles of treatment focus on reducing LVEDP, decreasing aortic impedance to LV ejection so that blood flow can be directed in a forward rather than retrograde direction, and initiating specific therapy for the precipitating etiology. As with acute aortic regurgitation, right heart catheterization is an integral component in the management of acute mitral regurgitation. The clinical severity of the regurgitation and the tempo of the illness, as evidenced by serial hemodynamic measurements, determine the urgency of emergent valve surgery. In the case of papillary muscle rupture, which is the cause of death in 1% to 5% of fatal MIs, urgent surgical intervention is mandatory if the patient cannot be quickly stabilized with medical therapy. Vasodilator therapy is the key component of medical management and the preferred agent is intravenous nitroprusside (for dosage, see section on treatment for aortic regurgitation). Infective endocarditis complicated by chordal rupture or leaflet perforation should be treated with appropriate antibiotics in addition to medical therapy to optimize the hemodynamics of acute mitral regurgitation. The decision to proceed with emergent valve surgery is based on the hemodynamic response to medical management of acute congestive heart failure and other factors. Recurrent systemic emboli despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy and infection with resistant organisms or fungi are additional indications for valve replacement. Finally, more complex infections, such as those involving valve ring abscess or fistula formation, also require surgical intervention. Indications for surgery are listed in Significant ischemic mitral regurgitation occurs in 3% of patients with acute MI Papillary muscle rupture in the setting of MI represents the most dramatic presentation of ischemic mitral regurgitation and is a surgical emergency. Although this occurs in only 1% to 3% of patients with acute MI, it accounts for up to 5% of infarct-related deaths. Ischemic mitral regurgitation may also be secondary to papillary muscle dysfunction without rupture. The mechanism involves ischemic apical and posterior papillary muscle displacement and wall motion abnormalities, which result in tethering of mitral valve leaflets and systolic tenting with incomplete valve closure. This condition can occur intermittently or continuously. Intermittent papillary muscle dysfunction classically presents as recurrent episodes of dyspnea associated with pulmonary edema. There have been conflicting results regarding whether mitral valve surgery is warranted as opposed to medical therapy alone and whether revascularization of the coronary arteries with percutaneous coronary interventions or surgery improves acute mitral regurgitation. A 2014 meta-analysis aimed to review the medical literature regarding mitral valve surgery with medical therapy compared to medical therapy alone in patients with acute ischemic mitral regurgitation without papillary muscle rupture. A proposed algorithm for the management of patients with acute ischemic mitral regurgitation includes emergent surgery for acute ischemic mitral regurgitation with papillary muscle rupture, surgery or medical therapy for moderate to severe mitral regurgitation, and medical therapy for mild to moderate mitral regurgitation. The role of mechanical circulatory support has not been well studied in acute mitral regurgitation, but these devices may be useful in cases of decompensated heart failure that does not respond to medical therapy. Prosthetic heart valves have been in use for over half a century. They are primarily implanted for hemodynamically significant valvular stenosis or regurgitation. A tremendous amount of experience with these devices has been gained over the past several decades. What has become apparent is that prosthetic valves, despite their obvious benefit, constitute another type of valvular heart disease due to the risk of prosthetic valve dysfunction. As this may occur rapidly, compensatory changes that could mitigate the effects of prosthetic valve dysfunction do not have time to develop. As a result, cardiac decompensation can be both severe and abrupt in patients who develop prosthetic valve dysfunction. Acute prosthetic valve complications, which affect both mechanical and bioprosthetic valves, may be classified as either structural or nonstructural leading to prosthetic valve obstruction or regurgitation; refer to Mechanical valves have an extremely low risk of structural failure and usually last at least 20 to 30 years. The usual clinical presentation of acute prosthetic valve dysfunction is that of rapidly progressive heart failure with evidence of either prosthetic valvular regurgitation or stenosis. The mechanisms of aortic bioprosthetic dysfunction are equally distributed between predominantly stenotic, regurgitant, or mixed stenosis/regurgitation. In patients with a mitral bioprosthesis, regurgitation is the predominant mechanism of valve dysfunction (49%), followed by stenosis (21%) and combined regurgitation/stenosis (30%). The incidence of both aortic and mitral bioprosthesis deterioration requiring reintervention is 20% to 30% at 10 years and over 50% at 15 years, although it is important to note that the clinical manifestations are more often chronic than acute. Acute prosthetic valve dysfunction due to thrombosis or endocarditis can also manifest as thromboembolism (cerebral or peripheral). Normally functioning prosthetic valves are associated with various opening and closing clicks and systolic and occasionally diastolic flow murmurs. A new or changing murmur may therefore signal a pathophysiologic alteration in prosthetic valve function. In addition, the absence or damping of normal valve clicks that are characteristic of mechanical prostheses also suggests abnormalities in valve function. As part of the initial evaluation, identification of the class, type, and model of the implanted valve and the date of implantation is extremely important. The chest radiograph can be invaluable in assessing for the presence of heart failure and may provide confirmatory radiologic evidence as to the type of valvular prosthesis that is in place. Echocardiography is an essential tool in the evaluation of prosthetic valve dysfunction. Color Doppler flow mapping has several important applications in prosthetic valve disease: (1) directing continuous-wave Doppler cursor parallel to the stenotic flow jet, allowing more accurate estimation of transprosthetic velocities and gradients Continuous-wave Doppler imaging is effective in assessing valvular stenosis by virtue of the modified Bernoulli equation: The transvalvular velocities measured by Doppler echocardiography correlate well with invasive measures in patients with native valve disease and after valve replacement. The dynamic flow velocities can also be plotted against the ejection time axis to provide the TVI, a representation of the distance the blood travels with each cardiac cycle. The DVI is a dimensionless ratio of proximal velocity in the LV outflow tract to that of flow velocity through the prosthesis. It is not dependent on the flow conditions through the valve, whereas the gradient and velocity are. In addition, the DVI is less dependent on the valve size. A DVI less than 0.25 is highly suggestive of significant valve obstruction. An important phenomenon to be mindful of when evaluating mean gradients in prosthetic valves is pressure recovery. When blood is pumped through the aortic prosthetic valve, the lowest pressure and highest velocity is at the vena contracta, which is a few millimeters from the prosthesis outflow orifice. As the blood is propelled forward through the aorta, the pressure recovers as the velocity decreases. Thus, the pressure gradient (LV pressure–aortic pressure) is dependent on where the velocity is interrogated in reference to the vena contracta. For smaller mechanical bileaflet valves, a higher mean gradient is often considered to be normal owing to pressure recovery. Clinically, it is the net pressure gradient rather than the maximal pressure gradient that correlates with the true hemodynamic burden on the LV. It should also be remembered that there is a wide variation in valvular gradients depending on the class, type, and model of the valve. Therefore patients with newly implanted valves should have a full TTE study, including comprehensive Doppler assessment, to evaluate the prosthesis as a baseline for future follow-up. The 2014 American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines recommend that the initial TTE be obtained 6 weeks to 3 months after valve implantation. When transthoracic imaging is limited secondary to reverberatory artifacts caused by metallic components of a mechanical valve or technically difficult echocardiographic windows, TEE is a useful adjunctive tool. In the case of acute prosthetic valve dysfunction with heart failure, right heart catheterization is essential for continuous hemodynamic monitoring and for helping to define therapeutic interventions. Because echocardiography has, in large part, replaced traditional catheterization measurements for valvular insufficiency and stenosis, cardiac catheterization is withheld unless the available echocardiographic data are inconclusive or there is a suspicion of significant coronary artery disease. In some cases, simple fluoroscopy may be used to identify prosthetic valve dysfunction and assess the effects of thrombolytic therapy on abnormalities caused by clots that affect valve function. Therapy for acute prosthetic valve dysfunction depends on the type and severity of hemodynamic abnormality, the valve involved, and the underlying etiology. If the valve becomes obstructed acutely, the clinical presentation is likely to be dramatic, with syncope and death in the absence of immediate surgical intervention. On the other hand, stenotic lesions that develop more gradually present as progressive heart failure and a low cardiac output state. Medical management consists of reducing LA pressure and maximizing ventricular performance with inotropic agents. Acute regurgitant lesions are managed according to the guidelines outlined in the sections on treatment for aortic, mitral, and tricuspid regurgitation. Usually, this will involve a combination of vasodilators, diuretics, and inotropic support. Definite therapy usually involves reoperation and replacement of the dysfunctional valve. The mortality risk for reoperation will depend primarily on the preoperative functional class, the underlying etiology of the valve dysfunction (endocarditis and valve thrombosis carrying the highest risk) and the need for emergency surgery. Valve surgery is recommended in severe prosthetic valve stenosis and severe prosthetic valve or paraprosthetic valve regurgitation with heart failure or intractable hemolysis. For high operative risk yet symptomatic patients with bioprosthetic aortic valve stenosis or regurgitation, a transcatheter valve-in-valve procedure is now included as a class IIa recommendation in the focused update of the 2017 AHA/ACC Valvular Heart Disease guidelines. Percutaneous repair is suggested for patients with severe perivalvular regurgitation with intractable hemolysis and New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III or IV heart failure who are at high risk from surgery. Specific management of prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) includes obtaining blood cultures and initiating empiric antibiotic therapy. Because there is a fairly well-defined difference between the pathophysiology and type of organisms responsible for early and late PVE, the initial choice of antibiotics will depend on the time of presentation relative to the date of surgical valve replacement. In early infection within 2 months of implantation, the new valve apparatus has not endothelialized, allowing microorganisms direct access to the new structures either from direct intraoperative contamination or hematogenous spread. Most common pathogens are nosocomial, including In addition to progressive heart failure, PVE may also be complicated by embolic phenomena or perivalvular leak (with or without hemolytic anemia). As progressive damage may advance rapidly in patients with prosthetic valves who have these complications, it is appropriate to obtain blood cultures and initiate empiric antibiotic therapy. In the setting of aortic prosthetic valvular endocarditis, the development of new atrioventricular conduction delay is specific for the presence of a valve ring abscess. Transcatheter heart valve endocarditis is an emerging complication of percutaneous valve replacement. Early TAVR-related PVE has been reported at a rate of 0.3% to 0.4% per patient year. Although valvular obstruction may occasionally be secondary to bacterial vegetations, they are more commonly the result of pannus ingrowth or thrombus formation. Subclinical asymptomatic prosthetic valve thrombosis (PVT) is likely more common than symptomatic PVT; however, there are limited data on the incidence and clinical significance of subclinical PVT. The incidence of PVT with currently available mechanical devices varies from 0.3% to 1.3% with a higher rate of approximately 6% in patients with mechanical prostheses who have had subtherapeutic anticoagulation. Mitral mechanical PVT is more common than aortic mechanical PVT. The incidence of bioprosthetic PVT is less well defined. Although a major risk factor for PVT is inadequate anticoagulation, approximately 40% of patients have adequate prothrombin times at the time of presentation. PVT may present acutely with heart failure or more indolently with slowly progressive symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue. A high level of suspicion must be maintained in any patient with a valvular prosthesis with nonspecific cardiac symptoms. TTE provides assessment of hemodynamic severity, whereas CT imaging or fluoroscopy is often used to delineate valve motion and clot burden. TEE is useful in measuring thrombus size ( Options for the management of PVT include medical or surgical therapy. The 2017 focused update of the AHA/ACC valvular heart disease guidelines now includes a class IIa recommendation for initiation of vitamin K antagonist agents in patients with suspected or confirmed bioprosthetic valve thrombosis who are hemodynamically stable based on case series data. According to the 2014 AHA/ACC valvular heart disease guidelines, emergent surgery is a class I recommendation for patients with left-sided prosthetic valve thrombosis with NYHA class III to IV symptoms. Surgery is a class IIa recommendation for left-sided prosthetic valve thrombosis that is mobile or large (>0.8 cm). This is mostly based on a meta-analysis of seven observational studies that demonstrated that surgery for left-sided PVT with severe functional impairment was associated with significantly lower rates of thromboembolism, major bleeding, and recurrent PVT compared to fibrinolytic therapy. Mortality rates and complete restoration of valve function was not significantly different. In general, the hemodynamic impact of acute tricuspid regurgitation is less significant than that of acute left-sided valvular lesions. More commonly, persistent, severe, chronic tricuspid regurgitation results in salt and water retention leading to peripheral edema, ascites, and congestive hepatomegaly. However, acute tricuspid regurgitation can lead to massive RV volume overload, causing significant reduction in LV ejection fraction due to paradoxic early systolic septal motion that results from the severe volume overload of the RV. It should be emphasized that isolated, acute tricuspid regurgitation is a relatively uncommon medical emergency. The chronic form of tricuspid regurgitation predominates and usually results from annular dilation secondary to left-sided valvular pathology, severe LV dysfunction, or pulmonary hypertension. In the current era, infective endocarditis remains the most common cause of acute tricuspid regurgitation and is almost exclusively a disease of intravenous drug users. The physical findings in acute tricuspid regurgitation are dependent, in part, on the severity of the RV volume overload. In the case of papillary muscle rupture or RV infarction, there may be hypotension and cardiovascular collapse. Most patients, however, maintain blood pressure within the normal range and typically demonstrate findings consistent with right-sided heart failure. There is usually a prominent “v” wave visible in the jugular venous pulse and a holosystolic murmur along the left sternal border. The tricuspid regurgitation murmur increases in intensity with inspiration, a finding that differentiates it from mitral regurgitation. An S The diagnostic modality of choice for evaluating acute tricuspid regurgitation is two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography. where The ECG in cases of trauma may show right bundle branch block. If the tricuspid regurgitation has been long standing, there may be ECG criteria for RV hypertrophy. RV infarction with acute tricuspid regurgitation rarely occurs in isolation and typically presents in conjunction with inferior MI, which can be diagnosed by the characteristic ST segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. The presence of ST segment elevation in the right-sided lead V The chest radiograph may show signs of cardiomegaly that represent RV and right atrial (RA) enlargement. The presence of cavitary septic pulmonary emboli may also be seen with tricuspid valve endocarditis. As noted, blood cultures are an essential component of the diagnostic workup for patients with suspected infective endocarditis. In patients with a history of intravenous drug use, staphylococcal organisms are the predominant isolate. Right heart catheterization can be extremely helpful in confirming the diagnosis of pure tricuspid regurgitation and ruling out significant LV abnormalities. The presence of a large “v” wave in the RA tracing with concomitant elevation in mean RA pressure usually signifies the presence of significant tricuspid regurgitation. In addition, if the pulmonary artery and capillary wedge pressures are normal, the tricuspid regurgitation is likely to be related to primary dysfunction of the valvular apparatus and not secondary to left-sided heart dysfunction or pulmonary hypertension. The management strategy for acute tricuspid regurgitation should be focused primarily on medical therapy. Most patients can be effectively treated with a diuretic alone or in combination with an inotropic agent, such as dobutamine. Milrinone, another inotropic agent, may be used as well, particularly in patients who have evidence of pulmonary hypertension. In rare instances of acute massive tricuspid regurgitation, the patient who is refractory to medical therapy may require immediate surgical intervention. Whenever possible, tricuspid valve repair, often with ring annuloplasty, is preferred over valve replacement. However, when valve replacement is required, a bioprosthetic valve is often used as there is a high incidence of valve thrombosis when mechanical valves are implanted in the tricuspid position. The treatment of tricuspid regurgitation secondary to an inferior MI with RV involvement is revascularization. The type of revascularization procedure will depend on the nature of the coronary anatomy, extent of atherosclerotic disease, myocardial territory at risk, and LV function. Acute heart failure secondary to valvular dysfunction remains an extremely difficult clinical dilemma from the standpoint of both diagnosis and treatment. Since the underlying pathophysiology determines the clinical course, expeditious treatment with appropriate diagnostic testing is of paramount importance. In most cases of acute heart failure secondary to valvular disease, both echocardiography and pulmonary artery catheterization are invaluable tools that allow the clinician to determine the severity of the lesion as well as underlying cardiac function, assess the patient's hemodynamic status, and reach decisions regarding the best management strategy. Providers treating patients with acute valvular dysfunction must not only understand the pathophysiology of the disease but also be cognizant of the limitations of medical therapy. As surgical intervention represents the most definitive intervention, early cardiothoracic surgical consultation is a critical step in the management algorithm of these often desperately ill individuals. 