The magnet has a dominant role in a high gradient magnetic separator; it provides the passage for the magnetic field and the working space where the matrix is placed to produce magnetic gradients and magnetic forces high enough to capture magnetic particles from the slurry. The effect of the magnetic field orientation of the magnet on high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) performance has been comparatively investigated on a pilot pulsating HGMS separator with vertical and horizontal magnets respectively. The results of the investigation indicate that the magnetic field orientation has a significant effect on the performance. It was concluded that a properly designed magnet in a HGMS separator greatly improves the performance.Many people ( Therefore, an attempt has been made to investigate the effect of magnetic field orientation on the performance of a HGMS separator. A pilot pulsating HGMS separator was used in the investigation. A vertical magnetic field orientation (VMF) and a horizontal magnetic field orientation (HMF) as illustrated in The pilot separator was fed in batches; when a batch was finished, the energizing current was switched off and magnetic particles captured on the matrix surface washed out to get a magnetic product. A detailed description of the separator has been given by The material used in the present investigation contained 46.89% Fe, with a particle size 90% less than 74 The material was fully mixed in a stirred beaker and evenly fed to the separator within 10 Magnetic leakage factor, concentrate grade, recovery and separation efficiency were used for evaluating the performance of the magnetic field orientations. Magnetic leakage factor was calculated using the following equation ( Separation efficiency ( Magnetic leakage factor is one of the most important characteristics that affect the performance of a HGMS separator; lower energizing energy consumption is needed with a smaller magnetic leakage factor, thus a higher magnetic induction is achievable in the working space. From The two orientations produced two different sets of performance criteria with variation in magnetic induction. The magnetic leakage factor of the HMF was 1.34 when the induction reached 0.7 The separation performances of the pilot HGMS separator with VMF and HMF respectively are shown in The HMF achieved higher performances than those of the VMF when the magnetic induction was not below 0.6 However, for the magnetic captures on the left and right of a matrix element, which is characteristic of the HMF in pulsating HGMS ( The above analysis was confirmed by the size-by-size analysis of concentrates from VMF and HMF respectively at a magnetic induction of 0.7 The magnet possesses a dominant role in a HGMS separator and a properly designed magnet in a HGMS separator greatly improves the performance. The magnetic field orientation has a significant effect on the performance of a HGMS separator. The VMF has a much smaller magnetic leakage factor and as a result a much higher magnetic induction than those of the HMF, and therefore a lower energizing power is needed to produce the same magnetic induction. The VMF achieves higher recoveries for finer magnetic particles, due to there being no direct impingement of feed flow on the magnetic deposits on the matrix elements. The pilot pulsating HGMS separator is designed and manufactured by SLon Magnetic Separator Ltd. and this research project was supported by Yunnan Provincial Foundation for Applied Basic Research (Grant No. 2009ZC007X).