The dynamic tensile failure mechanism of concretes after high-temperature exposure is important for evaluating the material load carrying capacity and for reinstating thermo-damaged structures. We investigate the influence of thermal damage on the dynamic tensile strength of two mortars. The Brazilian disc (BD) mortar specimens are heat-treated at temperatures of 150 °C, 250 °C, 350 °C, 450 °C, 600 °C and 850 °C. The thermal damage of two mortars is then quantified via the CT values measured using the X-ray Computer Tomography (CT) technique, the P-wave velocity and the density. These quantities are observed to decrease with the increase of the heat-treatment temperature, which can be explained by the increase of microcracks, the undesirable chemical changes and the deterioration of the binding capacity. Dynamic tension tests of untreated and heat-treated BD specimens are then conducted at room temperature with a split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) apparatus. The results show that the dynamic tensile strength increases with the loading rate and decreases with the increase of the heat-treatment temperature. The damage variable based on the CT value is introduced to quantitatively describe the thermo-induced damage for two mortars. The effect of the loading rate and the thermal damage on the dynamic tensile strength is further represented through an empirical formula in terms of the damage variable. In the last the experimentally obtained dynamic tensile responses of the mortars with and without thermal damage are interpreted using the Dominant Crack Algorithm (DCA) model. The DCA model parameters for the mortars are obtained and their dependences on the heat-treatment temperature are analyzed.Ordinary concrete infrastructures may be exposed to high temperatures in applications such as geothermal energy extraction and fire accidents, and barite based radiation shielding constructions for deep burial of nuclear wastes may also be commonly subjected to high temperature up to 400 A number of researchers have investigated the properties of various types of concrete-like materials (e.g. ordinary concrete, high performance, radiation shielding concrete, cement paste and mortar) after exposure to high temperatures Researchers have also investigated the effect of heat-treatment on the dynamic tensile strength of concrete and mortar Despite of existing research efforts, the thermal damage of concretes due to elevated temperatures has not been systematically studied. It is desirable to develop a quantitative relationship between the thermal damage and the dynamic tensile strength of concrete-like materials After the introduction, As mentioned above, both ordinary concrete and radiation shielding concrete are concerned in this study, we thus prepared two mortars to mimic these two types of concretes. The mix proportions of these two mortars are listed in In this study, the block mortar specimens were first cured for 28 days in a curing room with a standard temperature of 23 ± 2 After the heat-treatment, mortar samples were scanned by using X-ray micro-CT technique to investigate 3D thermal damage (e.g. micro-cracking and chemical changes) under different heat-treatment temperatures Moreover, the densities and P-wave velocities of two mortars were measured according to the recommended methods by the ISRM Based on the ISRM suggested methods for the determination of dynamic rock tensile strength The BD specimen is first sandwiched between two bars, and the striker bar then impacts the free end of the incident bar. An incident pulse The tensile stress in the center of the BD specimen can be calculated using the following formula According to the suggested method by the ISRM To evaluate the dynamic force balance, the dynamic forces The loading rate To minimize the influence of moisture on the dynamic tensile strength of two mortars, the heat-treated mortar specimens were sealed in the dry condition and then tested as soon as practicable in the same ambient condition. The static and dynamic tensile strengths for two mortars heat-treated at different temperatures with the corresponding loading rates are depicted in The reduction of tensile strength and other physical properties of two mortars due to heat-treatment from 25 In order to completely describe the complex influence of the thermal and loading rate effect on the dynamic tensile strength of two mortars, the dynamic tensile strength It is noteworthy in For each mortar, the For each mortar under certain heat-treatment temperature, the dynamic tensile failure process is a damage accumulation in the mortar specimen during the loading period. Therefore, a theoretical damage constitutive modeling is employed here to fully understand the dynamic tensile failure process and predict the dynamic tensile strength of two mortars. Compared with the traditional continuous damage model It is assumed that the crack number density is constant during the failure process (i.e. In addition, according to Von Mises law, the local stress intensity factor Furthermore, Dienes According to the theory reported by Evans Consequently, the crack propagation velocity at all conditions can be concluded as follows: In summary, the theoretical algorithm of the DCA modeling is demonstrated in In order to obtain the optimized values of parameters ( Using the PSO method and DCA modeling discussed above, the characteristic volume size Furthermore, as shown in The dynamic tensile strength of two mortars under different heat-treatment temperatures (150 The dynamic tensile strengths of two mortars at various heat-treatment temperatures were measured using the SHPB apparatus with the BD specimen. The highest dynamic tensile strength is 20.89 MPa under 828 GPa/s for Mortar 1 without heat-treatment and 15.23 MPa under 395 GPa/s for Mortar 2 without heat-treatment, while the lowest dynamic tensile strength is 4.87 MPa under 89 GPa/s for Mortar 1 heat-treated at 850 A damage variable was introduced to quantitatively describe the thermo-induced damage in two mortars. The damage for both two mortars increases with the heat-treatment temperature and reaches 85% at 850 This research was supported by the