Factors affecting electrical comminution performance were investigated through experimental work and numerical simulations. The effects of feed size, under-sieve classification, incremental breakage and energy input level on particle pre-weakening and mineral liberation were tested with six ore samples. Using commercial software, COULOMB 3D, simulation was used to explore the trends between the electrical field distribution/intensity, and the ore particle electrical/mechanical properties. These results were used to interpret the differences in breakage and liberation for various ores. The results showed that the induced electrical field is strongly dependent on the electrical properties of minerals, the grain size, the location of the conductive minerals in rocks, and the particle shape/orientation. Understanding how the machine-related factors and ore-related factors affect the electrical comminution performance will assist in the machine scale up development.Mechanical size reduction processes in the mineral processing industry are energy intensive. One area of research that could potentially lead to a step change in comminution efficiency involves applying high voltage pulses to improve the grindability of ores and the liberation of minerals of interest. High voltage pulses have the ability to utilise both the electrical and mechanical properties of the ore to reduce the mechanical strength and improve liberation, thus reducing the energy required for further breakage. There are a number of reports demonstrating the effectiveness of mineral liberation by high voltage pulses ( In the last 4 The work undertaken by the JKMRC shows that ore particles, treated by high voltage pulses with low specific energy input (a couple of kWh/t), develop cracks/microcracks and become weaker than untreated particles. Comparison of Bond work indices shows that the treated material may lead to energy savings of up to 24% in the downstream grinding process ( The JKMRC work also shows that using the same specific energy, minerals of interest in the electrical comminution product are better liberated than those in the conventional comminution product. Therefore, there is a potential to use less energy in electrical comminution to generate a similar degree of mineral liberation. Distribution of the liberated minerals demonstrates that, in the electrical comminution product, a large percentage of the liberated minerals appear in size fractions coarser than 53 It was found in the JKMRC work, that the pre-weakening and mineral liberation efficiency of electrical comminution is variable, and is ore-dependent. Using three models which calculated the distribution of electrical fields in the solids water-system, An experimental program was undertaken to investigate the factors affecting the performance of electrical comminution. These factors can be classified into two groups: the ore-related factors and the operation-related factors. The equipment operation-related factors can be tested in the experimental program, but some of the ore-related factors are difficult to test experimentally. Using a commercial software package, COULOMB 3D, numerical simulations of electrical field distribution for various ore-related properties were performed, to assist in identifying the major factors affecting electrical comminution performance and elucidating the reasons for the observed trends in the experimental results. The aim of this work is to provide guidelines for achieving better results in electrical comminution based on the ore properties and for machine scaling up. An investigation of the factors affecting the performance of electrical comminution was carried out with two major approaches: an experimental study and a numerical study. The aim of the experimental study was to identify the factors that may affect the electrical comminution performance in terms of particle weakening and mineral liberation. The numerical study was employed to elucidate the trends observed in the experimental study, or as an investigative tool, if the experimental test was not possible. The electrical comminution was conducted with selFrag Lab equipment installed at selFrag AG based in Switzerland. The equipment utilises high voltage pulses to fracture particles and liberate minerals. The selFrag Lab is designed to process wet batch samples in the one kilogram range, with a top particle size of 45 Six ore samples were collected for the study, with a total of 400 The factors affecting the electrical comminution performance, investigated in this study, can be classified into two categories: ore property-related factors and equipment/operation-related factors. The ore property-related factors include feed size, grain size, particle shape, ore texture and mineral composition. The effect of feed size on pre-weakening and mineral liberation was tested in the experimental program, while the other factors were investigated through numerical simulations. The operation-related factors include under sieve aperture, incremental breakage and input energy, all of which were investigated in the experimental program. In the experimental program, the softness of progenies from mechanical breakage and selFrag breakage were tested with JKRBT (Rotary Breakage Tester), a device using kinetic energy for particle breakage characterisation ( On the other hand, the mineral liberation was determined with an MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyser) system in JKMRC, which uses XBSE (back-scattered electron) measurements to collect a series of BSE images, which undergo a number of steps of image processing for quantitative mineralogical analysis. Mineral modal abundance and the percentage mass of the liberated mineral in the >95% liberation classes were determined by the MLA. A product form of the modal abundance and the >95% liberated mineral in a single size was used as a liberation indicator for comparison. Numerical simulations of electrical field distributions, under various conditions of interest, were used to confirm and elucidate the observed trends (where experimental results were available), or to investigate the influence of some factors which were difficult to test experimentally in electrical comminution. The program COULOMB 3D, developed by Integrated Engineering Software was used for the numerical simulations. It is based on the Boundary Element Method (BEM) and provides fast and accurate calculations of electrical field intensity, which is used as an indicator of pre-weakening and preferential liberation in this paper. In this technique, electromagnetic phenomena are mathematically described by Maxwell’s equations in integral form. Enforcing the boundary conditions along the material interfaces allows one to obtain a set of boundary integral equations with the unknowns as the equivalent sources or field variables along the interfaces. BEM uses only 2D elements on the surfaces which are the material interfaces or assigned boundary conditions. Users can set up a problem quickly and easily. Since only elements on interfaces are involved in the solution procedure, problem modifications are also easy. Hence, less computer power is required to solve the problem than Finite Element Method, where larger matrix is generated. BEM also allows all field variables at any point in space to be obtained very accurately. Also, the results are more precise because the integration operation is smoother ( The major steps in setting up the simulation and solving it are summarised below:  A cylindrical domain, representing the property of water, has been set up to allow changes of mineral properties within the system. Inputs of two different voltages are needed across the top and bottom areas of the cylindrical domain, to allow for the existence of an electrical potential difference in the system. The minerals of interest are usually selected as spheres or other suggested shapes, which are embedded within a cubical or spherical gangue. This geometry setup mimics a system in which a particle with minor minerals of interest embedded in a major gangue mineral, which is immersed in water and subjected to high voltage pulses.  The two material properties assigned in the present simulations are the electrical conductivity and permittivity. The material property data are collected from literature and are given in  In the Solver Setup, the user will select ‘Boundary Element’ for the Method of solution, ‘Auto’ for the Matrix Solver Type, and set the Iterative Accuracy and Self-adaptive Accuracy.  COULOMB will assign elements to the model and solve it. It will check the computed values on elements to verify how well the boundary conditions are satisfied. If the average error is larger than the target, it will subdivide those elements with the largest error and resolve. It will repeat the process until the average error is smaller than the target.  The simulation results are shown on an x-plane view, with the flux (arrow) representing the electrical field intensity and the direction in such a way that: The flux always flows in the direction of high potential to low potential. The magnitude of the flux is presented on a colour scale from red (high intensity) to blue (low intensity). The distance between the flux represents the concentration of charges, where the shorter the distance, the higher the concentration of charges. Electrical principles suggest that the locations of breakdown or the paths of streamer are strongly related to the location of a high intensity field. The simulated electrical field intensity was therefore used as an indicator of preferential breakdown; the higher value indicating the easier breakdown, and inferring better liberation. Two mono feed sizes, 37.5–45 To investigate the feed particle size effect on liberation, two mono feed sizes (9.5–12.5  The experimental data indicated that, in the electrical comminution process, the coarser feed produced better pre-weakening and mineral liberation results. To investigate the grain size effect, which is not possible through experimental study, numerical simulations were performed to determine the electrical field distributions of spherical chalcopyrite particles in two different radii (10-units and 80-units). The use of spherical particles in the model is to avoid the effect of sharp edges on the electrical filed distribution. The spherical chalcopyrite particles were embedded in K-feldspar sphere on the In addition, the maximum electrical field appears on the poles of the inner spheres of chalcopyrite of boundary with K-feldspar. Such a field distribution provides a high probability of electrical breakdown along the boundaries of the larger inner sphere (80-units). The effect of particle shape/orientation on electrical comminution is investigated by numerical simulations. This simulation result agrees with the fundamental theory of electromagnetism. The simulation implies that, in electrical comminution, crushed particles exhibiting sharp edges and angular shapes, may respond better to the high voltage pulses than ground particles such as pebbles from an AG/SAG mill. This is due to the fact that the sharp edges would create high electrical field intensity (assuming the same minerals in both cases), resulting in better fragmentation and liberation. Nevertheless, this hypothesis needs to be validated by experiment. When a lead–zinc ore sample (Ore B) was processed with selFrag, it was observed that the particle surface was covered with galena. It was initially expected that this type of particle would respond well to the high voltage pulse treatment. However, it was surprising to find that particles from Ore B generated only a minor pre-weakening result. Numerical simulations were conducted to investigate the influence of the location of high conductive minerals in a particle. In addition to the sample from Ore B, this behaviour was also observed with a copper–gold sample (Ore C), which had a large distribution of pyrite on the particle surface. These high conductivity minerals on the particle surface led to the development of a higher electrical field intensity on the surface. The maximum electrical field occurring on a particle surface can lead the streamer to propagate across the sample surface, chipping and shaving away the conductive minerals (e.g. galena or pyrite). This type of streamer propagation on the particle surface prevented disintegration by internal electrical explosion inside the solid. Mineral composition affects electrical comminution performance in terms of valuable mineral liberation. Experiments were conducted on three ore samples: a copper–gold ore (Ore D), a gold ore (Ore E) and a platinum ore (Ore F). Samples were treated by selFrag and rod mill at the same specific energy levels, and their progeny particles were analysed with MLA. Mineral grade in the 0–0.3 The results in Numerical simulations were performed for these minerals embedded in a K-feldspar immersed in water, with application of an identical electrical potential of 100 A general trend was observed from the simulations that high electrical field intensity was created around the boundaries of the minerals with high conductivity/permittivity. This suggests that the higher the difference in electrical properties between the two mineral phases, the higher the induced electrical field at their interface. Hence, preferential breakage along the grain boundaries of minerals with high electrical field intensity is one the major causes of selective fragmentation, as observed in the experimental results. It is worth mentioning that mineral composition is not the solo factor affecting electrical comminution performance. Other factors outlined in this paper also influence the performance. Hence the percentage change in mineral grade shown in The selFrag equipment incorporates an interchangeable sieve at the bottom of the process vessel. The sieve aperture sizes can be selected from a few hundred microns to a few millimetres. The under-sieve in the processing chamber acts like a classifier during the high voltage pulse breakage. It allows the survivors of particles to be continuously subject to high voltage pulses, while preventing the undersize from further breakage. To demonstrate its effect on liberation, an example of the modal abundance of chalcopyrite (Ore D), produced at various under-sieve aperture sizes at two energy levels, was presented in It is shown that the chalcopyrite abundance increases as the under-sieve aperture increases. This trend is consistent with both energy levels, though it is more pronounced at a low specific energy input. The differences are at a 95% statistically significant level. Multi-linear regression was statistically performed to identify whether or not the under-sieve apertures exert a significant influence on the two liberation indicators: the chalcopyrite in the 95–100% liberation class and the modal abundance. The results are summarised in The results suggest that sieve apertures exert a significant effect on both >95% liberated chalcopyrite, and the chalcopyrite abundance (indicated by a 97% and a 99% significance respectively, as shown in To illustrate the role of the under-sieve, and how it affects the product liberation in high voltage pulse breakage, two scenarios are presented in Coarse grained minerals (such as the copper ore sample used in this study) are treated, better liberation and higher modal abundance is achieved by 1 Apparently, there exists an optimal sieve aperture to suit the ore texture and mineral grain size. Correctly selecting the under-sieve aperture will result in better liberation of valuable minerals and to an improvement in energy efficiency in electrical comminution. Three cycles of incremental breakage using selFrag were conducted on the platinum ore sample (Ore F). A sieve with 1 Comparing the pyrrhotite liberation at each cycle, the data suggest that the percentage of 95–100% liberated pyrrhotite is virtually unchanged as the incremental breakage cycle increases. However, the pyrrhotite abundance decreases with subsequent cycles, indicating that less pyrrhotite and its associated composites were produced in the later cycles of breakage, despite the increased instantaneous specific energy used in these cycles. This may imply that high voltage pulses can liberate pyrrhotite mineral at an early stage, using a rather small specific energy. As incremental breakage proceeds, the percentage of pyrrhotite liberated in each cycle remains similar. These liberated pyrrhotite particles may emerge from the binary or ternary pyrrhotite composites in the preceding cycle survivors. As a result, the remaining pyrrhotite available in the sample decreases with each subsequent cycle. The effect of energy input in the electrical comminution process is demonstrated in the example given in Simulations were conducted of electrical field distributions of a chalcopyrite sphere embedded within K-feldspar, for different electrical potential differences (100 In addition to liberation, the input energy effect on pre-weakening by high voltage pulses is presented in Apparently there are many factors affecting electrical comminution performance. In summary, ore particles with the following distinguishing features may enhance electrical comminution performance: Coarse grained valuable minerals. Large feed size. Conductive minerals embedded within gangues, rather than coating on the surface of particles. Angular particle shape. A large difference in the electrical properties between the valuable mineral-hosting phase and gangue phase. Since ore properties vary significantly from different mines and deposits, the performance of electrical comminution is often variable. This has been confirmed in treating the six ore samples in this study. It is therefore essential to optimise the operational conditions in electrical comminution to suit to the ore properties. The following example is used to explain the importance of correctly setting the electrical comminution operating conditions. In the incremental breakage (Section It is emphasised that the ore-related factors and the operation-related factors are strongly interrelated in the electrical comminution process. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out a case-by-case study for each ore sample, rather than attempt to use a universal set of operating conditions in the electrical comminution of all ores. For the benefits of pre-weakening and coarse liberation of valuable minerals to be realised by the mineral industry, the machine has to be scaled up from the laboratory scale batch test to continuous operation with a suitable machine throughput. Understanding how the machine-related factors and ore-related factors affect the electrical comminution performance will assist in the development. A number of factors associated with high voltage pulse operations were investigated through testing six mineral ores. They included the effects of feed particle size, under-sieve aperture, incremental breakage and energy input. Numerical simulations of electrical field distribution allow an improved understanding of the mechanisms behind the responses and the benefits offered by high voltage pulse comminution. Simulation was used to explore the trends between the electrical field distribution/intensity, and the ore particle electrical/mechanical properties. These results were used to interpret the differences in breakage and liberation for various ores. The simulations indicate the following trends: Electrical comminution depends strongly on ore properties. Particles having the following distinguishing features may enhance the electrical comminution performance: coarse grained minerals of interest; large feed particle size; conductive minerals embedded within gangues; angular particle shape; a large difference in the electrical properties between the valuable mineral-hosting and gangue phases. High electrical field intensity is found to occur along the boundaries of two mineral phases with large difference in their permittivity and conductivity. The existence of conductive minerals on the particle surface distorts the field distribution of the entire particle, changing the breakdown path and pattern, in turn, impacting the breakage and liberation results. Understanding how the machine-related factors and ore-related factors affect the electrical comminution performance will assist in the machine scale up development. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council Linkage Scheme (AMSRI – LP0667828), AMIRA International, the State Governments of South Australia and Victoria, and the sponsors of AMIRA International Project P924: BHP/Billiton, Rio Tinto, Orica Explosives, Anglo Platinum, Xstrata Technology, Freeport McMoran and AREVA NC. selFrag AG kindly provided the high voltage pulse testing facility for the experiment. Assistance provided by Dr. Alexander Weh of selFrag is gratefully appreciated. Support from Anglo Research, Newcrest, Newmont, Rio Tinto and Xstrata mining companies in sample collection is gratefully acknowledged.