The present study was aimed to investigate different methods of activation of carbon nanofibres, CNF, in order to determine the beneficial effect on the hydrogen sorption capacities of increasing the surface area. Two activation systems were used: physical activation with CO2 and chemical activation with KOH. A range of potential adsorbents were thus prepared by varying the temperature and time of activation. The structure of the CNF proved more suitable to activation by KOH than by CO2, with the former yielding higher surface area carbons (up to 1000m2
                     g−1). The increased surface area, however, did not correspond directly with a proportional increase in hydrogen adsorption capacity. Although high surface areas are important for hydrogen storage by adsorption on solids, it would appear that it is essential that not only the physical, but also the chemical, properties of the adsorbents have to be considered in the quest for carbon based materials, with high hydrogen storage capacities.Environmental concerns regarding the use of fossil fuels and their predicted exhaustion are globally important issues. Hydrogen is a promising substitute for fossil fuels in mobile applications, with the additional benefit of potentially allowing the production of zero emission vehicles. However, to facilitate the commercialisation of this technology suitable hydrogen storage systems need to be developed. In recent years, activated carbons, carbon nanofibres (CNF) and carbon nanotubes (CNT) have all attracted considerable attention as potential hydrogen storage materials The present study aimed to investigate different methods of activation of CNF to determine if this produced any beneficial effects on hydrogen sorption capacities. Two platelet CNF systems were selected for activation. CNF grown at 600 Ethylene (99.5%), hydrogen (99.9%) and argon (99.9%) were used for the preparation of CNF with no further purification. Helium (99.9%) and hydrogen (99.9%) were purified using a liquid nitrogen trap prior to the hydrogen sorption experiments. Reagent grade potassium hydroxide [KOH], copper nitrate trihydrate [Cu(NO The CNF sample was prepared by carbon vapour deposition from the copper–nickel (20:80) and iron–nickel (20:80) catalysts using ethylene–hydrogen (1:4) as the reaction gas. The catalyst precursors were prepared by co-precipitation from stoichiometric aqueous solutions of copper nitrate trihydrate, iron nitrate nonahydrate and nickel nitrate hexahydrate using sodium hydroxide solution as the base. The resulting suspension was then filtered and the precipitate dried at 107 CNF (2 CNF (1 Nitrogen BET surface area studies were carried out using a Micrometrics ASAP 2010 at −196 TGA analysis was recorded on a Perkin Elmer TGA Pyris 1. Carbon dioxide activation simulation was carried out under carbon dioxide (20 SEM images were recorded on a Zeiss DSM-942. All samples were mounted on aluminum stubs and coated with gold to ensure good electron conduction. XRD analysis was carried out on a Philips-1050 attached to a Hilton Brooks generator. Prior to the analysis the samples were placed in a gravity mount ensuring no preferential orientation of the sample occurred before the measurements were recorded. The hydrogen adsorption measurements were conducted on the custom built volumetric differential pressure apparatus, The potential performance of the carbon dioxide and potassium hydroxide activations of the CNF were compared using TGA simulations ( The physical activation of CNF prepared using a Cu To achieve better activation, longer activation periods were investigated. To reduce the increased burn off caused by extended activation times, lower activation temperatures were used ( The physical activation of CNF from Fe The XRD patterns of the precursor CNF and attempted carbon dioxide activated CNF were recorded to determine if any changes in the crystal structure of the materials had occurred ( The chemical activation of both Cu To optimise the Cu The XRD patterns of the precursor CNF and potassium hydroxide activated CNF were recorded to determine if any changes in the crystal structure of the materials had occurred ( The precursor and activated Fe The Cu The hydrogen sorption capacities of a selection of the CNF activated by potassium hydroxide and carbon dioxide were determined to investigate the effect of activation methods on hydrogen sorption capacity ( The physical activation of CNF prepared using a Cu The CNF prepared using a Fe The chemical activation of CNF prepared using a Fe The chemical activation of CNF prepared using a Cu To elucidate the effect of time on the chemical activation and hydrogen sorption capacity the start of the series CNF prepared using a Cu This study has shown that an increase in BET surface area does not always result in an increase in the hydrogen sorption capacity of the CNF, as exemplified by the carbon produced using the Fe We gratefully acknowledge the technical advice from Dr. G. Pez (Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.), Mr. F. Anderton and Mr. M. Fletcher. We would like to thank Mr. D. Clift for XRD analysis. The financial support of the EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council) and Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. is also gratefully acknowledged.