A novel method of organosolv lignin recovery, consisting of simultaneous precipitation and dissolved air flotation (DAF), is proposed. DAF offers a low energy, low maintenance alternative to centrifugation and filtration. DAF of organosolv lignin is studied in order to determine the parameters resulting in the fastest settling and most complete precipitation. Temperature, mixing regime and air saturation pressure were found to be important parameters. Higher temperature resulted in faster settling, but lower final lignin yields at temperatures above 30°C. At 40°C lignin formed a fine precipitate that did not clarify. Rapid addition of black liquor to water resulted in faster clarification. This is due to a redistribution of micro-bubbles in the dilution water immediately prior to formation of precipitate. Higher air saturation resulted in faster clarification. The difference was more pronounced if black liquor addition rate was slow.Conversion of lignocellulosics into fuel ethanol has recently received international attention. The process is reliant on the conversion of cellulose into sugars using cellulase enzymes. Lignin, contributing 15–25% of hardwood dry mass, inhibits the action of cellulase in several ways. Lignin competitively absorbs cellulase enzymes and, along with hemicellulose, forms a complex acting as a physical barrier between cellulose and cellulase enzymes Lignin is also reported to be a potential raw material for the production of plastics, adhesives and resin additives Organosolv pulping uses an organic solvent, commonly ethanol solutions of 30–70% (v/v), at temperatures of 150–190 Filterability of precipitated ethylene glycol lignin was considered a problem due to the high viscosity of the solvent. Dilution, acid concentration and filtering temperature were studied. Liquor to acidified water ratio of 1:3 and filtering temperature of 50–60 Centrifugation of precipitated lignin, as described in patents by Diebold et al. Foam fractionation of Kraft lignin is reported to be ineffective The hydrophobic nature of organosolv lignin makes flotation an ideal method of separation. This paper identifies dissolved air flotation (DAF) as the most appropriate technique in order to eliminate floc destabilisation caused by turbulence. Micro-bubbles are formed in DAF by the reduction in pressure of water pre-saturated with air. When the air saturated water is forced through an orifice or needle valve, a cloud of bubbles in the size range 30–100 The use of dissolved air flotation for the separation of ethanol pulping lignin from diluted black liquor is a novel approach to lignin recovery. In this paper, the effects of mixing regime, dilution ratio, solution temperatures, HCl concentration, saturation pressure and final ethanol concentration are examined using fractional factorial design. In each experiment, black liquor was diluted in a falcon flask by 2, 3 or 7 times. The black liquor was produced by autocatalysed organosolv pulping of chipped The first set of experiments was designed as a 2 Parameters and their value at each level are shown in Following the first set of experiments, it became apparent that temperature has a significant effect on both yield and clarification time. Samples at 45 In light of these observations, 3 further sets of experiments were performed as outlined below. The temperature and addition speed were examined to illustrate the variables affecting clarification rate. Finally, a second factorial block was designed to examine variables that may be affecting final yield. The temperature was studied in isolation using a water to black liquor ratio of 3, HCl concentration of 0 The first block of experiments showed that a water stationary phase resulted in faster clarification. It was also apparent that the rate of addition of black liquor to water was a significant noise variable. For this reason, it was decided to examine the effect of addition rate and nitrogen pressure on settling time in order to show the effect of a fine dispersion of micro-bubbles during precipitation. A temperature of 20 A second set of factorial designed experiments was then undertaken at constant water temperature to study effects of HCl concentration, water to liquor ratio, nitrogen pressures, black liquor temperature and time to addition. Time to addition is defined as the time elapsed between removing the water from the nitrogen pressure and delivering the black liquor. In this set of experiments, the rate of addition was 10 In all experiments following the first set of factorial experiments, 50% clarification times and lignin yields by mass of filtered precipitate were measured. All experiments were performed in duplicates.  Temperature had a minor affect on yield up to a temperature of 20 Flotation efficiency relies on the collision efficiency between particles and bubbles. Collision efficiency has been shown to increase with increasing floc size, assuming consistent electric chemical properties of the bubble and the particle The effect of addition rate and nitrogen pressure is evident from The rising velocity depends on the presence of buoyant micro-bubbles attached to the precipitate. Black liquor addition rate and pressure are variables that determine the dispersion of micro-bubbles during precipitation of black liquor. At the high addition rate of 10 The ideal conditions for rapid separation of precipitated lignin are high temperature, high water saturation pressure and fast addition of black liquor in order to redistribute micro-bubbles during precipitation. It should be noted that precipitation followed by pressurisation to 30 Increasing the pressure from 5 to 15 To apply dissolved air flotation of organosolv lignin in an industrial process, the addition of black liquor to nitrogen saturated water should be performed with turbulent addition of the black liquor into room temperature water with sufficient nitrogen saturation. It is critical that the final temperature of the diluted black liquor is below 35 Cooling of the black liquor either by heat exchanger or vacuum flashing prior to dilution. Sub-cooling of the diluting water prior to dilution. Increasing the water to black liquor ratio. The third option is the most elegant and economical of these. However, the subsequent recovery of ethanol will be more energy intensive. This can be somewhat alleviated by distillation of the black liquor to the maximum lignin concentration before dilution. Dissolved air flotation is an effective method of recovering organosolv lignin precipitate without the need for precipitating or collecting agents. Efficient flotation and good clarification of organosolv lignin occurs at temperatures below 35 The authors would like to thank the Foundation for Research Science and Technology, New Zealand and the Graduate Research Centre, University of Auckland for financial assistance.