Objective
                  Multiple treatment options for acetabular fractures in geriatric patients exist. However, no large-scale studies have reported the outcomes of acute total hip arthroplasty (THA) in this patient population. We systematically evaluated all available evidence to characterize clinical outcomes, complications, and revisions of acute THA for acetabular fractures in geriatric patients.
               
                  Methods
                  Meta-analysis of 21 studies of 430 acetabular fractures with mean follow-up of 44 months (range, 17−97 months). Two independent researchers searched and evaluated the databases of Ovid, Embase, and United States National Library of Medicine using a Boolean search string up to December 2019. Population demographics and complications, including presence of heterotopic ossification (HO), dislocation, infection, revision rate, neurological deficits, and venous thromboembolic event (VTE), were recorded and analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  Weighted mean Harris Hip Score was 83.3 points, and 20% of the patients had reported complications. The most common complication was HO, with a rate of 19.5%. Brooker grade III and IV HO rates were lower at 6.8%. Hip dislocation occurred at a rate of 6.1%, 4.1% of patients developed VTE, deep infection occurred in 3.8%, and neurological complications occurred in 1.9%. Although the revision rate was described in most studies, we were unable to perform a survival analysis because the time to each revision was described in only a few studies. The revision rate was 4.3%.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Acute THA is a viable option for treatment of acetabular fracture and can result in acceptable clinical outcomes and survivorship rates in older patients but with an associated complication rate of approximately 20%. Considering the limited treatment options, THA might be a viable alternative for appropriately selected patients.When managing acetabular fractures, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) is the treatment of choice for the younger population. However, ORIF is technically challenging in the elderly population in which it has a high risk of failure of fixation and incidence of posttraumatic osteoarthritis. Although multiple studies have described treating acetabular fracture using primary THA, conclusions are difficult to draw because of the small numbers of patients and the variable methods of follow-up. In addition, no study has systematically evaluated the effectiveness and the complications of acute THA after acetabular fracture. Hence, we systematically evaluated all available evidence. The purposes of our study were to determine the overall demographic characteristics, characterize the complications associated with acute THA for acetabular fracture, and assess the revision rate for acute THA for acetabular fracture. We performed a comprehensive literature search and evaluated all related published studies through December 2019. Using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guideline, We reviewed each study included in the analysis for population demographics and clinical outcomes, including the mean age of the population, types of acetabular fractures based on the classification by Letournel and Judet, All obtained results were recorded on an electronic spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel; Microsoft Office, Redmond, WA). Certain variables were not provided in some studies, such as participant demographics, Harris Hip Score, type of fracture, and surgical details. Therefore, each specific analysis was performed individually and studies were excluded from an analysis if information from that data point was not provided. Using statistical software (MedCalc version 15.2; MedCalc Software, Ostend, Belgium), we performed descriptive statistics for demographic characteristics. Complication rates and revision rates were analyzed using a random effects model of proportions when heterogeneous and a fixed effect model when not heterogeneous. Twenty-one studies evaluating 430 acetabular fractures managed with acute THA were included in our final analysis ( Twenty of the 21 studies reported the type and subtype of the acetabular fracture (n = 416). In accordance with classification by Letournel and Judet, Various techniques were used in these 21 studies in conjunction with THA for acute management of acetabular fracture. Most of the included studies used plates and screws for internal fixation. Four studies used ring devices, Using our random effects model, we determined that ORIF is well accepted as the treatment of choice for acetabular fracture in the younger population; however, no guidelines have been definitively established for the management of acetabular fracture in the elderly. Maintaining anatomic fracture reduction and avoiding posttraumatic osteoarthritis in this group of patients are challenging. THA has been used in acute management of elementary and associated acetabular fractures. Various acetabular fracture subtypes are included in this study, with posterior wall, anterior column or wall, and posterior hemi-transverse being the most common fracture subtypes. These subtypes were also most common in a 16-year prospective epidemical study based in the United Kingdom. HO frequently occurs after acetabular fracture as a result of the substantial inflammation, extensive muscle dissection, blood loss, length of procedure, and possible coexisting head trauma. The prevalence of dislocation after primary THA has been reported to be 2%–4% by various studies of various follow-up lengths. The revision rate for this series was 4.3% with a mean follow-up time of This study had several limitations. The 21 studies included for analysis were retrospective case series with heterogeneous designs, interventions, and follow-up periods. The internal fixation methods varied in individual studies as necessitated by the fracture types. In older patients with poor bone quality, the optimal management of acetabular fractures remains poorly defined. Acute THA for acetabular fractures can result in higher revision and complication rates compared with primary THA but has complication and revision rates similar to those associated with ORIF and delayed THA for acetabular fractures. However, because of the limited alternatives in this selected group of patients, THA might be the best alternative. Surgeons should be aware of this possibility, and patients and their families should be educated regarding all the possible risks of this procedure. Further prospective studies are needed to diminish the limitations and define the best management for acute acetabular fractures. No external funding was received for this work. Julio Jauregui: conceptualization and design of the study; data collection; data curation and statistical analysis; formal analysis; writing, original draft; writing, review and editing. Tristan Weir: data collection; data curation and statistical analysis; formal analysis; writing, original draft; writing, review and editing. Jin Chen: data collection; writing, original draft. Aaron Johnson: conceptualization and design of the study; resources; writing, original draft. Neil Sardesai: data collection; writing, original draft. Aditya Maheshwari: formal analysis; resources; writing, original draft. Theodore Manson: conceptualization and design of the study; formal analysis; project administration; resources; supervision; writing, original draft; writing, review and editing. TM and his institution receive money from various law firms for providing expert testimony; TM’s institution received a grant from the Orthopaedic Research and Education Foundation; TM receives money from AO North America and the Maine Review Course as payment for lectures. No other relationships, conditions, or circumstances present potential conflicts of interest. The authors thank Senior Editor and Writer Dori Kelly, MA, for professional manuscript editing. 