Lead-rich and antimony-rich oxidizing slag was subjected to regular HCl–NaCl leaching, with the experimental conditions optimized under which ultrasound was introduced. After only 15min of ultrasound-assisted leaching, the leaching rate of Sb resembled that after 45min of regular leaching. Ultrasonic treatment considerably elevated the leaching rates of Sb and Pb, and shortened the leaching time. With the decrease of particle size, the leaching rate of Sb and Pb increased gradually. Especially, as the particle size of the slag was greater than 0.217mm, the ultrasonic leaching effects of Sb and Pb were significantly higher than that of regular leaching effects. The temperature exhibited great effect on ultrasonic leaching performance. As the temperature increased, the leaching rates of Sb and Pb increased step by step. In case the temperature was higher than 85°C, the increasing speed of the leaching rates for Sb and Pb tended to be slow. Increasing ultrasonic power could augment the leaching rate or accelerate the procedure till the same leaching rate. However, since ultrasound failed to energize the formation of new reaction pathways, the maximum leaching rates of Sb and Pb were determined by their phase compositions rather than by ultrasonic field.Ultrasound has been introduced in leaching in hydrometallurgy As an intermediate produced from pyrometallurgy of jamesonite, lead-rich and antimony-rich oxidizing slag (LRAROS) mainly consists of Sb and Pb oxides, as well as Sn, Fe, and As etc. Given the difficulty in processing, LRAROS is now processed by smelting plant, smelting reduction in blast furnace or stockpiling Raw materials were obtained from a smelting plant in Guangxi Province, smashed by a grinding mill and screened. Except for the particle size-related experiment, LRAROS samples in which the proportion of particles smaller than 0.280 Phase analysis showed that LRAROS comprised several oxides. Sb Leaching experiment was performed in a 200 The aim of using HCl–NaCl was to maximally leach Sb and Pb from LRAROS and to recover them. The conditions for leaching were optimized with the univariate method by evaluating the effects of particle size, time, temperature, HCl concentration, NaCl concentration and L/S ratio. The experimental conditions were designed as follows. Effect of particle size: 6.0 Effect of temperature: 5.17 Effect of time: 5.17 Effects of amounts of HCl and NaCl: 2 Effect of L/S ratio: 5.17 As shown in Prolonging the leaching time to over 60 In general, the leaching rate of Pb was affected by the tested factors more significantly than that of Sb. Temperature, HCl concentration and NaCl concentration evidently affected the leaching rate of Pb, whereas only the former two factors had observable effects on the leaching rate of Sb. Probably, Pb was leached by forming differently coordinated Pb Taking production practice and operational cost into consideration, LRAROS samples comprising 85.45% smaller-than-0.280 Ultrasound was introduced under the optimum conditions for regular leaching by adding an intermittent ultrasound device and by initiating it as soon as magnetic stirring started. The effects of time on ultrasonic leaching are exhibited in The diffusion rate of diffusion boundary layer is expressed as Accordingly, diffusion rate is related with concentration of leaching agent, temperature, thickness of diffusion boundary layer, particle size and solution viscosity. With extended time of ultrasonic treatment (>60 Since ultrasound failed to increase the maximum leaching rates, the hardly soluble oxides remained intact, The effect of particle size on ultrasonic leaching is illustrated in  Under the conditions optimized during regular leaching, the influences of ultrasonic power were analyzed at 200 and 400  During regular leaching, temperature, HCl concentration and NaCl concentration remarkably affected the leaching rate of Pb, while that of Sb was only influenced by the former two factors. Introducing ultrasound substantially increased the leaching rates of Sb and Pb or significantly shortened the time required for reaching the same leaching rate as regular leaching did. Introducing ultrasound hardly raised the maximum leaching rates of Sb and Pb that were intrinsically determined by their phase compositions, because ultrasound could not energize the formation of new reaction pathways. The particle size exerted a great influence on ultrasonic extraction. With the decrease of particle size, the leaching rate of Sb and Pb increased gradually. Especially, as the particle size of LRAROS was greater than 0.217 The temperature exhibited great effect on ultrasonic leaching performance also. As the temperature increased, the leaching rates of Sb and Pb increased step by step. In case the temperature was higher than 85 A higher ultrasonic power was able to increase the leaching rate or to accelerate the procedure till the same leaching rate.