Endochondral bone formation is orchestrated by mesenchymal cell condensation to form cartilage anlagen, which act as a template for bone formation and eventual mineralization. The current study performed gene expression analysis to examine pre- and post-mineralization stages (E15 and E19) of endochondral bone formation, using fetal metatarsal long bones as a model. An extensive number of genes were differentially expressed, with 543 transcripts found to have at least 2-fold up-regulation and 742 with a greater than 2-fold down-regulation. A bioinformatics approach was adopted based on gene ontology groups, and this identified genes associated with the regulation of signaling and skeletal development, cartilage replacement by bone, and matrix degradation and turnover. Transcripts linked to skeletal patterning, including Hoxd genes 10–12, Gli2 and Noggin were considerably down-regulated at E19. Whereas genes associated with bone matrix formation and turnover, ACP5, MMP-13, bone sialoprotein, osteopontin, dentin matrix protein-1 and MMP-9 all were distinctly up-regulated at this later time point. This approach to studying the formation of the primary ossification center provides a unique picture of the developmental dynamics involved in the molecular and biochemical processes during this intricately regulated process.The formation of bone is a complex and highly regulated process, occurring through two distinct mechanisms, intramembranous and endochondral ossification. Intramembranous ossification occurs in a few skeletal elements such as the lateral halves of the clavicles and parts of the skull. These form from the direct condensation of mesenchymal cells to osteoblasts, which secrete a bone matrix that becomes mineralized Endochondral ossification is a dynamic process, with well-characterized stages of development. Previous studies have extensively characterized the tissues using histological and morphological approaches and a vast array of molecules have been identified, including those required for the development of the growth plate, osteoblast recruitment, osteoclast activity and bone remodeling (for review see However, how these molecules form a dynamic molecular network to regulate the process of early osteogenesis remains to be fully appreciated. Large scale gene array analysis offers the possibility to define the global gene expression pattern within cell populations or tissues. Two previous investigations have used such an approach of gene expression analysis to study endochondral bone formation. Clancy et al. Central mouse metatarsals of the NMR1 strain (Scanbur. BK AB, Stockholm, Sweden) were dissected free under sterile conditions on embryonic days 15 (76 bones) and 19 (64 bones). The long bones were washed twice in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Carlsbad, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. The purified total RNA was resuspended in 30 μl RNAase-free water. The RNA quality was determined by calculating the OD Expression profiling was performed for each RNA sample (E15 The analysis, including RNA processing, labeling and hybridization to the GeneChips®, was performed at the Bioinformatics and Expression Analysis core facility at NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden. All reagents and protocols followed those described in the Affymetrix manuals. Initially, mRNA was reverse transcribed from the total RNA (5 μg) using the T7-Oligo (dT) Promoter Primer in the first strand cDNA synthesis. After second strand synthesis, in the presence of RNAase H, the double-stranded cDNA template was used for in vitro transcription, in the presence of T7 RNA polymerase and the biotinylated nucleotide analog/ribonucleotide mix (UTP and CTP) to produce labeled cRNA. The labeled RNA was fragmented and hybridized to the Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array for 16 h at 45 °C with rotation. After hybridization, the arrays were washed and stained with streptavidin–phycoerythrin (Molecular Probes Inc, Eugene, OR, USA), in a GeneChip® Fluidics Station 450 (Affymetrix), according to the recommendations of the manufacturer. The GeneChip® arrays were then scanned using the Affymetrix Scanner 3000, in preparation for analysis. The expression values for each gene were calculated using the GeneChip® Operating System (GCOS, Affymetrix). In order to minimize inconsistencies due to variations, such as hybridization conditions, staining or probe array lot, all probe sets were scaled from each array to a target intensity value of 100, to allow for inter-array comparisons. The GCOS software was used to derive a list of those genes that were differentially expressed between E15 and E19. This list was then used within the GeneSifter® software (VizXLabs, Seattle, USA), to determine fold changes between E15 and E19, and to classify genes according to the standardized gene ontology groups (GO (Gene Ontology Consortium, Single-stranded cDNA was synthesized for use in Sq-RT-PCR from the total RNA isolated from E15 and E19 mouse metatarsals. Five micrograms of total RNA was incubated with 50 μM Oligo (dT) Analysis of the microarray data identified a number of interesting genes that warranted further investigation by Sq-RT-PCR. These genes and corresponding primer sequences are detailed in For histological analyses, entire mouse paws from E15 and E19, were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 3 h at 4 °C. The samples were then decalcified in 12.5% (w/v) ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) solution, pH 7.0 for 2 days, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. Seven-micrometer thin sections were mounted on Super Frost Plus glass slides (Menzel-Gläser, Braunschweig, Germany). The sections were dipped in xylene to remove the paraffin and rehydrated through a series of graded alcohols and then rinsed in Tris buffered saline. The sections were stained with Masson's Trichrome, and to identify pre-osteoclasts and osteoclasts sections were stained for tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) with fast red violet 1b salt as described Skeletal long bone development is a tightly controlled process, involving the careful balance of a distinct number of pathways: from skeletal morphogenesis, including patterning and condensation, to overt organogenesis of chondrocyte differentiation, apoptosis and cartilage matrix remodeling, and eventual vascular invasion and trabecular bone formation. Throughout these sequential and overlapping phases, an extensive number of factors interplay, with each step dependent upon the previous one, and each subject to different genetic control. This investigation has used microarray analysis to assess the gene expression pattern between two chosen developmental stages of embryonic endochondral ossification, in an attempt to characterize the dynamic changes in global gene expression patterns during this intricately regulated event. Embryonic stage E15 ( Gene expression analysis of the total RNA isolated from mouse metatarsals embryonic stages E15 and E19 identified an extensive number of genes to be differentially expressed. However, following stringent data analysis, these were condensed to 1285 genes, of which 543 were at least up-regulated on E19 compared to E15, and 742 were down-regulated, based on a selection criteria of 2-fold change and a detection Classification based on the Biological Process Ontology identified 528 genes that were involved in physiological, and 152 genes linked to developmental processes. The gene expression data followed the anticipated scheme of development, in that an extensive number of factors known to be involved in regulatory signaling and skeletal development were considerably down-regulated post-mineralization (E19), such as the Hoxd genes 10–12 (Homeobox D10 (4.4-fold), D11 (4.6-fold) and D12 (6.9-fold)) Gli2 (2.6-fold) and Noggin (2.5-fold). The Hoxd genes 10–12 are transcription factors, and in addition to an involvement in skeletal patterning In skeletal cells, the progression from condensation to overt differentiation is achieved through pathways of BMP-2,-4,-5 and -7 signaling Within both the Biological and Cellular GO classifications, TGF-β1 was highly up-regulated from E15 to E19 (3.8-fold). TGF-β1 is involved in a vast number of biological processes and in vitro studies have shown its involvement at every stage of bone formation, from recruitment of osteoblast progenitors and the stimulation of their proliferation, to the inhibition of the later phases of mineralization and bone resorption At the second stage of development (E19), a growth plate had developed, and a primary ossification center and marrow cavity formed. It was at this stage that the most pronounced changes in gene expression were witnessed. Whereby, a careful balance between bone formation by the osteoblasts was measured against bone resorption by osteoclasts. Within the Biological GO classification, 18 genes were up-regulated on E19 compared to E15, and some considerably so, such as Ibsp (BSP, 312.2-fold), Spp1 (OPN, 190.2-fold) and DMP1 (64.6-fold), all members of the SIBLING ( The expression of a number of selective genes, with particular relevance to osteogenesis, was assessed by Sq-RT-PCR ( The process of mineralization is the least well-defined stage of skeletal development. Despite a vast amount of information concerning the molecules involved, information regarding the biochemical transport processes for the major components of bone mineral, such as calcium and phosphate, is lacking. It is thought that mineralization requires cellular transport through a mechanism based on phosphate secretion to increase the local concentration Assessment of gene expression by microarray analysis of any cells or tissues generates a vast amount of data, and this current study is no exception. As a result the focus has been limited to those genes with particular relevance and interest to endochondral ossification. However, when interpreting these data it is necessary to consider that there are some limitations to this current set-up. As previously mentioned the whole metatarsal was examined, which for E15 constituted a relatively homogeneous cell population, but by E19 a wide number of more differentiated cells were present. Furthermore, the perichondrium was not removed prior to analysis and this may contribute to the large number of osteoblastic genes identified. In summary, this investigation has provided a unique insight into the complex inter-relationships of gene expression during endochondral ossification, pre- and post-mineral deposition. The use of microarray technology has provided a valuable tool by which to examine this process, and to study genes associated with biomineralization, and ultimately contribute to the further understanding of the molecular interactions involved in this complicated event. We would like to thank Johan Linden, Bent Terp, and David Broden at the Bioinformatics and Expression Analysis core facility at NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet, for the gene expression analysis. Also, to Alastair Chalk at the Centre for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Karolinska Institutet, for assistance with the data analysis. Furthermore, we would like to acknowledge the technical help of Cecilia Christersson and Marja Kärki. The study was funded by grants from the Swedish Research Council and the research funds of the Karolinska Institutet.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at