Several authors have noticed that relatively pure coppers with different oxygen levels present a higher hot flow stress as the oxygen content increases. This work attempts to demonstrate that a large contribution to the observed increase of stress is due to precipitation of fine Cu2O particles during hot working. Three fire-refined 99.9% pure coppers with different oxygen levels (26ppm, 46ppm, and 62ppm) were hot compressed at temperatures 600–950°C and at a strain rate range 0.001–0.3s−1. A comparison of transmission electron micrographs prepared from coppers compressed at 750°C and 900°C was performed to characterize the possible precipitates. Fine Cu2O precipitates were found only in the two coppers with higher oxygen and at the lower temperature, where stress differences were larger. Precipitation–hardening theories were adapted for higher temperature and used to iteratively determine if the precipitate sizes and calculated volume fractions could be indeed causing an increase of stress.The strengthening effect of dilute quantities of oxygen in copper had been reported on early works Recently Prasad and Rao The increase of hot flow stress as oxygen content increased was also noticed by the present authors The three fire-refined and phosphorus de-oxidized coppers of this study were first cast into billets and then hot formed at ∼950 A TEM comparison was performed between samples compressed at higher temperature, where minimum stress differences were found and samples compressed at lower temperature, where considerable stress differences were noticed. A thin foil sample was prepared of each copper compressed at 950 Vickers hardness measurements were performed on the polished samples of the three coppers. The indentation load and time were 500 The shape of the stress–strain curve was similar for coppers A, B, and C at equivalent temperature, The stress difference between coppers, or back stress Peak stress in The residual composition of fire-refined coppers still raises some speculation as to which precipitate(s) could be forming, however out of the six hot compressed samples examined only fine Cu The upper three TEM images in Characterization of the type of precipitate was only possible after examining the sample prepared by dimple grinding and ion milling, i.e. Cu C compressed at 750 Excess oxygen precipitates during cooling as Cu A homogeneous particle distribution is used in precipitation–hardening theories Additional evidence of dynamic precipitation can be observed by comparing the hardness plots of the compressed samples. The hardness of an annealed copper is approximately 40–45 VHN, but the hardness measurements of the hot compressed samples showed that as the compression temperature was lower hardness increased. Ordered differences were found when comparing the three coppers. Chaudhri In the plots of 600 The added strengthening observed during hot working was analyzed using precipitation–hardening relationships, which were adapted for higher temperatures. Precipitation–hardening relationships require determining whether the precipitate (Cu Gladman The assumption that an increase of peak or steady stress can be compared to an increase of yield stress (Δ  The semicoherent analysis would seem to work for Cu C if the strengthening was due to particles with 7.1875 Gladman The plot for Cu C at 750 At equivalent hot flow conditions, the fire-refined copper with higher oxygen content presented a higher back stress, which coincided with the presence of Cu