A zinc silicate ore was treated with sulfuric acid in a water-starved system in the presence of microwave irradiation. Phase changes occurring during the reaction process were examined by X-ray powder diffraction analysis, and the effect of microwave irradiation time and water amount used on the extraction of zinc, silica and iron was investigated. It is demonstrated that the hemimorphite present in the ore is predominantly changed to ZnSO4·6H2O for samples without microwave irradiation and ZnSO4·H2O for those with microwave irradiation, respectively. Silica and iron are changed to quartz and Fe(OH)3. An increase in microwave irradiation time can slightly increase the extraction of zinc and decrease the dissolution of iron. The increase of water amount used can increase the extraction of zinc and considerably decrease the dissolution of silica. Under optimum conditions, the extraction percentage of zinc is 99.08% and the dissolution of silica and iron is as low as 0.30% and 0.10%.Zinc silicate ores are attractive alternatives to zinc sulfide ores for the extraction of zinc owing to the increased restriction on sulfur emission all over the world. However, this attractive zinc resource is not widely used for lack of suitable processing methods. The zinc silicate ores usually have a low content of zinc and a high content of silica. The low zinc grade of the ores results in high consumption of energy in pyrometallurgical processing due to the necessity of heating high contents of gangue materials. The high content of silica usually enters solution as silica gel with zinc when hydrometallurgical method is used. The formation of silica gel makes filtration difficult. Form the economy point of view, hydrometallurgical methods are more attractive than pyrometallurgical ones for the treatment of zinc silicate ores, especially for low grade ores. The problem is that the silica gel formed during sulfuric acid leaching should be prevented. To overcome the filtration difficulty, a new flocculating agent (Magnafloc 156) was used by The zinc silicate ore used in the present study was from Yunnan Province of China. The ore was ground to less than125 μm in a ball grinder. The ore ground was analyzed by chemical method and examined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The chemical composition of the ore is given in The sulfuric acid used has a concentration of 96% by weight and a density of 1.84 g/ml. Other chemical reagents such as Fe Twenty grams of ground zinc silicate ore with a particle size of Microwave heating is different from conventional heating. The temperatures reached by microwave heating, to a large extend, depend on the properties of materials. It is necessary to measure the microwave heating characteristics of the zinc ore and the related compounds for the better understanding of reaction mechanism. Fifty grams of powder sample was placed in a quartz crucible and then subjected to microwave irradiation for 10 min. After microwave irradiation had stopped, a thermocouple was instantly inserted into the sample for the direct measurement of temperature. The temperature determined with this method may be lower than the real one a little, but the error is acceptable as described in previous work elsewhere ( It is demonstrated that the zinc ore and the related compounds could be heated to different temperatures by microwaves. The reason could be discussed as follows. Microwave heating is based on the heat effects generated by the dissipation of microwave energy within materials. The heating rate of a material is determined by its dielectric loss factor Depending on how much water is present in the reaction system, the silica combined with zinc oxide may react with sulfuric acid to form H The samples used in this group of experiments were prepared by mixing 20 g of zinc silicate ore with 12.6 g of diluted sulfuric acid ( From Microwave irradiation seems to have no significant effect on the dissolution of silica, as shown in The dissolution of iron was decreased from 0.16% to 0.10% with increasing microwave irradiation time from 0 to 25 min, as shown in Comparing The water content of samples plays an important role in controlling the dissolution of silica. According to  From It can be seen from (1) The silicate ore and the related compounds can be heat to different temperatures by microwaves, but the temperatures reached are below 176 °C. The reactions can proceed at low temperatures when microwave irradiation is used. It is favorable for the reduction of energy consumption. (2) The hemimorphite present in the zinc silicate ore is predominantly transformed into ZnSO (3) When the sample mixtures are irradiated by microwave for 15 min, the extraction percentage of zinc is slightly increased from 95.84% to 98.27%, whereas the dissolution of iron is decreased from 0.16% to 0.10%. The microwave irradiation seems to have significantly effect on the dissolution of silica when the amount of water used is in theoretical value. (4) An increase in the amount of water used can increase the extraction of zinc and considerably decrease the dissolution of silica. The effect of water amount on the dissolution of iron is not obvious. (5) Under optimum experimental conditions (zinc silicate ore: 20 g, microwave irradiation time: 15 min, sulfuric acid: 6.3 ml, water amount: 15 ml, particle size of zinc silicate ore: less than 125 μm), the extraction percentage of zinc obtained is 99.08%, and those of silica and iron are 0.30% and 0.10%, respectively. The silica and iron can be effectively eliminated from the leaching solution by the applications of microwaves. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province for the financial support of this work (Project No. 2000E0028M).