Background
                  Lateral tibial plateau fractures that are located posterolaterally are difficult to reduce through an anterolateral surgical approach because of the lack of direct visualisation of the fracture. This study compared the results of unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures in two patient cohorts: one treated through a posterolateral direct approach and the other through an anterolateral indirect approach.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  All nine patients admitted to our hospital, a tertiary care, urban, public hospital in Australia, from 2007 to 2010 with unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures were treated through a direct posterolateral transfibular approach and prospectively studied. All eight patients admitted from 2004 to 2007 with unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures were treated through an indirect anterolateral approach and retrospectively reviewed. Fracture reduction and maintenance of reduction were assessed radiographically over 2 years. Knee function was assessed clinically and using the Lysholm score.
               
                  Results
                  Fractures managed through a direct posterolateral transfibular approach were reduced with no measurable articular step on standard radiography and had no loss of reduction over time. By contrast, fractures treated through an indirect anterolateral approach had a median postoperative articular step of 5.5mm (interquartile range=4.5). These displacements worsened over time in six of the eight patients. At 2 years, patients treated through a direct approach had significantly better Lysholm scores than those treated through an indirect approach.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study suggests that a direct posterolateral transfibular approach to unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures results in improved reduction, stabilisation and functional outcomes at early follow-up compared to an indirect anterolateral approach.The outcomes of tibial plateau fractures are dependent on the quality of reduction and stability of fixation achieved at the time of surgery. We began using a direct posterolateral transfibular approach The study compared a consecutive prospective cohort and a consecutive retrospective cohort, which differed with respect to the operative approach used in the treatment of posterolateral tibial plateau fractures. All unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures, defined as those in which the lateral condyle depression and comminution were solely or predominantly located in the posterior half, which were treated operatively by ORIF between January 2004 and December 2009, were included. The study was undertaken at the Royal Adelaide Hospital, a 650-bed, tertiary care, urban, public hospital in Australia. The fractures were divided into two cohorts. The direct approach cohort comprised all nine unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures treated in our hospital between January 2007 and December 2009, whereas the indirect approach cohort comprised all eight unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures treated in our hospital between January 2004 and December 2006. Patients’ demographic data, mechanism of injury, confounding factors, associated injuries or co-morbidities that may influence knee function and means of fixation are summarised in All fractures in the indirect approach cohort underwent ORIF with a lateral buttress locking plate and a raft of subchondral screws. All but one patient had bone grafting. Fractures in the direct approach cohort were managed with a variety of fixation techniques that were employed on an individual basis thought to best stabilise each injury ( In the direct approach cohort, all surgeries were performed by one surgeon (LBS) through a posterolateral transfibular approach. Preoperatively, all patients were immobilised in a straight knee splint. No ligamentous reconstruction or repair was needed. Outcome data for all patients in the direct approach cohort were collected prospectively, according to a standardised protocol. Six of the nine patients in the direct approach cohort were reviewed clinically and radiographically at 2 and 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months and 1 and 2 years postoperatively. The clinical examination at each time point included assessment of the wound, knee alignment, range of motion, quadriceps strength and documentation of any postoperative complication. Three patients (patients 1, 7 and 9, direct cohort, Patients in the indirect approach cohort had been reviewed at 2 and 6 weeks and 3 months postoperatively as part of their routine follow-up and were also, when possible, reviewed at 2 years postoperatively for the purpose of this study. Thus, the data for patients in this cohort were collected both retrospectively (up to 3 months postoperatively) and prospectively (2 years postoperatively). Patients’ medical records were reviewed to retrieve operative details, intra- and postoperative complications, and any associated injuries and co-morbidities. The 2-year review in this cohort was identical to that undertaken in the direct approach cohort, including a clinical examination and completion of the Lysholm questionnaire. Preoperative, immediate postoperative and 2-year postoperative radiographs were assessed for fracture reduction and for maintenance of fracture reduction as for the direct approach cohort. Two of the eight patients in the indirect approach cohort (patients 1 and 4, indirect cohort, Most comparisons between the direct and indirect approach cohorts were descriptive in nature. Lysholm scores were compared using the non-parametric Wilcoxon test. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). There were no intra-operative or postoperative complications recorded for any patients in either cohort. Specifically, all tibial plateau fractures in the direct approach cohort healed uneventfully and, of particular note, all fibular head osteotomies healed uneventfully and there were no neurological deficits (motor or sensory) related to the CPN. Radiographic data and Rasmussen scores and gradings For the patients treated through an indirect anterolateral approach, the immediate postoperative radiographs identified an articular step with a median of 5.5 On clinical examination, good postoperative range of motion was achieved by all patients in the direct approach cohort and all but one patient in the indirect approach cohort (patient 8, indirect cohort, At 2-year follow-up, the median Lysholm scores ( This study investigated whether a direct posterolateral transfibular surgical approach improved the quality of reduction obtained intra-operatively, the stability of the reduction achieved and the postoperative functional outcomes of unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures in which the depression and comminution of the lateral condyle were located predominantly posterolaterally. The results demonstrated superior fracture reduction and maintenance of reduction when these fractures were managed through a direct approach as compared with an indirect approach, even though patients were mobilised more aggressively. The superior results seen with a direct approach compared to an indirect approach were reflected in the Lysholm scores, highlighting the clinical importance of the findings. The principal distinction between the indirect anterolateral and direct posterolateral transfibular approaches in treating posterolateral tibial plateau fractures is the direct visual and tactile confirmation of reduction and fragment capture by fixation devices with the direct approach, which, in turn, facilitates better reduction and more stable internal fixation. For unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures, the direct posterolateral transfibular approach negates the need for an anterior osteotomy to expose the fracture and thus preserves the anterolateral tibial condyle as a reference point for reduction and foundation for fixation ( Although not reported in this article, we have also collected similar data on 18 patients with bicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures. Their radiographical and clinical outcomes, while not as good as those reported in this article for unicondylar fractures, also favoured those patients whose management included a direct posterolateral approach over an indirect anterolateral approach. However, as all patients with bicondylar fractures required more than one surgical approach to achieve fracture stabilisation, which introduced a major confounding variable, these data have not been reported. A number of articles addressing the surgical approach for the treatment of the posterolateral tibial plateau fractures have recently emerged, invigorating the drive to rationalise and optimise surgical approaches dependent upon fracture configuration. The perceived risk of an increased complication rate with the posterolateral transfibular approach has not been demonstrated, either in our study or in previous work. Another important consideration after tibial plateau fracture is the preservation of joint stability, which can be affected by both osseous and ligamentous factors. Clearly, better fracture reduction reduces the risk of osseous causes of instability. As all fibular osteotomies undertaken as part of the direct posterolateral transfibular approach healed uneventfully, this proved not to be a concern in the current study. In addition, by exposing the posterolateral ligamentous structures, which are known to have a better outcome when they are repaired early after injury, the approach can facilitate the repair of these structures if required. This study had several limitations. The number of patients in each cohort was relatively small. The validity of the comparison between the two cohorts in the current study would have been improved if patients in both cohorts had been prospectively recruited and followed up, as opposed to one being retrospective, had all been operated on by the same surgeon and, even more importantly, been part of a randomised controlled trial. However, although not all fractures in the indirect approach cohort were operated on by the same surgeon, all operations were performed under his supervision. The patients in the direct approach cohort were operated on by one surgeon to minimise the potential effect of a learning curve in this study, while the new surgical technique was being established. Several surgeons in our hospital are now performing the technique. While it would have been preferable for fracture reduction to have been assessed with CT scans at all time points, this was not done because of the high dosage of radiation. Another limitation was that radiographic data were not available at 2-year follow-up for two of the eight patients in the indirect anterolateral approach cohort due to patients’ remote location, necessitating the use of earlier radiographic data for these patients in analyses. However, this reliance on earlier radiographic data for 25% of this cohort would be expected to have biased the results in their favour, as deterioration in radiographic findings would have been anticipated over time. Finally, it is acknowledged that these types of fractures are very complex and therefore other factors, apart from the surgical approach used, would have influenced patients’ outcomes. In summary, this study has demonstrated that the use of a direct posterolateral transfibular approach appears to lead to superior radiographic and clinical outcomes as well as patient-reported Lysholm scores, compared to the use of an indirect anterolateral approach in the treatment of unicondylar posterolateral tibial plateau fractures. No funding was received by any of the authors for or in relation to this manuscript. None of the authors has any conflict of interest in relation to this study. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. The authors wish to thank Drs. Kathy Stiller and Oksana Holubowycz for reviewing and editing the manuscript.