Supracondylar fractures of the humerus are one of the most common fractures of childhood. With the recognised complications of cubitus varus, injury to any of the three major nerves around the elbow, absent radial pulse after fracture reduction, stiffness and the fortunately rare incidence of Volkmann's ischaemic contracture, an appropriate understanding of the pathology and management of this frequent fracture is required. Both flexion and extension types occur, with the most common of the two being the extension injury. This article presents a review of the incidence, pathology, features and treatment options available, focusing on the extension-type fracture.Supracondylar fractures of the humerus have been recognised since the time of Hippocrates and are one of the more common fractures in children. Cheng With recognised complications of cubitus varus, Before the age of two, the “low supracondylar fracture” is an entity to beware of, as the largely unossified distal humeral chondro-epiphysis renders radiological interpretation in this age group difficult and injuries are often “missed”. The injury is usually a Salter–Harris type II equivalent. The even rarer distal humeral physeal separation is often misinterpreted as a humero-ulnar dislocation. The position of the capitellar ossific nucleus in a normal relation to the proximal radius however will dispel this misconception in those well versed in interpretation of children's radiographs. The importance of these injuries lies in the higher rates of growth disturbance and avascular necrosis of the trochlea encountered. The deformities arising after such injuries tend to be progressive and involve stiffening of the elbow often with pain that is initially of an inflammatory nature although eventually mechanical symptoms will develop. The latter may be addressed by corrective osteotomy, but if undertaken before skeletal maturity the deformity will often rapidly recur. Careful consideration to controlling the disordered growth will need to be given to such cases. Advice that the risks of long-term stiffening and the need for repeated surgery until the child has reached skeletal maturity needs to be part of the process of obtaining informed consent. By contrast, the supracondylar fracture when malunited (particularly in malrotation) may result in an altered arc of motion but very little restriction of range of motion. The tendency in children younger than 10 is for modelling to correct sagittal plane deformity and for function to return to normal. A severe “gunstock” deformity that is for the most part caused by malunion of the distal fragment in medial rotation and on some occasions with an element of cubitus varus (the latter occurring when there has been comminution of the medial side of the metaphysis) will sometimes give rise to mechanical symptoms when the elbow is axially loaded moving from flexion into extension with posterolateral rotary instability of the elbow. This will form the basis for an objective indication for surgical correction of these deformities. Where function is normal but surgery is requested for cosmesis, careful explanation of the risks associated with periarticular osteotomy need to form part of the process of obtaining informed consent. After age 15, it is a rare fracture, distal humeral fractures tending to be of a more adult pattern, frequently involving the articular surfaces and extending proximally into the diaphysis. Age is the key factor in the incidence of supracondylar fractures, occurring almost exclusively in the immature skeleton between the ages of two and ten. Fahey Average age was 6.7 years with the left side predominating (60.8%). The fracture occurs mostly in boys (62.8%) with an open injury occurring in 1% of cases. Nerve injuries occurred in 7.7% of fractures, with the radial most commonly affected (41.2%), followed by the median (36.0%) and the ulnar (22.8%). Following the report of Spinner True Volkmann's ischaemic contracture remains a fortunately rare complication being described in the combined series in 0.5% of cases. The precise aetiology of this contracture is often debated. When seen, it is often a slowly evolving contracture due to progressive fibrosis of the muscles in the flexor compartment of the forearm presumed to be due to ischaemia secondary to arterial injury or compartment syndrome. Treatment can be by passive stretch and splintage to prevent progression with surgical release if required. Unfortunately, functional recovery is usually poor. Flexion-type fractures are rare with a reported incidence of 2%. With the peak incidence of supracondylar fractures occurring towards the end of the first decade, there has to be an association with the anatomy of the elbow at this period of growth that accounts for this. The three major factors would appear to be bony architecture, ligamentous laxity and the position of the joint in hyperextension. During the age period for supracondylar fractures, the metaphysis is undergoing a period of remodelling, which decreases both the anteroposterior and lateral diameters. The newly formed trabeculae and cortex are thinner, and this is found maximally at the olecranon fossa. Ligamentous laxity with hyperextension is normal in children. Thus, the elbow is more likely to be hyperextended at the time of the fall. With the extension of the elbow, the linear force acting along the extended elbow is converted to a bending force. The elastic epiphyseal and articular cartilage of the distal segment act to transfer this force to the supracondylar area. With the anterior capsule and anterior portion of the collateral ligaments tight in hyperextension and the bony olecranon concentrating the force around the fossa, fracture can occur when the forces exceed the strength of the bone to resist them. The mechanism of hyperextension leading to fracture has been supported in two cadaveric studies. Extension fractures have been classified many times. Currently, the two generally recognised classifications are those of Gartland    This was subsequently modified by Wilkins:      As with any injury an appropriate and adequate history and examination are mandatory. It is helpful if possible to establish the mechanism of injury as well as the point of maximal tenderness and timing of pain. Development of forearm pain some hours after the injury may indicate muscle ischaemia. The most important part of the clinical exam is to establish and document the integrity of the neuro-vascular structures. Subsequent changes in status are more readily assessed if a thorough initial assessment is available for comparison. Each of the major nerves must be assessed for both motor and sensory function, being especially careful to assess the anterior interosseous nerve. This is the last major motor branch of the median nerve, innervating Flexor Digitorum Profundus to the index and middle fingers as well Flexor Pollicis Longus and Pronator Quadratus. With injury, clinical loss of interphalangeal joint flexion of the thumb and the distal interphalangeal joint of the index finger can be demonstrated. Patients are unable to make an “OK” with tip-to-tip pinch, substituting with side to side pinch (OK sign/Kiloh–Nevin sign). Vascular assessment is vital and can be considered as a static and dynamic review. Static assessment involves evaluation of the peripheral pulses and capillary filling. Absence of a pulse is a matter of concern, however, there may be adequate supply without a palpable radial pulse. With completely displaced Type 3 fractures, the limb develops two points of angulation to give it an S-shaped position. In the distal arm, there is an anterior prominence that overlies the distal end of the proximal fragment. The distal fragment is displaced proximally with the posterior olecranon becoming more prominent. Finally, as the distal fragment is flexed at the elbow, there is an anterior concavity accentuating the S-shaped deformity. If one of the spikes from the proximal fragment penetrates the dermal layer, there may be a puckering of the skin. This “pucker sign” is an alert to the fact that the fracture may be difficult to reduce by closed manipulation or traction. With the fracture there may also be rotation of the elbow and forearm, as well as angulation at the elbow. Normally, the forearm follows the distal fragment and tends to lie in internal rotation. This is especially true if the medial spike of the proximal fragment is anterior to the distal fragment. The rotation of the distal fragment can thus be associated with a subsequent medial tilting of the distal fragment, accounting for the varus angulation. With a posterolateral distal fragment and the lateral spike of the proximal fragment anterior the opposite can occur. The forearm and elbow may be externally rotated with valgus angulation at the elbow. This is less common. Interpretation of childrens’ elbow X-rays is a potential trap for the uninitiated. Appreciation of what is normal, especially with respect to ossification timings of the epiphyses is vital. The standard X-rays required are an anteroposterior view with the elbow extended and a lateral view with the elbow flexed to 90° and the forearm in neutral. In the injured child, obtaining these views can be difficult. With a high index of suspicion of fracture, but none apparent on these views, subsequent oblique views may be helpful. On the anteroposterior view, the main landmark is the angulation of the physeal line between the lateral condyle and the distal humeral metaphysis. This physeal line forms an angle with the long axis of the humerus termed Baumann's angle ( On the lateral X-ray, the teardrop is visible in the distal humerus ( There are three fat pads overlying major structures in the elbow: the posterior (olecranon), anterior (coronoid) and the supinator. Displacement of any of these may indicate an occult fracture. It is worth noting that the capsule must be intact for displacement to occur. In Corbett's We will concentrate on the treatment of the much more common extension fracture. Before we decide on what treatment should be performed, it is important to first understand the effect of various deformities. Mann With Type I fractures some authors such as Piggot, In Type II fractures where the posterior cortex is intact, Wilkins Traction can be skeletal with either a wire or a screw. Palmer et al. in their series produced good results with a winged screw inserted in the ulna In our institution after reviewing our results, all patients under the age of 10 with closed, isolated supracondylar distal humeral fractures and no vascular compromise are treated with straight arm skin traction. Skin traction is applied with the elbow extended and the forearm supinated and in the straight lateral position. Adhesive tapes are applied to the forearm and held with an elasticated bandage with the shoulder at 90° of abduction. The cord is passed through a universal pulley and enough weight applied (usually 0.45–1.8 Although the results from straight arm traction are equivalent to many series using pinning, it is not without its drawbacks. Traction relies on remodelling for patients to regain their full range of motion ( Even if traction is not being used as the definitive treatment, it can be used to immobilise the limb comfortably prior to surgery Prior to consideration for pinning of any supracondylar fracture, an adequate reduction should be performed under general anaesthetic. With image intensifier assistance and the arm extended, or hyperextended and supinated, longitudinal traction should be applied. With the traction maintained, medial or lateral displacement can be corrected with a valgus or varus force. Once length has been re-established the elbow should be flexed with posterior force on the proximal fragment and anterior force on the distal fragment. Wires of at least 1.6–2 The decision on whether or not to bury the wires is made by balancing the reduction of infection against the risk of a further general anaesthetic. Mazda et al. One thing in common amongst these most recently published studies is that better results are obtained when the surgeons involved are experienced in paediatric orthopaedic surgery or experienced trainees. Indications for open surgery are open fracture, failure to achieve an adequate closed reduction, or vascular compromise. If an open approach is required it should be done with a tourniquet in place, but not through a posterior approach. This approach does not give access to the neurovascular structures most likely to be damaged and will disrupt the tissues that are most likely to be uninjured. A medial or antero-medial approach would allow access to the most commonly injured structures, visualisation of the ulnar nerve and allow access to the area of comminution, and the area that tends to be displaced when the fracture rotates. Keppler et al. Labele et al. There is a lack of remodelling potential in the coronal plane, particularly in the older child. For this reason, observation is of little benefit in cubitus varus. The medial epiphysiodesis is also of no benefit in cubitus varus leaving only osteotomy in those that require intervention. The three most popular corrective osteotomies are the lateral closing wedge, the step cut lateral closing wedge and the dome rotational osteotomy. DeRosa and Graziano A dome osteotomy can produce correction in both the horizontal and coronal planes, although rotation may be limited by the medial soft tissue. A medial opening wedge osteotomy will maintain humeral length and does not produce a translational deformity. It does, however, take longer to heal therefore requiring longer immobilisation and there is also a risk of ulnar nerve neurapraxia. When undisplaced, flexion injuries can be treated by simple immobilisation. Once displaced such injuries should be treated with wire fixation. Although this can be achieved closed, some will require open fixation. This can be ideally done through a medial approach. Supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus may represent a very significant injury. Unstable fractures can be treated with either traction or k-wiring with satisfactory results if done well. If wiring an appropriately trained surgeon should at least be present, a satisfactory reduction achieved and careful wire insertion performed to reduce the risk of iatrogenic injury.