Methods used for modelling submicronic wet grinding processes are discussed. Simplified solutions of the population balance equation are first tested on experimental results obtained during batch runs performed with media mills on different materials. The use of statistical laws for modelling multimodal particle size distributions resulting from size reduction and aggregation processes is then presented. Finally, a method of macroscopic modelling to predict the particle size distribution of product from continuous ultrafine grinding is presented. It combines batch grinding kinetics and a solids flow model.Comminution models are used as a basis to choose process conditions for milling, design mills or scale-up laboratory tests to industrial plants. The methodology to describe grinding operations is similar to the one developed for other unit chemical engineering operations, as for example chemical reaction. Thus, a grinding step is defined by the fragmentation kinetics and the mill is the reactor, in which this operation occurs, characterized by the hydrodynamic conditions inside the grinding chamber. The aim of grinding models is to predict the product quality as a function of the initial material properties and the operational conditions. The objective of this paper is to discuss how to extend the existing knowledge of modelling ultrafine grinding operations. This discussion is based on wet grinding tests with different materials, performed over the last 10 years at the Chemical Engineering Laboratory in Toulouse (UMR CNRS 5503). Batch grinding is generally described on the basis of the selection function ( Cumulative distributions are sometimes more practical to use. The retained cumulative oversize distribution, corresponding to Combining The general analytical solution of batch grinding equations ( The interesting aspect of that solution is that the distributions, generated at different grinding times, coincide on a single curve when they are plotted as a function of the dimensionless particle size The self-preserving character of comminuted particles as shown in Batch grinding population balance is more often used in terms of discrete size classes as follows: The analytical solution of that equation, assuming that the selection and the breakage functions were independent of time was given by Reid in 1965 The main problems in the population balance modelling concern the determination of the selection and breakage functions. Usual methods, used for coarse grinding, in particular those based on experiments done with monoclass size cuts, cannot be applied in the particle size range covered by fine (<50 μm) and ultrafine grinding (≈1 μm) due to the difficulty to prepare narrow sieve fractions in that range. However, it is possible to avoid these problems, considering the following solution of the batch grinding equation given by Kapur The solution proposed by Kapur is best known under an approximate form obtained by stopping at order 2 the infinite series of the exponential terms of From experimental data on size distributions of ground samples, it is possible to derive the functions Compared to tumbling ball milling, stirred milling An example of the mathematical method previously described is illustrated in A second example of such a mathematical treatment is presented in The solution of the system composed by both the fragmentation and the agglomeration equation gives the evolution of the size distribution of the product versus time. In practice, hypotheses are usually done to simplify the models and to allow a separate determination of the probability functions An alternative way to obtain a mathematical representation of grinding kinetics is to use statistical laws. Classical statistical laws often used to fit size distributions are the Gaudin–Schuhmann law, the Rosin–Rammler law, and the normal or the log-normal law. When the distributions are multimodal, a single law cannot be used to model the kinetics and a combination of several laws sounds more appropriate. Of course, the higher the number of laws used for modelling, the better will be the fitting to the experimental data. However, the number of laws must keep a physical meaning and must be done on the basis of a quantitative or at least a qualitative characterization of the particle morphology. The procedure, used to model grinding kinetics, is illustrated in the following for wet grinding of calcite in a stirred bead mill. More details concerning the device and experimental conditions are given elsewhere The evolution of the size distributions and the morphology of the ground product is presented in On the basis of these observations, the experimental size distributions were decomposed into different sub-populations characterized by log-normal laws using the Origin Peak Fitting package (Integral Software, Paris France). The overall size distribution is then described by: An example of such a treatment is given in The evolution of the characteristic parameters of the log-normal law, Thus, the log-normal law may be used to fit experimental size distributions of a product obtained during an ultrafine grinding process. However, the log-normal distribution is skewed to the right and the mode and the spread of the distribution are dependent on each other. For processes involving both fragmentation and agglomeration processes, which is an usual situation in submicronic grinding processes, the population mode and spread may vary independently and the skew of the distribution can shift from right to left or vice versa. In such situations, the beta or log-beta law can be used instead of more classical statistical laws  The mode  Multimodal distributions may be represented by the combination of several beta or log-beta equations Such a treatment has been applied to data concerning the grinding of gibbsite in a stirred bead mill The initial population of gibbsite comprises particles presenting a global spherical shape. They are compact agglomerates formed by an association of large crystallites having a platelet shape. The crystallites are themselves constituted by a pile of pseudo-hexagonal plates. It was found that the main mechanism is, firstly, the rupture of the grains joints, leading to the dissociation of crystallites, and secondly, the chipping and the breakage of these crystallites. This initial population disappears, giving birth to two sub-populations. The coarser fraction, the median size of which varies versus grinding time from 100 to 10 μm, is constituted by fragments more elongated. They are less compact and have more concavities and more facets than the raw material. The finer fraction, which becomes above all predominant after a certain period of grinding in the stirred bead mill, consists of very small debris of a median size less than 1 μm. These fragments are simple convex polyhedrons with a few number of facets. Based on that morphological characterization, the size distributions of the ground product were divided into three sub-populations: initial particles, coarse fragments and finer ones, each of them described by a log-beta distribution. During continuous grinding processes, the relation between the size distribution of the ground product and the one of the initial material depends on both the fragmentation kinetics and on the time particles spend in the grinding chamber. Particles coming through the mill stay in the chamber for different periods depending on their transport. Consequently, particles leaving the mill at a given time stayed in the mill for different periods and thus were differently stressed. Two models have been reported describing the residence time distribution inside a stirred bead mill. The first model is based on the assumption that mixing superposes upon convective axial mass transport between the inlet and the outlet of the mill. The dispersion model is given by the dimensionless differential equation as follows: From the work of Schwedes and Bunge Heitzmann The residence time distribution of a continuous phase is easy to determine experimentally using soluble salts (NaCl, KCl) The formalism used to model continuous milling processes is similar to that used to model continuous reactors. Thus, if the residence time distribution Hence, the fraction of the ground particles in each size class is determined by integration of In that model, the fraction of recycled flow Many papers deal with modelling of coarse or fine grinding processes. The prediction of the product size distribution is usually done using a population balance approach. Concerning fine and submicronic wet grinding processes, problems arise due to practical difficulties in the determination of the selection and breakage functions and to agglomeration phenomena occurring during size reduction. Simplified solutions of the population balance equation as the similarity solution are very interesting to use for modelling when they suitably predict the experimental results. If the size distribution of the ground product presents a notable bi- or multimodal character, the use of statistical laws, such as the log-normal or the log-beta laws can be used to fit the fragmentation kinetics. A morphological analysis of the material can then help to give a physical sense to the resulting kinetics equation and to define the fragmentation path occurring during the size reduction process. A general chemical engineering approach for modelling continuous processes, combining batch grinding kinetics and a mass transport model, can be used to predict the particle size distribution of the product from continuous fine or submicronic grinding. The accuracy of the model mainly depends on the precision of the batch kinetics equation. So, further research work will attempt to develop a more generalized population balance representation of submicronic grinding processes involving agglomeration phenomena. characteristic parameter of the log-beta law breakage distribution function breakage function related to class cumulative breakage function cumulative breakage function related to class ratio of the solid concentration on the maximal one axial dispersion coefficient (m residence time distribution (s beta function frequence distribution of log-normal law cumulated mass fraction of particles of size less than Kapur function reaction of recycled flow Kapur function agglomeration kernel mill length (m) parameter of log-beta law mass fraction of particles of size class mass fraction of particles of size number of particles of mass fraction of continuous ground product of size flow rate (l/h) cumulative retained distribution at time cumulative retained distribution related to size class selection function (s selection function related to size class time (min) actual time divided by the ideal filling time axial velocity (m/s) variance (m particle mass (kg) weight fraction of the sub-population particle size (m) geometric mean size (m) mode (m) reduced size distance from the inlet of the mill divided by the mill length first moment of the particle size distribution (m) standard geometric deviation (m) Gamma function