In the present study, accumulative roll bonding (ARB) was utilized to incorporate ZrO2/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) hybrid nanoparticles into the 1100 aluminum matrix to fabricate composite filler rods of tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding. After welding, microstructures and distribution of hybrid nanoparticles were analyzed with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). It was found that by increasing the number of ARB cycles, the hybrid nanoparticles were uniformly distributed in the filler rods. The tensile strength and microhardness of the nanoparticle-reinforced weld metals have an obvious improvement compared to that of unreinforced weld metal, but the elongation show a decrease. This improvement in the mechanical properties was attributed to the grain refinement and homogeneous dispersion of hybrid nanoparticles as well as the good interfacial bonding between the hybrid nanoparticles and aluminum matrix resulted from the ARB technique.Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding is a common joining process in automotive, marine and aerospace industries. TIG welding is an electric arc based welding process which melts and joins base materials by heating them under an inert shielding gas atmosphere. A filler rod can be also added to the weld pool to reinforce the welded joint. This welding technique is extensively used in the joining of aluminum structural components due to its advantages in utility and economy [ Lately a new approach has been made to introduce nanoparticles to filler rods of TIG welding using accumulative roll bonding (ARB) [ Hybrid composite filler rods are a new class of nanostructured materials containing a combination of two or more different kinds of reinforcement in order to take advantages of all of them. Recently, association of hybrid particles for enhancement of composite properties made by ARB has been reported by different researchers [ In this study, 1100 aluminum sheets (having elemental composition of Si, 0.95; Fe, 0.40; Cu, 0.05; Mn, 0.05; Zn, 0.1; Mg, 0.05 in wt%) with 1 mm thickness were used as the filler rods. The sheets were annealed at 773 K for 2 h and were cut into 200 mm × 50 mm strips, parallel to the sheet rolling direction. Graphene oxide (GO) with a thickness of 12 nm and ZrO The schematic illustration of accumulative roll bonding (ARB) process for the composite filler rod synthesis is shown in In order to evaluate the microstructure and mechanical properties of weld metals produced by the composite filler rods, the 1100 aluminum alloy plates (150 mm × 100 mm × 10 mm) with a single V-shaped groove with an angle of 60° were used as the base metal. With each of the experimental filler rods (F1–F4), a weld joint was produced by TIG welding process, designated as W1, W2, W3 and W4, respectively. The flow rate of argon shielding gas, arc voltage and arc current used in the welding process were 16 L min   In order to have a better understanding about the dispersion of the hybrid nanoparticles in filler rod F4, the higher magnification SEM micrograph and EDS analysis of a nanoparticle was used as shown in  The average microhardness values of the weld metals are shown in   The fractured surfaces of tensile specimens are shown in In this study, the composite filler rods of TIG welding were successfully fabricated by ARB. Effects of ZrO