The present paper refers to the results of a research project on the polychlorinated dibenzyil-p-dioxin (PCDD) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans repartition in particulate and volatile phase in emissions from municipal solid waste incinerators. The distribution of such micropollutants between the different phases is analyzed in terms of absolute weights and in terms of 2, 3, 7, 8 TCDD Equivalents. This paper shows that more than half of the total content of PCDD/Fs emitted are adsorbed in the fly ash, with the remaining part in the volatile phase. Such repartition is inverted if the PCDD/Fs are expressed in terms of 2, 3, 7, 8 TCDD Equivalent.Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) are present in trace concentrations in the emissions of several thermal processes, among which include municipal solid waste incinerators (MSWIs), as shown for the first time in At present, the majority of the researchers consider the post-combustion de novo synthesis and the precursor condensation theory as the most accepted mechanisms of PCDD/F production. The kinetics, peak temperatures, and resulting fingerprints of these mechanisms have been widely investigated both in pilot-scale and real plants for a relevant number of thermal processes and, in particular, for solid waste incinerators. Recent studies ( After the discovery of PCDD/Fs in flue gas of MSWIs ( Presence of PCDD/F in waste fed to the incinerators. Formation of PCDD/F during the combustion from chlorinated organics (chlorobenzenes, chlorophenols) that are present in the waste. Formation of PCDD/F during the combustion from non-chlorinated organic aromatic compounds with the contribution of chlorine from donors such as PVC. Today, the two major formation mechanisms of PCDD/F proposed and assessed by researchers for MSWIs ( The precursor mechanism is the result of the polycondensation of precursors such as polychlorophenols, polychlorobenzenes, and PCBs. This heterogeneous phase synthesis occurs at temperatures between 300 and 600 The de novo synthesis requires the presence of carbon in the solid phase and occurs mostly between 200 and 400 The PCDD/F formation rate for the de novo synthesis has been evaluated to be several orders of magnitude faster than the precursor reaction ( In the majority of the thermal processes, congener patterns in terms of the degree of chlorination are almost constant within the PCDD-group (hepta and octa congeners are constantly dominant), while a more considerable variation is present within the PCDF-group. The average PCDD and PCDF chlorination degrees for MSWIs emissions are, respectively, 7.35 and 6.69 ( Literature data concerning possible correlations between PCDD/F emissions of MSWIs and emissions of other pollutants or operative are limited, rarely conclusive and sometimes misleading. Correlation between PCDD/Fs and flue gas chemical parameters (such as HF, HCl, H Effects of combustion temperature on PCDD/Fs formation in laboratory-scale incineration has been found by In a number of studies, temperature at various locations of the incinerators seemed to be the parameter most clearly correlated with PCDD/F emission levels. According to recent studies, the temperature of the ESP seems to be an important driving parameter in PCDD/F emissions levels. A careful analysis of the PCDD/F distribution between solid (particulate – fly ash) and gaseous (gas and vapors) phase in different plants may be found in It is known from the literature that the semi-volatile pollutants inter-phases distribution is strongly affected by the temperature, vapor pressures, particle number density and size distribution and particle properties ( Post filter gas-phase PCDD/F emissions have been reported to be greater than 50% of the total PCDD/F emissions when sampling the raw gas downstream of the boiler of large-scale MSWIs ( This gas/particle partitioning of PCDD/Fs has severe implications on both monitoring and control technologies. While particle-bound PCDD/Fs are largely controlled by particulate collection devices, the gas-phase fraction may escape. The Italian environmental laws (D.M. 503/97) limit the emissions of the PCDD/Fs in terms of absolute weight concentrations, as well as in terms of 2, 3, 7, 8 TCDD Equivalent (TCDDEq) concentrations, corrected to take into account the different toxicities of the isomers. The present study is carried out in two MSWIs of fluidized bed typology. It provides a characterization of the distribution of the several PCDD/F isomers between the particulate and the gaseous phases. The present study extends the analysis to two identical fluidized bed MSWIs with a glance on the current Italian law (D. M. 503/97) that establishes the limit of PCDD/F emissions according to the toxic levels of each single isomer. The main purpose of this study is the repartition of the PCDD/Fs emitted by MSWIs between particulate and volatile phase. The PCDD/Fs in both phases (solid and gaseous) have also been characterized in terms of PCDF/PCDD ratios and chlorination degrees. This paper shows that more than half of the total content of PCDD/Fs emitted are adsorbed in the fly ash that in most cases are landfilled, while the remaining part is on volatile phase. Such repartition is inverted if the PCDD/Fs are expressed in terms of TCDDEq. The results reported in the present paper are obtained from two identical fluidized bed MSWIs called “A” and “B”. The maximum capacity of each plant was 100 t/day. Waste was preselected, reduced in size, and homogenized before being fed into both plants. The composition of the waste was typically of municipal origin and was the same in both of the incinerators. In both plants, combustion flue gas (generated in the combustion chamber at 720 The samplings and the successive laboratory measurements were performed following the EN 1948 protocol [isokinetic sampling with filter – condenser and adsorber – resin XAD2, high resolution gas chromatography (HRGC) and high resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) analysis, with the obvious separation of the results obtained for the particulate state (dust on filter) from those obtained for the gaseous state (condense and adsorbent resin)]. In all cases, only municipal waste was treated in the plants. The contents of PCDD/F were also expressed in terms of 2, 3, 7, 8 TCDD Equivalents (TCDDEq), multiplying the isomers concentrations by the corresponding equivalent toxicity factors (ETF) as established in D. M. 503/97 (Annex 1) and reported for clarity in The results of the present study are reported in  The composition of volatile phase (VP) of PCDD/F in terms of absolute percentage obtained in the present study is reported in The results presented in The distribution of PCDD between particulate and volatile phases in this study is graphically reported in As expected, and as shown in The compositions (weight percentage) of the PCDD/F particulate and volatile phases obtained in this study are reported in The total PCDD/F amount in particulate and volatile phases is reported in In terms of absolute weight percentage, From the comparison between the “A” (samples 1–5) and “B” (samples 6–8) plants in The PCDD/F distribution in terms of TCDDEq is reported in   Nevertheless, in the global overview, it is also important to take into account that the content of PCDD/F (both in absolute and in TCDDEq percentage terms) is significant in the fly ash that is mostly generally disposed. The PCDD/F concentrations due to the adsorption in fly ash occurs preferably in lower temperatures areas along the flue gas treatment line, especially in agglomerations with high contents of unburnt materials. Moreover, the results reported in the present study, and in particular the PCDD/F resulting isomeric composition, allow one to associate or not with MSWIs a pollution from PCDD/F (both in soil and air). The results may also suggest, as a preliminary step, a systematic survey sampling-analysis of PCDD/F in emissions, based exclusively on isokinetic sampling of the particulate phase (powders). In fact, the weight ratios between different states, analyzed in the present work, may allow approximated estimation of the total concentration in the emissions, which may be used for “internal monitoring”. This is crucial because it could enable the avoidance of complex sampling of the gaseous state required by the EN 1948 protocol. It is known from the literature that the semi-volatile pollutants inter-phases distribution is affected by temperature, vapor pressures, particle number density and size distribution and particle properties. The present investigation was focused on the percentage distributions of the PCDD/F in emissions from MSWIs, in the particulate and gaseous phases. In particular, the higher contribution of the former, in terms of absolute weight, over the total emissions has been highlighted. A higher incidence of the latter was nevertheless recognized in terms of TCDDEq. The revealed isomeric composition is typical of the formation mechanism of PCDD/F named as de novo synthesis, with some difference from literature data in the PCDF/PCDD ratio and in PCDD and PCDF chlorination degrees. As expected, most chlorinated isomers are concentrated in the solid phase, confirming other data collected in the literature. The weight of the gaseous state over the total emissions in terms of TCDDEq strongly requires the necessity of appropriate treatment, while the relevancies of PCDD/F quantities in fly ash motivate a particular care in their consequent disposal in sanitary landfill. The author thanks Mara Toso and Roberto Marcia.