 Electrochemical methods can be used to produce a variety of metal powders ( The main properties of such powders are purity, dendritic shape of particles ( Electrochemical methods make it possible to control crystallization (definite shape and size of powder particles) by selecting the process parameters: concentration of the metal and hydrogen ion exponent pH of the electrolyte, cathode potential, current density, temperature and rate of circulation of the electrolyte, type and size of anode and cathode and their distance from each other, type and quantity of addition agents and conditions of removing deposits at the electrodes. The use of some techniques (permanent anodes, electrochemical reduction from solid phase, electrodes with highly developed surface) makes it possible to utilize production waste and to achieve Powders of the majority of metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt, cadmium, zinc, silver, may be manufactured by electrodeposition of metals from aqueous solutions. This method is differentiated by the properties of the electrodepositions: the first method, namely ‘direct deposition’ of a friable or spongy deposit that can easily be disintegrated mechanically into fine particles, and the second method named ‘brittle process’ deposition of a dense, smooth, brittle layer that can be ground into powder [ Unique possibilities to produce a wide list of metals in powder form are provided by amalgam metallurgy. In the course of electrolysis, the metal is crystallized in dendrites due to the destroyed stability of the flat front of growth of particles of the newly formed metallic phase that occurs at positive values of the thermodynamic criterion S I n many cases, metal deposition is controlled by material transfer towards the phase boundary. The maximum rate of such electrochemical reaction is characterized by limit current density As a rule, the resistivity of the solution p The structure of particles of the dendritic deposit depends on of the metal, the nucleation mechanism and the dynamics of the dendrite growth ( Subsieve dendritic particles (up to 1–10 μm) are obtained by the electrolysis in a two-layered cell and by the chemical reduction from solutions. Big wellcut dendrites of 50–100 mm are crystallized from the melts. Particles of 5–200 μm are produced by electrolysis of aqueous solutions. Diffusion limitations are provided by high depletion factor An anisotropic shape of dendritic particles is connected with the difference between electrolytic crystallization rate at the tips  Dendrite growth dynamics in its turn completely depends upon the conditions of the electrolysis, potentiostatic and galvanostatic as well. Under the potentiostatic conditions [ where t where ik is the current kinetic density determined in accordance with electrochemical laws [ If dendrite height exceeds the diffusion layer thickness δ, then the maximum current of the spherical diffusion is calculated as following: The tip shape that is closest to parabolic can be approximated by a semi-sphere with the radius where Thus, the dendrite growth rate is defined by the over-voltage value η, the nature Under potentiostatic conditions, uniform dendrite growth is determined by the establishment of a constant curvature radius of the dendrite tips that is correlated with the applied over-voltage. The spherical diffusion rate determined by the surface curvature radius (Eqn Such electrolysis conditions provide for the crystallization of the dendrite deposit uniform in structure during a long-term electrolysis. At that, the size and the morphological characteristics of dendrites are determined and regulated by the value of the applied over-voltage. This prospective way to obtain dendritic deposits of uniform and regulated structure is not implemented currently due to a lack of industrial potentiostats. Since in galvanostatic electrolysis the set current is many times higher than the limit current, hydrogen is formed at the cathode together with the metals that do not possess high exchange current (in precipitation from aqueous solution). If hydrogen is not co-reduced together with the metal, then the change of the dendrite length within an interval where Due to a decrease of Uniform dendritic deposits can be obtained in galvanotatic electrolysis too, when the deposit growth front area is constant. For instance, in the aqueous solution together with the dendrite layer growth, the current load must be increased. Then, the initial current value and its rates of increase will determine structural and technological parameters of the powder [ Simulation of the electrolytic dendrite deposit growth is meant for the description of a relation between powder technological properties and electrolyte composition and electrolysis condition. In the course of processing, after the electrolysis the powder properties (particle size distribution, apparent density and specific surface) are significantly changed depending on drying, milling and screening conditions. However, the basis of particle structure is formed in the electrolysis stage. While simulating the process, we assumed the key structural parameters to be the dendrite tip curvature radius The distribution of the obtained dendritic deposit over the dendrite tip radii is a prototype of electrolysis product distribution by particle size. The average density of tip distribution on the growth front characterizes a dendritic form of the loose deposit and is proportional to the reciprocal apparent density of the powder. The share of the dendrite deposit with the tip radius where The use of activation control or ohmic control instead of transfer control can result in a radical change of the type of the dendrite deposit that is weakly connected with the degree of diffusion limitations. Another kind of control (for example activation or ohmic control) instead of a transport one can In such cases, the deposit structure is controlled by other technological parameters, for example, a change of discharge activation parameters (introduction of surfactants, complexing ligands) or an increase of electrolyte conductivity. Electrolytic dendrite deposits produced under the diffusion control conditions possess fractal properties, so that the structural characteristic of such deposits is the value of the fractal dimension D. The process can be described by stochastic models based on the diffusion-limited aggregation (DLA) [ Nanopowders are produced under the condition of the enforced removal of metal nuclei that develop within the period of short-term current impulses from the cathode surface [ Electrical precipitation of metal as a loose dendritic deposit is performed from diluted solutions under a high current density. The possibility of powder precipitation on the cathode from aqueous solution is provided by the ratio of electrochemical parameters of metal and hydrogen. Intensive evolution of hydrogen is registered for the majority of metals (except mercury) ranging of the potentials from −1 to −1.2 V. This limit determines the area within which metals can be precipitated from aqueous solution on the cathode with appropriate current efficiency Taking into account the polarizability, the most electrically negative metal that is precipitated from aqueous solution as a dendritic deposit is zinc. The use of a mercury electrode allows us to extend the range of metals precipitated from aqueous solution. The electrolysis on a solid cathode is accomplished usually at low temperature (17–57°C) with a relatively low specific power consumption (1.6–10 kW·h/kg). The crystallized deposit either falls off due to shaking or is brushed off from the cathode, it depends on the precipitated metal. The anode current density across the soluble anodes is usually lower than the cathode one to avoid passivation. The powder deposit is removed from the electrolyzer and dehydrated; it is then washed, stabilized with surfactants to protect it from oxidation, milled, screened, blended, mixed and packed. An alternative technological treatment of powder includes washing, drying, sintering in a reducing atmosphere, milling and screening. In this case, the powder is characterized by higher apparent density and flowability, but has a lower corrosion resistance owing to the destruction of stabilizing layers while sintering. All the factors that contribute to the destabilization of the flat growth front result in comminution of powder particles. The stability is disturbed ( Hydrogen evolved, together with the metal, stirs the space close to the cathode, making the diffusion layer rather thinner, and contributes to dendrite coarsening (lower After the current is switched on, conditions of accelerated growth of dendrites are created within the transient time interval τ and, at the end of this interval, metal ion concentration where Then dendrites can crystallize in two ways depending on the ratio of equilibrium potentials and the exchange currents of the metal and hydrogen: either by means only of cathode process (discharge of metal ions) or together with the process of the co-reduction of metal and hydrogen ions. The first approach is applied in the case of precious metals with the equilibrium potentials much more positive than the equilibrium potentials of hydrogen as well as of metals with high over-voltage of hydrogen release on them (lead, cadmium, tin from simple electrolytes). The dynamics of dendrite growth in the first group is described by Eqns The second group comprises the rest of the metals as well as metals of the first group precipitated from solutions of complex compounds or in the presence of surfactants. In these cases, dendrite deposit growth is accompanied by hydrogen release, dendrites grow more slowly, the cathode potential is determined by the current density of hydrogen reduction until the condition of dendrite growth K Trends of different distribution of the dendrite deposit in dendrite radii of dendrite tips under new electrolysis conditions are equal for electrolytic crystallization of all metals (see Electrical crystallization of the structurally uniform deposit that grows with a constant rate is enabled along with potentiostatic electrolysis by a technically simpler galvanodynamic mode with linear change of current in time: Here, The impulse mode of electrolysis is elaborated to affect the particle structure directly and enables a change of particle size distribution and powder particle shape depending on porosity, amplitude and duration of the impulse. Constant electrolyte composition is one of the main conditions of process stability and of permanent powder quality. The requirements for the electrolyte are the following: absence of impurities able to co-reduce together with the metal; high conductivity to reduce the specific power consumption; minimum rate of hydrogen release that decreases cathode current efficiency; the lowest possibility of chemical dissolving of the precipitated metal.  The current efficiency of the dendrite deposit is always less than 100% for the following reasons: accompanying release of hydrogen interaction of cathode product and anode product if permanent (insoluble) anodes are used reduction of metal ion only to intermediate valency chemical dissolving, especially when powder falls down from the cathode. The following measures contribute to the increase of the current efficiency: maintenance of optimal parameters of electrolysis (metal ion concentration, background, current density, stirring mode) installation of a diaphragm if permanent anodes are used extension of the interval of cathode deposit growth rapid powder removal out of the electrolyte and its washing to reduce secondary dissolution. Measures to increase the current efficiency should be balanced with their effect on powder dispersivity and particle shape. As current density increases, the current efficiency passes through a maximum. At first, the proportion of current for dendrite deposit precipitation increases due to a decrease of the quantity of the compact precipitate and joints produced if current densities are comparable with the limit density. An accelerated hydrogen release leads to stirring the near-electrode space due to lowering of the current efficiency, The anode current efficiency in the case of soluble anodes is, as a rule, higher than the cathode yield and can exceed 100% taking into account chemical dissolution of the metal. In a number of electrochemical systems, anode passivation and decreasing of anode current efficiency are possible. To align current efficiencies, depassivators (for example hydrochloric acid in nickel powder production) are introduced. The inequality of cathode and anode current efficiencies changes the electrolyte composition. Metal ions gradually accumulate; a saturation by gas of the solution close to cathode and a growth of the concentration of metal ions in the near-anode space lead to electrolyte separation into layers. The denser solution from the near-anode space drops to the bottom of the electrolyzer and, in its upper part, the solution with a lowered concentration accumulates. This effect is overcome by a periodic withdrawal of a part of the electrolyte together with the introduction of a fresh correction solution or the introduction of insoluble anodes. Denoting the electrolyte volume in n-cells as ν where The required quantity of cells with insoluble anodes ( If such a cell is one in the series, then its current load will be: Electrolyte circulation (approximately 0.4 dcm Electrolytic cells of box type with plain (disk) or cylindrical cathodes (bars or in the form of a drum) are used for water solution treatment. In electrolytic cells, devices of electrolyte input and output are The type of the device depends upon the duration of precipitate accumulation and the strength of its binding with the cathode. Shaking off the loose precipitate ( In the cells with disk cathodes, a quick shifting of cathode sections in the air, automatic powder cleansing from the cathode and powder washout into the collector are provided. Cathodes are placed between anodes and are manufactured in the form of sections; they are fixed on the shaft and are able to rotate around its axis. When a cathode goes from solution, each section of it is separated from others and, using a mechanism, is quickly transferred to a chamber where the powder is cut from the cathode with a knife and flushed with water into the collector. The bath for collection of the powder from the cylindrical cathodes is installed on a platform moved in the vertical plane by a screw using a drive ( If a duct cathode is used, the electrolyte is supplied into it under a pressure through a fitting. The electrolyte is released through holes and falls onto plates. It is reflected from them and removed along the cathode surface. In this process, ultrasonic fluctuations with a frequency of 100 kHz arise in the solution. Metal powder precipitates on the cathode, then it is taken off the cathode by solution jets and ultrasonic fluctuations and removed into the collector in the form of a sludge. To intensify the process of electrolysis and to simplify powder discharge, the electrolyte is fed by impulses of 5–300 s with a periodicity of 1–100 h from below the device under an angle of 5–75° to the horizontal with speeds in the range under 20 cm/s (the range under 10 cm/s is preferable) depending on the quantity and the grain-size composition of the precipitated particles. If a vibrating ribbed cathode is used, the process of powder precipitation is accelerated 50–100 times (the amplitude is 0.8 mm and the frequency is 100 Hz). Cavitation arises close to the ribbed surface of the cathode and this intensifies electrolyte stirring and facilitates powder crumbling from the cathode. Impulse gas feeding through holes of a hollow cathode ( Metal particles with grain size of 0.1–10 μm are produced by electric precipitation in a bath with a two-layer electrolyte. The cathode is a rotating metal drum or disk. The bottom electrolyte layer is an aqueous In process of crystallization of ultrafine elongated whiskers and strands precipitated from the two-layer bath several stages are distinguished: formation of a strong passive layer on the electrode surface metal ions discharge through the absorbing film by overcoming a high potential barrier development of three-dimensional nuclei on the electrode surface development of crystals inside the thin passive layer of the organic liquid growth of dendrites outside the film in the aqueous phase. Under conditions of increased concentration of metal ions in the water phase, the discharge through the film of organic liquid occurs with overcoming of a high energy barrier and is controlled by the parameters of the barrier reaction. When diluted solutions of the water phase are used, diffusion factors control dendrite growth rate and qualitative links between particle structure and mass transfer parameters remain the same: particle size decreases when water solution is diluted, current density is increased and temperature is reduced. Surfactants influence the electrocrystallization process: whiskers, needles of constant section are formed due to the localization of electroprecipitation on their end surface, as crystal side faces are blocked by the layer of absorbed particles of the surfactant; the process is controlled by surfactant diffusion because of continuous nucleation and movement of growth steps with competing surfactant absorption. In the case of precipitation from solutions saturated by surfactants, the value of the current density on the strand end is practically close to constant. According to Krichmar [ Introducing into the water layer a surfactant other than oleic acid that is usually present in the organic phase in the amount of 2–5 kg/m Current efficiency of ultrafine disperse precipitation goes through a maximum with growing current density decreasing at too high current densities due to intense hydrogen emission. An excess quantity of the acid added to water phase to increase its electric conductivity leads to prevailing hydrogen discharge and reduces the current efficiency. In alkaline media, an excessive increase of pH causes the formation of hydrates and a passivation of the electrode surface. A growth of metal ion concentration in the water layer leads to an increase of the current efficiency of the disperse precipitate. In electrolyzers, to produce metal organic sol, devices for continuous removal of disperse phase are provided ( A promising method for production of ultrafine metal powders is based on the use of emulsion devices with fixed electrodes. The method of a running magnetic field is proposed for production of ultrafine powders with the participation of non-equiaxed ferromagnetic particles ( The electroemulsion method involves pressing of the emulsion through the electrolyzer with fixed electrodes ( High-efficiency methods of metal recovery from dilute solutions are based on the application of electrodes with developed surface together with an increase of the mass transfer coefficient that is achieved under respective hydrodynamic conditions in the electrolyzer. Metal electroprecipitation under such conditions occurs together with the formation of powder. In the  Series installation of several chambers with each of them working at a certain cathode potential allows a selective recovery of different metals from solutions ( The process is activated on account of the high mass transfer coefficient in the inter-electrode space of two electrodes, the anode being rotated at a high speed and the cathode being fixed ( The electrolyzer with a rotating cylindrical layer of particles consists of two concentric perforated nonconducting cylinders (  Both electrolyzers with a moving particle layer are designed for cadmium recovery from solutions containing cyanide. Metal precipitates on the cathode in the form of powder and cyanide ions oxidize on the anode to carbon dioxide. The cathode current efficiency starts to decrease significantly when the metal concentration reaches 10 A moving layer of steel balls 4.5 mm in diameter covered by an18 μm copper layer is used for copper recovery from the sulfate solutions. The balls fill up to 35% of the drum volume. Current is supplied to them using a free hanging lead ball 11 mm in diameter; the anode is a lead wire 3.1 mm in diameter placed along the horizontal drum axis. The condition for the precipitation of metal alloy powders is the equality of discharge potentials of metal ions on dendrite tips. The electrocrystallization of the dendrite deposit proceeds under diffusion control and is located at the tips of growing dendrites. The conditions of mixed electrochemical kinetics with semi-spherical character of diffusion are realized: where The content of the component in the alloy is proportional to the current density of its reduction at the growing front So far, diffusion limitations are not released from the growing front, the current densities The combination of Eqns ( In aqueous solutions, the effective diffusion factors for different ions are close to each other, so that for z During electrolysis, the depth of diffusion limitations on the growth front of the dendrite deposit is gradually decreased and the potential shifts to the field of more positive values. In this case, the alloy component with a more electronegative potential may prove to be under conditions of activation discharge control; then the linear connection between ( To provide diffusion control, alloys are precipitated from dilute solutions (the total concentration of metal salts is not higher then 0.2 mol/L) of simple electrolytes. The proportion of metal ions in the solution corresponds to their proportion in the alloy and a constant value of ( The methods of supporting constant solution composition depend on the nature of the anode reaction. When using insoluble anodes, it is necessary to make up the loss of reducing components in the electrolyte; an accumulation of ballast salts in the electrolyte is possible. If the soluble anodes are used, a periodical correction of electrolyte composition is required because of the difference of cathode and anode current efficiencies and uncontrolled current distribution between soluble anodes. The most reliable method is the application of combined anodes (  Usually the discharge of the component with more electronegative potential is obviously relieved in alloy formation. The kinetics of electrochemical reduction of metal ions depends on the nature and the character of the cathode surface that changes for each metal during alloy formation in comparison with individual discharge. If diffusion limitations on the growth front are released for any component, these effects are manifested in the change of alloy composition in comparison with one calculated according to Eqn ( Dispersivity, grain-size distribution and apparent density of alloy powder depend on the total concentration of metal ions and on the parameters of electrolysis (current density, temperature, pH, stirring mode). As in the case of precipitation of single component powder, the dispersivity of powders from multicomponent alloys increases, their apparent density lowers and flowability deteriorates with growing exhaust coefficient and vice versa. The devices for producing powders of pure metals and multicomponent alloys are the same. The method is based on a combination of zone chemistry and electrochemistry, and this allows the manufacture of nanopowders because of the following effects: substance transportation to the reaction zone is uninterrupted electrode surface is cleaned and degassed the rate of the electrochemical process is increased. The idea of the method is that after each electrochemical impulse of constant current, during which metal nuclei form on the electrode surface, an ultrasonic (zone) impulse follows, the energy of which is the located in the reaction zone. It separates nuclei from the cathode surface and throws them into the solution. In this method, the characteristics of impulse and zone electrolysis (interval between ultrasonic impulses, parameters of cathode-sample electrode, capacity of ultrasonic impulse) are added to the traditional factors that determine particle size and shape (solution composition, current density, electrolysis duration). As under other electrolysis modes, the dominating particle size decreases with the growth of current impulse amplitude, with the dilution of the solution, when the time period between ultrasonic impulses is reduced and noticeably depends on their wattage. If the energy of ultrasonic impulses is low, then metal clusters formed on the cathode-sample electrode are not able to overcome the adhesion forces and to strip the deposit from the electrode into the solution. The clusters remaining on the surface affect every subsequent current impulse so that the nanoparticle yield is lowered. If the impulse energy is excessive, the temperature goes up immediately in the reaction zone, and it encourages disappearance of the transport control and leads to undesirable particle aggregation.  Electrolytically precipitated powder may be produced by the displacement of one metal M To provide a high rate of this heterogeneous reaction, a large area of the cementing metal is provided by using it in the form of powder, chips, lumps and the intensity of the limited flow is increased. Due to excess of the precipitator, precipitated metal is deposited completely. After electrolytic precipitation, the solution is washed from the product and the precipitator surplus is eliminated (by acid solution treatment, by magnetic separation etc.). The possibility of spontaneous proceeding of the process is estimated by the decrease of Gibbs free energy Δ Completeness of the precipitation is defined by equilibrium according to Nernst's equation: where The basis of electrolytic precipitation is corrosion ( Metal is reduced on the tips of growing dendrites with tip location density at the growth front Around The precipitator M The formed dendrite deposit has a volumetric specific surface Dendrite growth rate and expansion rate of areas covered by the precipitated metal are described by Faraday's law in differential form: where On the area of the tangentially spread film, the metal is precipitated during diffusion control, as the effective value of the diffusion layer for the film is increased up to the value δ + The precipitator dissolves according to the mechanism of delayed ionization: Hydrogen emission rate is determined by its exchange current on the metal that is connected with the parameters of the kinetic equation as well as by its equilibrium potential where The charge balance in this process is retained: The dynamics of the electrocrystallization of the dendrite deposit is calculated by the solution of the system of differential equations that describe the behavior in time of its structural characteristics As precipitator area is covered by the tangential film of the precipitate, the anode current density increases and the electrode potential becomes more positive. When The solution of this task makes it possible to observe the behavior in the time domain of the dendrite tip radius and the current of metal M Besides, the longer the process, the larger are the particles. The diffusion control of the process absolute at the moment of metal M All factors contributing to the instability of the flat growth front (see If both processes take place on the unchangeable equal surface of the cathodes where The cases of delayed discharge of cathode and anode reaction are described most completely by Rotinyan–Heifez equation [  A chemical treatment of the product is most effective for cleaning the produced powder from precipitator residues. Sometimes such treatment is conducted in an inert atmosphere to prevent the produced powder from oxidation, or magnetic separation is applied. Electrolysis from melts is used for producing electronegative metal powders. Their precipitation from water solutions is non-effective because of intensive hydrogen emission. High values of rate constants of electrochemical processes at high temperatures cause an insignificant polarizability and, as a result, the flat growth front becomes unstable long before the achievement of the limit current density. As a rule, metals from melts are crystallized in dendritic form. To prevent the electrolyte from absorption of moisture and metal oxidation at high gas temperatures, the dendrite deposit is discharged from the electrolyzer in the form of solid dispersed bulk metal together with electrolyte salts. Further treatment of the powder consists of separation of powder and electrolyte either by mechanical milling, air separation, salt leaching or vacuum distillation of the electrolyte. High electric conductivity of salt electrolytes allows use of high current densities that provide high efficiency of the process of metal takeoff and high current efficiency because of the absence of cathode hydrogen emission. All the factors that lead to positive values of S  where At high cathode current densities, fine crystals of secondary powders are formed due to metal reduction by subions of eluted basic metals. When selecting the solvent salt, it is necessary to take into account a possibility to achieve lower electrolysis temperature and higher thermodynamic stability than the reduced metal compound. As a rule, equimolecular mixtures of metal chlorides (NaCl + KCl, KCl + LiCl, NaCl + KCl + MgCl where ΔG is a modification of Gibbs free energy at the formation of a given compound. It is necessary to supply periodically or continuously the salt of the precipitated metal to the electrolyte and to add solvent salts carried away by the discharged cathode deposit. Metals and conductive metal-like compounds (carbides, nitrides, oxycarbides, carbonitrides) are used as soluble anodes. The following factors can cause a decrease of powder yield in relation to current: chemical dissolution of eluted metal interaction with the solvent disproportionation reaction accompanied by the formation of low-valency ions reaction of reversed oxidation of metal in the anode area as a result of its convection or diffusion transfer recombination of the products of cathode and anode processes reduction of metals with more negative potential. The following measures promote the increase of powder yield with respect to current: addition to the electrolyte of salts with cations having more negative potential and decreasing metal solubility in the electrolyte separation of anode and cathode areas by a diaphragm maintenance of temperature and current density at the optimum level. As the temperature rises, current efficiency passes through a maximum. An excessive temperature increase intensifies chemical dissolution and facilitates diffusion and convection transfer of active substances to the anode area. At low temperature, the maximum process rate defined by the limit current density is decreased. Besides, the lower the temperature, the lower the melt electroconductivity and the larger is the specific power consumption. The current efficiency increases when current density increases up to At a ‘critical’ current density there is the possibility of an ‘anode effect’ (abundant gassing on the anode that leads to reducing the contact of the electrolyte with the anode, spark formation, and increase of the resistance, especially when the electrode is wetted poorly by electrolyte), which is undesirable. To increase the ‘critical’ current density, the surfactants improving anode wettability, chlorides of basic metal and oxides of the reduced metal (if oxygen is permissible in the melt) are injected into the electrolyte. If the metal oxide is considered to be an electro-active substance, the anode effect is permitted to appear with a certain regularity as the index of the oxide concentration factor in the melt. The parameters of producing disperse precipitates of various metals are generally the same, normally sodium chloride or its eutectics with potassium chloride are used. The melt contains 10–20% of metal chlorides (usually between 3 and 7% calculated for the metal). The electrolysis temperature is between 970 and 1140 K; high cathode current density of 5–15kA/m High densities of metal exchange current in molten media cause a rapid increase of the area of the precipitate growth front and cancel the diffusion control. This causes a corresponding coarsening of dendrite crystals during electrolysis and the deposition of the product in the form of large powder particles. Statistical models that relate the average particle size where The following statistical ratio between the average particle size and electrolysis conditions is valid for metals indicated in The values of constants The ratio (Eqn where α In this case it is simpler to calculate the α Calculations of ratios, Eqns  The dendrite growth rate decreases in the course of time and leads to a non-homogeneous structure of the product. But, at any moment, dendrites can be lengthened linearly (see The electrolyzer with soluble anodes and immovable cathodes is a vessel with anodes and cathode cores and an inlet for inert gas injection. The graphite sleeve in the electrolyzer fulfills simultaneously the function of anode current supply in the cell with the diaphragm. A design of electrolyzer with the transfer of the cathode precipitate to a water-cooled chamber is known ( Dendrites are crystallized in a mercury electrode as a result of the formation of oversaturated amalgams after achieving the limit of metal solubility in mercury ( The metal is precipitated either by electrolysis on the liquid mercury cathode or by electrolytic precipitation by amalgam of a more negative metal ( When the metal is precipitated in the form of amalgam, continual use as the anode means that more positive impurities are left in the amalgamanode and more negative impurities remain in the solution. The Volta series for amalgams differs from that for pure metals and depends upon the amalgam phase composition. The following Nernst equation is presented for a single-phase amalgam: where where  In surface layers of the mercury, a supersaturated solution of metal being reduced is formed and conditions for homogeneous crystallization of metal nuclei of a size defined by the degree of amalgam oversaturation are created. Nuclei crystallization leads to amalgam depletion by metal atoms near the newly formed surface; reduced particles flow through the ‘solution-mercury’ phase boundary. This flow is determined by the set current density. Dendrites are crystallized under conditions of substance diffusion delivery through the amalgam layer to the surface of growing crystals. The rate of dendrite lengthening is defined by current density on the boundary ‘solution-mercury’, by the number of nuclei where  Steel amalgamated plates fitted on a slowly rotating shaft serve as anodes and feed new portions of the amalgam to the upper space containing the electrolyte. Electrolyzers with amalgam bipolar electrodes are used to produce high-purity powders ( For metal electrolytic precipitation by amalgams, there are in use units in which amalgams and solution are strongly mixed with an agitator. Drum precipitating devices are used to recover metals from flowing solutions. These units operate in the conditions of countercurrent flow of amalgam by means of centrifugal or magnetic pumps. Fine powders of copper, gold, silver, cobalt, niobium, molybdenum, chromium, vanadium, tantalum, zirconium, hafnium and other metals hardly soluble in mercury are produced by precipitation from aqueous organic medium on a rotating cathode ( An oily solvent film with mercury dispersed in it is applied to the cathode surface with a roller. The electrolysis takes place in an inert atmosphere; the gas is supplied separately to anode and cathode areas separated by a diaphragm. The cathode deposit is removed from the cathode by a scraper after oil is applied to the cathode surface with a grease gun. Amalgam is filtered in a nutsch-filter or filter press and treated in a distillation furnace. Amalgam is fed in by a screw conveyer. Inert gas or hydrogen is supplied by countercurrent flow and carries mercury fumes to a cooler. In the predistillation zone, a