The floatability of chalcopyrite and pyrite by using 6-hexyl-1,2,4,5-tetrazinane-3-thione (HTT) as a collector was evaluated in the paper. In comparison with the traditional-type collector sodium hexyl xanthate (SHX), HTT exhibited the favorable flotation affinity toward chalcopyrite and superior selectivity for flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. UV spectra demonstrated that HTT preferred to react with cupric/cuprous ions rather than ferric/ferrous ions. Contact angle results indicated a stronger hydrophobization of HTT towards chalcopyrite than SHX. DFT (density functional theory) calculations recommended that HTT had a stronger electron-acceptance power to the d-orbital electrons of interface copper atoms on chalcopyrite and a slightly weaker electron-donation ability than HX− anion, which improved the flotation selectivity of HTT toward chalcopyrite against pyrite. AFM images displayed a dense cover of HTT agglomerates on the whole surface of chalcopyrite. Zeta potential and XPS confirmed the bonding interaction of the interface copper atoms of chalcopyrite with the N and S atoms of HTT’s tetrazinane-thione group.Chalcopyrite generally associates with pyrite in copper sulfide mines ( The general flotation collectors for copper sulfide minerals include xanthates, thionocarbamates, dithiophosphates, dithiocarbamates, thioureas and so on ( Recently, azole-thione surfactants have been introduced as the high-efficient chelating collectors for flotation of copper sulfide and oxide minerals ( In this paper, 6-hexyl-1,2,4,5-tetrazinane-3-thione (HTT) was recommended as a collector for flotation of copper sulfide mineral. Its flotation response to chalcopyrite and pyrite was compared with that of sodium hexyl xanthate SHX. The reactivity of HTT and SHX to copper/iron atoms was evaluated by both theoretical and experimental approaches such as DFT (density functional theory) calculation and UV spectrum. Atomic force microscope (AFM), contact angle, zeta potential, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were adopted further to explore the hydrophobic mechanism of HTT to chalcopyrite flotation. HTT and SHX were prepared in our group ( The micro-flotation procedure was similar with our previous report ( Gaussian09 software ( 1 × 10 AFM (Dimension Icon, Bruker, USA) was used to record the topography of chalcopyrite surface in fluid (Milli-Q water) ScanAsyst mode ( Contact angle was measured on a JC2000C device (Zhongchen Digital, China) ( The ZetaPALS analyzer (Brookhaven, USA) was used to characterize the zeta potential ( The XPS were measured on an ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Fisher, USA) ( 0.5 g mineral particles were stirred in 50 mL aqueous solutions (50% ethanol, v/v) with/without 1 × 10 1 × 10 The flotation behavior of chalcopyrite by using HTT or SHX as a collector was shown in  The flotation results of chalcopyrite and pyrite from their mixture (with a 1:1 weight proportion) at pH ~ 10.5 by using HTT or SHX collector were presented in The optimized geometries of HTT molecule and HX As shown in The HOMO and LUMO compositions of HTT molecule and HX The natural charges as listed in The UV spectrum of 5 × 10 The AFM images of chalcopyrite surfaces (1 × 1 μm The contact angle of chalcopyrite before/after adsorption of HTT or SHX was presented in In the existence or absence of HTT, the influence of pH on the zeta potential of chalcopyrite was shown in The high-resolution XPS spectra of Cu, S and N for HTT-Cu The Cu 2p The S 2p XPS are comprised of two peaks with 1.18 eV splitting energy ( The N 1s XPS of HTT-Cu The flotation results showed that in comparison to SHX, HTT displayed superior flotation selectivity towards chalcopyrite versus pyrite. Chalcopyrite had 0.6 eV band gap and its interface copper atoms existed as the (t The AFM images demonstrated that the dense tiny agglomerates of HTT covered on the whole surface of chalcopyrite. The larger contact angle inferred that HTT exhibited a stronger hydrophobization towards chalcopyrite than SHX, being agreed with the micro-flotation results. The recommended pKa of HTT was of 11.10 ± 0.40 by Advanced Chemistry Development (ACD/Labs) Software, which meant that HTT mainly existed as its molecular species at pH < 11.0. In the attendance of HTT, the IEP of chalcopyrite transferred from pH 5.1 to 3.5, inferring the adsorption of HTT onto the positively-charged copper sites of chalcopyrite interface. The bonding interaction of the interface copper atoms of chalcopyrite with the N and S atoms of HTT was further confirmed by the XPS results. I.e., HTT chemisorbed onto chalcopyrite interfaces through forming Cu-S and Cu-N bonds. In this paper, a novel collector HTT was introduced in flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. After investigation of its flotation selectivity and mechanism to chalcopyrite by micro-flotation, DFT calculation, UV spectrum, AFM, contact angle, zeta potential, and XPS, it could draw conclusions as follows: Compared with the traditional-type collector SHX, HTT exhibited a preferable collecting affinity toward chalcopyrite and realized the high selective separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. The UV spectra of HTT demonstrated the selective interaction of HTT with cupric/cuprous ions rather than ferric/ferrous ions. And the larger contact angle inferred that HTT exhibited a stronger hydrophobization towards chalcopyrite than SHX, coinciding with the micro-flotation results. The DFT calculations inferred that the tetrazinane-thione group of HTT owned the stronger electron-delocalization ability than the dithiocarbonate group of HX The AFM images demonstrated that the dense tiny agglomerates of HTT covered on the whole surface of chalcopyrite. The zeta potential suggested the adsorption of HTT onto the positively-charged copper sites of chalcopyrite interface. And the XPS results confirmed the bonding interaction of the interface copper atoms of chalcopyrite with the N and S atoms of HTT.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: