Distal, intra-articular, comminuted distal radius fractures can be a challenge to treat. Fragment specific methods allow the most anatomic and secure reduction possible. Earlier methods included Kirschner wires, wire forms and non-locking plates. The newest generation of fragment specific fixation is via precontoured locking plating systems developed for specific column fragment arrangements. As treatment methods continue to evolve, functional outcomes, even after comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures, will hopefully continue to improve.Distal radius fractures are among the most common fractures treated. National survey data in 1998 estimated the annual incidence to be 644,985, Although there is no universal agreement regarding the acceptable limits to these parameters, most surgeons make an attempt to restore the anatomy when treating distal radius fractures. This is challenging particularly in complex, comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures. The distal radius is comprised of the radial metaphysis, scaphoid facet, lunate facet, and sigmoid notch. In cases of comminuted, intra-articular, periarticular distal radius fractures, proximally based volar locked plates alone are often not adequate. The surgeon should address the fracture fragments individually and be prepared to fix them with a multitude of methods, not being limited to one particular device or technique. We will discuss each fragment and its concepts individually. Sometimes the only fragment that is large enough to capture in an extremely comminuted distal radius fracture is the radial styloid fragment. However, in some cases it is the keystone fragment. To adequately reduce it, particularly when the fracture is beyond 2 weeks old, the brachioradialis either needs to be released or lengthened. Fixation is often adequate with 2 × 0.062 inches Kirschner wires. This is in addition to the orthogonal volar and the dorsal locked plates. We have found that locked radial column plates are occasionally necessary, particularly when severe and extremely distal comminution precludes volar and dorsal locked plating. Volar locked plates address this fragment. For very distal fragments, a periarticular plate which extends to the distal volar lip is employed (Synthes, West Chester, PA). Alternatively, a suture lasso tied over a dorsal bony tunnel may be used. This is the fragment discussed by Harness et al This is a die-punch fragment. Reduction is best done by raising the fragment with a freer elevator and filling the proximal void with bone graft. Allograft cancellous chips are adequate to serve as a spacer; bone graft substitutes with added growth factors are probably unwarranted and excessively expensive for this purpose. Locked pegs or screws in the subchondral position further support the central die-punch fragment. These fragments can usually be captured by the volar locked plate's screws. When reduction or capture is inadequate, we will have a low threshold to approach the fracture dorsally for reduction and bone graft if necessary, and will have to apply a dorsal locked plate. Instead of using 1 plate for the entire dorsal radius, our preference is that 1 or 2 plates should be placed dorso-radially or dorso-ulnarly, relative to the apex of Lister's tubercle. The Synthes radial column plate fits well in the dorso-radial position, while their “hockey stick” dorsal plate is well suited for the dorso-ulnar position. We prefer the Synthes distal radius locking system for fixation, as it has the most variety of plates for different scenarios, particularly for the “periarticular” distal fracture. The instrumentation industry, however, is constantly evolving with the introduction of new implants. Choices of implants are certainly the surgeon's preference; the common goal is fracture fragment reduction and stabilization. With over 30 distal radius specific implant designs available, External fixation can have an adjunctive role in fragment specific fixation. We occasionally employ it for the extremely comminuted, “dusted” intra-articular fracture, where the external fixator is used to unload the radial platform. It is applied first in distraction, with bone graft usually placed to lift fracture fragments. After an appropriate fragment specific internal fixation is applied, the fixator distraction is released to allow the carpal bones to serve as a template for the fracture fragments. The fixator is used as a neutralization device until the fracture is healed. We prefer the Stryker Monotube in this case (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ). It is single use packed, with 4 pins, 2 × 6 degree-of-freedom clamps, and 1 radiolucent carbon bar. Fragment specific reduction and fixation requires preoperative planning, familiarity with implants, standard exposures to the distal radius, and the use of intraoperative fluoroscopy. Surgical exposures have been well described.  The degree of comminution in some fractures is so severe that fragment specific fixation and external fixation is needed. External fixation is used to distract the fracture to aid in reduction, and bone grafting/internal fixation is performed. The distraction is then released and the external fixator is used to neutralize the forces across the radiocarpal joint and prevent collapse during healing Another fragment specific internal fixation technique is the use of a suture lasso. A strong suture, such as Fiberwire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) is used to maintain reduction of comminuted fracture fragments when plates and screws will not have enough purchase or will not reach certain areas. Several fragment specific methods are summarized in Disadvantages of fragment-specific fixation include a learning curve for a technically demanding procedure resulting in increased tourniquet time, usually over 1 hour for even experienced surgeons,