Cognizant of the key experimental facts from studies of carbonaceous solids ranging from soot to graphite, we performed a quantum chemistry study of the interaction of NO monomer or dimer with one or more zigzag sites. Thermodynamic and kinetic results were used to examine two alternative mechanisms proposed in the literature, and to compare them with the graphene–O2 reaction mechanism. The chemisorption stoichiometry similarities are striking; but the differences, especially regarding the intermediate role of N2O, have important practical implications. Monomer chemisorption on an isolated site is a dead-end and temporarily inhibiting process, similar to that of formation of a stable C–O surface complex in the graphene–O2 reaction. When two sites are available, successive monomer adsorption eventually leads to N2O formation subsequent to parallel reorientation of the first NO molecule. If three contiguous sites are available, N2 and CO are the principal products. Chemisorption of the dimer provides a straightforward path to N2 and CO2 when one site is available and to N2 and CO when two sites are available. The formation of N2O is also feasible in this case, both during adsorption and desorption; in the adsorption phase it is very sensitive to the details of the electron pairing processes.Among the gas-phase reactions of carbon materials In the present study we address two mutually related aspects of the mechanism of the C–NO reaction: (i) whether and how the adsorption step is different from that of the C–O Density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the Gaussian 03 quantum mechanics software The DFT model chemistry selected was B3LYP with the 6-31G(d) basis set as a reasonable compromise between accuracy and computational time. Special emphasis was placed on the analysis of ground-state spin multiplicity (M) and the spin-pairing processes. Transition-state structures were sought using the QST2 and/or QST3 procedures and then confirmed using the intrinsic reaction coordinate (IRC) algorithm. Kinetic parameters were obtained using the methodology described by Ochterski For mechanistic analyses, we compared the changes in self-consistent-field (SCF) energy (with, E While the NO dimer is not the thermodynamically favored state under all reaction conditions, its presence in porous carbons has been documented in many experimental studies The most plausible NO dimer configurations are shown in Complementary studies were carried out using prototypical graphene molecules containing both C(N) complexes and zigzag active sites (see It is excessively simplistic, and arguably misleading, to represent the carbothermal reduction of NO as C A recurring and still somewhat controversial issue in NO adsorption is whether C–O–N or C–N–O bonding is more likely and, more important still, which of the two is on a more straightforward path to reaction products (see Eq. As a reminder to the rapidly growing new generation of graphene researchers, Garcia-Fernandez et al.  The comparison of results of parallel adsorption of NO and O The comparison of kinetic parameters is also of interest. The N-down adsorption is apparently barrierless (we have not been able to identify a reasonable transition state), as is O A recurring theme for dual-site adsorption is whether dissociation occurs. Thus, for example, the importance of reaction Stimulated by the presumably existing evidence that the “decomposition of nitric oxide on a soot molecule forms surface nitrogen and oxygen”, Sander et al. Finally, the trends shown in  A comparison of dimer adsorption with the successive adsorption of two monomers in similar configurations is also instructive. For example, when we consider the O-down configurations, the former is 119 Regarding the kinetics and the relevant transition states, dimer adsorption is very much different from that of NO or O The thermodynamic and kinetic analysis of monomer and dimer adsorption, with due consideration of well established experimental facts, allows us to postulate feasible reaction pathways. While the emphasis below is on the formation of N The accumulated evidence is strong for reaction When N-down adsorption occurs on a site that is contiguous to a C(N) complex (see Finally, in The above results support the three-zigzag-site reaction path proposed by Kyotani and Tomita As shown in Section Due to the fact that parallel adsorption involves the formation of many bonds, the most straightforward reaction path that involves the NO dimer is the formation of structure XV for single-site O-down adsorption and structure XVI for dual-site adsorption. The results summarized in The kinetics of the desorption process from Z1-B graphene are illustrated in Computational chemistry results have provided additional insight into the key details of the mechanism of the C–NO reaction on zigzag sites and its similarities and differences with respect to the C–O The following are the answers to the questions posed at the end of the introductory section. (a) NO monomer dissociation is endothermic and has a higher energy barrier than O This study was supported by