The performance of multistage air gap membrane distillation (MS-AGMD) system is experimentally investigated. The effects of feed temperature and flow rate, coolant temperature and flow rate, air gap width, and feed concentration on the system performance are studied. Parallel and series flow stage connections for the feed stream and coolant stream are tested. Energy analysis is performed for the MS-AGMD and compared with the single stage system. Parallel stage connection shows better performance than series connections in terms of permeate flux and energy consumption. The distillate volume of MS-AGMD module is measured to be 2.6 and 3 times the distillate volume of single stage AGMD module, for series and parallel stage connections; respectively. However, the specific energy consumption of multistage system is only 1.5 times the single stage system. The gain output ratio of the parallel stage MS-AGMD system is higher than the series stage MS-AGMD system, and it reached 0.6 for parallel MS-AGMD system and 0.45 for the series MS-AGMD system, at 90°C.Shortage of fresh water is a major challenge facing modern societies. To overcome the shortage of fresh water, the world today depends on desalination of seawater and brackish water Air gap membrane distillation (AGMD) process is one of the common MD configurations Main limitations facing industrialization of the MD systems include high energy consumption, the absence of perfect design of module (membrane cell), the hydrophobic membranes which are designed specifically for MD applications, and the relatively low productivity. Thus, new designs of multistage membrane distillation (MS-MD) systems are needed for industrial applications. The multistage vacuum membrane distillation (MS-VMD) module has been successfully commercialized, and accomplished higher heat recovery as compared to the single MD units Lawal and e. Khalifa Lee et al. In the present work, the performance of the multistage air gap MD system is investigated by studying the effects of main operating and design parameters such as inlet feed temperature, inlet coolant temperature, feed flow rate, coolant flow rate, air gap thickness, and feed concentration on the system output flux. The performances of parallel and series flow stage-connections are investigated and compared. The permeate volume and flux obtained from the three stages are compared with the single stage at the same inlet conditions. In addition, the power consumption is measured and energy analysis is performed for the MS-AGMD system. A schematic diagram of the laboratory-scale multistage air gap membrane distillation (MS-AGMD) system is shown in The feed water is heated up to the required set temperature and pumped to the inlet of the MD modules where it passes over the membrane that is fitted inside the MD module. Water vapor is separated from the feed stream at the membrane pores interface, and the feed water returned back to the heating bath. The membrane is supported using a perforated copper plate of 1.5  Two different flow connections/arrangements between the system stages are considered in the current study. The flow connection between the MD stages can be of parallel, such that all the three modules receive the feed water and the coolant water at the same time and the same desired conditions. Moreover, the flow connection between MD stages can be series, with a single flow stream from module 1 to module 3, such that the feed water and coolant water leaving the first module are used as inlet to the second module and so on. The performance of the multistage air gap MD system is investigated by studying the effects of main operating and design parameters such as inlet feed temperature, inlet coolant temperature, feed flow rate, coolant flow rate, air gap thickness, and feed concentration on the system output flux. The performances of different flow stage-connections (parallel and series) are investigated and compared. The permeate volume and flux obtained from the three stages are compared with the single stage at the same inlet conditions. In addition, the power consumption is measured and energy analysis is performed for the MS-AGMD system. The PTFE, 0.45 The influences of hot feed inlet temperature on the MS-AGMD flux for parallel and series stages connections are shown in The influence of the coolant inlet temperature on MS-AGMD flux is investigated and results are illustrated in  The parallel stage connection performs better at low feed flow rates compared to the series stage connections, and its slope of flux variation with feed flow rate is also higher. A higher permeate flux is obtained from the parallel stage connections if the same feed flow rate is applied, as indicated at stage flow rate of 2.3 Illustrated in In AGMD process, the gap between the membrane and condensation plate is used to reduce the conduction heat losses from the membrane. However, the air gap adds more resistance to vapor transfer before condensing on the cold surface of the condensation plate. In order to study the influence of the air gap thickness on permeate flux, three different gap thicknesses of 2, 4, and 8 One of the important parameters that affect the system performance is the salinity of feed water. The variations of distillate flux with feed salinity for both parallel and series flow stage connections are shown in  A comparison is made between the single stage MD system and the 3-stages system in terms of specific energy consumption, as shown in The gain output ratio (GOR) represent the ratio between the energy used to produce the permeate (evaporation) to the energy consumed by the MD system. GOR is defined as:  A comprehensive experimental investigation was carried out to study and compare the performances of parallel and series stage connections of multistage air gap membrane distillation (MS-AGMD) systems under different operating and design variables. In general, parallel stage connections produces slightly higher distillate flux compare to series stage connections. The distillate volume collected from the 3-stages, parallel connection MD system is about three times of distillate collected from the single stage AGMD system. For the stage series connections, the MS-ADMD system distillate volume is, on average, 2.6 times the single stage system. The performance of the MS-AGMD system increases with increasing the feed temperature, feed flow rate and the flow rate of cold stream. However, it declines with increasing the cold stream temperature, feed concentration, and air gap thickness. The feed inlet temperature remains the most important variable affecting the flux of the multistage system, followed by the air gap width. The specific energy consumption decreases as the feed inlet temperature increases and as the gap width decreases. In comparing the multistage system to the single stage system, the multistage system produced distillate volume is about three times the single stage system while consuming 50% extra energy, for different feed temperatures. The gain output ratio of the parallel stage connections MS-AGMD system is higher than the series stage connection MS-AGMD system. The maximum GOR values reached 0.6 for parallel MS-AGMD system and 0.45 for the series MS-AGMD system, at 90 The authors acknowledge the support and fund received from the Deanship of Research,