Toe fractures are common; however, there are few data on demographics and functional outcome. We studied outcomes in 339 consecutive patients with toe fractures treated between January 2006 and September 2008. Two hundred and sixty-four patients, aged 16 to 75, were mailed an outcome questionnaire, and overall subjective satisfaction with the outcome of treatment was measured using a visual analog scale (VAS). Most frequently affected were the first (38%) and fifth (30%) toes, and most (75.6%) of the fractures were caused by stubbing or crush injury. More than 95% of the fractures were displaced less than 2 mm, and all of the fractures were treated conservatively. The questionnaire was returned by 141 (53%) patients with a median follow-up of 27 months. Respondents were female in 57.4% of cases and had a median age of 45 years. The median AOFAS score was 100 (P25, P75 = 93,100) points; the median VAS was 10 (P25, P75 = 8, 10) points. Univariate regression analysis revealed no statistically significant associations between outcome and the particular toe or phalanx involved, number of fractured toes, fracture type and location, articular involvement, gender, age, body mass index, smoking habits, and the presence of diabetes mellitus. Satisfaction VAS was dependent on age (P = .047) and gender (P = .049) in the multivariate analysis. The AOFAS midfoot score was not influenced by any of the covariates. This is the first epidemiological investigation using 2 outcome-scoring systems to determine function and satisfaction following treatment of toe fractures.Digital fractures are among the most common fractures of the foot, with an incidence ranging from 14.0 to 39.6 patients per 10,000 persons per year All consecutive patients with a toe fracture caused by an isolated trauma to the foot, between January 1, 2006, and June 31, 2008, were extracted from the Emergency Department registries, following approval of the local medical ethics board. The initial radiographs performed at the Emergency Department were reevaluated by 2 observers (T.S., S.T.V.). Patient characteristics (eg, age, body mass index [BMI], gender, diabetes, smoking habits, and side of injury) were collected. Data on the fracture characteristics (ie, which toe and phalanx were involved, the number of involved toes, joint involvement, type of fracture [transverse, oblique/spiral, comminution, or avulsion], the fracture level [distal, shaft, proximal], the amount of displacement [zero, < 2 mm, 2 to 5 mm, and > 5 mm], and the trauma mechanism (supination, fall from height, crush, stub, or stress fracture) were abstracted from the medical records. Treatment for all patients was carried out according to hospital protocol. Patients with a fracture of the great toe were treated with a cast for 3 weeks initially. Fractures of 1 or more of the lesser toes were treated with splinting to the adjacent intact toe, and patients were advised to wear a rigid-sole shoe. A postal survey was developed according to existing guidelines to optimize response rates The statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 16.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to test for normality of the numeric data. Levene’s test was applied to assess homogeneity of variance between data. Because most numeric variables did not show normal distribution or equal variance, all items were regarded as nonparametric for the statistical analysis. Mann-Whitney In the 30-month study period, 339 patients with 368 digital and 370 phalangeal fractures of the foot were identified. Two patients had 2 concurrent phalangeal fractures in the same digit. There were 172 (50.7%) males and 167 (49.3%) females in the cohort. The median age of the group was 35.2 (19.3 to 53.5) years; the male patients had a median age of 26.0 (15.0 to 44.7) years, and female patients had a median age of 43.3 (26.1 to 58.6) years. Patients 5 years or younger accounted for 2.7% of all patients, and those 12 years or younger represented 15% of the study population. The right side was involved in 177 (51.9%) patients and the left side in 164 (48.1%). In 2 cases, a bilateral digital injury was encountered, but with an interval of several weeks between the injuries. With regard to the distribution of fractured digits, the first toe accounted for 141 (38.1%) fractures, the second toe accounted for 40 (10.8%), the third toe accounted for 26 (7%), the fourth toe accounted for 50 (13.5%), and the fifth toe accounted for 113 (30.5%) ( A total of 141 (53%) of 264 patients between 16 and 75 years of age returned the questionnaire with a median follow-up of 27.3 (21.2 to 39.0) months. Respondents were female in 57.4% of cases, and the median age for the respondents was 44.7 (30.8 to 58.3) years. The median BMI for the respondents was 23.9 (21.6 to 26.0). In 46.8% of the patients the left side was affected. A total of 7.4% of the patients had diabetes and 25.7% were smokers. In the respondent group, 66 (47%) patients were treated by splinting the fractured toe to an adjacent toe, and 44 (31%) were treated with a cast. Three (2%) patients were treated without the use of a splint or a cast. With regard to self-reported activity level, 84.4% of the responders reported being able to run, 75.2% to walk on their toes, and 82.3% to walk barefoot. Twenty-five (18%) patients failed to answer the questions about activity level. The median AOFAS midfoot score was 100 (93 to 100) points, with an AOFAS functional subscore of 45 (45 to 45). The median satisfaction VAS was 10 (8 to 10) points. Respondents were comparable to nonrespondents, except for age (44.7 versus 36.9 years, respectively). As for the inferential statistical analyses, no differences in outcome were identified with regard to which toe or phalangeal bone was affected, the number of fractured toes, fracture type and location, joint involvement, gender, age, BMI, smoking habits, or the presence of diabetes mellitus ( The current study of 339 patients with 368 digital and 370 phalangeal fractures provides insight into one of the most common fractures of the foot. Males and females were equally represented in the current study, as opposed to previous studies in which a male predominance of 62% to 66% was reported The secondary aim of this study was to evaluate functional outcome scores after the conservative treatment of toe fractures. Patients were sent a postal questionnaire so as to obtain the highest possible response rate. Hence, physical examination of the patients for range of motion of the toe joints was not possible. Therefore, we applied the AOFAS midfoot scale in the current study. The outcome scores in this population were excellent with a median of 100 (93–100) points (AOFAS) and 10 Because of the overall excellent scores for both the AOFAS midfoot score and the VAS, few predictors of outcome could be identified by the statistical analysis. However, our statistical analysis revealed a tendency toward the association of lower AOFAS scores with more displaced fractures in the univariate analysis, although this association was not statistically significant. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in outcome based on type and location of the fracture. In their review on the management of toe fractures, Hatch and Hacking We recognize a number of methodological limitations that could have influenced the validity of our results. Because physical examination of the patients, in particular assessment of digital range of motion, was not performed, we were not able to use the AOFAS hallux and lesser metatarsophalangeal-interphalangeal scoring scale. Despite this shortcoming, however, we believe that the scoring scale that we used conveyed face validity and, for this reason, was found to be useful for our purposes. We also understand that potential biases could be associated with data input into the medical record system, and thus ascertainment of eligible cases and the study variables of interest could have been affected by this. By the same token, use of the postal system conveys certain known selection biases, and this could have influenced the rate of participation with regard to our questionnaire. Furthermore, the patient population used in this study did not include those treated by a general practitioner or those who did not seek any medical attention at all; therefore, the incidence of toe fractures reported herein could be an underestimation. In fact, previous studies reported an incidence of 14 to 40 per 10,000 patients This study is the first epidemiological exploration of functional outcomes following toe fractures, and showed that more than 95% of such fractures are either non- or minimally displaced. Three-quarters of the fractures were transverse, oblique, or spiral, and in more than 75% of the cases the mechanism of injury was stubbing of the digit or a crush injury. An excellent outcome was obtained with conservative treatment, as measured by the AOFAS midfoot score and 10-cm satisfaction VAS after a median of 27 months of follow-up. Based on our findings in this study, as well as our understanding of the foot surgical literature, conservative treatment of toe fractures is generally associated with excellent outcome scores and high patient satisfaction with the results of treatment. Young female patients reported slightly less favorable outcomes, and a there was a tendency for a less favorable outcome in association with increased displacement at the fracture site. The distribution, patient, and fracture characteristics provided by this study may aid in the planning of future clinical trials concerning different treatment modalities for this common form of pedal trauma.