Strontium cobalt-based perovskites display high electrochemical activity but poor stability for solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs). Here, we evaluate the stability of three strontium cobalt-based materials, i.e. SrCo0.8Nb0.2O3-δ (SCN), SrCo0.8Ta0.2O3-δ (SCT) and SrCo0.8Nb0.1Ta0.1O3-δ (SCNT) as air electrodes for SOECs. The electrochemical results show that the area-specific resistance (ASR) for SCN and SCNT cells decreases and then becomes almost constant whereas the ASR of the SCT cell continuously increases, during the 240 h SOEC test. The improved performance of SCN and SCNT cells is ascribed to the lower energy barrier required for the oxide ion movement in the presence of niobium and the less concentration of undesired phases formed during SOEC operation. SCN is further tested under reversible solid oxide cell (RSOC) conditions with 16 h solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and 7 h SOEC cycles. The cell presents excellent stability as its impedance increases only slightly from 0.188 to 0.193 Ω cm2 after 114 h RSOC test. A single cell with NiO-SSZ/SSZ/SDC/SCN configuration shows high electrolysis current densities of 0.51, 0.42 and 0.34 A cm−2 at 800, 750 and 700 °C, respectively, in 10% H2O/90% H2 and 0.79 A cm−2 at 800 °C in 50% H2O/50% H2 at 1.3 V.Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOECs) have received great attention as a promising energy storage device as they can work in combination with renewable energy resources [ Lanthanum strontium manganite (LSM) and lanthanum strontium cobalt ferrite (LSCF) are state-of-the-art air electrode materials used for SOECs. However, various researchers have observed LSM delamination from the electrolyte [ LSCF, on the other hand, has shown quite promising results, as it is a mixed ionic-electronic conductor and offers a lower ASR compared to LSM or LSM/YSZ composite [ Various new materials have been proposed over the years to achieve higher OER activity and better long-term stability during the SOEC operation [ A more recent development in this area is the use of highly active and stable perovskite, strontium iron molybdate (SFM). SFM has shown promising results as a symmetric electrode for SOECs. One such cell with SFM/La Nickelates are also strong candidates as air electrodes for SOECs and reversible solid oxide cells (RSOCs). Nano-structured Nd Most of these studies are focused only on achieving high electrolysis performance. Very few studies have been carried out to determine the long-term stability of air electrode materials under SOEC conditions, and even fewer have been carried out to establish the long-term RSOC stability. The aim of the present research is to study the newly developed strontium cobalt-based perovskites under SOEC and RSOC conditions, both for their activity and long-term stability. We selected strontium-cobalt based materials because of their excellent performance during the solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) testing, as reported in the recent studies [ The electrode powders (SCN, SCT and SCNT) were prepared by solid-state reaction route, as described elsewhere [ A full cell to determine the electrolysis current density of the cell with SCN as air electrode was also prepared and tested at 800, 750 and 700 °C in different fuel conditions. For this purpose, commercial NiO (J. T. Baker) and SSZ (fuel cell materials (Sc A four-wire resistance measurement method, as described in our previous study [ For RSOC testing, a current density of ±0.5 A cm For the full cell testing, H After electrochemical testing, samples were prepared for interfacial and cross-sectional analysis. To study the interface, the electrodes were etched away using hydrochloric acid (HCl), whereas, for cross-sectional examination, the samples were mounted in the epoxy resin, followed by vacuum impregnation and drying. The mounted samples were ground and polished to prepare a smooth and scratch-free surface. The samples for the interfacial studies were coated with carbon, while the samples for cross-sectional analysis were coated with iridium [ To demonstrate a good performance, the half-cells tested under the SOEC conditions must show a stable voltage during the long-term testing.  SC was also tested as a reference and the voltage obtained was much higher compared to all samples, even at the start of the test ( It is important to reiterate that the impedance plots in In previous studies, it has been observed that the addition of Ta to SrCoO As shown in the previous studies [ SEM images for the cross-sections of the cells on WE side after the SOEC operation have been presented in EDS analysis was also carried out to analyze the bare SDC surface after the WE was removed using the diluted HCl acid. These results have been presented in The XRD analysis of the SDC surface for the different samples after the removal of WE was also carried out and has been presented in  SCN showed very promising results as a future air electrode material for SOEC applications. Therefore, it was further tested under RSOC conditions. The cell and testing setup was similar to our previous study [  It has been demonstrated in SEM image for the SCN after RSOC operation has been shown in A single cell with NiO-SSZ/SSZ/SDC/SCN configuration was tested at 800, 750 and 700 °C to determine the electrolysis current density with 10% H The electrolysis current density values obtained at 800, 750 and 700 °C are 0.51, 0.42 and 0.34 A cm The electrolysis current densities obtained in the present study have been compared with few others reported in the literature ( Three different electrode materials, i.e. SCN, SCT and SCNT are evaluated for their use in future SOEC and RSOC applications. All these materials are first tested under −0.5 A cm Schematic for the cell tested under SOEC and RSOC conditions; Log f vs |Z| graphs for different cells tested under SOEC and RSOC conditions; Voltage-time graph and EIS patterns for SC and SCN cells; R All authors acknowledge the support of an The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at None.