Three different white cast irons with compositions of Fe–3%C–10%Cr–5%Mo–5%W (alloy no. 1), Fe–3%C–10%V–5%Mo–5%W (alloy no. 2) and Fe–3.5%C–17%Cr–3%V (alloy no. 3) were prepared in order to study their solidification and abrasion wear behaviors. Melts were super-heated to 1873K in a high frequency induction furnace, and poured at 1823K into Y-block pepset molds. The solidification sequence of these alloys was investigated. The solidification structures of the specimens were found to consist of austenite dendrite (γ); (γ+M7C3) eutectic and (γ+M6C) eutectic in the alloy no. 1; proeutectic MC; austenite dendrite (γ); (γ+MC) eutectic and (γ+M2C) eutectic in the alloy no. 2, and proeutectic M7C3 and (γ+M7C3) eutectic in the alloy no. 3, respectively.
                  A scratching type abrasion test was carried out in the states of as-cast (AS), homogenized (AH), air-hardened (AHF) and tempered (AHFT) using the abrasive paper with 120mesh SiC and 10N application load. In all the specimens, the abrasion wear loss was found to decrease in the order of AH, AS, AHFT and AHF states. Abrasion wear loss was lowest in the specimen no. 2 and highest in the specimen no. 1 except for the as-cast and homogenized states in which the specimen no. 3 showed the highest abrasion wear loss. The lowest abrasion wear loss of the specimen no. 2 could be attributed to the fact that it contained proeutectic MC carbide, eutectic MC and M2C carbides having extremely high hardness. The matrix of each specimen was fully pearlitic in the as-cast state but it was transformed by heat-treatments to martensite, tempered martensite and austenite. From these results, it becomes clear that MC carbide is a significant phase to improve the abrasion wear resistance of white cast iron.Alloyed white cast irons with many kinds of strong carbide-forming elements are recently developed wear resistant materials for the application to the hot strip and mineral pulverizing mills Properties such as abrasion wear resistance, surface roughening resistance and seizing or sticking resistance are essentially important to these alloyed white cast irons used for the rolls and other wear resistant parts of steel rolling and mineral pulverizing mills. Among these properties, the abrasion wear resistance is reported to be dependent upon not only type, morphology, amount and distribution pattern of the carbides precipitated from the melt, but also the type of matrix structure. Nevertheless, the abrasion wear behavior of these irons was little researched systematically. In this work, alloyed white cast irons with three different chemical compositions were selected for the investigation of solidification and abrasion wear behaviors. In order to clarify the solidification process, the specimen was quenched into water from different temperatures during thermal analysis to interrupt freezing. On the other hand, heat-treatments such as air-hardening and tempering were employed to obtain the different type of matrix structures. Then, the effect of carbide type and matrix structure on the abrasion wear resistance was investigated using a scratching type abrasion wear testing machine. The worn parts of the specimens were also examined by the scanning electron microscope (SEM) to derive the mechanism of abrasion wear. To obtain the alloys with several combinations of the different carbides, the four alloying elements such as Cr, Mo, W and V were designed so as to make their sum approximately 20 For studying the solidification sequence of each alloy, 50 Before air-hardening and tempering, the as-cast specimens were homogenized at 1223 The volume fraction of austenite was calculated from the ratio of peak areas of (2 A schematic drawing of a main portion of the abrasion wear testing machine is illustrated in The specimens were polished, etched and examined metallographically by an optical microscope (OM) and a SEM. Villela’s and Murakami’s etchants were employed to distinguish the phases clearly. Since the multi-component white cast irons contain plural elements with strong carbide forming ability and there exists no phase diagram of such multi-component system, it is difficult to estimate their solidification process from the as-cast structure. The technique that a sample is quenched into water from temperatures before and after the reaction point during thermal analysis has been successfully employed to reveal the solidification sequence of cast alloys because the freezing process is interrupted by quenching A cooling curve of the alloy no. 1 with six different quenching temperatures and the corresponding microstructures are shown in A cooling curve of the alloy no. 2 with six quenching temperatures and the corresponding microstructures are shown in Alloy no. 3 is so called a high chromium white cast iron. From the publication on the solidification of high chromium cast iron, the solidification sequence of the alloy no. 3 can be explained that the proeutectic M For later discussions, the volume fraction of austenite in matrix ( The results of the abrasion wear test of the homogenized specimens are shown in In case of air-hardened specimens shown in The results of abrasion wear test of the tempered specimens are also shown in For more discussions about the abrasion wear behavior, the worn surfaces of tempered specimens were investigated using SEM. The SEM microphotographs of the worn surface and those of the cross-section near the surface are shown in Solidification and abrasion wear behavior of highly alloyed white cast iron has been studied. The results are summarized as follows: The solidification sequence of the alloy no. 1 (Fe–3%C–10%Cr–5%Mo–5%W) is The solidification sequence of the alloy no. 2 (Fe–3%C–10%V–5%Mo–5%W) is The alloy no. 3 (Fe–3.5%C–17%Cr–3%V) solidified with the precipitation of proeutectic M In all the alloys, the abrasion wear loss was found to decrease in the order of homogenized (AH), as-cast (AS), tempered (AHFT) and air-hardened (AHF) states. In the as-cast state, the abrasion wear loss was lowest in the alloy no. 2 which was consist of proeutectic MC carbide, eutectic MC and M In the homogenized state, the order of the alloys in abrasion wear loss was the same as that of the as-cast state. But, the abrasion wear loss of each alloy was larger than that of each as-cast alloy because all the matrix structures were composed of coarse pearlite and fine secondary precipitated carbides. In the air-hardened and tempered states, the abrasion wear loss was lowest in the alloy no. 2 as was the case in the as-cast and homogenized states, and highest in the alloy no. 1 having eutectic M The lowest abrasion wear loss of the alloy no. 2 could be attributed to the fact that the main carbide types of this alloy are MC which has the highest hardness among the carbides in alloyed white cast iron, and M This work was supported (in part) by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) and the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the Center for Automotive Parts Technology (CAPT) at Keimyung University.