This paper evaluates the corrosion resistance of duplex treated AISI H11 tool steel. The duplex treatment involves cold wall plasma nitriding and plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD). Plasma nitriding was carried out in a chamber including 25vol.% of N2 and 75vol.% of H2 at 500°C for 4h. PACVD treatment was performed in the same chamber containing Ar, N2, and H2 gases along with TiCl4 vapor for 4h at a chamber pressure of 3mbar, for different process temperatures of 470, 495, and 520°C. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and potentiodynamic polarization test in 3.5% NaCl solution were used to study the samples. The results indicate that samples coated with TiN at lower temperature exhibit a 10 times improvement in corrosion resistance relative to the coated samples at higher temperatures. It was found that the grain size is about 4–7nm which plays an important role in corrosion behavior. Furthermore, this study demonstrates that surface roughness increases by raising the deposition temperature of the PACVD treatment from 470°C to 520°C, leading to a lower corrosion resistance of the coated samples.In recent years, increasing demands for lower costs, improving productivity and better product quality have been the main driving forces in the development of hard coatings for cutting and forming applications Besides physical vapor deposition (PVD), plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD) has been successfully applied to Ti-based hard coatings deposited onto steel tools with complex geometry at deposition temperatures below the tempering temperature of the substrate materials Reaction Structure and properties of films sensitively depend on the deposition conditions. Coatings can be produced with different morphologies and microstructures, i.e. grain sizes, defects, impurity contents, and thus their mechanical and tribological properties vary widely In this study, corrosion behavior of TiN nanostructure coatings deposited on AISI H11 hot work tool steel by PACVD was investigated. For investigation of the corrosion behavior, different test conditions were employed. In this investigation the hot-work tool steel grade AISI H11 (DIN 1.2343) was used as the substrate. The specimens, in the form of bars Ø 20 Throughout this paper, the plasma nitrided steel samples with TiN coating will be known as TiN samples. The treated samples were studied using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) Hitachi S41100, and atomic force microscope DualScope C26 (AFM). The film morphology and the thickness of the coating were measured by scanning electron microscopy. Also, corrosion resistance of samples was evaluated by potentiodynamic polarization test with apparatus set (EG&G 273A model) with standard flat cell in 3.5% NaCl solution. The surface and cross section of the TiN film deposited on plasma nitrided steel were observed by FE-SEM ( TiN coatings were deposited on the samples under different temperatures of 470, 495, and 520 D is the grain size, β is the FWHM of the diffraction peak, λ is the wavelength of the incident Cu Kα X-ray (1.540 Since the grain size is inversely proportional with FWHM, the more (higher) amount of FWHM, the smaller the grain size. In this case, increasing temperature from 470 to 520 In this investigation, surface topography of the TiN coatings was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The coatings are deposited at different temperatures of 470 Consequences are the situation in which the lateral size decreases with decreasing the deposition temperature and the coating becomes denser and smoother. Also, the peak–valley ratios of the particles are increased markedly with raising the deposition temperature. The roughest surface is observed in the sample treated at 520 The results of corrosion tests from the samples deposited at temperatures of 470 As indicated in Also, as derived from AFM micrograph, in the samples with low deposition temperature, the surface roughness is less than the samples deposited at high temperature. On the other hand, the surface roughness is one of the effective factors to increase the corrosion rate It is true that the corrosion resistance is not solely dependent on surface roughness but also other factors such as coating materials and coating methods are effective. However, surface roughness plays an important role in chemical phenomena, for example as in the paper Because of the escape of Cl from the surface of the coating at high temperatures, the Cl content in deposited coatings at high temperatures is less than that of the low temperatures. However, the harmful role of Cl in corrosion of nanostructure coating is little. Consequently, the corrosion rate increased with increasing deposition temperature. In addition, it is shown in AFM micrograph of three samples can be indicated that the sample deposited at 520  The grain size of the TiN coatings at the deposition temperatures of 470 The surface roughness of TiN coatings deposited on the steel substrate can be increased with raising the deposition temperature from 470 Reduction of the deposition temperature from 520 The best corrosion resistance of the TiN coatings was obtained at the least deposition temperature (470