Maritime shipping is essential in global trade. The shipping industry uses fossil fuel with significant environmental impact as a result and a transition to renewable fuels may be part of the solution to reduce emissions. A fuel transition needs to be understood at all stages of the supply chain, ranging from feedstock to use in ships’ engines. The purpose of this paper is to do a synthesis of literature to provide an overview of main challenges and opportunities along potential supply chains of renewable methanol for maritime shipping, with a focus on bio-methanol. It is shown that renewable methanol is a technically viable option to reduce emissions from shipping and there are no major challenges with potential supply chains. Minor economic barriers that currently exist have the potential to be overcome with strengthening of environmental targets for shipping or if fuel oil prices revert to higher levels as seen previously.Large variations in local and national yield of biomass Many type of biomass can be used for methanol production Competition from energy producers shapes availability of biomass Dependency on other types of biomass industries to supply feedstock Manage trade-off between logistics and methanol production cost through size and location of plants Minimize transport cost Minimize storage cost Less storage is needed in methanol supply chains compared to the heat and energy producers Including a pre-treatment process can lower supply chain cost and production cost. Maritime transport is of key importance to global trade, as over 80% of world merchandise trade volumes are moved by sea CO One way to reduce emissions from shipping is to switch from fossil fuels to renewable fuels, such as biofuels, which are often considered as CO A switch of fuel is not only an adaptation of vessel engine and fuel systems, it is also to some extent an adaptation of the whole supply chain up to the end user, using new feedstock, new methods for fuel production, and new logistics. To understand the viability and feasibility of introducing a new fuel, central issues and challenges all along the supply chain have to be understood. The purpose of this paper is to do a synthesis of literature to provide an overview of the main challenges and opportunities along potential supply chains of renewable methanol for maritime shipping. This paper takes a comprehensive perspective ranging from feedstock and supply, via production of methanol, to distribution and end use of renewable methanol in the shipping industry. Along energy supply chains in general, numerous decisions need to be taken, ranging from feedstock selection, to technology selection within harvesting, transport, comminution and energy conversion, and these result in a myriad of different possible supply chains. Therefore, the common approach is to present challenges stepwise, see e.g. Gold and Seuring To present the following overview, the literature for topics relating to renewable methanol supply chains and use of methanol in the shipping industry was reviewed. Essential for viability of any part of the supply chain is setting the product demand in focus A number of areas were covered; focus when it comes to methanol use was both technical as well as market related. Due to a lack of journal articles with a supply chain perspective and shipping industry end use, journal articles covering biomass-to-energy logistics for end uses such as heat and electricity production were investigated. Literature on methanol as a fuel in internal combustion engines An efficient feedstock supply chain is essential as logistics and transportation account for significant costs in the production of biofuels in general The biomass feedstock availability is of crucial importance for any energy generation and in a long term perspective (2050), the overall worldwide potential lies between 200 and 500 EJ yr Biomass can be used for several different end uses, including fuel, energy and non-energy use. For some types of biomass such as forest biomass, a main supply chain attribute is therefore competition of and integration in supply chains Managing the supply includes making decisions on overall network design, harvesting, transport, storage and pre-treatment, c.f. Gold and Seuring In comparison to fossil fuels, one main characteristic of renewable feedstock, particularly biomass, is the geographical spread On a regional scale, the location of methanol plants using biomass feedstock is a function of supply logistics, production cost and distribution cost. From a transport perspective, inadequately located plants may lead to high transport cost and negative environmental impact In comparison to heat and electricity production, for which it is often argued that feedstock storage to cover peaks in production or seasonal fluctuations incurs extra costs The primary mode of transport to collect biomass in general is road, due to high flexibility over relatively short distances The inclusion of feedstock pre-treatment processes, such as pyrolysis or torrefaction, can be preferable from a production perspective, depending on the technology used. For example, torrefaction improves the efficiency of the gasification process for wood biomass The main key issues that are of concern to supply of feedstock to bio-methanol plants are summarized in Methanol is currently produced mainly via catalytic conversion of synthesis gas (CO and H It is important to highlight that from a production capacity point of view, bio-methanol plants will be significantly smaller than fossil-based plants. New fossil methanol plants typically have very large production capacities ranging up to 10,000 t of methanol per day in a single train. The energy conversion efficiency from natural gas to methanol is in the order of 67–68%. The plant size is 5–10 times larger than a plant based on biomass ever can become. 10,000 t/d of methanol corresponds to 2300 MW of product, which with a conversion efficiency of 60% from biomass would need about 3800 MW of feedstock. In a mature future scenario, perhaps in the range of 500–1000 MW of biomass feedstock can be gathered to one location. In such a case, it would lead to a production capacity of 300–600 MW of methanol or 1300– 2600 t per day of methanol Many of the current research and production initiatives consider solid and liquid forms of forest biomass (such as black liquor, pyrolysis liquid, forest residues, etc.) as feedstocks for methanol production Gasification of wood chips or wood pellets in Circulating Fluidized Bed (CFB) and Bubbling Fluidized Bed (BFB) gasifiers are feasible technologies. Developments in Europe and in North America have come so far that demonstration in large scale is the essential next step. The Gas Technology Institute (GTI) BFB development plant in Des Plaines (Chicago, US) was in 2012/13 operated for about 3000 h using wood pellets. The results were promising and concepts were developed with the ambition to build large-scale plants. Consequently, these tests also proved that the BFB-based concept for syngas generation from dry wood material worked well and companies involved judged the technology ready for scale up Tests have also been performed using wood-powder in entrained flow gasifiers. One of the benefits with this technology compared to fluidized beds is that a synthesis gas with high purity is produced, decreasing the need for downstream gas cleaning. The downside is the associated high energy requirement for reducing the feedstock to sufficiently small particles Entrained flow gasifiers are well suited for liquid and slurry fuels. Black liquor, a residue from pulp making and normally combusted in a recovery boiler to produce process steam to the pulp mill is also an excellent feedstock for gasification. Gasifying the black liquor in an entrained flow gasifier results in a high quality synthesis gas well suited for methanol (or BioDME) production or any other syngas derived product. The gasification process becomes very energy efficient due to the high reactivity of black liquor caused by the catalytic effect of alkali present in high concentrations Pyrolysis liquids can be mixed into black liquor and in that way enhance the production capacity. During 2015 and 2016, gasification tests with up to 20% (w/w) of pyrolysis liquid blended into black liquor were carried out in the LTU Green Fuels plant. The trials lasted for about 1100 h in total, of which 900 h also included methanol and BioDME production Recent research has also evaluated black liquor blended with crude glycerol and fermentation residues for production of two different methanol qualities, 99.85% pure on a weight basis according to the International Methanol Consumers and Producers Association (IMPCA) standard and crude methanol of about 90% purity. The latter would be suitable for maritime applications as a marine diesel replacement. The reported energy efficiencies exceeded those of pure black liquor gasification and the blending of pyrolysis liquids Methanol could also be produced via thermochemical conversion of waste Conversion of industrial sources such as steel mill coke oven gas to methanol contributes to a relatively large share of China's methanol production. Lundgren et al. Lundgren et al. Methanol can also be produced by catalytic synthesis of carbon dioxide (CO In the currently ongoing European Union Horizon 2020 research project FReSMe (From Residual Steel gases to Methanol), CO Holmgren et al. Bio-methanol production costs differ largely depending mainly on feedstock type, conversion process and production capacity. In general, the two cost elements that dominate the cost of production are the capital cost (CAPEX) and the cost for buying the feedstock. These two contribute to 75–90% of the total production cost. The remaining part is other variable and fixed operating cost For methanol production via black liquor gasification in an average sized pulp mill (2500 t black liquor solids per day) the corresponding figures are 21 €/MWh for capital, 35 €/MWh for feedstock and auxiliary power and 13 €/MWh other Operations and Maintenance (O&M), in total 69 €/MWh With the exception of Enerkem waste to methanol/ethanol plant, no large plants have been built in which solid renewable feedstocks such as woody biomass are converted to methanol. Therefore the cost estimate for a large plant investment for methanol production from renewable resources will have a larger element of uncertainty than an investment calculation for a plant utilizing a technology that already has been constructed and operated on a commercial scale Production cost can be lowered through integration or co-location with other industries. Andersson et al. Most of the published work on methanol production from biomass considers methanol of IMPCA quality (99.85% purity). For maritime transportation, a less distilled methanol with higher water content, e.g. crude or fuel grade methanol (90% purity) would be acceptable. Carvalho et al. Energy conversion efficiencies from biomass to methanol vary in the range of 50–70% depending on process concepts and technology selection. Total fuel consumption in the shipping sector was estimated to be 298 million tonnes in 2015 Criteria used by Bengtsson et al. For the widespread adoption of a marine fuel by ships engaged in global trade, there must be a global network of bunkering facilities for the fuel. This was noted by McGill et al. There is already dedicated infrastructure for methanol storage and supply to the chemical industry at many ports worldwide, such as Rotterdam and Antwerp in Europe For smaller ships operating in a more confined geographical area, such as ships engaged in short sea shipping, coastal shipping, and inland waterway shipping, bunkering opportunities and options are more limited, and thus availability of fuel on a wide geographical basis is not an issue in most cases. For the case of provision of conventional oil bunker fuel in Sweden, for example, there are only a few large companies providing this service Ship owners need to have some certainty about long-term fuel availability before committing to a fuel switch that would require additional investments to adapt fuel systems and engines. Chryssakis et al. Methanol fuel burned in a diesel combustion engine can be less pure than the IMPCA quality methanol used by fuel blending and chemical industry consumers. Methanol with purity as low as 90% has been shown to perform well as fuel in tests by Ryan et al. Economic considerations are a key driver in fuel choice decisions made by ship owners. Both investment costs and operating costs are considered and are described as follows. A main barrier for implementation of new fuels can be the cost and complexity of converting existing ships, or the added costs associated with an alternative fuel when building a new vessel. Some alternative fuels, such as biodiesel, are essentially “drop in” solutions, as they can be mixed with currently used fossil fuels and they have a minimal impact on engine and on-board fuel systems. Thus any investment cost would be very low. Other fuels, such as LNG, other gaseous fuels, and methanol, require conversion or modification of the engine, on-board fuel system, and associated safety systems. Investment costs for conversion of vessels to methanol are estimated to below that of investment costs for conversion to LNG The investment cost is generally considered together with expected operational cost changes so that payback times on the investment can be estimated. The accepted payback time for ship operators is typically quite short, but varies by ship owner and is influenced by global economic conditions, company size, and degree of risk aversion The majority of operational costs for a ship owner are fuel costs. Yao et al. Thus economic conditions favour the adoption of methanol for vessels spending the majority of their time within sulphur emissions control areas, but only under conditions where the methanol is priced below the cost of the conventional low sulphur fuel oil alternative. Investment costs can be paid back over a reasonable period of time for fuel price differentials between conventional methanol and lower sulphur fuel oil that have occurred historically, although in late 2017 the price of marine gas oil was lower and thus there was no economic incentive. When fuel limits outside ECA areas are lowered to 0.5% sulphur in 2020, the price of fuel oil may increase again, so there may again be an economic incentive to switch to methanol. Technical and operational factors that may be considered when assessing marine fuels include engine technology maturity; fuel storage and handling on board; and risk and safety systems and requirements. Regarding large marine engines, both conversion of existing engines Methanol engines for smaller vessels, such as pilot boats, commuter ferries, or road ferries, are not currently available commercially, but are under development. Several different concepts for use of methanol in small marine engines in the power range 250–1200 kW were tested as part of the Swedish research project SUMMETH Some alternative marine fuels, such as methanol and LNG, require conversion or modification of on-board fuel and safety systems. LNG, for example, requires special storage tanks and fuel piping The amount of energy per unit mass or volume of a fuel is an important characteristic to consider for on board storage requirements and bunkering frequency. Ren and Lützen Regarding technical requirements for fuel storage, there is quite a bit of flexibility for methanol, as it is a liquid at ambient ship board temperatures and pressures and does not require specialized pressure tanks. Modification of existing tanks is possible, with the addition of methanol compatible tank coatings, as appropriate. There is also flexibility regarding tank location. Because methanol is not classified as a marine pollutant by IMO, it may be carried in tanks next to the hull, according to the IMO's code for the construction and equipment of ships carrying dangerous chemicals in bulk The lower energy density of methanol may be a drawback for ocean going ships that are required to carry a large volume of fuel, or for vessels that have limited time for bunkering. Ships with operational profiles that can accommodate additional bunkering activities, such as ferries, cruise vessels, or other ships that may be in port for several hours each day, will be less impacted by a requirement to bunker more frequently. Methanol has a flashpoint lower than that specified for marine fuels in the IMO's Safety of Life at Sea Convention (SOLAS) Regulations and rules for the use of methanol are under development by the International Maritime Administration, and will be part of the International Code of Safety for Ships using Gases or other Low-Flashpoint Fuels (IGF CODE). The completion of regulations for the ships using low flashpoint fuels will likely simplify the approvals procedure for ships wishing to use methanol as a fuel. The main environmental aspect important for evaluation of alternative marine fuels is whether the fuel use will be compliant with current and future anticipated environmental regulations. Combustion of methanol in a ship's engine, regardless of feedstock used for fuel production, meets the strictest sulphur emission requirements, as methanol contains no sulphur. Combustion of pure methanol will not produce carbon based soot Regarding emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG) from a fuel use life cycle perspective, feedstock and production methods of methanol fuel are very important. When used as a ship fuel, methanol produced from natural gas was estimated by Brynolf et al. Ship operators may set their own environmental targets in response to customer expectations or to differentiate their brand. As described previously, there are CO An overview of the renewable methanol supply chain and the requirements for ship operators as end users was carried out to identify potential challenges and opportunities influencing the uptake of renewable methanol as a shipping fuel. The main challenges identified for each of the main links of the supply chain were related to economic aspects, such as optimising processes to reduce feedstock supply and production costs, and ensuring price certainty for end users, as shown in From the end use perspective, environmental issues including current regulations regarding sulphur emissions and expected future controls on greenhouse gas emissions are driving a search for solutions such as renewable fuels. There are no technical barriers to using renewable methanol as a shipping fuel and investment costs for a ship operator are considered reasonable. The current cost of renewable methanol has been identified as an economic barrier, however, and there is uncertainty regarding future prices and availability. From the supply chain side, there are also no major technical barriers towards commercialisation. Cost for production of methanol from biomass is dominated by capital costs and feedstock costs, as stated previously. Although production cost estimates for bio-methanol in 2017 are higher than prices of fossil fuels for the same period, they are in the same range as prices reported historically for low sulphur marine gas oil. Landälv and Waldheim There is potential to reduce the cost of renewable methanol for ship fuel use by producing a lower purity fuel grade methanol. As stated previously, this would result in production cost savings and methanol with water content up to 10% has been shown to work well in diesel combustion engines. Although there is no production of fuel grade methanol on a commercial basis, possibly due to lack of demand and the need for parallel distribution systems over long transport distances for the large producers, it could be a possibility for smaller renewable methanol producers. Production capacity of bio-methanol plants is limited by the amount of biomass that can be gathered and transported at reasonable cost to the plant location, and will never be as large as those using natural gas feedstock Another issue of importance to the shipping industry regarding fuel is long-term supply and availability, particularly if the use of a new fuel requires some investment by shipowners, as is the case for methanol. Production of bio-methanol is currently very limited – the International Renewable Energy Agency reported that only 200,000 t were produced annually as of 2013 Regarding potential production volumes of bio-methanol, a recent estimate shows the potential for Sweden as an example. Landälv Environmental regulations directed at reducing sulphur emissions from shipping have driven a search for alternative fuels, but the fuel shift that has occurred has been to low sulphur fuels from fossil feedstocks, such as LNG, low sulphur diesel and in one case methanol. As the focus moves to CO Using biomass to produce renewable methanol for use in the shipping industry has been shown to be a technically viable option to reduce environmental impacts from maritime transport. No major technical challenges have been observed in production, distribution or use on ships. Likewise, there are no major challenges within potential supply chains, and although there is currently an economic barrier, this does not seem to be insurmountable. A transition from fossil fuel to renewable methanol can be facilitated by the use of methanol from fossil feedstock as a complement. Furthermore, infrastructure for both storage and transport is already to some extent in place, or can be easily adapted from existing. Based on the review, the following further work was identified as having potential for reducing or better understanding factors related to the economic barrier for use of renewable methanol in the shipping industry. Optimisation of feedstock supply chains and plant location, specifically further work on optimisation strategies for biomass to methanol supply chains, as there is already an identified base of literature on biomass to heat and electricity chains. Larger scale testing of production of methanol from renewable feedstock. There are few commercial scale plants in operation and additional large scale testing of different technologies would reduce the uncertainty in production cost analysis. This lowering of the cost uncertainty would also benefit end users in their consideration of investments for fuel system and engine conversion. Production of a “fuel quality” renewable methanol. A few studies were found showing that marine engines could use a lower purity methanol than is currently produced and traded. One study Environmental policy drivers for emissions reductions from shipping. Targets and strategies for emissions reduction from shipping were identified at the international, national, and corporate levels. Existing and expected future developments should be further investigated with regards to economic implications for adoption of renewable fuels and other emissions reductions alternatives. This work was partially supported by the Swedish Maritime Agency and the Region Västra Götaland.