Hydrogen and carbon monoxide mixtures are reducing agents for main direct reduction (DR) processes. However, sticking of iron ore pellets during reduction always leads to discontinuous operation. In order to evaluate the effects of the temperature, syngas constituents and reduction degree on sticking properties, reduction of iron ore pellets in the presence of H2–CO mixtures was conducted at 800–1000°C. The experimental results indicated that fibrous iron on the sticking interface hooked the pellets together at lower temperatures, while sintering of fresh iron with high activity led to the rise of sticking index (SI) at high temperature. SI decreased with the addition of H2 in reducing gas for the porous iron precipitation on the interface. Sticking firstly occurred on edge angles and then developed connection in large area as reduction degree increased. Bonding of wustite phase could be attributed to the sticking at lower reduction degree. Additionally, crystallization of iron phase and formation of low melting eutectic phase became the dominant factor as reduction degree increased.In the past few decades, direct reduction (DR) has become an important new process for iron making. About 75% of direct reduced iron (DRI) in the world is produced by the Midrex and HYL shaft furnace processes which use syngas as reducing agent The sticking phenomenon has some features to occur mostly during metallization of ore, sometimes accompanied with fibrous irons H The iron ore pellet sample supplied by a domestic pelletizing plant (China) was used in this work. The elemental composition of iron ore pellets is shown in High purity (99.99%) H These iron ore pellets were isothermally reduced at 800–1000 The clustered pellets consisting of more than two pellets were dropped 10 times from a height of 1 The experiment was carried out as described in The effect of temperature on sticking index was investigated as the pellets were reduced to 90% in different atmospheres and the results were illustrated in The influence of temperature on the characteristics of precipitated iron might be another reason for the variation of sticking index. So the morphology of sticking interface at different temperatures was analyzed by scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta-200). The effect of gas composition on sticking index was studied as the pellets were reduced to 90% at a temperature range of 800–1000 To get detailed knowledge about the relation between sticking and reducing gas composition, the morphology of sticking interface in different atmospheres was analyzed by scanning electron microscope. The sticking indexes recorded at different reduction degrees were presented in In order to examine the influence of reduction degree, the morphology of sticking interfaces at different reduction degrees was also analyzed by scanning electron microscope. The morphology of sticking interfaces formed at reduction degree of 48.46%, 70.10%, 82.24% and 92.64% was presented in For investigating the detailed information of the sticking, the cross section morphology and EDS analysis of sticking interface (signed as dashed line in The effect of temperature, gas composition and reduction degree on the sticking behavior during reduction of iron ore pellets was examined. Morphology of sample was analyzed by scanning electron microscope equipped with EDS to reveal the mechanisms of sticking. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work: With increasing temperature the iron precipitation, which acts as a bonding phase, varied. Fibrous iron precipitated on the sticking interface hooked the pellets together at lower temperatures. While at high temperature sintering of freshly precipitated iron with high activity and surface energy led to the rise of sticking index. Pellets reduced by CO exhibited the highest sticking index for the dense iron layer that precipitated on the interface. Addition of H Sticking practically occurred on micro-convexities and edge angles on the surface at lower reduction degree, and then developed connection in large area as edge angles transformed to flat surface with the rise of reduction degree. Sticking at lower reduction degree mainly depended on the bonding of the wustite phase on the interface. The crystallization of iron phase and formation of low melting eutectic phase became the dominant factor afterward as reduction degree increased, which correspondingly led to higher sticking index. This research was financially supported by the