The general protocol for quantitative petrographic description of clastic sediments envisioned by J.C. Griffiths approximately 60 years ago is built on specification of the following five statistically independent fundamental properties of aggregates: modal composition, spatial arrangement, size distributions, shape distributions, and orientation distributions of the elements. Each element is represented by a grain falling into one of an exhaustive set of petrographic classes. We introduce the so-called Generalized Griffiths Descriptor (GGD) which extends this protocol to igneous and metamorphic rocks. Statistical independence of the fundamental properties permits rigorous testing of petrogenetic hypotheses as well as simulation of rocks based on any conceivable combination of them. The benefits of a unifying scheme for description of crystalline parent rocks and their weathering products are illustrated by exploratory analysis of a petrographic data set derived from five granodiorites from across North America, comprising the parent rocks and three size fractions (coarse, medium, and fine) of their detritus. Compositional data analysis is used to estimate sediment generation and evolution (SGE) trajectories for each of the plutons sampled. The bulk mineral composition and the mineral composition of the rock-fragment assemblage display a common trend of relative depletion of quartz and K-feldspar with decreasing grain size, compensated for by relative enrichment of biotite and accessory minerals. The evolution of crystal interface composition suggests that the balance between chemical and mechanical weathering may be reflected in relative stabilities of crystal interfaces. We propose a computationally efficient stereological inversion procedure for estimating the parameters of crystal-size probability distributions in rocks based on the assumption of lognormality. The lognormal distribution is an acceptable default model for crystal size in granitoids at the level of individual thin sections (about 87% passes the tests for lognormality), but less so at the level of entire plutons (only 62% success ratio). The current implementation of the GGD is not yet complete, because it deals explicitly with the first three fundamental properties only, as a consequence of adopting the simplifying assumption that all elements which make up a rock are spherical. Shape and orientation distributions may be included in future implementations of the GGD. Dedicated data sets comprising sediments generated from a single parent rock under different conditions will be needed to advance SGE studies by shedding more light on the balance between chemical and mechanical weathering. The primary controls on the type of sediment released from source areas are the mineralogical composition, texture, and crystal or particle size of the parent rocks ( Quantification of the initial properties of sediments and their modifications in transit is one of the fundamental tasks of sedimentary petrology. Analysis of sediment generation and evolution (SGE) seeks to capture changes to the detrital spectrum of sediments in response to selective modifications along the pathway from source to sink. The prevailing approach to reconstructing the conditions in source areas of sediments has been based on analysis of their properties ( A prerequisite for achieving rigorous quantification in SGE studies is a solid descriptive framework capable of capturing the textural and compositional properties of parent materials and their weathering products with the same set of parameters, to permit direct comparisons and analysis of genetic relations among them. The foundations for such a comprehensive descriptive framework were presented by The number of properties one could measure with the objective to characterize an arbitrary specimen of rock or sediment is potentially infinite. In order to decide which properties permit complete characterization of a specimen in the most efficient way, their information content has to be taken into account. The smallest number of variables needed for a complete description of an aggregate is obtained when all variables are statistically independent and contain only unique information. The five fundamental properties identified by The concept of statistical independence of the five fundamental aggregate properties may be illustrated by the following thought experiment. Suppose that person A has access to an aggregate and is in possession of the full knowledge about all of its fundamental properties. Person A is willing to share all possible information about one of its fundamental properties with person B, who does not have access to the aggregate. If person A would ask person B: “What can you say, based on the exhaustive information I have shared with you on this fundamental property, about any of the other four fundamental properties of the aggregate?”, the invariable answer of person B would be: “Nothing.” The existence of an exhaustive set of statistically independent fundamental properties implies that: (1) all other properties (so-called derived properties in the terminology of Petrogenetic inference from fundamental properties is illustrated by analysis of the joint size-shape distributions of sediments. Operational definitions of grain shape in sediments are statistically independent of the sizes of grains (e.g., The starting point of  The choice of a petrographic classification scheme is logical because it is grain-based: it would not make much sense to describe the composition of sediment that consists primarily of polymineralic grains in terms of its constituent minerals alone. The grains are the natural units of observation because their properties (size, shape, and density) determine how the sediment will be transported and fractionated on its way from the source to the sink. A petrographic description of sediments that includes information on the mineralogical composition of the polycrystalline grains may be used to predict the bulk mineralogical composition of specimens. In contrast, it is not possible to predict the petrographic composition of a specimen from its mineralogical composition in the absence of additional information (grain and crystal sizes, interface frequencies) and therefore it may be concluded that the petrographic description contains more information than the mineralogical description. It follows logically from the above that trying to understand the behaviour of sediments based on their bulk mineral composition instead of their petrographic composition would be much harder, in view of the fact that the physical properties of the individual minerals (i.e., their sizes, shapes, and densities) do not directly govern the behaviour of the sediment, even though it seems likely that they must be related to it in an indirect way. This problem is amplified in the case of geochemical characterization, which is currently the most popular method for describing the composition of rocks and sediments with a common set of variables. Here, the term elements as used by Characterization of rocks on the three levels discussed above (chemical, mineralogical, and petrographic) may be placed in the compositional hierarchy applicable to SGE studies (  The GGD may be used to describe the fundamental properties listed above to encompass a wide range of rock types, i.e., sedimentary, metamorphic, and igneous rocks. Each of the properties of the GGD represents a multivariate entity (i.e., a probability distribution or its discretized equivalent, a vector or matrix). In implementing the GGD, we will keep things as simple as possible, reflecting the current state of the art in sediment characterization. The modal composition represents the volumetric proportions of the elements of the population. It is represented by a vector with The elements of the population refer to petrographic classes. Petrographic classes are categorical data, which fulfil two criteria: (1) the classification scheme must be exhaustive, and (2) its classes (categories) must be mutually exclusive. These two requirements permit each element to be uniquely assigned to a category. In practice, this leads to the definition of an ‘Others’ group comprising all other minerals than those specifically named, for instance, several species of comparatively rare accessory minerals. Operational definitions of petrographic classes in sandstones include various categories of mono- and polycrystalline framework grains and any other phases (i.e., different types of matrix, cement, and voids). In igneous rocks such as granites and metamorphic rocks such as gneiss and schist, petrographic classes correspond to interlocking crystals. In porphyritic rocks, consisting of phenocrysts in a cryptocrystalline groundmass, not all mineral phases can be resolved individually, and a category termed groundmass may be defined, analogous to the matrix of sandstones. Measurement of modal composition is generally straightforward, either directly (point counting, digital image analysis) or by proxy (XRD combined with chemical analysis). As discussed above, bulk chemical composition may be upgraded to bulk mineral composition if the chemical compositions of all minerals are known, and there is no collinearity of mineral composition (polymorphs and solid solutions). Mineral compositions of sediments cannot be routinely converted to petrographic composition in the absence of textural information. If it is assumed that the spatial arrangement of elements is random (as in detrital sediments), it may be fully described by a single dimensionless number known as the packing density ( Generalization of the above measure to rocks that display non-random textures is needed to extend the original scheme of The interface frequencies in a rock comprising Let Number frequencies of the elements ( Expected frequencies ( It may be noted that the direction of a fabric-perpendicular traverse is not likely to be of interest to the description of foliated metasedimentary rocks but will prove to be essential in the case of sediments with asymmetric (fining or coarsening up) laminae. We propose that such sediments be traversed “bottom-up” in accordance with the stratigraphic facing direction. Moreover, asymmetric spatial arrangements cannot be described by a single vector, but require the raw transect data of observed transitions from which higher-order Markov chain models ( This property may be represented by Property 3 pertains to the size-frequency distributions of the elements (petrographic classes) in the form of probability distributions (relative frequencies summing to unity). In sedimentary petrology, specification of the size-frequency distribution of each class of elements separately has proved to be essential for understanding the relation between size and density of mineral grains in wind and water-sorted sediments ( The bulk grain-size distribution (GSD) as commonly employed in sedimentary petrology is not equivalent to property 3, because the GSD is not a particle size-frequency distribution, but a particle mass-frequency (e.g., sieving) or volume-frequency (e.g., laser diffraction) distribution. Other measurement techniques (e.g., Sedigraph) record a fall-velocity distribution. The implicit assumption in all these techniques is that particles are spherical. In general, no technique measures all particle properties (i.e., size, shape, and density) simultaneously. Conversion from mass- or volume-frequency distributions to number frequency distributions is thus not exactly trivial. A promising approach for unconsolidated sediments is dynamic image analysis (DIA), which permits capturing of individual particles with high-speed cameras, and is able to provide joint size-shape frequency distributions as output (combination of properties 3 and 4). If DIA protocols could be extended to measure terminal settling velocities of particles, one could solve for particle density (using the equation of The crystal-size distribution (CSD) as defined in igneous and metamorphic petrology ( The CSD is not suitable for examining inter-relations between fundamental properties because it is actually a measure which contains information on three of them (properties 1, 2, and 4). In order to permit testing of the hypothesis that modal composition varies independently of the size distributions of crystals, the intrinsic link between crystal size and modal composition must be broken by expressing the CSD of element CSPDs cannot be directly observed in plane or thin sections, because these only provide information on the size distributions of 2-D cross-sections of elements. The statistical techniques developed to estimate 3-D distributions from distributions of lower dimensionality belong to the field of stereology. Methods of stereological inversion of crystal-size data obtained from thin or plane sections have been frequently applied in petrology ( Despite the likely inter-relationship among size, shape and orientation distributions (properties 3 to 5) in geological populations, remarkably good results have been obtained with parametric fitting of spherical particle distributions to 2-D data ( In the petrological literature, the log-linear distribution is commonly adopted as the reference model ( It is fairly straightforward to apply stochastic simulation techniques to generate unique 2-D data sets from any fully specified 3-D population (joint size-shape-orientation distributions), as shown by These properties may be represented by Most of our knowledge about shape and orientation stems from the analysis of thin sections, which provides 2-D measures in the form of apparent size and shape only ( In crystalline rocks, a distinction between crystal (or lattice) preferred orientation (CPO) and shape preferred orientation (SPO) is made ( Micro-CT scanning could be used to image rock specimens of up to 1 cm The shapes and orientations of non-framework elements of sedimentary rocks (matrix, pores, cement) are fully defined by their complement, the framework elements surrounding them. The same would apply to the groundmass of porphyritic rocks (broadly equivalent to the matrix of sedimentary rocks), and even to the shape of quartz in granitoids, as quartz is commonly the last phase to crystallize and its apparently random spatial distribution seems to indicate that it simply fills any remaining space ( In our application of the GGD to the set of parent rocks and derived sediments presented below (for which no information on shape and orientation distributions is available), we will adopt the simplifying assumption that all elements (crystals/grains/non-framework classes) are spherical. This eliminates properties 4 and 5 from the GGD. While this assumption may be regarded as an oversimplification, for instance when applied to the shapes of micas or overgrowths on detrital grains, it should be borne in mind that it is not yet possible to routinely measure all fundamental properties of rocks, and the simplification achieved by eliminating properties 4 and 5 from our current implementation of the GGD is considered a necessity at the present level of description. It also permits a straightforward transformation of the bulk GSD as defined in sedimentary petrology to a size-frequency distribution (property 3) under the additional assumption that the range of grain densities is limited and does not correlate with size. Recently, Owing to the statistical independence of fundamental aggregate properties, it is possible to describe rocks that display any conceivable combination of fundamental properties in an internally consistent manner. Below we discuss the inverse of this approach, i.e., simulation of any conceivable rock from a randomly chosen set of fundamental properties. The size-frequency distribution of element With the help of the arithmetic mean element volume Hence, the total number of elements of class It is thus always possible to generate an internally consistent hypothetical rock from a random combination of modal composition, interface frequencies, and crystal-size probability distributions. This is an important prerequisite for 3-D simulations of rocks which honour the above three constraints simultaneously (cf.  Direct comparison between parent rocks and sediments based on petrographic criteria is not very meaningful (from a petrographic point of view, a parent rock represents a single “rock fragment” of near-infinite size), so instead, the mineral composition was used for comparative purposes. Each sample was characterized in terms of modal mineralogy (property 1) and crystal-interface frequencies (property 2). The data set of one pluton (CA) was considered large enough to be subdivided into two groups according to the orientation of the drainage (E-W and N-S). The sediment data set comprises analyses of three size fractions (coarse, medium, and fine), in which the mineral composition of the monocrystalline grains and that of the polycrystalline grains (rock fragments) were tallied separately. These separate tallies give rise to two variants of property 1, termed 1a (bulk mineral composition) and 1b (mineral composition of the rock-fragment assemblage), respectively. The data-acquisition protocols and operational definitions used have been outlined in full detail in The only information on the CSPDs of minerals in the parent rocks (property 3) is given by the arithmetic averages of the lengths of crystal intercepts (1-D apparent diameter) obtained from the parent-rock interface tallies of The following was carried out for each of the six mineral classes in each of the thin sections: A predetermined number of crystals (25, 50 or 100) was randomly selected in Adobe Photoshop. Random selection consists of assigning a uniform probability distribution to all points falling within the limits of the digitized specimen (rectangular thin section). A crystal is selected if the pair of random coordinates (generated from a uniform distribution) falls within its limits, and the crystal falls entirely within the bounds of the specimen. Crystals larger than 25 μm could be reliably identified. By using the ‘quick selection tool’ in Photoshop the crystals were converted to paths in vector format and given a corresponding mineral-class colour. All in all, about 14,000 crystals were digitized. The images were exported and loaded into the JMicrovision software for segmentation and data acquisition of 16 features including length, width, area, perimeter, and equivalent circular diameter. The equivalent circular diameter ( Unfortunately, the data set of the sediments does not include measurements of property 3, so we cannot compare directly CSPDs of parent rocks and sediments. We will, therefore, limit ourselves to presenting the two parameters of the best-fit lognormal distributions (mean and standard deviation) of each mineral in each of the thin sections of the parent rocks separately, as well as the average values for the minerals in each pluton. All distributions will be compared against the observations by means of four statistical goodness-of-fit tests: Anderson-Darling, Pearson's Chi-squared, Kolmogorov-Smirnov, and Shapiro-Wilk (e.g., The first two fundamental properties of rocks (modal and interface data) represent compositional quantities and are thus preferentially analysed in the form of log-ratios ( All statistical calculations will be performed in clr-space. If required, the inverse clr-transform may be applied to express fundamental properties in terms of their native units. The inverse clr-transformation is defined as: Because clr-transformed data can be treated with standard statistical methods ( Multivariate analysis of properties 1 and 2 was carried out employing Principal Components Analysis (PCA). The results were graphically summarized in biplots which show the data points in a space of reduced dimensionality, as determined by the singular value decomposition of the data matrix ( Our exploratory data analysis of properties 1 and 2 is based on the following line of reasoning, illustrated for the interface composition (property 2). The probability of survival of interfaces mirrors their relative strengths under the prevailing conditions. The interface composition of the rock-fragment assemblage evolves from that of its parent by preferential destruction of the weakest interfaces, which causes enrichment of the strongest interfaces ( The relative abundances of the different types of crystal interfaces in the parent rock define the initial conditions for sediment generation ( In the multivariate analyses that follow, we will normalize the data corresponding to each pluton by the mean composition of the parent to eliminate the effects of parent-rock properties on the properties of the derived sediments, i.e., we will only look at changes relative to the parent. If the mean value of the property of interest in the parent rock is given by  In this framework, the data points The shift introduced above to eliminate the variability of “inherited” properties from the data set is identical to the transformation that was used to define the interface composition (property 2) as a fundamental property which is independent of the modal composition because it is expressed relative to the expected interface composition under the assumption of random texture Note that random texture of rock-fragment assemblages implies that all interfaces are equally stable, a hypothesis that can be evaluated with a Chi-squared test, as illustrated in The last phase of exploratory data analysis consists of subjecting the mean compositions of the parents and the sediment fractions (properties 1 and 2) to a weighted PCA. For each pluton, the mean composition of the parent rock was subtracted from the mean composition of each sediment fraction to define mean SGE trajectories, as described in the previous section. The “weight of evidence” assigned to each of these mean SGE trajectories was derived using the rules of error propagation: Where Tvar represents the total variance of the property in the parent ( This property is represented by the bulk mineral composition of the sediments relative to the composition of their parents (property 1a). A separate analysis was conducted of the mineral composition of the rock-fragment assemblages in the sediments relative to the composition of their parents (property 1b). Five classes of elements were considered: quartz (Q), plagioclase (P), K-feldspar (K), biotite (B), and an others (Oth.) group comprising opaque minerals (O) and translucent accessory minerals (A) of which the most abundant are hornblende and chlorite. Hence, The results of Hotelling's two-sample T The biplots of properties 1a ( This property has been quantified in terms of isostructural interfaces (all combinations among Q, P, and K, 6 in total) and a rest or remaining group comprising the sum of all non-isostructural interfaces (all interfaces involving B and A, 9 in total). Opaque minerals (O) were left out of the interface data, as OO interfaces cannot be reliably measured in transmitted light. Summation of non-isostructural interfaces was motivated by the results of previous studies ( The results of Hotelling's two-sample T The biplots of property 2 ( The CSPDs of the minerals in each of the parent rocks have been estimated by assuming that they follow a lognormal frequency distribution (for details see The most conspicuous result is the strong positive correlation among the AD, PC, and SW tests, which implies a high degree of consistency. A lognormal distribution of Upscaling to the lithosome level is exemplified by fitting a single distribution to all crystals of a given mineral counted in the set of specimens (thin sections) belonging to a single pluton. For each pluton, the lognormal CSPD obtained from the pooled data was compared to the average of the CSPDs of the corresponding mineral as determined from individual thin sections (i.e., the models obtained by pooling the CSPDs) with a PC test. A visual comparison of both versions of the pooling is presented in The biplots of The  The GGD proposed in this study permits a wide range of rocks and their derived sediments to be described in terms of the same fundamental properties, which opens the way to statistically rigorous analysis of SGE trajectories, testing of petrogenetic hypotheses, and simulation of rocks possessing arbitrary combinations of fundamental properties. It should be borne in mind that highly condensed statistical representations of complex 3-D aggregates as presented in this contribution are unlikely to cover all possible cases. For instance, the GGD cannot be used to describe biogenic carbonates (boundstones). The GGD as implemented in this study was designed with the objective to describe a wide variety of igneous, metamorphic, and siliciclastic parent rocks and their detritus at the thin-section scale, subject to achieving a balance between simplicity and generic applicability. In our attempt to define the GGD for granitoids and their sand-sized detritus as a tool for siliciclastic SGE studies, one major simplification had to be made. All elements of the rock were assumed spherical, so as to eliminate properties 4 and 5 from the current implementation of the GGD. If desirable and feasible, properties 4 and 5 of the GGD may be activated using appropriate statistical descriptions of shape and orientation data. In principle, estimates of all fundamental properties of a specimen can be obtained through digital image analysis of thin sections which have been segmented into petrographic classes ( The degree of clustering of CSPD parameters in Systematic variations of the bulk mineral composition relative to the inherited modal composition of parents show comparable patterns among plutons, which indicates that compositional shifts are fairly predictable. The same applies to the mineral composition of the rock-fragment assemblages. The most common Even plutons CA-NS and MT, which display the most divergent The conclusions drawn from two detailed studies of weathering products of granitoid parent rocks produced under conditions in which either mechanical or chemical weathering are considered the dominant control on sediment generation ( The main compositional trend identified among the six plutons analysed is the overall change in mineral composition with decreasing grain size, attributed to the selective removal of Q and K from the medium and fine sand fractions, and their accumulation in the form of monocrystalline grains in the very fine sand and silt fractions. Quantitative XRD measurements of the very fine sand and silt fractions would be needed to check this hypothesis and complete the mineral-composition database. Such additional data are also sufficient for establishing the petrographic composition, as polycrystalline grains will be scarce or absent in the size range below fine sand, which implies convergence of mineralogical and petrographic composition. During exhumation and weathering, the anisotropy of physical properties of minerals (compressibility and expansibility) creates interface strain owing to unloading, deformation, and temperature variations ( The analysis of None of the three representative series extracted from the results of our interface analysis shows many similarities to this expectation. In addition, the representative series are quite different from each other. From this, we conclude that the evolution of interface composition among plutons cannot be predicted from a general theory about contrasts among isomineralic, isostructural, and non-isostructural interfaces. This observation is consistent with the original premise of In view of the many factors that are likely to affect the relative strengths of interface classes, it should come as no surprise that the evolution of interface composition as depicted by their Geostatistical analysis of property 1 across five plutons (Weltje and Paredis, this issue) indicates that up to several hundreds of specimens must be analysed to obtain accurate estimates of the mean (area-weighted) value of this property, and the same may hold for the other four properties as well. If this is indeed the case, the plutons in the data set presented here have been distinctly undersampled, and thus a high degree of uncertainty must be assigned to the average parent-rock and sediment properties reported above. Given the noise in such small data sets, some form of averaging or smoothing of results is likely to lead to a more robust estimation of SGE trajectories. To model the trends shown in the biplots of Modelling of SGE trajectories requires large integrated data sets of parent-rock and sediment properties. An efficient protocol for the acquisition of integrated data sets has been developed by Disintegration of rocks along crystal interfaces has not been widely studied from a quantitative point of view. The exploratory analysis of the evolution of interface composition indicates that calibration on a case-by-case basis is needed for SGE studies in view of the variability of relative interface stabilities among plutons. An additional complication for establishing reliable SGE models that predict the evolution of interface composition is that mechanical and chemical weathering in natural systems go hand in hand, and their interactions are likely to influence overall interface strengths ( An example of multiple SGE trajectories originating from a single parent was presented by The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We wish to acknowledge the achievements of John Cedric Griffiths (1912-1992), Andrei Borisovich Vistelius (1915-1995), and John Aitchison (1926-2016), three titans of mathematical petrology and statistics. Our attempt to quantify sediment properties for the purpose of SGE studies was inspired by their ideas. We thank the editor (Chris Fielding), guest editor (Luca Caracciolo), and two anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions which led to significant improvement of the original manuscript. BP wishes to thank Luca Caracciolo for lending him the thin sections of the parent rocks analysed by WAH. The research reported here forms part of the PhD thesis of BP, which was funded by Crystal-size probability distributions (CSPDs) of the parent rocks sampled by Heins (1992) were constructed by combining his 1-D measurements with newly acquired 2-D image analysis data of the same thin sections. In order to reduce the considerable workload of estimating more than 300 crystal-size probability distributions according to the conventional approach ( The lognormal distribution may be viewed as the default model for positive quantities which do not possess an upper bound, such as discharge, permeability, or particle size. By definition, crystal size ( The difference between the two measures of central tendency is a function of the standard deviation of the lognormal distribution. If we define Where We solve the above equation for The data set of Heins (1992) comprises interface frequencies, the number of traverses passed when counting the interfaces, and the total traverse length. Hence, the mineral number frequencies Where 〈 The mean intercept lengths It should be noted that Fitting of a single CSPD by pooling all crystals belonging to the The probability distribution of apparent (2-D) crystal diameters observed in thin or plane section is biased because the probability of selecting a crystal by spatially random sampling depends on its size and on the dimensions of the specimen. The probability of observing a crystal in a finite area (such as a rectangular thin section) can be modelled as the combination of two effects: left-hand and right-hand truncation. Under conditions of spatially uniform random sampling, the left-hand truncation effect is represented by the probability of selecting a crystal with area This equation depicts the effect of left-hand truncation (= If we would have carried out an infinite number of random selections which resulted in the identification of a given crystal and recorded the values of all coordinate pairs that fell on it, we would find that the average of the coordinate pairs coincides exactly with the centre of mass of that crystal as observed on the plane. Because we assume that all crystals are spheres, the expected set of coordinates corresponding to each crystal marks the centre of a circle observed on the plane. The right-hand truncation (= The probability of selecting a crystal goes to zero when its circle diameter approaches the width of the thin section. The relative probability of selecting a circle completely enclosed by the area of the thin section is given by the product of the left- and right-hand truncation probabilities: This function is equal to zero for crystals at the physical limits of observation (i.e., Where The inverse of this distribution is termed the truncation probability: The cumulative distribution of The term containing Stochastic simulations of the sectioning process were conducted in which sets of lognormally distributed spheres (with diameters The 3-D lognormal probability density function was initialized with a mean of 0 and a variance ranging from 0.1 to 10 with intervals of 0.1. Note that the mean and variance of the lognormal distribution as defined here are those of the normal distribution of ln( The first step of the simulation consists of selecting the spheres to be cut. If a set of The intersection probabilities are assigned to each set of The apparent size of the circles on the plane of intersection is modelled by assuming that each sphere is cut according to a random uniform distribution on the interval between its centre and its surface. If The result of the stochastic simulation is the probability distribution of circle diameters that will be observed on a plane of infinite size if the spheres follow a lognormal distribution and are randomly distributed in space. The stochastic simulation is illustrated in After correcting for the effects of truncation, the 2-D data obtained from digital image analysis of the thin sections have been transformed into a cumulative probability distribution of circle diameters observed on an infinite plane. This representation coincides with the format in which the output of the stochastic simulations is given. Hence, data and model may be directly compared and The cumulative probability distribution of ln( Note that the above transformation implies that all values of In the next step, The value The intercept of the straight line was set to zero by subtracting the mean of ln( As a result of the above operations, the centred cumulative distribution can be closely approximated by a linear function of the following form: The slope of this curve, The relation between This equation may be used to estimate the standard deviation of the lognormal distribution of 3-D crystal sizes from the set of observed 2-D circle diameters after transformation of   Supplementary data to this article can be found online at