The effect of ultrasonic treatment on the bioleaching of metals from black shale was investigated using an indigenous strain of Aspergillus niger. Maximum growth of fungus was achieved in up to 15days of incubation in stationary as well as shaking flasks (with and without ultrasonic treatment). Culture filtrates contained oxalic, citric, tartaric and malic acids. Maximum leaching of Al (92%), Fe (83%), Cu (92%), Zn (87%) and Co (71%) was achieved within 24days when the black shale was leached by culture filtrate and treated ultrasonically. Lower values with statistically significant differences were found in the maximum extraction of metals during leaching for 36days in control experiments without ultrasonic treatment and in stationary flasks.Worldwide reserves of high grade ores are diminishing, but there exists large reserves of low and lean grade ores yet to be mined. The difficulties associated with the recovery of metals from these ores, such as shales and schists, using conventional techniques are expensive technology, high energy consumption and environmental costs due to high levels of pollution from these technologies ( The mining industry is constantly seeking new and more economic technologies such as bioleaching to treat low grade ores ( The use of low power ultrasonic waves in the bioleaching of metals is a developing field to aid metal extraction from ores. Combining ultrasonic treatment with classical methods of ore extraction resulted in faster leaching ( The purpose of this work was to examine the effect of ultrasonics on the bioleaching yield of metals from a polymetallic black shale with organic acids produced by a locally isolated fungus All chemicals and reagents used in the present study were of analytical grade and purchased from Merck as well as Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). A representative sample of black shale ore was obtained from Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences (PIEAS) Islamabad, Pakistan. The sample was oven-dried (109 The mineralogical composition was determined by X-Ray Diffraction studies of black shale using a Rigaku Rint 300 Series diffractometer and the JCPDS diffraction software. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of citric, malic, oxalic and tartaric acid for metals solubilization, chemical/sonochemical leaching tests were performed by taking each of the pure organic acids (1%) and shale residue (2% pulp density) in 250-mL flasks. The flasks were incubated in an orbital shaker (Gellen Kamp, England) at 28  For the bioleaching of metals, a series of 250-mL Erlenmeyer flasks, each containing 100 Enhanced microbial extraction of metals was performed ultrasonically in shaking flasks by following the modified method of After 15 Analysis of metabolites (e.g. citric, oxalic, tartaric and malic acids) produced in the stationary as well as shaking flasks, with and without ultrasonic treatment, was performed by following the modified HPLC method as described by Dissolved aluminum in solution was determined spectrophotometrically using eriochrome cyanine R as chromogenic agent. The 1:1 violet red aluminum complex was determined by measuring absorbance at All experimental results were determined in triplicate before and after leaching in stationary as well as shaking flasks (with and without ultrasound treatment) and are reported as a mean value The mineralogical composition of the black shale, as determined by XRD, is given in The elemental analysis of the acid digested ore sample is reported in Worldwide deposits of black shale ores are generally polymetallic and often contain a considerable variety and amount of base, heavy, rare and precious metals ( Chemical leaching with and without ultrasonic treatment was performed after 30 and 15 Similarly oxalic acid has also affinity for iron recovery than any other acid. Maximum iron (91%) was extracted from the shale in ultrasonically treated shake flasks containing oxalic acid solution compared to similar shake flasks without ultrasonic treatment (87%, Citric acid showed greater potential for copper recovery from shale than oxalic acid as shown in During the growth of In case of flasks under stationary condition, the greater biomass production might be attributed to greater spores yield than hyphal formation, thus resulting in low organic acid production due to reduced glucose oxidation. Sonic treatment of the shake flask cultures enhances transport of oxygen and nutrients to the fungal cells and dispersion of excreted metabolic end products from the fungal cells, thus stimulating growth ( To investigate the production of organic acids during growth period and its utilization during leaching period, HPLC analysis were performed for samples under stationary as well as shaking (with and without ultrasonic treatment) mode. The results of the HPLC analysis are shown in After 15 In shake flasks containing culture supernatants and treated with ultrasonic waves, the maximum metal extraction was observed after 24 Results regarding aluminum solubilization from the shale are shown in The results of iron solubilization are shown in The results on copper leached from the shale are summarized in The study on the effect of different organic acids on zinc and cobalt extraction is summarized in Conditions are described under which the fungus This research paper is a part of Ph.D. research work of the Miss Fozia Anjum. The authors are highly thankful to