In this work using an electrochemical technique, deposition and crystal growth of calcium carbonate and barium sulphate at a stainless steel electrode is investigated through a rotating disk electrode involving oxygen reduction under diffusion condition. The influence of some parameters such as pressure, temperature, surfactant, cosalt and pH on morphology and deposition of CaCO3 and BaSO4 at surface of the stainless steel are studied. The results of the temperature tests reveal that the surface deposition is reduced by increase of the temperature and decrease of pH. The pressure also proves to have a significant influence on the morphology and the structure of calcium carbonate and barium sulphate deposition at the metal surface. With establishing a flow condition at high pressure, nucleation and deposition of calcium carbonate and barium sulphate at the metal surface generate the nano size of CaCO3 and BaSO4 crystals and leads to reduction of the coverage of the surface. In the presence of surfactant, it is shown that deposition of the calcium carbonate decreases the surface coverage so that after the point of the critical molar concentration of surfactant, a reduction of deposition of the calcium carbonate and barium sulphate at the surface can be clearly observed. Finally, influence of monovalent cosalts such as NaCl and KCl are investigated so that it does not present any certain trend in the deposition; however the morphology of the deposited crystal considerably changes.area of the electrode (cm number of electron Faraday constant diffusion coefficient of the electroactive species (cm rotation speed (rad viscosity of water (cm bulk concentration of electrode active species (mol/cm the Levich limiting current (mA) Formation of insoluble mineral salts from supersaturated aqueous electrolyte solution is an important and expensive problem in the several industrial processes such as hydrometallurgy, water desalination, enhanced oil recovery in petroleum industry etc. In recent years, a few studies have been focused on these aspects of the surface scaling so that the different mechanisms were proposed to explain the differences between the scaling precipitation in bulk solution and scale deposition at the surface. Klaren et al. The main objective of the present work is to study the effects of temperature, pH, pressure, surfactant and cosalt, on calcium carbonate and barium sulfate deposition on the metal surface. To our best knowledge, using an electrochemical technique no investigation has been carried out so far to see the influences of pressure and surfactant on morphology and deposition of the calcium carbonate and barium sulfate scale at the metal surface. To achieve this aim, a specific high pressure cell is designed and constructed to mix the reactants of the reaction at the flow condition. We followed the electrochemical technique that was introduced completely by Neville et al. Extra pure (97.5–99.5%) powder of sodium carbonate, calcium chloride; sodium sulfate and barium chloride in analytical grade supplied by Merck Company are used. The stock solutions of the calcium chloride and sodium carbonate are made by dissolving 1.4 The two different apparatuses are used to carry out the experiments. The first electrochemical set up was used to analyze the coverage of surface deposition and the other set up consists of the high pressure vessel to set a suitable condition for contacting of the surface with scaling solution. Each apparatus is explained as follows. A μAUTOLABΙΙΙ potentiostat apparatus with NOVA software is used to maintain the necessary potential. A conventional glass cell is used with the three electrodes: the Rotating Disk Electrode (RDE) as working electrode, Pt wire electrode as a counter, and saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as a reference electrode. The rotation speed of the RDE can be controlled remotely with the NOVA software by connecting the RDE to an available DAC channel of the μAUTOLABΙΙΙ potentiostat. The rotation speed can be varied continuously between desired ranges so that the limiting current is recorded simultaneously by the software. The working electrode for polarization measurement is a stainless steel 316 The electrodes are dipped in 40 We used a 300 Initially the calcium chloride solution is placed at the high pressure vessel and the surface of the rotating electrode is immersed in the solution inside the vessel so that the contact surface of electrode is wetted. The angular velocity of the stainless electrode is 380 After 1 The particles size and morphology of the crystals deposited at the surface are investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of a Holland Philips XL30 microscope with an accelerating voltage of 25 We used the same electrochemical technique that was utilized by Neville et al. A rotating disk electrode is chosen because the mass transport to its surface is uniformly distributed along the whole surface and can be varied by changing the rotational speed. The scale formed on the metal surface resulted in the reduction of electroactive surface area and reduces the active surface for the reduction of dissolved oxygen under mass control. At a constant potential, the limiting current ( Before contacting the electrode with scaling solution, the active surface is the entire RDE surface which is uniformly accessible to O To investigate the effects of the variables such as pressure, temperature, surfactant, pH and cosalt on the deposition of the calcium carbonate and barium sulfate on the surface, a series of experiments are designed and the percent of the surface coverage is measured by the electrochemical technique. This method quantifies the surface coverage of electrode by distinction between the active surface area on a bare and the scaled electrode The deposited scale during 60–90 The effect of the pressure on the deposition of the scale at the surface has not been studied before. Reviewing the researches in this subject showed that the effect of pressure on precipitation of CaCO For the operation of industrial equipments such as heat exchangers and water/oil separator, it is more important to have enough information on how the pressure affects the scale deposition, especially for high pressure vessel and oil production equipments. To achieve this aim, the vessel should be pressurized before starting the nucleation. Thus, using the high pressure injector cell, the solution of Na X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to identify the polymorphic forms of the deposited calcium carbonate. The resulted pattern is compared with the standard pattern of three polymorphism of calcium carbonate (calcite, vaterite, aragonite) to ensure the type of polymorph deposited at the surface. The analysis by XRD shows that the calcite polymorph of calcium carbonate is formed at high pressure condition. As demonstrated in The influence of temperature on the deposition of the scale at the surface of the electrode is investigated at 25 The work of Chibowski et al. To study the coverage of surface by deposition of scale at high temperature, in general the trend is well seen and the reproducibility is quite good, especially at lower temperatures, although in some cases the changes lie within the range of standard deviation. At higher temperatures, reproducibility of the replicated experiments presents more deviation that might be due to agglomeration and transformation of the crystals. Finally, increasing temperature affects not only the properties of the metal surface, but also the morphology of crystals. The effects of co-existence of excess ionic additives in the CaCO It may be concluded that the increasing concentration of NaCl has no considerable effect on deposition of the CaCO To investigate the effect of surfactant on deposition of the calcium carbonate and barium sulfate crystals, the CTAB is added into the initial CaCl Since the mixing of the solutions, the precipitation of CaCO Scaling calcium carbonate and barium sulfate at the metal surfaces is a common problem for the produced water by mixing the formation and injection waters for the oil enhanced recovery in petroleum industry. In addition, the deposition of calcium carbonate scaling is a challenging task for equipments such as heat exchangers, cooling towers, desalination storage settlers and the water/oil separators. The large numbers of works in this area focus on the effect of the different variables on the precipitation in bulk solution, however studying the various variables on deposition of the scales at the metal surfaces are scare. The variations in temperature, pressure, pH, surfactant and cosalt play an important role in the morphology and crystal growth process of CaCO We appreciate