An improved process was developed to produce gold with purity >99.9998% (>5 N) from gold scraps using dibutyl carbitol (DBC) as an extractant. The extraction of gold into DBC was optimised, which showed that gold could be effectively loaded into DBC up to 190 g/L Au. Only small amounts of other minor elements and impurities, such as Pt, Pd, Ag, Cu and Zn, were extracted into the DBC phase. Fe on the other hand has to be removed by pH adjustment to pH3, prior to solvent extraction. The novel stripping step recovered solid fulminating gold Au2O3×3NH3, which was formed by contacting the gold-loaded DBC with concentrated ammonia. This intermediate product was then further reduced to gold powder by hydrazine. Further washing of this gold powder with nitric acid yielded >5 N gold.Gold has mostly been extracted from its ores by cyanidation in the Carbon-In-Pulp process. The gold bullion produced from this process generally has to be further refined in mint shops to achieve 99.99% (4 N) purity ( High purity gold [5 N or higher] requires more elaborated processing, using 4 N gold as starting material, which is first dissolved in high purity acid and then re-plated. The process is repeated several times to achieve the required purity. The dissolution of gold in chloride systems has been well-studied, with the gold chloride complex being very stable in solutions of strong chloride, acid and high solution potential ( Several solvents have been evaluated for the solvent extraction of gold, including ammonium extractants ( Monoamide compounds, such as Using a liquid membrane, Based on PVC-supported liquid membrane extraction, Using 2-hydroxy-4- Polyethers, such as glymes, form strong complexes with gold. Several commercially proven applications use butyl diglyme (diethylene diglycol di- As a result, several patents on process steps based on DBC have been lodged ( However, the above processes, based on solvent extraction, require multistage extraction and stripping. In some cases, the stripping was not efficient, leaving a high percentage of gold in the organic phase. Laborious operation of multistage solvent extraction sometime causes losses of gold solution during processing. An investigation was instigated with the aim of improving the stripping and gold recovery steps following the extraction of gold into DBC phases. There is room to improve the process further, especially during the stripping stage, for the recovery of gold from DBC. Similarly, The improved process was based on the rapid formation of a gold solid, believed to be fulminating gold; Au This paper presents the results from a study to determine the optimum conditions for the treatment steps involved in such a process. Gold scraps (containing approximately 60–75% Au) from various sources were collected and dissolved in batches for use in the solvent extraction testwork. The scraps also contained 4% Ag and other minor components, such as Pt, Pd, Zn and Fe. DBC was obtained from TCI Tokyo Kasei Kogyo Co. Ltd, Japan, and used in a concentrated form. All other agents used (HCl, HNO The developed process is shown in Liquor preparation, which involves: (i) Digestion of scrap materials to produce the mother liquor (Liquor A), (ii) Fe removal at pH Selective solvent extraction of gold, which involves: (i) Extraction of gold using DBC and (ii) Scrubbing of DBC with acid to remove impurities (Scrub Liquor D). The spent liquor C is then further treated to recover residual gold using an ion exchange resin. Stripping of gold using concentrated ammonia to produce a solid intermediate product (fulminating gold). Reduction of “fulminating gold” using hydrazine or hydrogen peroxide after filtration. Washing gold powder in nitric acid to further remove impurities. The mother liquor (A) was generally produced within 30 min by digesting the gold scraps in aqua regia at 90–100 °C. Under these strong chloride and acid conditions, most metals, with the exception of Ag, should exist as soluble chloride complexes. Liquors of up to 50 g/L Au could be produced from various sources of scraps, as shown in the later section. In general, the mother liquor (A) also contained Ag, Fe, Cu, Pt and Pd. Fe was a major impurity at 2–4 g/L Fe which was precipitated at pH> Some gold would also be lost during this precipitation stage, possibly due to the spot precipitation of Au(OH) After all the iron had been precipitated and the mother liquor (B) filtered, HCl was added to re-acidify the liquor to ensure the stability of the soluble gold in the mother liquor. The gold-containing iron oxide precipitate can be further digested in aqua regia. Fe In one experiment, the analysis of the different liquors yielded typical solution assays as shown in The amount of silver in the scraps (4.2% Ag) should have yielded 3 g/L Ag(I) during digestion (as 70 g of scraps was dissolved into 1 L of aqua regia). The fact that less than 400 mg/L Ag was observed in the mother liquor (A) indicated that the majority of Ag either could not be extracted or existed as insoluble AgCl. Continuous precipitation of a white solid (which was confirmed as Ag by chemical analysis) during the storage of the pregnant liquor indicated that most silver would be lost via AgCl precipitation. The instability of silver chloride complexes has been reported previously ( The variation in the percentage of the soluble form AgCl To study the characteristics of extraction, a known volume of the DBC solvent (used as is) was mixed with a known volume of treated mother liquor (Liquor B) yielded from the Fe removal step for 5 min in a beaker. After each test, the phases were separated using a separating funnel and the aqueous phase was then subjected to full chemical analysis. DBC's structure is represented as CH In the extraction step, the OH  The effect of the aqueous phase acidity on the gold extraction efficiency is shown in The extraction efficiency (as %) at different Liquor/DBC ratios was determined, as shown in The amount of DBC used in subsequent tests was chosen so that up to 190 g/L Au could be loaded into the DBC solvent. If this criterion was chosen, almost all the gold was loaded into the DBC organic phase. After the solvent extraction, the spent liquor (C) is sent to a waste recovery stage to recover the residual Au solution, using an ion exchange resin, The gold gold-loaded DBC solvent was then scrubbed, using 2 M HCl, at a DBC:HCl ratio of 1:2 v/v to remove minor components, such as Ag, residual Fe and other metals, yielding a Scrub Liquor (D) containing some gold, which requires further recovery in a waste treatment stage. The process can be described by the following reactions: Stripping of gold chloride from the DBC: Converting gold chloride complex to “fulminating gold”: The novel aspect of this process was the stripping of gold chloride from DBC using ammonia, forming an intermediate yellow gold solid. Although the composition and nature of this solid could not be confirmed, the reaction of gold chloride complex in the DBC solvent with ammonia solution was believed to form fulminating gold. This compound has been well publicised in old chemistry treatises ( However it was able to check the molar ratio of Au and NH The Au and NH In the stripping stage, it was believed that most gold was removed from the DBC as shown by the clarity of the fresh DBC (DBC had a bright yellow colour when gold was loaded even at low concentrations). This was confirmed in a mass balance experiment presented in the later section. For the production of high purity (> The precipitate was quickly filtered and transferred to another reactor, with hydrazine and ammonia added to reduce the reactive “fulminating gold”. A brown gold powder was immediately formed during this step. The redox process can be represented by the following reaction: In a demonstration experiment, 1.0 L of the mother liquor A containing 34.0 g/L Au was treated following the procedures described earlier (also shown The partition of minor components into liquor streams during processing was evaluated, as presented in Some gold was lost during the iron precipitation stage, but this could be recovered as shown in Improvements have been made to several steps of a process to recover gold from scrap materials, based on solvent extraction using DBC to produce gold of 5 N purity or higher. The extraction of gold into DBC was optimised, which showed that for liquors containing 50 g/L Au or less, gold could be loaded into the DBC organic phase up to 190 g/L (at >