In the present study, cathode materials (C/LiCoO2) of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and waste polyvinyl chloride (PVC) were co-processed via an innovative mechanochemical method, i.e. LiCoO2/PVC/Fe was co-grinded followed by water-leaching. This procedure generated recoverable LiCl from Li by the dechlorination of PVC and also generated magnetic CoFe4O6 from Co. The effects of different additives (e.g. alkali metals, non-metal oxides, and zero-valent metals) on (i) the conversion rates of Li and Co and (ii) the dechlorination rate of PVC were investigated, and the reaction mechanisms were explored. It was found that the chlorine atoms in PVC were mechanochemically transformed into chloride ions that bound to the Li in LiCoO2 to form LiCl. This resulted in reorganization of the Co and Fe crystals to form the magnetic material CoFe4O6. This study provides a more environmentally-friendly, economical, and straightforward approach for the recycling of spent LIBs and waste PVC compared to traditional processes.(140 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are an attractive energy storage option due to their high energy density, high energy storage performance, long discharge period, and excellent circulation performance ( Owing to the lack of adequate policy and feasible technology, there are only limited recycling plants to recycle the spent LIBs in some countries such as China. As a consequence, the most wasted batteries including the spent LIBs entered into the approach of municipal solid waste treatment and disposal. LIBs are discarded at the end-of-life phase, and the recycling mainly rely on small workshops since lacking of specific collection system ( Prior work on recycling spent LIBs has focused on the recovery of valuable metals cobalt (Co) and lithium (Li) from the cathode materials using recovery processes such as pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and biometallurgy ( In recent years, the chlorination metallurgical process has been widely used for the recovery of metals from waste materials. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) has been used in these processes because it contains 58% Cl by weight and is an excellent chlorine atom donor. Moreover, the disposal of waste PVC has become a major problem as the production of PVC rises steadily ( Recently, many research groups have focused their efforts on the recovery of metals by mechanochemical methods ( In this study, we developed an innovative mechanochemical method for the co-processing of cathode materials (C/LiCoO Spent LIBs were supplied by XIAMEN OASIS Sources Co., Ltd. The LIBs were completely discharged by addition of a 5 A commercially available PVC powder (Chemical Reagent Company of Beijing) was used in this study. The diameter of the PVC particles was approximately 50–100 PVC and LiCoO The concentrations of metal ions in the filtrate were measured by ICP-OES (Prodigy, Leeman, USA), while the concentration of inorganic Cl  Previous work has shown that alkali oxides/hydroxides are efficient reagents for co-grinding dehalogenation ( The effects of oxides (Fe  The effects of PVC dosage on the conversion rates of Li, Co, and Cl are shown in As can be seen from  The optimal co-grinding parameters for the mechanochemical co-processing of LiCoO  Solid products were analyzed by SEM-EDS under different operating conditions ( VSM was performed to obtain the magnetic hysteresis loop of the resulting magnetic material CoFe We assessed the impact of different processes used to recover materials from spent LIBs ( We assessed the economic benefits of the mechanochemical co-processing method in terms of equipment investment, raw material investment, and product profit ( A novel mechanochemical process was successfully established for the recycling of spent LIBs and waste PVC, where PVC was dechlorinated, Li was recovered as LiCl and Co was converted into a separable magnetic material (CoFe This research was financially supported by the