Modern metal production techniques often use solvent extraction either for separation or purification purposes. Processes were developed for specific mineral ores and deserve consequent modifications to be adapted to the recovery of metals from complex mixtures, arising eg from the hydrometallurgical processing of waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE), as these mixtures contain a large panel of elements in highly fluctuating content. Three-liquid-phase (TLP) extraction systems allow the separation of metallic ions in three different phases in a single apparatus, and thus open the door to the treatment of complex mixtures with fewer operations. This paper reviews the work performed on TLP systems for metals separation, and highlights the potential advantages of such a technique in the design of new processes. Several systems enable the controlled formation of three immiscible phases, and have been successfully applied to the separation of various metals of interest. Advantages and drawbacks of each system are discussed, with a perspective for further developments, and the possibility for the rapid sorting of complex mixtures into separate groups of metals, easy to process.Liquid-Liquid extraction (or solvent extraction) is one of the key techniques operated at industrial scale for the separation and purification of metals. It complements well pyrometallurgy, and is routinely employed during the production of various metals such as copper, cobalt, nickel, rare earths or Platinum Group Metals (PGMs) from natural ores. This technique is also more and more considered for the recovery of metals from secondary resources, such as low grade ores, and waste with a high valuable metal content, such as waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) found in the so-called urban mine There are many different secondary resources which contain metals. Whereas some are of simple and stable composition, most secondary resources are of fluctuating composition, and contain a large number of different metals. In the former category, there is no particular issue regarding metal isolation or purification, and industrial process have been developed for the recovery of diverse metals such as zinc, copper, cobalt, nickel, cadmium, vanadium or molybdenum from various sources such as acid effluents, electroplating baths, metallic dust, fly ash, scrap alloys or spent desulfurizing catalyst As total dissolution with strong mineral acid or base leads to very complex mixtures, various selective leaching processes targeting some specific metals have been developed Numerous extracting molecules have been developed and studied depending on the required purification to achieve The adaptation of existing techniques and processes deserves thus continuous efforts, but alongside the solution to the design of an efficient recycling of WEEE may arise from new extracting molecules or new extraction processes. In the latter case, separation of metallic cations into groups prior to final separation and isolation emerges as a new strategy. A quick sorting into a reasonable number of homogeneous families of metallic cations, easily manageable with existing techniques, appears thus as an interesting approach, rather unexplored so far. The idea has been present in the mind of scientists for decades: careful examination of the Rhone-Poulenc REE process reveals separation of some lanthanides as pairs, eg. Nd/Pr, which enables thus the direct production of didymium, or Sm/Eu, so that the process is not strictly-speaking a linear process. And it has also been applied in pyrometallurgy since its beginnings: base metals such as Cu, Pb or Ni are employed as collectors for precious metals (Ag, Au, Pd, Pt, Rh, Ir and Ru) and special metals such as Bi, Se, In, Sn and Sb; this is the basis of the Umicore process for WEEE recycling for instance. TLP extraction, composed of an aqueous feed and two extracting phases all immiscible, can provide straightforward solutions, as three flows instead of two can be generated during a single step. This strategy can be envisioned either for single metals separation, or included in a ‘group separation’ strategy. During a classical solvent extraction process, an aqueous metal-loaded feed is contacted with an immiscible organic solvent meant to extract selectively one metal in order to isolate and purify it, thus forming a biphasic system. Oil and water biphasic systems have been known for millennia. They were used, if empirically, for various extraction and purification purposes such as perfumes or medicines preparation Working with three phases already offers relevant technological solutions in oil recovery processes and in industrial processes such as caprolactam production The shortening of solvent extraction flowsheets is a very important goal to achieve in order to develop efficient metal recovery processes. Indeed, each separation stage is generally accompanied by a scrubbing stage, a stripping stage and a solvent regeneration stage. Latter stages are also necessary in the processing of each phase obtained after phase separation in a TLP system. But as the complexity of these stages is strongly related to the complexity of the considered feeds, a rapid separation of the different metals present in the initial mixture leads to much higher flexibility in the design of the scrubbing and stripping stages (chemical reagents employed, volume ratios.). For instance, in the above proposed theoretical case ( The major difficulty to tackle for a TLP process to operate consists in the separation of the three different phases. Zhivopistsev was the first to report a TLP system in metal extraction In this approach, the bottom and the middle phases flow co-currently, while the top phase runs counter-current. Having three phases opens however new configurations of counter current patterns. With a given set of distribution factor and solvents, three different metals output compositions can be accessed, as shown in The successful design of a TLP process relies then on the availability of three non-miscible phases with each one presenting a specific affinity for a different metal (or group of metals). These phases will have to avoid the usual problems of liquid-liquid extraction, such as the leaching of one extractant from one phase into another, or the poor selectivity of a metal for any phase, but with respect to two different phases instead of one. Two approaches have been considered to generate TLP systems in the frame of metals isolation and separation. First approach relies on the physical demixtion of one of the two phases (organic or aqueous), and second approach relies on the use of two different immiscible solvents (also not miscible with water). Advantages and drawbacks of each approach are discussed in the following sections. The segregation of various solvents into three different liquid phases was reported as early as 1955 by Hartwig et al. with acetonitrile, benzene, heptane and water Recently, works on TLP systems based on one aqueous and two organic phases revived in the frame of the recycling of PGMs In all cases, either with salt or sugar as demixtion agent, the inhibition of the hydrogen bonding between the water miscible organic solvent (acetonitrile) and water leads to the separation of the polar organic phase. As it is rich in ions and possesses a high dielectric constant, it is not miscible either with the aliphatic organic phase. Although the (top) organic phase generally enables clean isolation and separation of a metallic ion, thanks to the choice of the extracting molecule, separation of remaining ions in the middle and bottom phases relies on the behavior of two water containing phases. As a consequence, the water content in the middle phase is difficult to control (the only trigger is salt or sugar concentration, which also has an impact on metals speciation), and some of the polar organic solvent is also driven into the (bottom) aqueous phase. As noticed by the authors in the above presented examples, acetonitrile and water are distributed between both middle and bottom phases, and the Pt/Rh separation factors are low. Improvement of those separation factors appears difficult and would deserve intense formulation studies, for each considered system. The physical phenomenon which gives birth to a third liquid phase in theses examples is different from the so-called third phase formation in classical solvent extraction, when a metal rich phase separates from the solvent In a similar approach, segregation of a water miscible polymer such as poly-ethylene glycol (PEG) or poly-ethylene-propylene oxide (EOPO) from water in the presence of salts has been exploited. This approach is widely applicable, and several separation processes based on aqueous two phase systems (ATPS) have been proposed This same TLP extraction strategy was applied to operate the simultaneous separation of Pt(IV), Pd(II) and Rh(III) Similar systems based on PEG salting out were also applied to the separation of Mn(II), Ni(II) and Co(II), which represent an issue in Li-ions batteries recycling The organic-PEG-water TLP system can be adapted to the separation of REEs according to their atomic number using a dialkylphosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) as the extractant in the organic phase and diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) as complexant in the PEG phase These organic-PEG-water TLP systems are easy to prepare with commercially available materials and provide good and tunable separation properties, which is an asset should it be used on larger scale. Few drawbacks remain such as precise formulation, composition and the connection between the PEG and aqueous phase which lead to complex reuse of the middle (PEG rich) phase. The separation generally relies on a classical organic extractant selective of a first metal (or metal group) into the organic phase. A second metal (or metal group) remains strongly hydrated in the aqueous phase. The third metal is extracted into the PEG rich phase through ion exchange with the positively charged PEG, either as an oxoanion or a negatively charged complex (with EDTA for instance). The viscosity of the polymer containing phase is not discussed, and this could be a severe drawback as high viscosity if often a large problem for industrial applications. Ionic liquids (ILs) are ionic compounds which are liquid below 100 °C, and more commonly below room temperature. ILs are generally obtained through the combination of an organic heterocyclic cation, such as dialkylimidazolium, and an anion, of inorganic or organic origin, which further controls the chemistry of the IL. Since the first reviews by Seddon ILs can be tuned so that they possess a more or less hydrophobic and/or lipophobic character. They can thus be immiscible with water and/or common organic diluents, so that an approach of TLP systems relying on three completely distinct phases can be considered. TLP systems composed of an alkane, water and an IL were first reported for the separation of Ni(II), Cu(II), Mn(II), Zn(II), Cd(II) and Pb(II) Recently, a controlled TLP system composed of two immiscible ILs ([Hbet][Tf The recent development of ILs is impressive: common ILs are synthetized easily, and currently supplied on a large scale. Some processes have been developed and are run at an industrial scale, such as the Dimersol process or the BASIL process Since the work of Horváth and Rábai, fluorous chemistry has proven its efficiency in various domains, notably in purification The partition of fluorinated molecules such as phosphines between regular organic solvents and perfluorocarbons has been largely documented In order to sustain our current natural resources consumption on the long term, solutions to recycle wastes have to be developed. Precious metals represent a large part of the composition and value of WEEE, but the lack of efficient technique to deal with those complex mixtures prevents their recovery. Among emerging techniques, multiple phases extracting systems for solvent extraction can assess some of those purification issues. Proofs of concept and key-steps have already been obtained using polymers, polar solvents, salting out agents or ILs to generate TLP extraction systems. The treatment of model metals solutions and the isolation of metals from complex mixtures have both been reported. Extraction of metals into a fluorous phase has already been reported but not in TLP systems, although we suppose that this medium possesses all the requirements to lead to another phase of great interest for solvent extraction, orthogonal to water and to common organic diluents. Beyond the process intensification envisioned through the reduced number of operations achievable thanks to the use of TLP extraction systems, the scientific knowledge gained on non-classical metal containing solvents is of high interest. Hydrometallurgical reprocessing of metal containing wastes comes up against the difficulty to generate a metal rich flow of stable composition. Attention has been focused on selective chemical leaching, albeit with moderate success, as no technique emerged as a general performing consensus so far. The possibility to create a metal containing phase, orthogonal both to the initial aqueous phase and another extraction solvent, is an interesting supplementary strategy to generate a metal rich feed of stable composition, which has poorly been explored so far. Thus, TLP systems also bring new tools to conventional bi-phasic liquid extraction, and should be taken into consideration when developing metal recovery strategies from wastes. Furthermore, some of the proposed systems rely on readily available chemicals, so that their applicability seems entirely reasonable. The authors are grateful for support from the Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (