A regrind–flotation pre-treatment method developed to improve performance of a CIL circuit at copper–gold concentrators has been implemented at plant scale at the Newcrest Telfer mine. Low gold recovery in the CIL circuit due to the occlusion of gold by iron sulphide gangue minerals was overcome by the fine grinding of the CIL feed. A post-regrind copper flotation stage recovered liberated copper sulphide minerals allowing lower cyanide consumption in the subsequent CIL circuit than by regrinding alone. Gold recoveries achieved during the laboratory development of the regrind–flotation pre-treatment method have been replicated during the commissioning of the full-scale plant.Gold recovery is often well below copper recovery in copper–gold flotation plants ( Copper minerals unrecovered by the flotation process are also present in the CIL feed and, similar to gold, these copper minerals may also be encapsulated by the rejected iron sulphides. In a case study by the authors on the Telfer gold mine CIL circuit ( A subsequent study ( The Telfer processing plant receives ore from three sources, one underground mine and two open pits. Across the ore sources, pyrite content of the ore varies significantly, gold presents as free gold and as discrete grains locked in copper sulphides and pyrite, and copper deportment varies from mainly chalcocite in the open pit ore to predominately chalcopyrite in the underground ore ( Since implementation of the regrind–flotation pre-treatment method, the pyrite concentrate is now reground via M5000 and M3000 Isamills to target P80 of 40 The subsequent CIL circuit processes the pyrite recleaner tailings for recovery of contained gold. The CIL circuit simultaneously leaches remaining copper. A counter-current decantation (CCD) thickener circuit recovers copper in the liquor of CIL tailings. A Sulphidisation, Acidification, Recycling and Thickening (SART) circuit precipitates copper from the CCD supernatant as CuS. CCD tailings solids are discarded to the tailings storage facility without further processing. This paper reviews the plant performance during early commissioning in late 2012 with comparisons to the previously presented laboratory development. While this regrind–flotation pre-treatment method has been developed with the Telfer ore as a case study, it could be applied to many similar porphyry/skarn copper–gold ore bodies, particularly in ores where a significant iron sulphide gangue content exists. This flowsheet represents a new method to recover gold for this type of deposit. Plant surveys were used to assess the performance of the pyrite recleaner flotation. Composite samples were collected from recleaner feed, concentrate and tail process streams over a period of 30 Laboratory leach tests were undertaken in conjunction with the pyrite recleaner surveys. A 1 Monthly composite samples representative of the CIL feed and CIL tailing streams were created from routine shift samples that were collected during operation of the CIL plant. Each sample was separated into different size fractions. The samples were first wet sieved at 38 Diagnostic leaches of CIL tailing monthly composite samples were conducted to identify the forms of gold losses in this process stream. A 500 The pyrite recleaner concentrate must attain sufficient copper grade so that it will not adversely affect the grade produced by the copper cleaner circuit to which it reports. For this to occur, previously strongly-floating pyrite must be nearly completely depressed. In the development study, the addition of 100 In order to minimise cyanide consumption in the subsequent CIL treatment of the pyrite recleaner tails, copper recovery must be high in the flotation stage. During development, addition of 10 As pyrite concentrate P80 reduced after the implementation of regrind, the overall monthly gold grade of plant CIL tail also reduced ( Representative monthly samples of the CIL circuit tail underwent diagnostic leaching to confirm the cause of reduced gold grades ( The current plant performance of the pyrite recleaner at Telfer is below that achieved in the laboratory studies. The reasons for the gap between laboratory and plant, in terms of both copper–gold recovery and depression requirements for pyrite were unclear during the early stages of commissioning. The Telfer metallurgical department has undertaken further laboratory and plant studies, in particular focusing on satisfying the oxygen demand of the fresh sulphide mineral surface exposed during regrind of the pyrite concentrate. As described recently by Despite the lower flotation recovery, the overall performance observed during the commission stage of the regrind–flotation method has met the laboratory study expectation, and confirms this method as a viable processing path that could apply to many similar porphyry/skarn copper–gold ore bodies, particularly those where significant iron sulphide content exists in the copper flotation tailings. However, for this processing path to operate most cost efficiently and be economically appealing for future implementation in other processing plants, the recovery of gold and particularly copper during pyrite recleaner flotation must be as high as possible to minimise CIL cyanide consumption. The Telfer copper–gold processing plant has implemented a CIL pre-treatment methodology of an ultra-fine regrinding followed by selective copper–gold flotation to recover freshly liberated copper and gold minerals prior to CIL. Overall plant performance in terms of gold and copper observed during commissioning has improved as a result of this method. Regrinding and selective flotation of the pyrite concentrate to a P80 of 42 The authors gratefully acknowledge the approval for publication of this paper by Newcrest Mining Limited.