The use of the guanidine extractant, LIX 7950, to extract copper cyanide from waste cyanide solution has been investigated. Copper extraction is favorable at low pH while a high cyanide to copper molar ratio tends to suppress copper loading. The extractant also strongly extracted zinc and nickel from cyanide solution, but the extraction of iron was poor. The presence of thiocyanate ion significantly depressed copper extraction, but thiosulfate ion produced negligible impact on copper extraction. The preferential extraction of metal cyanide species to free cyanide has been noticed. The potential application of the recovery technique as a pre-concentration step for the treatment of cyanide effluent has been suggested, by which copper can be extracted and concentrated into a small volume of solution and the barren cyanide solution recycled to the cyanidation process.The treatment of the large volume of cyanide-contaminated effluents has long been a challenge for gold cyanidation process. Environmental constraints controlling the discharge of cyanide from gold mining industry are being tightened by the local governments. Detoxifying cyanide by traditional destruction methods, such as INCO SO The recovery of valuable metals and cyanide from cyanide effluent by strong-base resins has been proposed ( Due to the potential high selectivity and loading capacity, and especially the relatively fast extraction rate, solvent extraction technology offers an alternative method for metal and cyanide recovery from waste cyanide solution. In the early research of The extractant LIX The extraction and stripping tests were carried out in a sealed beaker and mixing was provided by a mechanical agitator with glass impellers. All tests were conducted at a phase ratio of unity. Equilibrium pH was adjusted by direct addition of concentrated H Initial investigations showed that the equilibrium between the two phases could be established rapidly. Both solution pH and copper extraction amount are constant after 3 In the aqueous phase, the equilibrium speciation of Cu (I) in cyanide solution can be represented by reactions The formation of Cu The preferential extraction of The tests for temperature effect on the extraction of copper cyanide were carried out with a dilute copper cyanide solution ([Cu] The effect of two sulfur species, thiocyanate (SCN Solvent extraction of a mixture of metal cyanide solution (see Again charge density and the geometric shape are key factors. The charge densities for It is desirable to recover copper and cyanide from the loaded extractant using a simple technique so that the solvent can be reused. The recovery of copper cyanide from cyanide solution by a guanidine extractant (LIX 7950) has been investigated and the results show that copper cyanide can be extracted effectively from the alkaline cyanide solution. A high cyanide to copper ratio tends to suppress copper cyanide loading and the preferential extraction of The extractant exhibits higher extraction affinity for SCN The extractant can be used in the SX circuit for pre-concentrating copper cyanide into a small volume of strip solution which can be further treated by electrowinning, AVR, or similar processes to recover copper products and cyanide. Due to the preferential extraction of metal cyanide complexes, most of the free cyanide will remain in the aqueous phase which allows for the potential recycling of the barren solution to the cyanidation process. If zinc and nickel cyanide complexes are present in the waste solution, they will be preferentially extracted into the organic phase and their potential effect on the subsequent copper recovery process should be considered. Iron (II) cyanide complexes will probably accumulate in the recycling water if a closed circuit system is applied in practice and their potential effects on the cyanidation process should be considered. The need for clarified feed solution for solvent extraction will not be a limitation while targeting heap leaching solutions, overflow stream or dam return water from tailings. For operations using carbon-in-pulp (CIP) for the recovery of gold, it will be necessary to thicken and wash the solids in order to produce a clarified feed solution for SX circuit. The authors thank Dr. Berend Wassink for his generous help on the project and Cognis is thanked for providing laboratory samples of reagents.