Here we report the thermal properties and cycling performance of Ca(BH4)2/MgH2. The reaction enthalpy is 48 kJ mol−1 H2 and equilibrium pressure at 350 °C is 0.4981 MPa. We add NbF5 into Ca(BH4)2/MgH2
                     to figure out the degradation mechanism because of its catalytic ability. Ca(BH4)2/MgH2 follows the dehydrogenation path to form CaH2, CaB6 and Mg. The degradation of Ca(BH4)2/MgH2 composite during cycling is due to the particle aggregation and the reduction of CaB6 product. NbF5 can promote the forming of CaB6 and prevent microstructural coarsening in Ca(BH4)2/MgH2 during cycling, which leads to better reversibility.Complex hydrides such as sodium alanate, lithium amide and lithium borohydride have been investigated as promising materials for hydrogen storage for several years Recently, in our research group, destabilized-complex hydride composite was investigated as thermal storage material Besides LiBH CaH The thermal property and cycling performance are the important parameters to determine whether a hydride material is suitable for hydrogen storage or thermal storage. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of PCI (Pressure-composition isotherms) curves of Ca(BH Ca(BH The isothermal desorption was measured by using the Sieverts-type pressure-composition-temperature (P-C-T) apparatus (General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals, China). Typically, 0.8–1 g sample was loaded into the vessel, and then heated up to 400 °C under 0.1 MPa hydrogen atmosphere. Following the dehydrogenation, the samples were subjected to rehydrogenation studies at 400 °C under 7 MPa hydrogen pressure for 16 h. It should be noted that the additional content was not taken into consideration when calculating the released hydrogen. The PCI curves were measured at 350 °C, 375 °C, 400 °C and 425 °C, respectively. The hydrogen pressure was first set at 3 MPa. Then gradually decrease the pressure to get the equilibrium state of material. Each data was obtained after at least 5 h waiting for stable pressure value. The phase structure of the samples after milling and dehydrogenation was examined by an MXP21VAHF X-ray Diffractometer (XRD with Cu Kα radiation, 40 kV, 300 mA), with the 2θ angle ranged from 10° to 90° with a scanning rate of 10° min All samples handling was performed under strictly inert conditions (≥99.99% Ar atmosphere) in the glove box (Mikrouna, Super-750) equipped with oxygen/humidity sensors and recirculation system to avoid oxidation and moisture. Oxygen and H The isothermal dehydrogenation curves of Ca(BH The dehydrogenation PCI curves of pure Ca(BH The DSC and TGA curves of pure Ca(BH To evaluate whether a material is suitable for the hydrogen storage, the cycling performance is one of most crucial factor needs to be considered. However, the longtime cycling performance of pure Ca(BH The degradation mechanism of Ca(BH The XRD patterns of pure Ca(BH  The TEM (Transmission Electron Microscopy) images and SAED (Selected Area Electron Diffraction) patterns of pure LiBH In the The reason why NbF Although the peak of NbB Although the addition of NbF Hydrogen produced from renewable resources is a promising potential source of clean energy. Complex hydrides are considered as promising candidates for hydrogen storage material due to its high storage density (usually more than a mass fraction of 9%) and low reactivity (high safety). Unfortunately, the high reaction enthalpy and poor reversibility limit the implementation of leading candidates, like lithium hydride and lithium aluminium hydride, for hydrogen storage. However, the high reaction enthalpy, low equilibrium pressure and high working temperature make them potential thermal storage materials for CSP. An investigation of the thermal property and the cycling performance of Ca(BH XRD results show that Ca(BH Further study needs to improve the kinetics and reversibility of by Ca(BH The authors declare no competing financial interests. This study was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 