Strain is an important parameter for assessing the potential for impacts on surface features due to mine subsidence. However, this parameter is also one of the most difficult to predict. Research is being undertaken with the objective to improve the currently available predictive methods for horizontal movement and strain at the surface. The methodology predominantly follows an empirical approach, using a large database of ground monitoring data, which was supplemented using numerical modelling. Predictive equations have been developed for the relative horizontal movements across various zones above longwalls based on the vertical subsidence and the influence of topographical features. These relative horizontal movements are then used as the basis to predict the distributions of strain within each of these zones. This paper provides an overview of the methodology and the current findings from this research project.There are several well-established empirical and mechanistic methods used to predict mine subsidence due to longwall mining. These methods can provide reliable predictions of vertical subsidence, tilt and curvature when properly calibrated to local conditions. The prediction of horizontal movement and strain are much more difficult, as they are sensitive to variations in the surface topography and the presence of near surface geological features. Strain is also one of the most important subsidence parameters for assessing the potential for impacts on natural and built surface features. Early methods for the prediction of horizontal movement and strain were generally based on simple empirical relationships with mining geometry or other predicted subsidence parameters. These empirical methods generally provide reasonable predictions of the regular ground movements, when the surface and overburden are relatively flat and uniform and when there are no significant near surface geological features. However, predictions of horizontal movement and strain obtained using these methods are often exceeded at discrete locations due to irregular movements. These irregularities develop due to the presence of incised terrain or variations in the near surface geology. More recently, statistical methods have been used to predict the distribution of strain based on both the regular and irregular movements. These methods provide the likelihoods of exceeding strain thresholds based on previously measured ground monitoring data. However, the application of these statistical methods is often limited to locations where the mining geometry and overburden lithology are similar to the mining areas from which the monitoring data were collected. The objectives of this current research are to develop improved methods for the prediction of absolute and relative horizontal movement, normal strain and shear deformation at the surface. The predictive methods have been developed predominately using an empirical approach supplemented with numerical modelling. A large database of ground monitoring data from the Australian coalfields was available for this research project. The predictive methods have therefore been derived based predominantly on Australian conditions. These methods can be applied to coalfields elsewhere by calibrating them for the local conditions using the available ground monitoring data. Predictive methods for longwall mine subsidence broadly fit into two categories. Historically, subsidence prediction methodologies have been predominantly based on simple empirical relationships. Many of these methods have evolved from those initially developed by the National Coal Board (NCB) of the United Kingdom (UK). The Subsidence Engineers Handbook (SEH) was originally published by the NCB in 1965 and was updated in 1996 and 1975. The SEH has been used internationally in locations including Europe, Australia, India, China, Canada and the United States of America. The methods have been found to over-predict subsidence in some coalfields such as those in Australia, The empirical methods presented in the SEH have been modified or calibrated to suit coalfields located outside the UK. The predictive equations typically have similar forms as those presented in the SEH, where strain is determined by applying multipliers to the ratio of maximum vertical subsidence to depth of cover. The multipliers for each coalfield have been derived from the locally available ground monitoring data. It is often observed that the shapes of the horizontal movement profiles are similar to the shapes of the tilt profiles. This similarity occurs when the surface, overburden strata and seam are relatively flat and uniform and when the ground subsides regularly. These conditions are often referred to as the The horizontal movement and tilt profiles can differ considerably when mining beneath undulating or incised terrain. Curvature can be approximated by the first derivative of tilt and normal strain is the first derivative of horizontal movement. On this basis, a number of empirical relationships have been developed between curvature and strain. These relationships have been discussed by numerous authors. These empirical relationships are often exceeded by localised and elevated strains. These Irregular strains can develop when longwalls are extracted beneath steeply sloping or incised terrain. Localised and elevated compressive strains generally develop in the bases of valleys or steep slopes. Elevated tensile strains can also develop at the tops of scarps and hills. Irregular strains also develop due to the presence of near surface geological features. These features include local variations in the surface lithology or jointing, or the presence of a soft inclusion within a more competent rock mass. The locations and properties of these small scale features are generally unknown. Strain therefore includes an irregular component that cannot be directly predicted. The term Profile function and influence function methods predict horizontal movement and strain based on relationships with tilt and curvature. Linear relationships are often adopted. These methods therefore have the same limitations as empirical methods. Numerical methods adopt constituent models that provide approximate equations for the relationships between stress and strain and between strain and displacement. Continuum methods comprise elements with shared nodes and the displacements are derived directly from the calculated strains. Discontinuum methods comprise discrete elements that interact via compliant contacts. The displacements of the elements are determined at small time increments allowing contact, separation and slip to occur. Numerical methods allow for more complex relationships between strain and deformation based on the modelled properties of the rockmass and joints. These methods can also incorporate the influence of varying surface topography, lithology and large-scale structure. However, it is not possible to model all the small-scale variability in the near surface lithology or the small-scale structure, as the locations, distributions and properties are generally not known. Numerical methods therefore cannot accurately predict the irregular movements that often dominate the strain profiles. Statistical methods can provide confidence intervals for strain based on both the regular and irregular ground movements. These methods are developed by analysing the distribution of strain from large sets of ground monitoring data. However, the application of these statistical methods is often limited to locations where the mining geometry and overburden lithology are similar to the mining areas from which the monitoring data were collected. All predictive methods are developed, reviewed and calibrated using ground monitoring data. This data comprises strains that are measured along the alignments of the monitoring lines and at specific epochs. Strain is a tensor that comprises three components, two orthogonal normal strains and one shear strain. The measured strains therefore do not always reflect the maximum or principal strains. Also, the magnitude, sign (i.e. tensile and compressive) and orientation of strain vary during active subsidence and in many cases the surveys may not measure the peak values. The reliability of the predictive methods is therefore limited by the quality and the quantity of the available monitoring data. The existing predictive methods for strain have been reviewed as part of the current research project. Extensive ground monitoring data was available from the Australian coalfields. For this reason, the reviews were based on the predictive methods that have been historically used in Australia. The Department of Mineral Resources (DMR) Handbook method for the Southern Coalfield The prediction curves for the Southern Coalfield are shown on the left-hand side of In some of these cases, the maximum observed strains were two to three times greater than the predictions. This is understandable as the prediction curves did not include the irregular strains, which can far exceed the regular strains. The observed strains exceeded the predictions by two to three times in 1% of the cases for maximum tensile strain and in 3% of the cases for maximum compressive strain. The observed compressive strains were more than three times greater than predicted in 1% of the cases. This review indicates that the DMR Handbook method for the Southern Coalfield provides reasonable predictions for the maximum regular strains. However, these predictions can be exceeded by more than two to three times by the irregular strains. This limitation was highlighted in the handbook, but no specific method or guide was provided to assess the magnitudes of these irregular movements. Several empirical predictive methods for strain based on curvature were also reviewed using on the latest available monitoring data from the Southern Coalfield. The measured curvatures and strains and the predictive curves proposed by various authors are shown in Curvature is measured over three adjacent survey marks, whereas strain is measured between two adjacent survey marks. In order to review the relationship between these two parameters, the strains have been compared with the average of the curvatures measured at each end of the survey bay. The small grey diamonds shown in The other data points (i.e. red diamonds and yellow squares) compare the maximum curvatures with the maximum strains regardless of where these maxima occur along the monitoring lines. The empirical relationships proposed by various authors attempt to predict the maximum strains from the maximum curvatures. Hence, these data points have been used in this review. The red diamonds represent the cases where the ground subsides regularly. The yellow squares represent the cases where irregular strains have developed. The blue line represents the The magenta line represents a linear relationship between curvature and strain based on a factor of 15. This line provides more reliable predictions for the regular strains (i.e. red diamonds) when the curvatures are greater than 0.1 The maximum hogging and sagging curvatures for longwalls in the Southern Coalfield are generally greater than 0.1 The empirical prediction curves are often exceeded by the irregular compressive strains (i.e. yellow squares). The irregular strains can be two to three times greater than the predicted values. This was not unexpected, as these empirical curves only provide predictions for the regular strains. These exceedances are often caused by variations in the surface topography, the effects near surface geological features, or other unknown mechanisms. Extensive ground monitoring data from the Australian coalfields was available for this research project. The database comprises more than 725 monitoring lines located above 456 longwalls in 72 separate mining areas. The ground monitoring data was analysed to review the relationships of horizontal movement and strain with other mine subsidence parameters and with mining geometry. The initial review considered relative horizontal movements, since the potential for impacts on surface features is dependent on differential movements rather than absolute movements. Whilst profiles of strain can be highly variable and irregular, it is often observed that areas of sagging curvature tend to be net compressive zones and areas of hogging curvature tend to be net tensile zones. The relative horizontal movements have therefore been analysed separately across each of the sagging and hogging curvature zones. The zones at the surface above a subcritical longwall are illustrated in The net compression across the sagging curvature zone has been referred to as As described in It was found that there was considerable scatter in the results based on tilt and sagging curvature. The reasons being that these parameters are sensitive to survey tolerance, disturbed survey marks, missing marks and irregular ground movements. The relationship between panel closure and maximum vertical subsidence was subsequently reviewed, as this parameter is the least sensitive to these effects. The relationship between the observed incremental panel closure (Δ There are reasonably linear relationships between panel closure and vertical subsidence, after the initial development of subsidence up to around 100 The projected A review of the results identified that the gradients at the lower end of the range are typically for the cases where the surface topography is relatively flat and when the ground subsided regularly, i.e. no localised or elevated irregular strains. Conversely, the gradients at the upper end of the range included cases with incised topography or when localised and elevated compressive strains developed. Similar reviews were undertaken using monitoring data from the Newcastle, Hunter and Gunnedah Coalfields, comprising a wide range of mining geometries and overburden lithologies. Similar results were found with the projected The results suggest that a simple predictive equation can be developed for panel closure using a linear relationship with vertical subsidence. This relationship holds when the magnitude of vertical subsidence is greater than around 100 The first coefficient alpha ( The second coefficient beta ( The third coefficient delta ( Similar linear relationships based on the maximum vertical subsidence have been developed for maingate opening and pillar opening. The coefficients for these parameters are in the order of zero to 25 The relationships between panel closure, maingate opening and pillar opening with vertical subsidence were not investigated for coalfields located outside of Australia. The reason was that the detailed ground monitoring data required for such analyses was not available for this research project. However, it is anticipated that similar behaviour would be observed where the overburden lithology comprises reasonably competent strata similar to that found in the Australian coalfields. A conceptual model was then developed for horizontal movements in undulating terrain above subcritical longwalls. This model was formulated based on the literature search, available ground monitoring data and case studies and is illustrated in The extraction of a longwall results in the development of the caving zone above the seam, which comprises a high void ratio. This zone has a reduced capacity to carry the horizontal in situ stress, which is then redistributed to the overburden strata and to the strata below the seam floor. The redistribution of horizontal in situ stress has been suggested by various authors as a mechanism for mining induced horizontal movements. The near surface strata above a subcritical longwall can be considered as a layered beam with limited slip (i.e. shear) along the bedding plane partings. Various authors have suggested that beam theory can be used to predict the horizontal movements at the surface including Refs. The near surface strata are not strictly linear-elastic due to the presence of existing joints and the development of new fractures. However, beam theory can be applied with limitation where the near surface strata remains in net compression due to the horizontal in situ stress. Rotation of the strata results in horizontal movement at the surface. The magnitude of movement is dependent on the tilt, the distance between the shear horizons and the magnitude of the horizontal shear, i.e. slip on the bedding plane partings. Less competent strata such as the Wianamatta Group undergoes considerable shear on the bedding plane partings that reduces the development of horizontal movement. More competent strata such as Hawkesbury Sandstone undergoes less horizontal shear deformation, allowing greater horizontal movement to develop at the surface. The relationship between this component of horizontal movement and tilt is represented by the equivalent lever-arm from the neutral axis, i.e. This is supported by the findings of Walsh et al. Horizontal movement can also be generated in incised terrain by lateral dilation of the strata due to combinations of blocky rotation as suggested in Refs. The components of horizontal movement due to the lever-arm action and lateral dilation are additive on the upslope side and are counteractive on the downslope side. The contributions of the various mechanisms therefore are dependent on the surface slope, overburden lithology and the location relative to the active longwall. Horizontal movements at the surface are greater when the near surface strata are more competent or massive. The smaller horizontal shear deformations result in a deeper neutral axis and a higher effective lever-arm. Differential horizontal movements at the surface are more concentrated when the near surface strata are less competent. This results in lower general levels of strain, but more localised and elevated strains. Absolute horizontal movements at the surface increase with elevation. The main factors are the higher effective lever-arm action, curvature resulting in increased blocky rotation and lateral dilation, and reduced horizontal constraint along the sloping surface. Relative horizontal movements at the surface are greater when the surface elevation increases from the tailgate towards the maingate, when compared with surface slopes in the reverse direction. The greater movements develop due to the higher tilt and hogging curvature adjacent to the maingate combining with the larger distance from the neutral axis, i.e. lever-arm. It follows that the magnitude of panel closure is also dependent on the change in elevation over the width of the active longwall, the direction of slope and the properties of the near surface strata. The component of panel closure due to varying surface topography can therefore be represented by a term based on the change in elevation (Δ These hypotheses were tested by numerical modelling and were reviewed using various case studies. Numerical modelling has been undertaken using The rock mass properties were determined using the test data from three boreholes at Appin and West Cliff Collieries (after Ref. There is a wide range of material and joint properties documented in literature. It was considered that no single value could be representative for each of these properties. Ranges of values need to be considered due to variations in the testing results, scaling effects, variations over depth and in plan and effects of inclusions and discontinuities. There is inherent uncertainly in these properties in situ, let alone when the strata are subjected to mine subsidence. The numerical model was therefore reviewed based on a range of selected properties and then calibrated using ground monitoring data. The main variables included the block size, horizontal in situ stress, material properties and discontinuity properties. The calibration process considered three block sizes, referred to as Types B1, B2 and B3 (smallest to largest). The spacing of the horizontal discontinuities varied between 9 and 15 The ratio of the horizontal to vertical block dimensions was taken to be 1.5. The vertical discontinuities were staggered so that the blocks formed a The models considered three cases for the material properties, referred to as Types M1, M2 and M3 (weakest and most flexible through to strongest and stiffest). The material properties were based predominantly on the testing results of Ref. There is a wide range of discontinuity properties documented in literature and adopted in the previous UDEC modelling studies. The available information in literature is predominantly for intact rock. There is little guidance on the appropriate properties when the joints are subjected to mine subsidence movements. The models considered a range of joint properties based on reviews of the available information, referred to as Types J1, J2 and J3 (weakest and most flexible through to strongest and stiffest). The numerical model was initially calibrated by comparing the maximum vertical subsidence with those provided by empirical prediction curves. The calibration process considered 378 models based on combinations of the three block sizes (B1, B2 and B3), two levels of horizontal in situ stress (S1 and S3), three groups of material properties (M1, M2 and M3), three groups of joint properties (J1, J2 and J3) and seven longwall widths of 150, 225, 300, 375, 450, 525 and 600 The modelled maximum vertical subsidence divided by the seam thickness versus the longwall width-to-depth ratio is illustrated in The range of results obtained from the 378 numerical models are shown on the left-hand side of The numerical model that matched the empirical prediction curves the closest is shown as the solid green curve on the right-hand side of The vertical and horizontal components of subsidence through the overburden are illustrated in The vertical strains within the Hawkesbury Sandstone were less than 0.5 The profiles of horizontal movement (refer to the right-hand side of The review of the selected monitoring lines indicate There was more variability between the observed horizontal movement profiles and the profiles obtained from the numerical models. One contributing factor was the influence of the varying surface topography including steep slopes, scarps, hills and small valleys. Another factor was the development of irregular ground movements due to the presence of near surface geological features. These variations are understandable as the base case numerical model assumes that the surface, overburden strata and seam are flat and that the ground subsides regularly. This review highlights the variability of the horizontal movements due to topographic and geological factors, whereas the overall vertical movements appear to be less sensitive to these factors. Several numerical models were then developed to review the effects of sloping terrain, scarps, hills and small valleys. An example of the model with sloping terrain is illustrated in The ratios of panel closure to vertical subsidence obtained from the numerical models are illustrated in The panel closure increases as a proportion of vertical subsidence with increasing surface slope and scarp height. The relationships are reasonably consistent over the longwall widths considered in the analysis. The relationship between panel closure and the change in elevation due to a slope or scarp can therefore be represented by a power term, i.e. A generalised predictive equation for panel closure has been developed, based on the review of the ground monitoring data, the conceptual model and the numerical modelling: The coefficient alpha ( The coefficient eta ( The coefficients for the panel closure predictive equation for the Southern Coalfield are summarised in The coefficient delta ( The predictive equation for panel closure has been reviewed using the available monitoring data in the Southern Coalfield. The equation has not been tested for coalfields outside of Australia, as the detailed ground monitoring data required for the review were not available for this research project. The comparison between the observed and predicted panel closure is provided in The observed panel closures are generally within the range of ±15% and ±25 The second stage of the research focuses on the development of predictive methods for strain at the surface. A graphical predictive method for strain has been developed for the Southern Coalfield. Further research is being undertaken to develop a more generalised predictive method that can be modified to suit other coalfields in Australia and overseas. Strain at the surface develops due to a number of mechanisms. These include the elastic, inelastic and post peak failure of the topmost bedrock. The peak strains are often concentrated where there are local variations in the near surface geology or jointing. In most cases, the locations and the properties of these near surface features are not known. Strain therefore includes an irregular component that cannot be directly predicted. The strains that develop due to irregular movements can be many times greater than those that develop due to regular movements. It is not possible therefore to directly predict the magnitude of strain at a point. Predictive methods for strain should therefore provide a distribution or probabilities of exceedance (i.e. confidence intervals), rather than a single predicted value. Predictive methods for strain can be developed based on the measured distributions of strain above previous longwall mining. A method has been developed by analysing of the extensive ground monitoring data available for this research project. Strain at the surface is measured using ground monitoring lines. Predictive methods are developed and calibrated from this ground monitoring data. These methods therefore should provide predictions that can be directly compared with this data. The definition of strain adopted for this research project is that measured by ground monitoring lines. Monitoring lines comprise regularly spaced marks on the surface. Strain is calculated by taking the change in horizontal distance between two adjacent survey marks and dividing by the original horizontal distance. The measured value represents the normal strain along the alignment of the monitoring line. This value in fact comprises both the normal and shear components of strain. It is not possible to separate these components from the data obtained using traditional ground monitoring lines. The predictive methods have been developed based on Extension ( The bay length differences based on a selected confidence interval can be determined from the mean ( The mean and standard deviation are determined from the GPDs fitted to the raw monitoring data. The confidence level coefficients are also dependant on the distribution of this data, i.e. they are not necessarily constant values. The magnitudes of the bay length differences vary with their position above the active longwall. Areas of sagging curvature tend to be net compressive zones and areas of hogging curvature tend to be net tensile zones. Hence, higher contractions tend to develop near the longwall centreline and higher extensions tend to develop near the maingate and chain pillar. The magnitudes of the bay length differences within the sagging and hogging curvature zones have strong correlations with the net horizontal movements across each of these zones, i.e. panel closure, maingate opening and pillar opening. For example, the mean ( There are reasonably linear relationships between the mean and the standard deviation of the contractions within the sagging zone with panel closure. The constants in these linear relationships are similar to the order of survey tolerance ( The confidence level coefficient ( Similar linear relationships were also observed between the extensions within each of the maingate and pillar zones. The extensions can therefore be related to the mean, standard deviation and confidence level coefficients for each of these zones. The confidence level coefficients for panel closure ( Predictive equations have been developed for extension ( The survey tolerance ( The predicted means and standard deviations for extension and contraction are illustrated in Predictive equations for bay length difference (i.e. strain) have been developed based on a two-step process. Firstly, the relative horizontal movements are predicted across each of the zones above the active longwall, i.e. panel closure, maingate opening and pillar opening. The distributions of strain are then predicted within each of these zones based on these net horizontal movements. The equations have been derived using the extensive ground monitoring data from the Southern Coalfield. These equations have been refined using numerical modelling to include the effects of varying surface topography. This method can be modified for use in other coalfields by calibrating the coefficients and prediction curves for the local conditions using the available ground monitoring data. The focus of the ongoing research is to extend these predictive equations based on wider ranges of the mining geometry and overburden lithology. This research includes the effects of width-to-depth ratio, surface lithology and other topographical features. The anticipated outcomes are generalised predictive equations which can be readily adapted to other coalfields.