Interest in understanding the response of particles to low-energy (incremental) breakage has increased significantly in comminution in recent years, mainly due to the recognition that a large proportion of impacts in tumbling mills is insufficient to cause breakage at the first collision event. Likewise, degradation during handling is another field in which low-energy breakage is of great relevance. The investigation of this mode of breakage, however, is very tedious when conducted in drop weight testers, so that more convenient alternatives for testing have been sought. A device, called JK Rapid Breakage Tester (JKRBT), has been proposed as a more convenient alternative to other breakage testers, mainly the Drop Weight Tester, being used in recent studies that investigate incremental breakage. The present work demonstrates, through experiments and simulations, that care should be exercised when using this device in investigating breakage by low-energy impacts, since testing of iron ore pellets resulted in significantly more breakage than expected, when compared to a drop test. This has been confirmed by simulations using the discrete element method, which demonstrated that ricocheting of a fraction of particles can happen against the rotor, resulting in overestimation of breakage for the set energy level. Such effect has been observed to be relevant not only in the case of nearly spherical shapes, such as the iron ore pellets studied, but also in the case of very irregularly-shaped particles.The widespread use of the discrete element method (DEM) in comminution since the 1990s ( A more convenient alternative to both drop weight testers and pneumatic systems in analyzing single impact breakage is the rotary impact tester. This device, which is inspired by the vertical shaft impact crusher, propels particles one-by-one through a rotor against a stator or an anvil, and allows collection of either the fragments or the unbroken particles at the discharge. Originally developed by More recently, the JKRBT has also been used in incremental breakage studies ( Experiments have been carried out with two samples of direct reduction iron ore pellets (A and B) contained in size range 12.5–9.0 mm either by dropping them one-by-one by gravity on a thick metal plate or by impacting them using the JKRBT. In the case of dropping by gravity, the specific collision energy is given by In the case of the JKRBT, the specific collision energy is given by ( Experiments were conducted with lots containing at least 180 particles each, so that after each impact, pellets were inspected one-by-one. If a significant part of each pellet (at least 10% of its volume) was lost in a particular impact, then the particle was considered to have undergone body breakage. If that was not the case, the particle was impacted again. This assessment, which was supported by eye inspection, was particularly facilitated by the nearly round shape of the fired iron ore pellets ( Simulations of the particle motion inside the JKRBT were carried out using EDEM® 2.7, in which the geometry of both the pellet particles, characterized as clumped spheres, and of the JKRBT have been input ( Experimental results of comparative drop tests and JKRBT impact tests are shown in Initially, simulations of propelling of particles against the anvils at different rotation frequencies were carried out and the specific impact energy given by Analyzing again the experimental results in  It is now important to assess whether such ricocheting collisions remain significant in the case of irregularly shaped particles, such as those that exist inside crushers and mills. This is illustrated in Finally, it is suggested that a modification in the design of the stator could significantly reduce ricocheting, without a significant deleterious effect on the collision efficiency. It was found that great care should be exercised when using the JKRBT to investigate incremental low-energy breakage of particles. At first, this is due to the fact that the machine is primarily calibrated to deliver high-energy impacts, such as in the standard JK Drop Weight Tester, used to characterize particle breakage. In addition to that, it was found to overestimate breakage probability of iron ore pellets when compared to drop tests, due to ricocheting of particles back to the rotor. Such overestimation is likely to be more pronounced in nearly-spherical particles, such as ore pellets, but will also occur in the case of irregularly-shaped particles. The authors would like to thank the support from the Brazilian agencies