Basic cobalt salts redissolve more easily than Co alloys; this is the major reason for cobalt redissolution during the technical purification of the zinc sulphate electrolyte before zinc electrolysis. The electrolysis is performed using a very pure zinc sulphate solution. Co2+ is a harmful impurity in the electrolyte, and is therefore usually removed by cementation. This cementation process is very slow. Cu2+ and Sb3+, which are used as cementation aids, are added as CuSO4 and potassium–antimony–tartrate, KSbC4O6H2·1.5H2O, respectively. Laboratory scale experiments show that large amounts of tartrate in the solution reduce the cementation rate of Co2+ significantly. Accumulation of tartrate may cause operational problems in a zinc plant.Electrolysis of zinc sulphate solutions is the most common method for zinc production. Metal impurities that are nobler than zinc must be removed from the electrolyte Industrial electrolytes contain several organic compounds such as glue, gelatin and other flocculants used to remove the hydrolysed iron compounds in early stages in the zinc production processes, to reduce foam formation or to increase the current efficiency during the electrolysis According to Steintveit and Holtan Alkatseva and Alkatsev van der Pas and Dreisinger Benzoquinone as a depolarizer increased the cementation rate according to Xiong and Ritchie The presence of organic inhibitors, such as sodium benzenesulfonate, may change the electrochemical conditions on the surface of the zinc particles and thereby the cementation rate of Co When Sb The amount of potassium–antimony–tartrate is small in industrial zinc electrolytes. It is not known to what degree tartaric acid is decomposed during the different steps in the production line. It may therefore accumulate in the electrolyte and its concentration may be as high as 50–250 mg/l. We therefore decided to investigate its influence on the cobalt cementation rate. The cementation reactions were performed using a rotating zinc disc in 0.5 M ZnSO Samples of the solution (8 ml) containing no solid particles were collected, at the same position in the cell, during the cementation process. The concentrations of Co From the data presented in The cementation rates of Cu The amount of removed cobalt is plotted versus added amounts of antimony in It is shown in the literature that several organic compounds have an influence on the cobalt cementation rate. The present data indicate that cobalt cementation can be reduced if tartrate is present. Antimony in the form of potassium–antimony–tartrate is often added to increase the cementation rate of cobalt. The negative effect of tartrate should also be evaluated when the design of a cobalt cementation process is made. A high concentration of tartrate in the electrolyte causes a reduced cementation rate of cobalt. The cementation rates of Cu We want to thank Norzink and The Norwegian Research Council for financial support and Stud. Martin Sesing from Rheinish-Westfaelishe Technische Hochschule, Aachen, who contributed to the experimental work.