Two techniques, Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), were applied to obtain the composition of the cross-section of a piece of tubing used within a petroleum well. The structure and composition of the steel wall and of the internal oxide layer were achieved. Physical and chemical changes of the original iron oxide layer induced by petroleum compounds were discussed.Selection of a tubing string used in petroleum extraction is governed by mechanical properties, which are based on the well depth and operation conditions. The pipe furnished to form the coiled tubing string is normally an API grade, seamless and manufactured by hot working and, subsequently, cold-finished Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) provides a surface microanalysis with a sampling depth on the order of 1 nm, whereas the characteristic X-ray (EDS) sampling depth was 0.3 μm (or 300 nm). Therefore, the AES information was assumed as surface composition, whereas the EDS results were assumed as bulk composition. A tubing string was extracted from a well located in a southeastern Mexican field, which produces a 29.5° API crude oil from the upper Jurassic Kimmeridge age zone reservoir with a bottom hole temperature of 420 K. A tubing piece with a black layer of solid material of 2 cm thickness adhered on its internal surface was collected. Coupons of 1.5×1.5 cm A layer of material with a thickness of 8 to 15 μm covers the surface of the coupon, as previously reported The SEM micrograph in EDS and AES spectra were recorded from five zones across the tube section, as indicated in (1) The surface composition of Zone 1 (Z1) indicates that iron is oxidized and there are higher amounts of manganese, chromium and molybdenum than the bulk composition shows. (2) The surface composition of Zone 2 (Z2) evidences an increase of oxygen content as well as the presence of carbon and silicon. The bulk composition indicates also an increment of the oxygen content. (3) The surface composition of Zone 3 (Z3) confirms the presence of sulfur, which is associated with an increase in the oxygen content and a decrease in the carbon amount. Additionally, the Auger KLL peak of carbon splits into two, at 272 and 270 eV, which suggests that there may be at least two types of carbon bonds. The bulk composition is similar to the previous zone with aluminum as an additional element. (4) The surface composition of Zone 4 (Z4) shown in (5) The surface composition of Zone 5 (Z5) shown in The AES and EDS spectra registered from different zones across the tubing wall depict the variation of concentration of the main elements on the surface and in the bulk steel, respectively. The steel composition is nonuniform, as shown in the bulk composition from Zones 1 to 3. However, this composition corresponds to an L-80 grade type 1, which is usually produced from a C–Mn or C–Mn–Mo steel Most of the petroleum compounds involved in the formation of the adhered layer of organic deposit are polar molecules containing N, O and S along with C and H atoms. Additionally, inorganic compounds are constantly carried out from the reservoir, together with the petroleum flow. Furthermore, rupture of the original iron oxide layer might be induced within the well by different events such as the geothermal gradient as well as by mechanical stress originated by the freely suspended tubing string weight. The contact between the iron oxide layer and petroleum increases as the surface is enlarged, and moreover, the bulk metal is exposed to petroleum ambient. Therefore, the morphologies and composition of the scale layer, Zones 4 and 5, reveal such events. The coupon border, which corresponds to the internal surface of the tubing, exhibits irregular structures, which are associated with the presence of high amounts of sulfur, carbon, calcium and aluminum. Thus, the valley-like structures (Z4) are related to surface composition rich in sulfur, carbon and calcium, although sulfur was not observed in the bulk composition. Therefore, the source of the surface sulfur amount must be BaSO In the edge-like structures (Z5), the Auger Fe peaks are shifted from their normal positions, which indicates the presence of new iron bonds. Indeed, as shown elsewhere Magnetite, which is the main compound of the scale layer, crystallizes in a cubic inverse spinel structure. The surface structure of Fe Eventually, the steel and scale wettability by water or by hydrocarbons is critical in the formation process of corrosion products or organic deposits on the tubing surface inside the petroleum wells. The EDS and AES techniques let us determine the chemical composition at different depths and from different zones through the cross-section of the petroleum tubing. Thus, a nonuniform composition of the steel as well as changes in the structure and composition of the iron oxide scale are identified. The surface chemical transformations are related to the formation of new iron phases as a consequence of steel surface contact with petroleum compounds and organic compounds chemisorption. Likewise, physical changes of the tubing internal border reflect the consequences of the scale fracturing and the adherence of organic and mineral compounds as a thick layer on this surface. This research was supported by Instituto Mexicano del Petroleo Grand FIES 97-06-I.