Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), a potent mitogen, has been found to restore trabecular bone mass and connectivity in osteopenic rats. The purpose of this study was to determine how sequential treatment of ovariectomized (OVXed) mice with bFGF followed by risedronate would restore trabecular microarchitecture and improve bone strength through alterations in bone mineralization. Six-month old female Swiss–Webster mice were OVXed or sham-operated and left untreated for 4 weeks to develop osteopenia. At week 5, a group of Sham and OVXed mice were treated with vehicle, and 3 other groups of OVXed mice were treated with bFGF (1 mg/kg daily, s.c., 5×/week) for 3 weeks. At week 8, one group of bFGF-treated mice was sacrificed and the other two bFGF-treated groups were treated with vehicle or risedronate (Ris, 5 μg/kg, s.c., 3×/week) for an additional 6 weeks. Study endpoints included trabecular microarchitecture by microCT, histomorphometry, bone turnover, degree of bone mineralization (DBM), and whole bone strength for the lumbar vertebral body. Compared to sham-operated animals, OVXed mice had significant reductions in trabecular bone volume, connectivity density, DBM, and bone biomechanical properties (P < 0.05). Treatment with bFGF resulted in higher trabecular bone structure and bone strength compared to pre-treatment sham control (P < 0.05). Treatment of OVXed mice with bFGF for 3 weeks followed by 6 weeks Ris maintained the trabecular microarchitecture gained by bFGF treatment, and DBM and bone strength were restored to baseline control levels. Also compared to Sham-operated animals, serum TGF-β1 was transiently increased after OVX, increased an additional 100% after bFGF withdrawal, and decreased by 30% with risedronate. In addition, DBM was the strongest predictor for bone biomechanical properties (R
                     2 > 0.7, P < 0.001). Serum TGF-β1 correlated with bone turnover (DPD/Cr, osteocalcin) and was negatively correlated to DBM. Thus, in osteopenic mice, sequential treatment with bFGF followed by risedronate increased trabecular bone microarchitecture, DBM, and bone strength. In addition, suppression of the serum TGF-β1 with risedronate was associated with increased DBM. Therefore, sequential treatment with bFGF and Ris restores trabecular architecture and allows mineralization of bone to increase, which appears to be beneficial to bone strength.In the adult skeleton, bone undergoes continuous remodeling through the close coupling of osteoclastic bone resorption and osteoblastic bone formation. Postmenopausal osteoporosis is a disease of increased bone remodeling in which bone resorption exceeds bone formation. Anabolic agents have emerged as a popular approach for treatment of severe osteoporosis as they offer the possibility to restore trabecular bone architecture Basic fibroblast factor (bFGF) is a potent bone growth factor that promotes the proliferation and differentiation of osteoblast progenitors in vitro TGF-β is secreted by osteoblasts and deposited in the bone matrix. TGF-β inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption in vitro by inhibiting the differentiation of immature osteoclasts Therefore, the purposes of this study are to evaluate whether sequential treatment of OVXed mice with bFGF followed by a potent anti-resorptive agent will restore and maintain trabecular microarchitecture and improve bone strength through alterations in bone mineralization. In addition, we will investigate whether TGF-β is associated with the regulation of bone turnover and bone mineralization in this study. Female Swiss–Webster mice were obtained from Charles River, Inc. (San Jose, CA). The mice were maintained on commercial rodent chow (22/5 Rodent Diet; Teklad, Madison, WI) available ad libitum with 0.95% calcium and 0.67% phosphate. Mice were housed in a room that was maintained at 70°F with a 12-h light/dark cycle. The mice were randomized by body weight into 8 groups with 8–10 animals each ( For all study animals, calcein (10 mg/kg s.c.) was given 14 and 4 days before sacrifice to assess bone formation surface. One day prior to sacrifice, the mice were housed in individual metabolic cages and a fasting 24-h urine sample was collected. Serum samples were obtained during necropsy and both the urine and serum samples were stored at −80°C prior to the assessment of biochemical markers of bone turnover. At necropsy, the mice were exsanguinated by cardiac puncture. At the time of sacrifice, the right femurs were placed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin for 24 h and then transferred to 70% ethanol for micro-CT and bone histomorphometry. The left femurs were used for micro-CT, X-ray tomography microscopy measurements and the 5th lumbar vertebral bodies were used for biomechanical testing. Urinary levels of deoxypyridinoline cross-links and creatinine (DPD/Cr, Quidel, Mountain View, CA), serum levels of osteocalcin (OC, Biomedical Technologies, Stoughton, MA) and TGF-β1 (R&D System) were measured by ELISA. The manufacturer's protocols were followed and all samples were assayed in duplicate. A standard curve was generated from each kit and the absolute concentrations were extrapolated from the standard curve. The coefficients of variations (CVs) for inter-assay and intra-assay measurements were less than 10% for all assays and are similar to the manufacturer's references The right distal femurs were scanned and measured with a desktop MicroCT (μCT 40, Scanco Medical, Bassersdorf, Switzerland), with an isotropic resolution of 10 μm in all three spatial dimensions. The number of slices varied according to the size of the distal femurs, ranging from 200 to 300 per specimen The right distal femurs were then dehydrated in ethanol, embedded undecalcified in methylmethacrylate, and sectioned longitudinally with a Leica/Jung 2255 microtome at 4 μm and 8 μm thicknesses. Bone histomorphometry was performed using a semi-automatic image analysis Bioquant system (Bioquant Image Analysis Corporation, Nashville, TN) linked to a microscope equipped with transmitted and fluorescent light Bone histomorphometric analyses were performed in the secondary spongiosa of the distal femurs that included trabecular area between 0.5 mm to 3.5 mm proximal to the growth plate and within the cortex. Static measurements included total tissue area (T.Ar), cancellous bone area (B.Ar), and cancellous bone perimeter (B.Pm). Dynamic measurements included single- (sL.Pm) and double-labeled perimeter (dL.Pm), and interlabel width (Ir.L.Wi). These indices were used to calculate cancellous bone volume (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), trabecular separation (Tb.Sp), mineralizing surface (MS/BS) and percentage of osteoclast surface (Oc.S). Interlabel widths were derived from the average of all double label widths. Mineral apposition rate (MAR) was calculated by dividing interlabel width by the label interval. These values were not corrected for obliquity of the plane of section in cancellous bone. Surface-based bone formation rate (BFR/BS) was calculated by multiplying mineralizing surface (single-labeled surface/2 + double-labeled surface) by MAR according to Parfitt et al. Biomechanical testing of the 5th lumbar vertebrae was performed using a compression test. The relevant cross-sectional dimensions and the height of the specimens were measured using an optical microscope with a 0.5-μm resolution (Olympus STM-UM Measuring Microscope, Olympus American Inc., Melville, NY), after which they were subjected to unconfined compression tests along the long axis of the lumbar vertebra with a cross-head displacement rate of 0.01 mm/s, and involved loading the samples to failure, while continuously recording the corresponding loads and displacements. Maximum load, and cross-sectional dimensions, length and height, were measured and used to determine the compressive strength and compression modulus Detailed high resolution X-ray microscopy (XTM) methods have been previously reported In the present study, multiple slices of 800 points of DBM values were used to determine the distribution of the DBM with % bone. In addition, BV/TV was calculated as described previously The group means and standard deviations (SDs) were calculated for all outcome variables. To determine significant differences among the groups, the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test was used. When Kruskal–Wallis testing showed overall significant differences among all the groups, we applied Ryan's post-hoc test to identify groups that were significantly different (SPSS Version 12, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). The trabecular microarchitecture parameters, bone volume, and mineralization were correlated to biomechanical values using the Spearman correlation test. Multiple liner regression tests were performed to determine the association between bone microarchitecture, DBM and bone biomechanical indices using S-Plus (Insightful Corp., Seattle, WA). Differences were considered significant at The animals in all of the treatment groups had modest weight gain of about 4–6 g of body weight above baseline during the experimental period, which was significantly different from the baseline weights but was not different among groups. In addition, treatment with bFGF and risedronate did not affect body weight during the treatment period (data not shown). Compared to the baseline animals (group 1), DPD/Cr excretion was decreased by 9% at 4 weeks (group 2) and by 32% ( Bone formation, assessed by serum osteocalcin levels, decreased by about 10% in 4 weeks (group 2) and 13 weeks sham-operated animals (group 4) compared to the baseline values (group 1, Serum levels of TGF-β1 ( Effects of aging: Compared to the baseline animals at 6 months of age (group 1), trabecular bone volume was 35% lower after 13 weeks in group 4 ( Effects of OVX: Compared to the sham-operated animals (group 2), trabecular bone volume decreased 46% after 4 weeks (group 3) and 79% after 13 weeks (group 5) of estrogen deficiency ( Effects of bFGF: OVX + bFGF for 3 weeks (group 6) restored all the structural indices; i.e., trabecular bone volume and trabecular number to the baseline level (group 1). Effects of bFGF followed by vehicle treatment: Six weeks after bFGF withdrawal (group 7), trabecular bone volume, connectivity and thickness were lowered by 5%, 26% and 9%, respectively, compared to the bFGF-treated group (group 6). However, these volumes were similar to the pre-treatment sham levels. Effects of risedronate following bFGF treatment: In OVXed mice treated sequentially with bFGF followed by risedronate (group 8), there was an additional 35% gain in trabecular bone volume. Connectivity density in group 8 increased by 27% and trabecular thickness increased by 27% ( Four weeks after OVX, osteoclast surface in the pretreatment-OVX group (group 3) increased by 40% compared to the pretreatment-sham level (group 2), while MAR, BFR/BS and OS/BS did not differ significantly from sham-operated animals. After 13 weeks post-OVX (group 5), OVXed mice had significantly higher MAR, BFR/BS and OcS/BS than the sham-operated mice (group 4) ( Compared to sham-operated animals (group 4), treatment of OVXed mice with bFGF (group 6) restored BV/TV to the baseline levels (group 1) and stimulated bone formation as evidenced by a 10% increase in MAR, a 27% increase in BFR/BS, ( After 6 weeks of bFGF followed by vehicle treatment, BV/TV decreased by 14%, OS/BS increased by 60%, OcS/BS decreased by 70% ( Sequential treatment of OVXed animals with bFGF followed by risedronate (group 8) significantly lowered MAR, BFR/BS, OS/BS, and OcS/BS (range 50–80%) ( Post-OVX (groups 3 and 5) had significantly lower values for maximum load, strength, stiffness, and compression modulus compared to the other groups ( In sham-operated animals (group 4), the degree of mineralization of trabecular bone obtained from the 5th lumbar vertebral bodies measured by XTM ranged from 0.9 to 1.8 g/cm To determine what parameters of serum bone turnover and trabecular bone structure are associated with degree of mineralization of bone, we performed simple correlations. TGF-β1 correlated to DPD/Cr ( To determine whether trabecular bone structure and mineralization are associated with whole bone strength, we performed multiple regressions ( Previously, we reported that bFGF stimulated new bone formation and increased trabecular connectivity in OVX rats Previous studies in rats have shown that neither estrogen nor PTH could restore trabecular connectivity to severely osteopenic animals even if trabecular bone volume was recovered to the normal control levels In both animal studies and human clinical trials, the use of an inhibitor of bone resorption after completion of anabolic treatments seems an appropriate way to maintain the skeletal benefits gained during therapeutic treatment period By quantifying the degree of trabecular bone mineralization by XTM in this study, we confirmed a number of previous observations in human biopsies Another finding in this study was that estrogen deficiency increased bone turnover and this was associated with an increase in serum TGF-β1 levels. Also, the reduction in serum TGF-β1 was significantly associated with an increase in the DBM. These results are intriguing because TGF-β is important in bone formation as it stimulates the proliferation and early differentiation of the osteoblast Our current in vivo animal study provides some insights into the role of TGF-β1 in bone mineralization. After ovariectomy, bone resorption increased, and we observed a significant increase in serum TGF-β1. Therefore, we hypothesize that TGF-β1 was released from bone matrix and stimulated osteoblast maturation while inhibiting bone mineralization. Our data provided some support for this hypothesis because serum TGF-β1 level was correlated with bone turnover, i.e., with DPD/Cr, and osteocalcin. Also, the increase in the serum TGF-β1 levels after OVX was associated with a decrease in the DBM in trabecular bone. On the other hand, when sequential treatment of OVX + bFGF was followed by risedronate, there was a reduction in bone remodeling, a reduction in the serum level of TGF-β1, and an increase in DBM. While our observations about changes in TGF-β1 with bone turnover and mineralization are interesting, these results require additional investigation. For example, we have not confirmed that TGF-β1 is indeed released from bone matrix at the bone remodeling site or if TGF-β1 alters the osteoblast mineralization process. While studies to date have utilized TGF-β1 receptor knockout models In summary, sequential treatment of osteopenic female mice with bFGF followed by risedronate improved trabecular bone architecture, mineralization, and bone strength. Interestingly, serum TGF-β1 levels increased with estrogen deficiency, but were significantly reduced by bFGF treatment (anabolic) followed by risedronate (antiresorptive) in an OVX model of osteopenia. Additional studies are now required to further elucidate the role of bone matrix growth factors, bone mineralization, and bone strength. The Advanced Light Source is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors want to thank Mollie McGee for her excellent editorial assistance and Solomon Chefo for his statistical assistance. This work was funded by NIH grants R01 AR043052-07, 1K24AR48841-02