Dual mineralization on a porous membrane was carried out using an electrochemical approach. The porous membrane was interposed between a pair of glass cells, and calcium chloride (CaCl2) and sodium hydrogenphosphate (Na2HPO4) solutions were separately injected into the cells. After inserting platinum electrodes into the cells, an alternating current with a sine waveform was applied for a given period of time. The resulting membrane was removed from the glass cells and rinsed with ultrapure water. The minerals formed on the membrane were analyzed by using spectroscopic methods such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), infrared (IR) spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction (XRD) and identified to be dicalcium phosphate and hydroxyapatite. It was noted that dicalcium phosphate formed on one side of the membrane, while hydroxyapatite was formed on the other side. Thus, dual mineralization could be successfully achieved on both sides of the porous membrane under an alternating current. This process of dual mineralization is very useful for the formation of versatile organic–inorganic hybrids and also for the regulation of the polymorphs on either side of a membrane.Calcium phosphate compounds are fascinating inorganic materials because they can be used to produce biomaterials and hybrid materials. The versatile calcium phosphate compounds are composed of calcium and phosphate ions. Some of the typical compounds in this category are as follows: dicalcium phosphate (CaHPO Porous membranes have a fine morphology, large specific area, and good separation abilities. Furthermore, the three-dimensional space in porous membranes is of considerable importance for chemical and biological reactions In the present study, we have investigated dual mineralization of a series of calcium phosphates on either side of a porous membrane under an alternating current. In this approach, CaHPO  The inorganic chemicals, CaCl For mineralization of CaCl For evaluation of the calcium ion and phosphorus content, a circular specimen (diameter: 5   To evaluate the amount of calcium phosphate formed on the membrane, the total amount of Ca  The dominant factor of the dual mineralization was regulated by pH in each cell. Generally, dicalcium phosphate readily dissolves in comparison with hydroxyapatite, if the pH condition is neutral to weak acidic condition. In the present study, pH in each solution was changeable during application of an alternating current. The pH in the calcium chloride solution (pH6.5) was lower than that of sodium hydrogenphosphate solution (pH8.5). On the CaCl The crystals deposited on the membrane were characterized by IR and XRD. Alternatively, crystal structures were also characterized by XRD. The XRD pattern of the porous membrane was monitored at diffraction angles of 20–50°. In the present study, dual mineralization on a porous membrane was successfully performed under the application of an alternating current. This process could be successfully used to functionalize both sides of the porous membrane. The pH-modulated crystal deposition was considered to be the dominant mechanism. The pH modulation could be easily achieved by separating the two solutions in the glass cell by a porous membrane. The proposed method can be extended to different ion combinations and porous membranes, and the resulting organic–inorganic hybrids can be used for developing high-performance membranes. The dual minerals would be capable of drug carriers for releasing in response to the change in pH, and these data would be reported in our future study. This study was financially supported by a Grant-in-Aid for the 21st Century COE Program of the Center for Integrated Cell and Tissue Regulation from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan, and a Grant-in-Aid for Exploratory Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (19655082).