The main purpose of this study was to precipitate indium and extract indium from pressure oxidative leaching liquor using sodium tripolyphosphate. Various influential factors were evaluated in the paper, such as pH value, temperature, reaction time, molar ratio of Na5P3O10/indium and metal ions including Fe3+, Fe2+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, etc. Over 95% of the indium was precipitated under the conditions employed, e.g. at a pH of 2.6, with a Na5P3O10 to indium molar ratio of 0.91, and 1.5h reaction time. The chemical and X-ray diffraction analyses showed that the main component of the precipitates was NaIn3 (P3O10)2·12H2O. The resulting precipitate was dissolved by using NaOH solution and hot sulfuric acid solution respectively, and then the solution was subjected to solvent extraction and cementation using zinc powder for the recovery of indium.Indium has emerged as an important strategic metal that is extensively used in electrical industries for its excellent chemical, physical and mechanical performance. Indium and its compounds exhibit semiconductor or optoelectronic characteristics, which are used in the production of liquid crystal display, semiconductor, low pressure sodium lamp, and infrared photo-detector ( The indium and iron concentrations in leach solution are in the low and high level respectively. It is difficult to recover indium from the leaching solution with solvent extraction directly ( The pressure oxidative leaching liquor was originated from Yunnan Lancang Lead Ore Co., Ltd, Yunnan, China. The chemical composition is described in As listed in The experiments were conducted in a batch mode by heating either 0.5 The concentration of Cu Many of the papers related to the separation and enrichment of metal ions (including indium) have been reported that one of the critical parameters is pH ( It can be seen that the indium precipitation percentage with sodium tripolyphosphate increases with increasing pH of the solution. However, when the pH is below 2.6, acid concentration has significant effect on precipitation of indium; while when the pH of the solution exceeds 2.6, less significant effect on the precipitation of indium was observed. Therefore, the best result is obtained when the pH of solution is 2.6. It was also found that the indium precipitation percentage without sodium tripolyphosphate is much lower than that with sodium tripolyphosphate. Moreover, in otherwise similar conditions, changes in temperature did not appear to affect the extent of indium precipitation with sodium tripolyphosphate, as the indium precipitation percentage did not change significantly when the temperature was raised from 25 The relationship between the indium precipitation percentage and reaction time was studied. The experimental conditions: temperature, 25 The results in The molar ratio of Na The indium precipitation percentage was increased when increasing the molar ratio of Na According to The indium precipitation percentage decreased with increasing molar ratio of Na The following experiment was conducted to confirm the mechanism proposed above. The reaction time studied was 90 After reacting for 90 It can be seen from The different metal ions' binding abilities with sodium tripolyphosphate in poly-metal complexation were described in As seen in In this paper, Fe The interaction between indium and sodium tripolyphosphate, the microstructures and the chemical composition of the precipitation were studied by BSE and XRD. A sample of the indium precipitate was polished and carbon-coated for observation with a BSE detector. The results demonstrate that indium-rich compound was dispersed and homogeneously distributed in the precipitate. The results of XRD analysis indicate that the main component of the precipitates was NaIn According to the analysis on these results, the mechanism was verified and therefore explaining the interaction between indium and sodium tripolyphosphate. Based on the above experimental results, the experiment of indium-rich pressure leaching liquor under the optimum reaction condition was conducted. As seen in In the overall framework of precipitation of indium with sodium tripolyphosphate in pressure leaching liquor system is one alternative that effectively extracts indium. This shows that the enriching indium via precipitation method that uses sodium tripolyphosphate (Na The precipitate was dissolved with NaOH solution. Then the hydroxide obtained was leached with sulfuric acid solution. The solution obtained from the leaching of the precipitate is much more appropriate for solvent extraction process ( The optimum conditions of extracting indium by D2EHPA include an organic phase of 30 The experiments on stripping indium were carried out under the stripping conditions as follows: ratio of 4 between organic phase and solution, 5 Cementation of indium from the striping solution was performed at a pH of 3. The reaction took place at 25 The results obtained show that sodium tripolyphosphate (Na Additionally, a possible mechanism was proposed to explain the interaction between indium and sodium tripolyphosphate. The resulting precipitate was subsequently dissolved using NaOH and sulfuric acid solution. The solution was then subjected to solvent extraction and cementation processes using zinc powder to recover indium. Total recovery ratio of indium from pressure oxidative leaching liquor bearing-indium was more than 95%. A comparison of the presented procedure and some current recovery of indium methods in the literature were given in The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of