A numerical modeling approach is proposed for predicting the progressive caving behaviour of strata and performance of powered roof support in a given geo-mining and strata condition. The study suggests that face convergence slope of 75mm/m of face advance may be considered as the maximum permissible value for selection of optimal capacity support for safe working in a given strata condition. The study also reveals that en masse caving of strata is responsible for dynamic loading leading to collapse of supports if they are not designed to discharge the fluid at the desired rate.Strata control in longwall mining has been a grey area of research since its introduction in underground coal mining industry worldwide. A reliable prediction of the caving behaviour of strata and its interaction with the roof support helps in selection of sustainable mining parameters and rational capacity of supports. It is pre-requisite for developing a reliable support selection tool essential for successful planning of longwall working in a given geo-mining condition. A number of approaches have been developed to address this important subject of applied rock mechanics. Theoretical models for prediction of main fall and periodic caving span are based on plate–beam theory For estimation of support capacity, theoretical models Experience shows that although the existing approaches offer important contributions towards understanding strata–support interactions, but do not provide effective means of support specification This paper describes a numerical modeling approach to assess the progressive caving of strata and performance of powered roof support of a given capacity deployed in a given geo-mining condition. The various features of the numerical model are described. The performance of the numerical model is compared with field observations of 23 case studies taken from different coal fields in India to assess the acceptability of the model for predicting the caving behaviour of strata and support performance in a given strata condition. Estimation of rock parameters consists of identification of different layers in the overlying strata and their properties, estimation of rock mass properties and The major mechanism of caving in sedimentary rock formation is controlled by dominant planes of parting in the strata. The approach of Roof Separation Index (RSI) Once the roof separation layers in the overlying strata are identified, the mechanical properties of different layers in roof existing within the zone of roof caving for a given geo-mining condition are assessed. The values of uni-axial compressive strength ( In absence of laboratory measured values of elastic moduli for different rock types from various longwall panels studied in this work, a uniform criterion for estimation of Young’s moduli has been adopted. For coal, a single value of 2 The phrase ‘immediate roof’ has been used in this work for a layer just above the coal seam to be extracted. It is amenable to cave after advance of the support if it is weak and thin or sufficiently laminated. If it is strong and difficult to cave, it overhangs to a considerable length in the goaf and plays a vital role on loading over the support at the face. Here, we consider that the ‘immediate roof’ and the ‘immediate caving roof’ are two different entities. Immediate caving roof may be same as the immediate roof in the first case, i.e. when the roof stratum is weak, thin and laminated. However, in the latter case, when the immediate strata is thick and competent, the immediate caving roof may be only a portion of the immediate roof which is caving in the goaf due to local spalling during the progressive face advance. Hence, in the difficult caving condition, the thickness of immediate caving roof may even be zero. In some cases, where a thick coal seam is mined leaving a portion of coal in the roof, the thickness of coal left in the roof may act as ‘immediate caving roof’ due to its easy caving characteristics. The ‘main roof’ lies just above the immediate roof. The failure of this layer in large span, conceptually, causes loading of support at the face resulting in face convergence as well as high abutment stress during the periods of main fall and periodic caving of the strata. The main roof may consist of either a single layer or a series of layers which may separate from each other during progressive caving. The ‘overburden’ strata lie above the main roof. It may consist of a single layer or a number of layers. However, we do not simulate parting of layers in the overburden when it lies at a height more than 15 times height of extraction. It is considered that such strata should not play a direct role on loading of the support at the face. The layers in the overburden strata gradually settle over the caved goaf. The schematic diagram of various layers in roof, as discussed above is depicted in Proper estimation of rock mass strength and modulus values is very important for a meaningful numerical modeling study of caving behaviour and support requirements. It deserves an extensive literature review and personal experience before proposing a final approach to address the subject properly. The review of literatures for conversion of intact rock properties to rock mass properties shows a widely varying number of approaches. In most of the cases, Hoek–Brown failure criteria Based on the common observations of literature review as cited above and personal judgment, a scale effect of 50% combined with the influence of RQD has been adopted to estimate the rock mass strength. The values of bulk moduli, shear moduli and cohesion are calculated using the standard relations  The average horizontal stress ( A two dimensional plain strain plasticity model has been developed to assess the progressive caving behaviour of strata and support performance in longwall workings. Such a model has been opted mainly for two reasons: (i) it is valid for simulating the condition at centre of a longwall face till the ratio of face length to the face advance is 2, however for practical purposes; it can simulate the condition up to a face advance till the ratio is 1.5 without any considerable error in the end modeling results and (ii) it enables simulation of a field representative progressive face advance due to lesser run time requirement enabling a more realistic and minute study of progressive failure and caving of strata as well as the loading behaviour of powered roof support deployed at the face as the face advances through critical mining cycles involving periods of roof caving including local fall, main fall and a few periodic caving. Finite difference based numerical modeling software FLAC Version 4.0 Necessary FISH modules (user defined functions) have been developed and implemented successfully to simulate the progressive failure and caving of strata, and assessment of strata and support behaviour parameters in most useful terms like load on the support, face convergence, front abutment stress and vertical strain in coal at the face with progressive face advance. The modeling scheme comprises schemes for model formulation, stable solution for every stage of progressive face advance, simulation of mining sequence, i.e. progressive face and support advance, and simulation of failure and caving of strata with the progressive face advance. A realistic simulation of the complex loading behaviour of powered roof support is very important. The powered roof support modeled in this two dimensional plain strain model ( The stiffness of powered roof support is estimated using Eq. The structural element ‘prop’ has been used to model the ‘support’ members, which interact between canopy and base set against roof and floor at the coal face. The yielding characteristics of the modeled system of support (the effect of pressure relief valve) has been modeled by incorporating a load closure table where the further development in load from its setting load upon installation of the support at the face is governed by the linear relation governed by its stiffness till it achieves the yield load value. Once the support achieves the yield load value, the stiffness becomes zero and the load experienced by the support does not increase further but it continues to yield at the constant yield load value till the system becomes stable. Formulation of the two dimensional plain strain plasticity model consists of construction of model geometry, defining of the constitutive relation and material properties for rock mass and parting planes, The model geometry of a longwall panel consists of 50 The different layers in roof are liable to slip and separate from each other due to presence of weak parting planes. These major parting planes have been simulated by interface elements implemented in FLAC. These elements are characterized by Coulomb sliding and separation in tension. It facilitates separation and slipping of the nodes joining the adjacent grid-points, which forms the interface to simulate the load-deformation behaviour of discontinuities. An interface is assigned pre-defined normal and shear stiffness, joint friction, joint cohesion and joint tension to simulate the representative behaviour of the parting plane. The boundary conditions have been applied in such a way that they represent the actual field conditions. The floor boundary has been fixed in both This model solution scheme is based on the basic concept of ground response curve ( In the numerical model, for obtaining reasonable load on support at the face, we obtain roof strata convergence curve with respect to time-stepping for a typical numerical model. A general nature of the curve is shown in A FISH module has been developed for the purpose of checking the point A2. It monitors the vertical displacement of the roof strata 3 Once this point is achieved, the support is installed at the new location of the face and the model is solved for a stable condition of the strata convergence. This is achieved by activating another FISH module. In this module, the vertical displacement of the roof strata is monitored at the same location, i.e. 3 Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model with tension cut off has been used to simulate the roof failure, which assumes that rock will fail under shear. This is the simplest failure model with minimum number of assumptions and gives accurate representation of rock mass behaviour under high confinement stress on a large scale Shear yielding of strata is detected in the model when In the present work, it has been considered that caving of roof strata is different from failure or yielding of the strata. Yielding of the strata is a result of induced stress exceeding the strength limit following the Mohr–Coulomb failure criteria with tension cut off. This original failure criterion has been used with a slight modification in the present work to consider the reduction in cohesive strength of strata which has failed in tension. In the normal failure criteria, there is no such consideration, whereas here, the cohesive strength of the element failing in tension is reduced to zero, which seems to be valid consideration as observed from laboratory test observations. This modification simulates the strain softening behaviour of the strata without much of assumption. A FISH module is used to monitor the tension and cohesion status of strata elements. If any element of the strata is detected for failure in tension, its cohesion value is set to zero. Although, failure of the strata is the preliminary requirement for its caving, whether a failed strata caves or not, it is guided by the shear strain or vertical displacement that the failed strata has undergone. The literature survey conducted in this work did not disclose any such work done previously, which have considered these criteria for modeling the caving of strata. The present wok has used these criteria intuitively where the limit of maximum allowable shear strain is set to 0.25 and the maximum vertical displacement is set to −1 The progressive face advance is simulated in stages of 1 Simulates initial face advance of 5 Simulates the face advance and delay the support installation at the new face location till the elastic range of roof convergence occurs, Installs the support at the new face location, Iterates to converge the solution after installation of the support in the advanced condition of the face. These FISH modules make use of the sub-modules to simulate the mining sequence and progressive face advance. The review of literature also suggested that modeling of goaf is necessary where a number of periodic caving with a very long advance of face (the whole panel length has been simulated in some cases) have been considered The results of the model are obtained in terms of front abutment pressure, load on support, face convergence slope and vertical strain in coal at the face using separate FISH modules for all the parameters. A FISH module searches for the maximum value of vertical stress at the middle level of the coal face and prints its value and the location with respect to the face for every stage of face advance. Similarly, the load on support for every stage of face advance is obtained using another FISH module. The convergence at a point is calculated as the difference of vertical displacement of the node in the roof level and that of the corresponding node in the floor level. The face convergence data so obtained are retrieved by a FISH module for nodes located at 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 A separate log file is used to store the data of specific parameter for all the simulated face positions and results of all the parameters are stored separately in specific log files. The data from these log files are fed into Microsoft Excel files using various macros for editing the format of stored data. These macros are very convenient for obtaining the final results containing large volume of data from the models. The formatted outputs of the data are finally presented in graphical forms with respect to face advance. A movie file is also created to visualize the progressive failure and caving pattern of strata with face advance. The outputs are finally analyzed to obtain the response of the model for simulating the features of local fall, main fall and periodic roof caving. In the progressive failure plots, for example Numerical simulation of strata behaviour and performance of the supports deployed in 23 different longwall panels, operated in various coal seams of India have been studied. These panels include successfully operated panels where no significant strata control difficulty was experienced during extraction of the panel, panels extracted with considerable difficulty where the face had to be periodically stopped for recovery operation at the face during periods of severe roof caving, and collapsed longwall workings where the face could not be recovered after occurrence of severe roof degradation during uncontrolled caving of the strata and the working of the face was permanently stopped. The numerical models assess the caving behaviour of strata and performance of the field deployed powered roof support. A movie of progressive face advance has also been prepared for each model to visualize the failure and caving of strata with progressive face advance. The comparative study of the model and the field observed load on the support with progressive face advance for two typical case studies are shown in A compilation of the qualitative comparison of the face condition observed in the field with that of the numerical model observation (  The numerical modeling approach reported in this paper is useful for simulating the progressive caving of strata and assessing the performance of a given hydraulic powered roof support in a given geo-mining and strata conditions. It makes use of borehole lithology and laboratory test data to identify the rock beds in the sequence of strata lying within 15 times extraction height above the coal seam. The major planes of parting among the rock beds are identified using an index called Roof Separation Index (RSI). The mechanical properties of different layers in roof existing within the caving zone for a given geo-mining condition are assessed after identification of the parting planes in the overlying strata. The maximum height of caving zone in the roof is considered as 15 times height of extraction assuming the bulking factor as low as 1.07. The Modeling of a hydraulic powered support has been done considering its ability to resist the maximum lateral load limited to 30% of its yield load capacity, while in case of pure vertical loading the lateral load provided by the modeled support remains zero. The stiffness of the supports of various capacities has been determined using stiffness of hydraulic legs and verified in the laboratory. The stable solution scheme, which has been used in numerical modeling, is based on the concept of Ground Response Curve. It enables a reasonable simulation of the interaction between strata and the yielding support of given capacity deployed at the progressively advancing face. The ground response curve is obtained automatically using a FISH module. The support is installed after completion of elastic deformation leading to face advance. The state of completion of elastic deformation is automatically detected by the FISH module on the basis of history of convergence of roof at the face. Another FISH module has been developed to simulate the The model observations shows that weight at the face is not always observed due to failure of main roof especially when the immediate roof is thicker. In this case, the immediate roof itself acts as the main roof and the role of immediate roof gets different from the conceptual considerations. The numerical modeling tool obviates such conceptual considerations and hence is more effective in understanding the mechanism of failure and caving of strata in a given geo-mining condition. The model observed load on support are quite representative of the field observations as depicted from the comparative plots of two cases. The modeling results show that the panels were extracted in the field without any severe strata problem, where regular caving of strata with peak face convergence slope of less than 75 The numerically simulated modeling results of caving span for main fall and periodic caving corroborated with their field observed values. The field observations also supported the caving behaviour, failure characteristics, load on the support, abutment stress and vertical strain in coal at the face as observed in numerical simulation. The three group classification of longwall panels as per the caving behaviour and face convergence obtained in numerical modeling study is reasonable and representative of the field experience. A numerical modeling approach is proposed for simulation of progressive caving behaviour and support performance in longwall mining. The model uses Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model with tension cut off and incorporates parting planes, The authors are thankful to the Head, Department of Mining Engineering, ISM University for providing necessary laboratory facility for conducting the numerical modeling work. The field data were compiled from BCCL and SCCL mines. The authors are thankful to the management of various longwall mines for their co-operation and encouragement for this work. The work reported in this paper is part of the Ph.D. Thesis submitted to ISM University by the first author. The views and findings expressed in this paper are opinion of the authors and not necessarily of the organization they serve.