Sebba published a paper in 1959 in which he discussed a new method (ion flotation) for recovering solute from dilute solutions by adding surfactant, with subsequent adsorption of the solute onto bubbles. The principles of the process and the characteristics of the solute–surfactant product formed in solution were discussed in his monograph on ion flotation published in 1962. The method rapidly became popular and researchers in several countries have studied various aspects of the separation of metallic ions, trace elements, molecules, inorganic anions and organic matter from aqueous solutions. Many laboratory-scale studies have been carried out, most of them aimed at development, analytical applications, water purification, resource recycling, removing radionuclides from solutions, and recovering metals from sea water. A comprehensive development of all aspects of the subject was presented in a monograph on adsorptive bubble separation techniques, edited by Lemlich in The research group directed by Grieves made an important contribution to the theoretical and applied aspects of ion and precipitate flotation during the 1960s, particularly on wastewater treatment. They showed that flotation efficiency of long-chain surfactants was the result of physicochemical aspects of particle growth and dispersion. But the adsorption of surfactant onto the solid and gas phases was identified as a factor limiting bubble-particles attachment in some cases of ion flotation. The adsorption of the surface-active solutes to the gas–liquid interface was studied by Rubin. An analysis based on the Gibbs and Langmuir isotherm and on an originally developed approach of long-chain ion adsorption in a solution containing several surface-active species was used to determine the effect of their concentrations on the ratio of distribution coefficients. This author also described the kinetic parameters for ion and precipitate flotation. A detailed review of the precipitate and adsorbing colloid flotation technique with a comprehensive literature review appears in the monograph published in 1983 by Clarke and Wilson. Golman has given a qualitative description of the chemical and kinetic aspects of ion flotation and some industrial applications, including the removal of molybdenum from solutions of hydrometallurgical flowsheets. He has also given methods for treating foam products and purifying process residual solutions. Relatively few studies on this subject have been published recently. They focus mainly on extending the applications of the method. The progress made in column flotation techniques, especially with bubble generation systems, offers hydrodynamic conditions favourable for ion flotation. Filippov has reported on the results of recent pilot-scale studies applying this technique to precipitate and ion flotation. It was demonstrated that aggregate formation and destruction under low dissipation energy are the parameters controlling precipitate flotation. The combined use of column and bubble spargers in ion flotation provided a removal rate for metals equivalent to that of laboratory-scale trials. Separation by adsorption onto bubbles is based on the difference between the surface activities of the solute species. These species can be ionic, molecular, or colloidal, and their adsorption onto the bubble–liquid interface depends on their surface-active, adhesion or electric properties. A species that is not adsorbed onto bubbles can be made to do so by adding a surfactant to the solution. The classification of methods based on these separation phenomena are shown in foam adsorptive separation and non-foaming bubble separation. The nature of the entity is introduced later. The Golman classification based on the phenomena at the various levels of process leads to another classification of ion recovery process ( the type of phase that accumulates the floated species: foam, scum, organic or aqueous phase; the nature of the components to be adsorbed onto the bubble surface: ions or molecules, particles of the precipitate or carrier; and the collector use to modify the hydrophobic properties of the entities Ion flotation, developed by Sebba, is a surface-inactive separation method that involves the removal of ions or molecules ( The formation of foam is not necessary for ion flotation. The hydrophobic nature of the scum makes it stable on the solution surface. A foam thin-layer phase may be needed to isolate the scum from the liquid phase and to evacuate it later to avoid it redissolving. Stable foam is a factor limiting the application of ion flotation, because it requires less foam formed or a lower gas rate. Solution entrainment also decreases the colligend concentration in the foam. If the formation of a foam during ion flotation is undesirable or impossible (i.e. recovery of organic ions or quantitative separation), the process of There are several ways to describe ion flotation and to determine the quantity of surfactants required for optimal separation. One considers the bubble surface to be an ion exchanger owing to surfactant adsorption. The charge created is compensated for by the adsorption of inactive ions of opposite charge. Jorne and Rubin assumed that the radius of the hydrated ions determined the maximum approach of opposite ions to the bubble surface, based on the theory of a double electrical layer. Their theoretical calculations were confirmed experimentally. Another approach highlights the stability constants of soluble compounds (complexes and pairs of ions) formed by the surfactant with the colligend and an oppositely charged ion, according to Moore and Philipps. Some believe that a solid phase is formed (assumed to be two-dimensional) in the adsorption layer on the bubble surface. These assumptions mostly concern the adsorption mechanism of ion flotation. Sebba and Golman used the product of the activities of the collector and colligend ( The parameter ( The influence of the surface-active species concentration and solubility product Ion flotation operates with dilute solutions of the colligend (10 As noted by Pinfold, the ratio Ф required for complete flotation must be at least stoichiometric (Ф The role of electrolytes is significant during the collector-colligend and sublat–bubbles interaction. Their role must be taken into account because of their significant quantities in real industrial solutions. Electrolytes modify the ionic strength and can react with the collector. For The opposite-charged ion forms a soluble product with the collector. The separation is more selective for higher colligend and for low opposite-charged ion concentrations. A higher collector concentration than that required by Ф also renders ion flotation more efficient. The collector–colligend interaction product is insoluble. A critical concentration of the opposite ion can be defined, below which it does not react with the collector and consequently does not influence further colligend recovery. Changing the ionic strength by adding NaCl allows the selective separation of metal oxyanions (MeO The change in ionic strength of the medium caused by adding anions reduces the effectiveness of ion flotation. The flotation of dichromate with a quaternary amine (adhesion mechanism) is blocked in the sequence, according to Grieves: The foam flotation of dichromate is controlled by the preliminary formation of a solid phase followed by adsorption onto bubbles (similar to precipitate flotation). The adsorption of differently charged ions influences surface hydration of the bubbles and the precipitate, the importance of which is directly related to the charge of the anion. Ferricyanide flotation is by solvent sublation. As was noted by Pinfold, the smaller ionic radius of the anion, the more effective the collector competes with the colligend. The use of 2-octanol to collect the sublat on the solution surface can cause solvent to dissolve and become adsorbed onto the bubble surface instead of the collector. Under these conditions the lower charged anions neutralize the adsorbed collector, so that it is no longer available to float the colligend. Ion flotation is particularly sensitive to the pH because the pH determines the nature and the charge of the collector (the degree of ionization) and the colligend (hydrolysis), and causes variations in the ion-collecting mode. Pinfold also notes that the following phenomena that can take place when the pH changes: colligend hydroxides may form, and precipitate flotation may take place instead of ion flotation; extreme values of pH block flotation because the ionic strength is higher; the stability of scum could be affected because of sublat redispersion in the solution. The temperature influences all aspects of ion flotation, i.e. the collector and sublat solubility, the sublat particle size and the flotation results. Its role were confirmed by Grieves for the flotation of Cr Optimal metal removal with C According to Pinfold, precipitate flotation includes all processes in which an ionic species is precipitated in the liquid phase and is subsequently removed by attachment to the bubble surface. It is difficult to clearly distinguish between ‘ion flotation’ and ‘precipitate flotation’ when a collector is used as a precipitation agent. If the colligend is first precipitated by a non-surface-active ion and made hydrophobic by adsorption of a surfactant, the process is termed The Ion flotation controlled by adhesion is a precipitate-like flotation because the sublat formed is a solid phase that can also be flocculated by adding active chemical agents or by the action of the collector. The two ionic flotation modes (adsorption and adhesion) may be distinguished at the level of particle–bubble interaction, depending on the nature of the sublat. The sublat formed is an ionic pair or a soluble complex (adsorption): the adsorption activity of these species on the bubbles determines the effectiveness of the process. The sublat is formed in the liquid phase as particles of 10 The sublat is a precipitate with micron- or millimetre-sized particle: the interaction results in sedimentation of the particles of negligible mass on the bubbles if the surface forces support the attachment of the entities. The time necessary for 90–99% colligend recovery at colligend concentrations of 10 Few studies on the kinetics of ion flotation are published, while there are many papers on mineral particle flotation. However the kinetic parameters of the process determine the practical applications of flotation because they determine the scale-up procedure adopted. Almost all ion flotation tests are carried out in cells (batch or continuous mode) equipped with a sintered-glass device to generate bubbles. The use of the column-type cells allows the user to: vary the introduction point of the collector and feed solution containing the colligend; vary the height of the foam; carry out sampling and/or The most recent bubble-generating systems make column flotation a flexible tool for ion flotation. A study of sublat formation and its structural organization showed that a column 75 The ion flotation of Cr In the classical mode of ion flotation (precipitation–flotation as described by Grieves), only the 200–240 The limiting conditions for molybdenum metal–organic precipitate flotation in columns are owing to aggregate stability under the turbulence created by upward movement of bubbles, which depends directly on the average bubble diameter. Pilot-scale flotation studies revealed the fundamental influence of the average bubble diameter and dissipation energy on molybdenum recovery in the form of precipitate obtained with the collector α-benzoin oxime for a molar concentration ratio of 2. It was therefore necessary to identify a bubble-size distribution and the gas hold-up in the column to ensure the flotation of low hydrophobic precipitate flocs, as they are extremely brittle with very low values of dissipated energy (0.01–0.05 W kg This is the partial separation of components within a solution by the selective adsorption of surfactants, colloid or ultrafine particle species onto the bubble. The effect of separation is demonstrated by a concentration gradient along the column-like cell that allows removal of a colligend-rich solution from the top and depleted solution from the bottom of the cell. Separation efficiency clearly decreases with increasing column diameter as a result of axial diffusion of rising bubbles, which breaks up the concentration gradient. This consists of the preliminary capture of colligend by the carrier particles (by adsorption, absorption, or co-precipitation), followed by charged-bubble flotation. Ion-exchange resin, activated charcoal, or the precipitate particles can be used as a carrier. The carrier particles can have flotation properties or be made hydrophobic by adding collector. This is the recovery of molecules using a surfactant. The name molecular flotation is use for all flotation processes that involve the recovery of the molecular colligend or those analogous to ion flotation.