The selective extraction and concentration of nickel from ammoniacal solutions containing nickel and cobalt by an emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) technique using 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline (DBHQ) as extractant has been presented. ELM consists of a diluent (kerosene), a surfactant (Span 80), an extractant (DBHQ), a modifier (tributyl phosphate), and a stripping solution (very dilute sulfuric acid solution containing EDTA as complexing agent, buffered at pH 4.25). Cobalt (II) in feed solution with 6mol/L ammonia was oxidised to Cobalt (III) by H2O2 and pH of this ammoniacal solution was adjusted to 10.0 with the addition of hydrochloric acid (HCl). The important variables governing the permeation of nickel and their effect on the separation process have been studied. These variables were membrane composition, ammonia concentration in the feed solution, mixing speed, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, pH of the feed and the stripping solutions, complexing agent concentration in the stripping solution, and phase ratio. After the optimum conditions had been determined, it was possible to selectively extract 99% of nickel from the ammoniacal solutions containing Ni and Co. The separation factors of nickel with respect to cobalt, based on initial feed concentration, have experimentally found to be of as high as 88.1 for about equimolar Co–Ni feed solutions.The separation of cobalt from nickel in aqueous solution has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy. Their adjacent positions in the transition metal series in the periodic table results in aqueous somewhat similar chemical behavior but differences do exist. For example, although both cobalt and nickel preferentially exist as divalent hexahydrated ions in dilute aqueous solution, the rate of water exchange on the cobalt ion is very much higher than for nickel. Thus complex ion formation often proceeds much more readily with divalent cobalt than with nickel. On the other hand, the trivalent cobalt ion is much less labile and forms in preference to nickel even though the redox potentials for the Co Nickel occurs within both laterite and sulphide ores and it is also associated with deep-sea nodules ( To date there are numerous published works on cobalt and nickel separation by liquid–liquid systems ( If an excess of ammonia is added to the feed solution containing Co Emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) for metal extraction are made by forming a water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion, stabilized by a surfactant, the (W/O) emulsion contains the metal extractant in the membrane solution and the stripping reagent in the stripping solution. This emulsion is then dispersed by a relatively low agitation into the feed solution containing metal ions to be separated. After extraction, the loaded emulsion is separated from the feed solution; demulsification yields a membrane solution that can be recycled. The extraction chemistry involved in liquid membrane transport is essentially the same as that in solvent extraction, but the overall transport is governed by kinetic rather than equilibrium parameters ( The liquid membrane consists of a surfactant, an extractant, a modifier, and a diluent. The non-ionic surfactant used for stabilizing the emulsion is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as Span 80. The extractant is 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline (DBHQ) which is purchased from Merck, Germany. The modifier is tributyl phosphate (TBP) which is purchased from Daihachi Chemicals, Japan. A commercial kerosene (TUPRAS Oil Company, Turkey) were used as diluents. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used as the disodium salt and was purchased from Merck, Germany. Cobalt and nickel stock solutions were prepared from reagent grade cobalt (II) sulphate (CoSO Initial ammonia concentration in the feed solution, contained cobalt and nickel ions between 100 and 500 After oxidation process, pH of the ammoniacal feed solution was reduced the desired pH value with the addition of HCl. No detrimental effect was observed on an oxidation of DBHQ, by the addition of H Very dilute sulfuric acid solution containing 0.01mol/L EDTA as complexing agent, buffered at pH 4.25 using NaOH–acetic acid, was used as the stripping solution. The stripping solution (25 To determine the important variables governing the permeation and extraction of nickel from cobalt, ammonia concentration of the feed solution, mixing speed, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, modifier concentration, pH of the feed and the stripping solutions, complexing agent concentration in the stripping solution, and phase ratio were varied to observe their effect on nickel extraction and concentration. At the end of each run, the emulsion was recovered and subsequently broken into its constituent organic and ammoniacal solutions using a high voltage splitter with niobium electrodes. All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 In order to investigate the effect of ammonia concentration in the feed solution, the ammonia concentrations were varied from 4 pH of the feed solution with 6 The effect of surfactant concentration on the behavior of metal extraction by ELM is very important. The effect of surfactant concentration on nickel extraction is exhibited in  The extraction of nickel is enhanced by increasing the concentration of DBHQ from 2% to 6%, while the emulsion stability does not affect and further increase of extractant concentration decreased the extraction performance very little ( The effect of the modifier concentration studied was in the range of 0–8% as shown in The effect of mixing speed was studied in the range of 300–800 The stripping reaction, given by Eq. ELM extraction studies reveal that the presence of EDTA as complexing agent in the stripping solution assists for stripping the extracted nickel. The stripping efficiency of EDTA in the stripping solution was studied in the range 0–0.075 The volume ratios of the stripping solution to the membrane solution were varied between 3/5 and 6/5. The results given in The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and are shown in The separation factors of nickel over cobalt, β An emulsion liquid membrane process using 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline (DBHQ) to extract and concentrate nickel from ammoniacal solution has been investigated and the optimum conditions have been determined experimentally as given in DBHQ can be successfully used as an extractant for selective extraction and concentration of nickel from cobalt in ammoniacal solutions by emulsion liquid membrane process. DBHQ in combination with TBP showed a remarkable acceleration in nickel extraction by emulsion liquid membrane process. The extraction of cobalt ions can be minimized provided that The extraction was maximum when the feed solution was maintained at pH 10 and very dilute sulfuric acid solution, buffered at pH 5.25 and containing EDTA as a complexing agent, was used as a stripping solution in the receiving phase. At the optimum conditions, the extraction of nickel has been achieved with an efficiency of about 97–99% from Co–Ni mixtures of about equimolar composition within 10 At the optimum conditions, for the three feed mixtures of about equimolar composition, the separation factors of nickel over cobalt, The author wish to express his sincere gratitude to Sakarya University that supported this work, and Mehmet Yilmaz, coordinator of BAPK in Sakarya University.