There has long been speculation as to whether some particle shapes are more ‘floatable’ than others, which might be due to differences in the induction period required to achieve attachment between the particles and the air bubbles in the pulp. To resolve this, we used the Milli-Timer apparatus to directly observe the process of particle–bubble interaction and attachment by means of a magnified, high-speed video recording, thus providing a direct measure of the induction period for attachment.
                  To assess the influence of particle shape on induction time we used two varieties of methylated borosilicate glass particles — spheres and angular ‘frit’ — in a range of tightly-sized fractions. Other factors that could affect the induction time, such as the polar angle of sliding commencement, and approach velocity, are accounted for using multiple nonlinear regression.
                  Our results illustrate the importance of particle shape on induction period, with angular particles exhibiting induction periods that were an order of magnitude lower than those of spheres. Furthermore, the induction period was seen to decrease with increasing particle velocity, or kinetic energy on approach, but increased as the trajectory approached the limit of just grazing the bubble. These results indicate that attention should be paid to the shape of particles obtained from the grinding operation, besides particle size.Flotation is a key unit operation employed in mineral processing and a range of other industries. Successful flotation hinges on the attachment of (certain) particles to bubbles. In real industrial systems the particles fed into a flotation cell will exhibit a variety of shapes, varying from approximately spherical ( Anecdotally it is expected that particle shape can have a significant effect on ‘floatability’: the common view is that angular particles are easier to float than rounder particles. However, such overall tendencies leave it unclear as to which flotation sub-processes are most affected by particle shape. For example, in the pulp we could consider collision rate, attachment efficiency, stability against detachment, and entrainment, besides a number of froth characteristics. Traditionally the efforts to model the interaction of particles and bubbles have typically assumed that both objects are perfect spheres (see In flotation the particles of interest are typically sized at around 10–150 An important element of working with real particles is to characterise their shape and surface roughness. Unfortunately, there is no single unambiguous parameter to fully characterise either of these properties, which has hindered research into this important area ( Different views exist on the dominant reason why particles have the shapes that they do, which can be summarised as the effect of the inherent material character, and the effect of the processing ( In the industrial context, working with a given material, the type of grinding takes on increased importance. A number of studies have been reported in the literature in which the effects of different grinding processes on a given sample are reported. A typical result is that more angular particles are produced from rod mills (attributed to impact processes), compared to rounder particles obtained from ball mills (attributed to abrasion and chipping) (  Dry and wet milling were carefully studied by It should be clear that comparison between studies on different materials is fraught with difficulty; yet even when the material is identical, the situation may not be straightforward. Besides the type of material and type of machine, the resulting particle shapes depend One of the key resistances to attachment is the hydrodynamic resistance arising as liquid drains out of the gap between a bubble and an approaching particle. Aspherical particles could experience a lower resistance (depending upon their shape and orientation), and hence require less time for the intervening gap to thin sufficiently to be breached, and attachment occur. There have been few systematic studies on the effect of particle shape or roughness upon flotation performance. One of the earliest notable studies on this topic was carried out by Studies on talc have suggested that rounder (but rougher) particles produced by ball milling are less easily recovered in a microflotation cell (  Schmidt & Berg have described an opposite tendency: they found that spherical printer toner particles floated better than disc or platy particles ( Ahmed’s work showed increases in flotation recovery — and greater resistance to detachment — with increases in either particle asphericity or particle roughness ( Finally, Hiçyılmaz et al. probed the effect of particle shape on the attachment process alone by testing recoveries in a modified Hallimond tube across a series of size fractions. The barite ( Particles with rough surfaces composed of microscale projections might achieve attachment more easily, if those bumps or jags protrude through the gap, so that the separation between particle and bubble is smaller than it might otherwise seem. A three-phase contact would then be expected to occur on one of the projections. Nanoscale topological features seem less likely to have much effect on the ease of breaching the interjacent liquid; however, they may still affect the expansion of the three-phase contact line in dewetting (  As alluded to above, Different grinding techniques do not just affect the physical form of the minerals, but can also affect the chemistry of the surface, for example through more or less reducing conditions ( The attachment between a bubble and a particle (see We are interested in using our technique of direct observation of the induction period in order to assess the role of the attachment process in the previously reported changes in floatability. This will establish whether the altered floatability is due to changes in the ease of attachment, following from changes in the time required for thinning of the interposed liquid, or whether it is due to other factors, such as detachment or entrainment. In order to assess the importance of particle shape and roughness on the induction period, CSIRO’s In the present set-up the camera used was a A Induction periods are defined as the time that elapses from the moment at which sliding commences, until the moment that attachment is initiated (see In each ‘run’, a dilute swarm of particles settles through the water column toward a freshly blown bubble. Depending upon the attachment efficiency, any given run might result in multiple opportunities to estimate induction time, a single opportunity, or no opportunities. Only interactions that could be clearly seen, that resulted in attachment, and that were not subject to any apparent interferences, were included in the data analysis. The polar angle of particle position at the moment that sliding begins is given the symbol Bubbles of 2.0 The particles used were composed of borosilicate glass, in two forms: spheres, and angular ‘frit’ (Mo-Sci Specialty Products, Rolla, U.S.A). The spheres were supplied in a 75–90 Due to the origin of the frit, its composition is practically the same as that of the borosilicate spheres (see All particles were washed using progressive stages of water rinsing, alkaline washing and acid washing ( The specific surface area of the frit was characterised using the approach suggested by Micrographs were taken with a field emission, environmental SEM (FEI, Oregon, U.S.A) operating at 10 In order to systematically investigate the influence of three key mechanisms on induction period, rigorous statistical analysis was performed in the form of multiple nonlinear regression. The three key issues explored are the effect of approach velocity, approach position, and particle shape or roughness. These are described by the approach velocity, We performed the regression using the following general equation: The nominally spherical particles are seen in The frit used in the present experiments was produced by comminution in a hammer mill and disk mill in sequence. It would be expected that the final particle shape and roughness would be influenced more by the later stage. Particle size reduction in disk mills is due principally to shear, with smaller contributions from particle compression, impact and other mechanisms, which is not so different from the hammer mill ( Arguably the most straightforward means of shape classification is still semi-qualitative descriptions obtained from visual inspection ( The specific surface area provides a quantitative indication of particle shape and roughness ( Measured reagent consumption for the borosilicate spheres at 100% methylation indicates chemisorption of 10 (For the soda–lime glass In It should be noted that in the case of angular particles much greater variation in the results can be expected as a consequence of the anticipated dependence on the orientation of the impinging particle. For example, a cubic particle could impinge point-first or face-on. The hydrodynamic resistances will assuredly be different, the relationship between gap and surface forces will be different, and even the surface chemistry may be different, so a different induction period could also be expected. However, as seen from the SEM images, the frit exists in a wide range of shapes, so that a simple quantification of the impinging particle’s orientation for each event is very difficult. Hence, the approach has been to gather more data for the angular particles, in order to provide a more representative selection of the possible combinations of particle shape and orientation. In short, the experimental data suggest that (on average) the induction period for attachment is reduced in the case of angular particles, and is also reduced at greater approach velocities. The direct dependence on polar angle seems weaker, but still suggests an increase in induction period for particles that impinge further from the apex ( It should be noted that the apparent dependence of induction period on approach velocity is not linked to the particle size, as might have been thought. In the experiments, the particles fall under the action of gravity, and it is known that larger particles (of the same shape and density), will fall faster. However, analysis of the data indicates that in the present set-up, variations in the approach velocity are predominantly due to the influence of other particles — Viewing individual scatterplots in isolation may not give a complete picture of the correlation if the parameter of interest depends on multiple variables ( Regressions for each combination of terms produced varying levels of fit, as indicated by the MSE in The most important influence on induction time, statistically speaking, is the polar angle. If only one coefficient were allowed to be retained in Eq. The next-most important influence is the particle shape. In all cases the frit is estimated to have induction periods that are only a few percent of the equivalent spheres, although the precise values fluctuate. This is in agreement with more general studies comparing ‘floatability’ of angular and round particles, as discussed earlier. Finally the influence of approach velocity is introduced. Although the In all cases the regression predicts increase in In this device the bubble is squashed against a bed of particles, approaching at a speed The constant term, The suggested fit to the data is: with τ in milliseconds. Eq. The correlation has been plotted in In the literature a number of papers have suggested increasing floatability of more angular (or rougher) particles. A few studies have judged this by flotation recovery, but have not been able to quantify the induction period directly. In the present work we have been able to observe particle–bubble interactions, and thus directly obtain estimates of induction period. Statistical analysis indicated that the induction period, Particle shape depends in part on the milling process. The results presented herein indicate the level of attention that should be paid to the shape of particles obtained from the grinding operation, besides particle size. It may be anticipated that the more angular the particle, the lower the induction period. An extension of the present work would be to measure the effect of different degrees of angularity on the induction period. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of numerous colleagues at CSIRO who assisted with sample preparation (Cathy Edwards), chemical analysis (Cheryl McHugh & team) and microscopy (Matthew Glenn), or advised on other aspects. Funding for this project was provided from CSIRO’s Process Science and Engineering Capability Development Fund. The simplest regression equation to apply would be The true induction period may take on arbitrarily small values — fractions of a millisecond — but should not become negative. This suggests perhaps an equation of the form The variances in The main concern associated with prediction of negative values of Note that this is still a linear correlation, because 1/ A further concern is that it seems more likely for the induction period for the frit to be a multiple or fraction of the corresponding value for spheres, whereas the foregoing equations all propose that they are interrelated by an offset, namely The neat thing about Eq. It is not possible to be sure in advance what relationship will best describe the influence of The first term, involving Nonlinear regression was performed with Initially it was expected that a stepwise-type regression procedure would be most practicable ( The ‘best’ regression for a given number of parameters was chosen based on the objective of minimising the mean squared error (“MSE”), which is similar to — but preferable to — maximising the relevant coefficient of determination, Statistical significance can be assessed by checking whether the confidence interval on the estimated coefficient excludes zero. Here the 95% confidence interval is computed from the diagonals of the asymptotic covariance matrix and the relevant Student’s Finally, for completeness it may be noted that an alternative, linear equation, Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 