The pyrometallurgical production of copper generates slags, a residue with a significant content of this metal. Copper can be recovered from the slags by froth flotation after cooling, crushing, and grinding. The obtained Cu-concentrate is sent to the pyrometallurgical process. If grinding is not fine enough for efficient flotation, copper is lost in tailings. In this paper, the ferric leaching of slag flotation tailings is studied. Copper extractions of 66% are achieved by ferric leaching, and Cu content in tailings is reduced from 0.78% to 0.24%.The vast majority of copper extraction from Cu–Fe–S minerals is pyrometallurgical ( The procedures currently employed for the partial recovery of Cu contained in these types of slags consist basically of returning it to the pyrometallurgical process ( The present work studies the recovery of Cu from slag flotation tailings by a hydrometallurgical treatment based on the BRISA process ( As the design of reactors for the biological production of ferric sulphate has been widely studied in recent years, this work is focused on the aspects of ferric leaching. The experimental work was carried out on a sample of flotation tailings obtained by the mining company Cerro Dominador (Chile) when concentrating slags from Chuquicamata. Cu, Fe, S and Si (main constituents) concentrations in this material are 0.78%, 32.8%, 0.76% and 16.2%, respectively. Phase identification and image analysis were achieved by reflected-light optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in conjunction with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDAX). The D The assays of dynamic leaching with ferric sulphate were carried out in 250 The influence of pulp density, regrinding, initial pH and temperature on ferric leaching was studied. Assays were also carried out on five granulometric fractions obtained by sieving the original sample. The main results are shown in The mild regrinding of this material yields a significant increase in the extraction of copper ( The partial dissolution of fayalite is inevitable in acid medium, leading to an additional release of Cu-bearing species (reactions 3–6).  At constant initial pH, the amount of acid per weigh of solid is higher as lower pulp density resulting higher the amount of fayalite leached. In contrast to this argument, the initial pH does not significantly affect the Cu-extraction in the studied range. But in this context it must be taking into account the internal generation of acid by precipitation of jarosite (reaction 7), which is greater as higher initial pH; this explains the values found for change in weigh solid after leaching (Δ  The reactivity of fayalite in acid medium must be higher as The effect of release of Cu-bearing species by solution of the occluding fayalite is associated to a Fe(II) additional generation (reaction 3), it could be counterproductive for the process, because it would imply increasing in size of the biooxidation reactor and the need for purging. This work was carried out within the project CTM-02548, financed by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science.