Mixture breakage of particles in various sizes is common in industrial mills, and breakage behavior is influenced by size composition. But studies on particle breakage are conducted to narrowly sized samples. In this paper, tentative works are made to investigate interaction among super clean coal in mixture breakage from aspects of breakage rate, energy consumed characteristics and energy split factors. Experimental results demonstrate that breakage rate of coarse particles in mixture breakage increases if compared with that in single breakage. Particle size is modelled into classical breakage equation, and the modified model is successfully applied to mixture breakage. Energy split factor of component is determined based on the balance of specific energies of components in heterogeneous breakage and energy-size equation, and consumed energy (W) of component in multi-component grinding is calculated. Calculated energy split factors of components are all above one in various mixed conditions, so energy efficiency (value of product t10 at the same specific energy) decreases if compared with that of single breakage. Energy split analyses are also conducted for mixture breakage of middling coals, which illustrates that the method is robustness for energy-size reduction process influenced by associated minerals in coal.Particle breakage is an energy-consuming process, which is influenced by grinding devices, particle property and grinding circuits. Statistical data indicate that over 70% energy of a mineral process plant is consumed by breakage and liberation of raw minerals Generally, materials in industrial grinding machines are mixtures of particles in various sizes and densities. It is significantly different to samples, in narrow size or density, used in experimental grinding tests. Hence, there is a gap between the industrial production and experimental study, and attempt could be made to the heterogeneous grinding step-by-step. Heterogeneous grinding can be divided into three aspects, namely mixture breakage of different minerals in the same size, coarse and fine minerals with the size ratio above 10 and the same minerals with the neighboring size. Among these three aspects of mixture breakage, the first one is easy to conduct because minerals show obvious difference in density or chemical property, and components in ground products of mixture can be easily separated by float-sink tests or chemical reaction. Number of component in mixture is also two, which is relatively easy to analyze if compared with three or more components. The first two aspects of mixture breakage has been systematically studied by Fuerstenau and co-workers, and heterogeneous breakage of two components are mainly conducted in ball mill and high pressure grinding roll Studies on the mixture breakage of neighboring sized coal particles in VSP are relatively less. Compared with the single breakage of coal in narrow size, particles in difference sizes would interact with each other in mixture breakage, and results in changes of breakage and energy consumption characteristics. However, reasons for these changes are differences in split energies. Aiming to conduct this research, SCC is selected first to avoid the effect of associated minerals on breakage behavior. Mixture breakage experiments of SCC, including two narrow size fractions, are designed to compare with the single breakage of SCC. Differences in specific breakage rate of coarse particles in mixture are discussed and energy split factors are determined based on the modified energy-size reduction model. Simultaneously, supplemental mixture breakage tests of middling coals are designed to validate conclusions. Energy-size reduction experiments of particles in narrow and wide size were conducted in a modified ball-and-race mill, namely Hardgrove mill, with the addition of a power meter. Materials were SCC particles in size of 2.8–2 mm, 2–1.25 mm and 1.25–0.71 mm. SCC particles in neighboring size were mixed with mass ratios (coarse-to-fine) of 3:1, 1:1 and 1:3. Considering the relatively low density of SCC, mixture mass was reduced to 40 g, which was less than that of the standard HGI test, to ensure the correctness and repeatability. Grinding time was designed as 10 s, 20 s, 30 s, 60 s, 90 s, 120 s and 180 s (the maximum grinding time of 2.8–2 mm and 2–1.25 mm mixture was 90 s), and energy consumption for particle breakage was recorded and calculated. Ground products were sieved by a series of sieves of 2 mm, 1.25 mm, 0.71 mm, 0.355 mm and 0.18 mm to decide the product t It is difficult to distinguish generated and original fine particles in ground products of mixtures, so comparison of breakage rate is only conducted for coarse particles. Coarse particles are broken into fines under a certain specific energy, and the product fineness and specific energy are important output and input during the particle comminution. Relationship between above two parameters can help to compare energy efficiencies among different grinding conditions, devices or circuits. In this paper, t But this model does not consist of particle property, and samples in various sizes would have different fitted parameters. Particle density was modelled by Shi into breakage degree model in the M-term by analyzing the effect of particle density on product t This modified model is first used to describe the relation between re-calculated specific energies and product t Breakage process of mixture in ball mill is different with that in ball-and-race mill due to difference in grinding mechanism. Methods proposed for energy split study of heterogeneous breakage of minerals in ball-and-race mill may be helpful. But there are still some differences in experimental materials. Previous studies pay attention to the effect of different pure minerals (in the same size) on energy-size reduction of mixture and components. While samples used in this research are coals in various size fractions, and minerals associated in middling coal may make breakage more complex. As the grinding process of mixture happens in the same machine, the method still can be applied for reference. Specific energy balance of mixture breakage is developed from the energy balance, in which the mass percentage of component is considered Balance equation of specific energy in mixture breakage should be satisfied first before the calculation of energy split factor of component. So it is essential to determine the specific energy consumed by coals of different sizes in multi-component breakage. In above discussion, application of modified energy-size reduction model to mixture breakage has also been confirmed. So the deformation of Eq. Parameters in Eq. In studies of heterogeneous breakage of the same sized minerals, product t Normally, energy split factor of component in mixture breakage can be described in two forms. One is defined as the ratio of energy expended in the same time interval for mixture and single breakage. Another one is the proportion of energy consumed to yield the same product fineness in heterogeneous breakage to that of homogeneous breakage. Aiming to compare the energy efficiency of component in mixture and single breakage, the second definition of energy split factor is used in this study. As size of component and mixture is different, modified works are conducted to the second definition. Energy split factor is redefined as the ratio of consumed specific energy for component to produce particles, which is smaller than t Note that According to the balance equation of specific energy of mixture and energy split factor of component, some details in mixture breakage are determined, which cannot be directly measured in tests. As mass ratios of components and the total mass of mixture are known, energies (W) consumed by components to yield a certain product t Mixture breakage tests of SCC and middling coals in different sizes are conducted to investigate the interaction between components. Breakage rate of particles in top size, energy consumed characteristic are compared in single and mixture breakage. As particles around coarse ones in mixtures are smaller than those in single breakage, and grinding process of coarse particles is promoted. Breakage rate of coarse particles in mixture increases with the decrease of its mass percent. Energy-size equation is developed with modelling the particle size in exponential form. Application of this function to mixture breakage of SCC and middling coal depict its robustness for coals in various properties, and interaction between components in heterogeneous grinding could be reflected in this model. Energy split factors of components are determined based on the balance equation of specific energy and modified breakage model. Calculated results indicate that all energy split factors of components are ranging from 1.00 to 1.76, which demonstrates the decrease of energy efficiency of mixture breakage if compared with that of single breakage from the aspect of yielding fine progenies. On the other hand, fine coals in mixture show a bigger decrease of energy efficiency in comparison with coarse ones. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 