Separation of Re from roasting dust leaching solution of molybdenite using a multi-stage mixer–settler extractor was studied. Systematic solvent extraction tests were performed using TBP as an extractant diluted in kerosene. The optimum extraction conditions were as follows: pH=0, temperature 25°C, 500rpm agitation rate, 6min contact time and 40% v/v TBP. The results showed that the extraction reaction is exothermic. A flow sheet was developed for the process. Three different extraction ways were studied in a laboratory size mixer–settler: Namely, counter-current, cross-current and co-current. The results showed that counter-current was the best. In addition, it was found that 2h of continuous operation was necessary to reach a steady state condition for the process. Extraction as high as 95.43% was obtained.Rhenium is important industrially as high-temperature super alloys and as catalysts, as Pt–Re, for example, for the production of high-octane, lead free gasoline ( Tributyl phosphate (TBP), a widely applied extractant in hydrometallurgical processes, is a major extractant and modifier for Re separation ( Over the past 20 This study investigates solvent extraction of Re from roasting dust leaching solution of molybdenite using a multi-stage mixer–settler. Systematic studies were performed using TBP as an extractant diluted in kerosene. For an efficient separation of Re, parameters such as pH, extractant concentration, phase ratio, contact time, stirring speed and temperature were studied. Three different ways of extraction (counter-current, cross-current and co-current) ( Dust required from the molybdenite roasting furnace of the Karmania Co. (Kerman, Iran) was obtained. Tributyl phosphate (Fluka, Switzerland) was an extractant, Kerosene (Tehran Refinery, Tehran) was diluents and sulfuric acid and ammonium hydroxide (Merck, Germany) were pH modifier. The aqueous solutions were prepared by leaching the roasting dust. The samples were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The compositions of dust sample are given in The leaching experiments were performed under the conditions that the liquid-to-solid ratio, stirring speed, temperature and leaching time were 3.5, 400 Extraction equilibrium experiments were carried out by agitating equal volumes (50  For the multi-stage experiments, the mixer–settler units were assembled for counter-current, cross-current or co-current experiments. The aqueous and organic phases were transported to the system inlets by separate peristaltic pumps. All the experiments were done at room temperature. The liquid temperature, T, was measured by an alcohol thermometer immersed in the settler. The aqueous phase in each system outlet was sampled at specific time intervals. The ratio of the flow rates, Q  The difference in extraction behavior can be attributed to the extraction reactions of Re and Mo ( In the case of Mo, anionic to cationic conversions can occur by pH effects on the extraction reactions. Depending on pH and Mo concentration, both MoO Regarding that each TBP has one free Oxygen atom with an electron pair and on the other hand, Re forms only perrhenic acid there is a stronger hydrogen bond between TBP and H The equilibrium constant of reaction The distribution factor of Re may be written as: By substituting Eq. Re-arranging and taking logarithms yields: Finally, it was written: Eq. It was found that with increasing TBP, both of them increased. Also, in  It was observed that a temperature increase has a negative effect on distribution factor and that percentage of Re extraction decreases. Considering the van't Hoff equation: Re-arranging it and differentiating it by 1/T, Therefore, the apparent standard enthalpy of the extraction reaction   The studies for the extraction time of Re were carried out using 40% (v/v) TBP diluted in kerosene. The mixing time was varied from 0.5 to 10 In these experiments, when the two-phase mixing time was less than 2 The effect of phase ratio, A/O, on the separation time of two phases is shown in V  As can be seen the C The conditions used for the extraction experiments in the mixer–settler have been given in  Considering In co-current extraction, the two phases flow in the same direction between the various contactors. Thus, in this configuration no advantage is gained over a single contact because, providing equilibrium is reached in the first contactor, the separated flows are in equilibrium when entering the second contactor so no change in relative concentrations will occur. Nevertheless, it is appropriate when the number of the less extraction stages and depletion of Re are needed. The counter-current provided better situation against two other methods. In this configuration, the phase volumes remain constant and by feeding the two phases, feed and solvent, at opposite ends of the bank of contactors, the driving force for extraction, i.e., the solute concentration difference between the two phases is maximized. Although, the number of more extraction stages is needed in the high phase ratios of A/O in counter-current extraction, but it has more ability in terms of efficiency and recovery than the other methods. Therefore, it can be a more useful method and economical for Re separation in the mixer–settler. The final E value for the counter-current extraction was 95.43%. Solvent extraction of Re from roasting dust leach liquor using TBP as an extractant diluted in kerosene was performed. The effect of different parameters to achieve equilibrium conditions of Re extraction was investigated. The continuous extraction experiments of Re were carried out using a horizontal type multi-stage mixer–settler in which the feed solution (640 The optimum values of pH, TBP, agitation rate, extraction time and temperature were obtained as 0, 40% v/v, 500 The effect of phase ratio, V The apparent standard enthalpy of the Re extraction reaction was − Chemical analysis of the withdrawn samples showed that the steady state conditions are reached after around 2 It was found that increasing the number of extraction stages, N, has had the most effect on the Re extraction in the counter-current than two other methods. The maximum E value was obtained at 99.91% in the cross-current extraction. However, the counter-current presented better results of Re extraction in the mixer–settler. Under conditions used, the remaining content of Re in the leaching solution was reduced to 29