Recovering economically valuable rubidium (Rb) from natural resources is challenged due to its low concentration and limited selectivity of extracting agents. Equilibrium and kinetic studies were conducted on the sorptive removal of Rb at low concentration (5mg/L) using a commercial and a laboratory prepared potassium cobalt hexacyanoferrate (KCoFC). These laboratory and commercial KCoFCs exhibited similar characteristics in terms of chemical composition, surface morphology (scanning electron microscopy) and crystal structure (X-ray diffraction peaks). KCoFC exhibited a higher sorption capacity for Rb (Langmuir maximum sorption 96.2mg/g) and cesium (Cs) (Langmuir maximum sorption 60.6mg/g) compared to other metals such as lithium (Li), sodium (Na) and calcium (Ca) (sorption capacity<2mg/g). KCoFC sorption capacity for Rb was affected only when Cs was present at twice the concentration of Rb, while the influence of other metals (Li, Na, and Ca) was minimal even at high concentrations. High Rb sorption capacity was due to the exchange of Rb for K inside the crystal lattice and strong sorption on the sorbent surface. These were evident from the data on K release during Rb sorption and reduced negative zeta potential at the sorbent surface in the presence of Rb, respectively. Kinetic sorption of Rb was satisfactorily described by the pseudo-second order model with intraparticle diffusion and exchange of Rb with structural K acting as major rate limiting steps. Up to 74% desorption of Rb was achieved with 0.1M KCl. Overall, the results established the superior selectivity of KCoFC for Rb sorption.In the last few decades attention has been focused on extracting rubidium (Rb) due to its application in many fields of science and technology. Rb is used in fibre optic telecommunication systems, semiconductor technology and night-vision equipment This has led to the development of new methods for the extraction of Rb from resources such as oilfield water, mining industry, ores with low Rb content, seawater and salt lakes A number of diverse inorganic sorbents have been used for selective alkali metal sorption including Prussian blue Hence, the objective of this study was to establish the selective affinity of potassium cobalt hexacyanoferrate (KCoFC) for Rb sorption. The specific objectives were to: (1) synthesise KCoFC in the laboratory (KCoFC(L)) and compare its properties and characteristics with a commercial KCoFC sorbent (KCoFC(C)) in terms of chemical composition, crystal structure, surface area and pore size distribution, surface charge characteristics, and efficiency of Rb sorption; (2) determine the effect of pH and co-existing alkali metal ions on Rb sorption; (3) model the equilibrium and kinetics of Rb sorption; (4) determine the mechanism of Rb sorption; and (5) investigate the desorption of Rb using different acid, alkaline, and salt solutions. KCoFC(C) also known as CsTreat was supplied by Fortum Engineering Ltd, (Finland). This sorbent consisted of dark brown-black granules ranging in size from 0.25 to 0.85 KCoFC(L) was prepared in the laboratory by adding 1 volume of 0.5 Stock solutions of Rb, Cs, Li, K, Na and Ca were prepared by dissolving RbCl, CsCl, LiCl, KCl, NaCl and CaCl Samples of KCoFC (0.05 The morphology and detection of elements on the KCoFC before and after Rb sorption was carried out with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with Energy Dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDX) operated at 15 XRD data (on powders) were collected on a Siemens D5000 diffractometer operating with Cu Ka radiation and a rotating sample stage. The samples were scanned at room temperature in the 2 Nitrogen adsorption–desorption on KCoFC(C) and KCoFC(L) was determined at 77 To investigate the effect of pH and zeta potential on sorption, suspensions of 1 In view of the low concentrations of Rb and Cs in natural resources, and in order to reliably measure the metals concentrations utilising analytical instruments, sorption experiments were carried out at a maximum initial concentration of 5 Equilibrium sorption experiments were conducted with different doses of sorbent (KCoFC) ranging from 0.02 to 0.20 The sorption data were modelled according to Langmuir (Eq. Sorption kinetics experiments for Rb and Cs were conducted by agitating KCoFC at a dose of 0.05 The sorption data was modelled using pseudo-first order (PFO) and pseudo-second order kinetics (PSO) as described in (Eqs. The Weber–Morris diffusion model (Eq. Initially Rb was sorbed onto KCoFC by shaking 0.1 The chemical decomposition analysis showed that both KCoFC(L) and KCoFC(C) had reasonably similar chemical composition ( The SEM images showed that KCoFC(L) and KCoFC(C) had a similar appearance, i.e. a porous and rough morphology before Rb sorption ( The EDX emission pattern revealed the presence of K, Fe, and Co peaks in the samples representing the main metals of the KCoFC. The semi-qualitative element analysis showed that for KCoFC(L), the atomic ratio for K/Fe was 1.2 while for Co/Fe it was 1.4. Similarly, for KCoFC(C), the corresponding ratios were 1.0 and 1.5, respectively. Both the EDX and chemical decomposition analysis indicated a good match for the atomic ratio of Co/Fe (1.4 and 1.5 for EDX vs 1.6 and 1.8 for chemical decomposition). On the other hand, the K/Fe ratio for the EDX analysis was much lower (K/Fe 1.0–1.2) compared to the chemical decomposition analysis (K/Fe 2.4). This could be due to the limitation of EDX emission in capturing K that is located in the body/centre of the cubic caged KCoFC structure, in comparison to Fe and Co which are primarily located at the corners of the structure Upon Rb sorption, a peak of Rb in the energy zone of 1.7 The XRD composition showed the same diffraction peaks for both the lab and commercial sorbent, confirming the similarity in crystal structure ( The surface area of KCoFC(L) was 55.4 The pH of the aqueous solution is an important controlling parameter in the sorption process because it influences the surface charge on the sorbent. To study the influence of pH, experiments were conducted between pH 3 and 10. Rb sorption capacity increased up to pH 7–8 and then declined as pH increased ( The increased sorption was mainly due to an increase in the negative surface charge on the sorbent as indicated by the zeta potential trend ( Both KCoFC(L) and KCoFC(C) sorbents showed much higher sorption capacity for Rb and Cs than Li, Na and Ca at all equilibrium solution concentration of the metals ( The sorption data were modelled using Langmuir and Freundlich equations. The sorption data for Li, Na, and Ca did not satisfactorily fit to these models. However, the data for Rb and Cs fitted well to both the models with the fit being better for the Langmuir model ( In the Langmuir model, the value of Langmuir model fits to data showed that for Rb, a The capacity of alkali metal sorption on sorbents is generally in the order of Cs The occurrence of lattice ion exchange was evident as K was released with the sorption of Rb and Cs ( It is important to highlight that an additional amount of K release was detected (1.05–1.39 During the Rb and Cs sorption process very little Co and Fe were released, which indicated that Rb and Cs were not exchanging with Co and Fe in the crystal lattice ( While Rb and Cs exhibited high sorption capacity on KCoFC, other metals such as Li, Na and Ca remained mostly unchanged in the initial solutions without having any appreciable sorption ( Kinetics of sorption governs the uptake rate of sorbates and is therefore an important aspect in assessing the sorbent’s characteristics. The kinetic results of KCoFC(L) displayed an increased sorption capacity of Rb with contact time ( The sorption kinetics data was analysed using different kinetic models. The results showed that the data fitted slightly better to PSO model than to PFO model with Generally, kinetic models describe the whole sorption process but the actual rate limiting steps are not provided in detail. The transportation of Rb from the bulk solution to the KCoFC surface can be described by: (1) bulk diffusion from the external solution to the film surrounding the KCoFC particle (bulk diffusion); (2) diffusion of Rb through the film surrounding the KCoFC particles (film diffusion); (3) diffusion of Rb through the hydrated pores of the KCoFC particle (intraparticle diffusion); and (4) chemical exchange reaction of Rb at the internal particle surface and exchange with structural K (chemical reaction). Bulk diffusion is negligible in determining the limiting rate because of enough agitation in batch experiments which does not allow any concentration gradients to build-up. Intraparticle diffusion is highly likely because the particles are mesoporous. In this study, the Weber and Morris intraparticle diffusion model was used to represent the intraparticle diffusion trend with time for KCoFC The results of the kinetic study clearly demonstrated that Rb was first adsorbed on to the surface of the KCoFC prior to the K ion exchange reaction within the crystal lattice as indicated by previous studies An important factor that influences the performance of a sorbent for a target metal is the selective sorption of the metal in the presence of competitor ions. In order to verify the selectivity of KCoFC(L) for Rb, the sorption capacity of Rb was evaluated in the presence of other competitor monovalent alkali metals (Cs, Li, Na, K) as well as the divalent metal, Ca at a range of concentrations ( The results showed that when Rb and Cs were present together at the same concentration (5 Comparatively, Rb sorption was minimally affected by the presence of alkali metals, Li, Na, and K and divalent alkaline earth metal, Ca at concentrations of 5–20 At a concentration of 0.1 The affinity of KCoFC sorbent for Rb was evaluated using a laboratory prepared KCoFC (KCoFC(L)). Detailed characterisation (chemical composition, SEM–EDX and XRD) of KCoFC(L) established its similarity to the commercial KCoFC. The major findings for the Rb sorption characteristics of KCoFC(L) are as follows: Rb sorption increased from pH 3 to 7 and remained the same at pH 7–8, in accordance with the increase of zeta potential negativity. Sorption capacity of alkali metals and alkaline earth metal Ca on KCoFC followed the decreasing order Rb The Rb sorption kinetics data fitted satisfactorily to PSO model with intraparticle diffusion and exchange of Rb with structural K acting as major rate limiting steps. The presence of co-existing elements such as Li, Na and Ca only minimally influenced Rb sorption, thereby indicating the selective sorption of KCoFC for Rb. Only at higher concentrations did Cs reduce the Rb sorption capacity. A high desorption capacity (74%) of Rb was able to be achieved with 0.1 This work was funded by