A method was developed to determine the modal mineralogy and Sn deportment of a fine-grained skarn ore. Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) and electron probe microanalysis were applied to crushed and uncrushed samples for mineralogical characterization. A comprehensive list of mineral references consisting of energy-dispersive X-ray spectra and information about elemental concentration and density was created. This conventional approach did not achieve reliable results in the characterization of some of the analyzed ore types. Small grain sizes and the variety of Sn-bearing minerals required adding mineral references with manually mixed EDX-spectra, calculated elemental concentrations and densities. Comparison of MLA data using this modified approach with bulk geochemistry and X-ray powder diffraction illustrates very good agreement for all ore-types characterized. The new approach may well be considered for other mineralogically complex ores containing a multitude of ore minerals and complex deportment of metals.Tin (symbol Sn from Latin: Skarn is a calc-silicate-dominated rock type that typically forms at the expense of carbonate rocks during regional or contact metamorphism including intense metasomatic alteration by magmatic hydrothermal fluids ( The Hämmerlein deposit in the Western Erzgebirge, Germany, is an example of a stratabound, compositionally complex and polymetallic ore deposit that comprises two parts: a shale-hosted unit and a Sn-In-Zn skarn ( Soon after discovery of the deposit in the late 1970 Complex mineralogy, often fine-grained Variety of Sn-bearing minerals (cassiterite and various Sn-bearing silicates) Variability in grain sizes of valuable minerals (grain sizes of cassiterite range from According to Within the context of a publically-funded research project dedicated to the beneficiation of complex Sn ores of the Erzgebirge, it was decided to develop a novel approach for the quantification of the recoverable Sn content of the Hämmerlein orebody by automated mineralogy. Previous studies have illustrated the potential of this approach to calculate the deportment of resources like e.g. gold ( The conventional approach of automated mineralogy ( This section deals with the applied methods from sample preparation to analytical techniques. The part on automated mineralogy is extended with a paragraph on the link between mineral grain sizes and the fraction of recorded mixed spectra in a sample. A graphic example illustrates the differences between the conventional and our modified approach. Twenty-five samples from six different lithological units of the +590 Samples were characterized using a number of analytical methods, including scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS)-based image analysis ( Automated mineralogy ( MLA grain-based X-ray mapping (GXMAP) method was selected as the measurement mode for the analyzed ore. The discrimination of the minerals by their greyscale (BSE mode), with a closely spaced grid of X-ray points (X-ray mapping) ensures that minerals are reliably identified ( The identification of minerals detected during data acquisition by MLA requires the compilation of a mineral reference list. The approach to compile this reference list was significantly modified for this study. Therefore, the conventional approach – as well as the modifications – are described in detail below. The modification to the well-established conventional approach to mineral identification was motivated by the abundance of mixed spectra in the data sets obtained for the fine-grained skarn samples investigated. As EDX measurements in GXMAP mode are placed in a narrow grid, spot measurements may be located near grain boundaries such that the excitation volume affects more than one mineral grain. The result will be mixed X-ray spectra that cannot be assigned to any reference from the mineral list. It is obvious that this particular issue becomes more prominent the finer-grained and more complexly intergrown the minerals are within a sample. In order to quantify the amount of mixed spectra at different mineral grain sizes, a 2D simulation study was carried out for an ore with attributes (mineralogy, microfabric) similar to that of the chlorite unit of the Hämmerlein deposit. Five minerals were considered, namely arsenopyrite, cassiterite, quartz, fluorite, and chlorite with volume fractions 1%, 4%, 10%, 30%, and 55%, respectively. Furthermore, three different mineral grain size ranges were considered for this mineral assemblage, with the largest size of cassiterite grains reported here as the determinant. Accordingly, the three simulated microfabrics contained cassiterite grains of up to 500 In the next step of the simulation the ores of different mineral grain sizes were transformed into a particle population with an average particle size of 80 The simulation study then yields the fraction of mixed spectra at the three chosen scales (largest cassiterite grains of 500, 250 and 125 Mineral references for each mineral are created in the Mineral Reference Editor of the MLA software. Each reference must contain the following information: Name Spectrum with the intensity (number of counts) on 2000 channels Density Elemental composition Density values and mineral compositions were taken from the literature. Stoichiometric formulae of minerals as reported in the literature were used to calculate average mineral compositions ( Authors working with MLA do consistently not elaborate how mixed spectra recorded during measurement runs have been taken care of (see all literature mentioned within this study). To our knowledge, the problem is typically addressed in very simplistic manner only. This includes, for example, using so called touchups (“Unknown to Host”) or by lowering the spectrum-matching threshold. Both ways increase the analytical inaccuracy and are therefore regarded as stopgap solutions that require the investigation of alternatives, especially when dealing with very fine-grained materials. QEMSCAN does not use the BSE value for mineral discrimination during the measurement. This results in mixed spectra being recorded on grain boundaries, independent from the grain size of the analyzed material. Therefore, users of this platform have implemented the approach of spectra mixing for several years. The approach was never published, but is briefly mentioned in In this study, mixed spectra were frequently recorded during measurement runs. No touchups were made to the data set. Instead, mixed spectra were created manually and added to the mineral list. As a thought example, one can imagine that two minerals, named mineral A (MinA) and mineral B (MinB) are intimately intergrown. EDX spot measurements located close to the grain boundaries between the two minerals record a mixed spectrum (SpecM). A new mineral reference is created for this purpose by mixing the spectra of mineral A and mineral B (SpecA and SpecB) in the ratios 70/30 and vice versa ( The Mineral Reference Editor offers a software solution for spectral mixing but the approach can also be carried out manually by calculating the counts (c) of each channel individually. A similar approach was used to create synthetic mineral references for the Sn-bearing minerals with variable, but minor Sn content, such as the silicates titanite and epidote as well as iron oxide minerals. The spectra of these minerals were mixed with the spectrum for cassiterite (= SnO Further details and explanations concerning this novel approach to mineral identification by MLA can be requested from the authors of this study. The consequences of classifying a data set with a conventional Ten gram aliquots of each sample were shipped to ALS Limited in Ireland for bulk geochemical analyses. The samples were pulverized at ALS to 85% passing 75 Sn contents were determined on separate 5 EMPA provides quantitative information on mineral chemistry ( Sn concentrations were measured on the Lα line with a PETJ crystal. Measurement times were 120 XRD data were collected using a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer, equipped with a PIXcel3D-Medipix3 1 Below, all Sn-bearing minerals that were found in the 15 thin sections are described. The results from automated mineral analysis of the six grain mounts with the modified approach (modal mineralogy and Sn deportment) are presented. The results of the two approaches are compared.  Minerals with Sn as a major component (cassiterite, stokesite) Minerals with Sn in the crystal lattice of typically Sn-poor silicates and oxides (epidote, titanite, iron oxide minerals, amphibole, rutile, garnet, and chlorite) Microcrystalline inclusions of cassiterite (<1 No evidence of microcrystalline inclusions of cassiterite was found in either of the minerals from category II, which clearly differentiates this group from the iron oxides in category III. Cassiterite is the most important host of Sn in the studied samples; it is rather uniform in composition and most commonly intergrown with chlorite (±quartz Stokesite has a median SnO Epidote reaches a maximum of 4.36 wt.% SnO Titanite incorporates a maximum of 21.91 wt.% SnO EPMA analyses on iron oxide minerals reached a maximum of 2.33 Minute inclusions of cassiterite within magnetite (<1 Two different types of amphibole were found in the Hämmerlein deposit: I) a Ca-Mg-Fe-bearing variety, probably actinolite, with concentrations of up to 0.40 Distinguishing minerals with a median SnO Quartz, feldspar, mica, fluorite, carbonate minerals (calcite and ankerite), and sulfide minerals (e.g. pyrite, sphalerite, arsenopyrite) are available in the deposit as well. However, they do not contribute to the Sn deportment and will be discussed in the following section. The modal mineralogy of the six studied grain mounts was calculated with the modified approach and is presented in The Sn deportment is best described as the quantitative distribution of the total Sn content of the ore into the main host minerals. The impact of changes between the modified and conventional approach is judged by comparing their calculated assay, modal mineralogy, and Sn deportment ( Samples S1 and S6 are characterized by a simple mineralogy, coarse grain sizes and simple Sn mineralogy. As would be expected, the two approaches to mineral identification yield very similar results. Minerals that were not mixed in the 70/30 ratio (like fluorite, sulfide minerals, and pyroxene; see Using the results obtained from samples S5, a sample of the iron oxide lithological unit, as an example ( A similar effect is observed in sample S2. In this sample most cassiterite grains are smaller than 5 Quartz in samples S2, S3, and S4 is underestimated by 1.0, 1.4, and 1.6 The most significant differences are observed for the deportment of Sn ( As with any other analytical method, results obtained from automated mineralogy may be affected negatively by errors in sample preparation, lack of operator experience, or all interpretation and assumptions made during data processing. Therefore, quality control is an integral part of this study. The coefficient of determination (R The analyzed cations Si, Al, Fe, Ca, Mg, N, and K, together with their anions O and F (in fluorite, CaF Achieving agreement between MLA and XRD data ( S5 (iron oxide unit) contains cassiterite, minute inclusions of cassiterite within iron oxide minerals and iron oxide minerals with Sn substituted into the crystal lattice. The EDX spectra of microcrystalline cassiterite cannot be distinguished from spectra with small amounts of Sn in the crystal lattice and consequently report to Sn-bearing iron oxide minerals. XRD recognizes the cassiterite itself (0.8 Usually, mineral identification by MLA (and similar automated mineralogy systems) is based on mineral reference lists in which an EDX reference spectrum is used to link to information about density and elemental composition. Although this approach yields satisfactory results in many cases ( The differences between the Our study illustrates that the proposed modified approach towards mineral identification will lead to significant improvement for deportment assessments for complex and fine-grained ores. The modified mineral reference list yields robust information that is a considerable improvement over the conventional approach. We therefore recommend enriching mineral lists by adding mixed spectra to the mineral reference list when dealing with very fine-grained and complex sample materials. We furthermore strongly recommend validating the results obtained in automated mineralogy studies of complex and fine-grained raw materials by quantitative X-raw powder diffraction and bulk rock geochemistry data. Electron microprobe (or similar) advanced analytical tools may be needed for materials where value elements show a complex distribution between different ore and rock-forming minerals (see We would like to thank the