Background
                  Surgical fixation is currently recommended for unstable anteromedial coronoid fractures, but the role of nonoperative management is not well defined. Our purpose was to report the functional and radiographic outcomes of select patients managed nonoperatively.
               
                  Methods
                  Between 2006 and 2012, 10 patients with anteromedial coronoid fractures underwent nonoperative treatment. Outcomes assessed included elbow range of motion (ROM), stability, strength, radiographs, and 3 functional questionnaires, including the Patient-Rated Elbow Evaluation, Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand, and Mayo Elbow Performance Index.
               
                  Results
                  There were 9 anteromedial subtype 2 coronoid fractures and 1 subtype 3. Mean fragment size was 5 mm, with a mean displacement of 3 mm for the subtype 2 fractures. The subtype 3 fracture was 9 mm in size with 1 mm of maximal gap displacement. At a mean follow-up of 50 months (range, 12-83 months), the average ROM of the affected elbow was 137° ± 8° of flexion, 2° ± 5° of extension, 88° ± 5° of pronation, and 86° ± 10° of supination. The mean Patient-Rated Elbow Evaluation score was 9 ± 13, Mayo Elbow Performance Index score was 94 ± 8, and the Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand score was 7 ± 9. All patients had bony union without radiographic arthrosis. There were no cases of recurrent instability or delayed surgical intervention.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Current indications for nonoperative management, based on the results of this study, include fractures that are small, minimally displaced, and most importantly, demonstrate no evidence of elbow subluxation. The elbow joint must be congruent and demonstrate a stable ROM to a minimum of 30° of extension. For selected anteromedial coronoid fractures, nonoperative management is an option that can lead to good clinical and radiographic outcomes.Fractures of the coronoid process have historically been classified according to the fragment size on a lateral radiograph as type 1 (tip), 2 (up to 50% of the coronoid), or 3 (greater than 50%). Operative intervention is typically recommended for anteromedial coronoid fractures, although the evidence stems from expert opinion or small case series. Between 2006 and 2012, 10 patients with radiographically documented anteromedial coronoid fractures underwent nonoperative management by 1 of 3 participating surgeons (K.J.F., G.J.W.K., G.S.A.). Patients eligible for participation in the study were contacted by an independent physician (K.C.) who was not directly involved with their care. After informed consent, each patient's medical record was retrospectively reviewed for demographic information and clinical course. Computed tomography (CT) images were used to classify the anteromedial coronoid fractures according to the system by O'Driscoll et al. We used a nonoperative treatment protocol that is similar to a previously published study. All patients were subsequently assessed by 1 of 3 fellowship-trained elbow surgeons (K.J.F., G.J.K., G.S.A.) within 1 week of injury. Patients underwent a physical examination and a CT scan to characterize the anteromedial coronoid fractures. The criteria applied to identify patients suitable for nonoperative management were (1) a congruent elbow joint seen on plain radiographs and CT scans, (2) a stable arc of active elbow motion to a minimum of 30° of extension with the forearm in neutral rotation to allow early range of motion (ROM) within the first 10 to 14 days, and (3) normal findings with the hyperpronation and gravity varus stress test. Patients who met the prespecified indications for nonoperative treatment were referred to therapy for supervised ROM exercises within a stable arc in the first 10 to 14 days after injury. We are unaware of any validated clinical examination maneuvers for varus posteromedial rotatory instability (PMRI). Typically, we test for dynamic PMRI by palpating for subluxation with hyperpronation of the forearm and the elbow at 90° of flexion (hyperpronation test). In addition, we use a gravity varus stress test ( Patients were seen weekly thereafter for 3 weeks for repeated clinical and radiographic examinations to monitor for fracture displacement, subluxation, or dislocation of the elbow. Active and active assisted elbow flexion/extension exercises with the forearm in neutral rotation were initiated within 2 weeks of injury. Overhead exercises with supine positioning were performed to allow early motion with the effect of gravity to maintain a congruous reduction. Patients returned to the clinic for a study-specific evaluation by an observer (K.C.) not involved with their care. The outcome measures used in this study included 3 functional outcome scores (Patient-Rated Elbow Evaluation [PREE], Mayo Elbow Performance Index [MEPI], and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand [DASH]), elbow ROM, stability, isometric strength measurements, and radiographic evaluation. Elbow motion was recorded using a standard long-arm goniometer for flexion, extension, pronation, and supination, as reported by Armstrong et al. Isometric strength measurements were performed using the Biodex System 4 Pro (Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, NY, USA). Testing was done with the patient sitting, the shoulder in neutral flexion/abduction, and the elbow at 90° of flexion and neutral rotation. Three maximal contractions were performed, and the mean value was recorded for elbow flexion, extension, pronation, and supination. Measurements were repeated for the contralateral unaffected elbow for comparison. Radiographic evaluation consisted of standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the affected elbow. Radiographs were examined for evidence of bony union, subluxation, and elbow arthrosis, which was graded according to the system of Broberg and Morrey. We also reviewed medical records and interviewed patients for the presence of complications, including instability, stiffness, ulnar neuritis, and need for surgical intervention. Descriptive statistics were used to report summary data, including means and standard deviations for continuous data. Where applicable, a paired Ten patients (6 men, 4 women) satisfied our inclusion criteria and were treated between 2006 and 2012. The average age at the time of injury was 49 ± 10 years (range, 28-61 years). Mean follow-up time was 50 ± 24 months (range, 12-83 months). The mechanism of injury was a fall from standing height in 5 patients, a sports-related injury in 4, and a fall from a ladder in 1. There were no open fractures. One patient had a concomitant elbow dislocation requiring a closed reduction. According to the O'Driscoll classification, there were 9 anteromedial coronoid subtype 2 fractures ( The mean PREE score was 9 ± 13, MEPI was 94 ± 8, and DASH score was 7 ± 9. According to the MEPI, 6 patients had an excellent outcome, and 4 patients were rated as good. The mean ROM of the affected elbow was 137° ± 8° of flexion (range, 120°-150°), 2° ± 5° of extension (range, 0°-15°), 88° ± 5° of pronation (range, 75-90°), and 86° ± 10° of supination (range, 60-90°). This corresponded with the following percentages of the contralateral, unaffected elbow: 100% ( The mean affected elbow strength was 38 ± 24 Newton-meters (Nm) of flexion, 34 ± 17 Nm of extension, 7 ± 3 Nm of pronation, and 6 ± 3 Nm of supination. These strength measurements corresponded with the following percentages of the contralateral, unaffected elbow: 82% ( All patients demonstrated bony union without radiographic evidence of elbow subluxation/instability or post-traumatic arthrosis. None of the patients experienced clinical instability at the latest follow-up, and there were no incidences of delayed surgical intervention. Current literature suggests that operative fixation of anteromedial coronoid fractures may lead to better elbow function, even when the fracture is very small. At a mean follow-up of 50 months, the 10 patients in our case series had regained nearly symmetric elbow motion with satisfactory strength and function. It was interesting to note that patients lost approximately 25% supination strength, although this did not translate into poor functional outcomes. There were no instances of instability or need for delayed surgical intervention. Our results coincide with 2 case reports documenting successful nonoperative treatment of anteromedial coronoid fractures. We believe that there are important similarities that may be generalizable to the management of these fractures. Nonoperative treatment can be considered if there is no evidence of static elbow subluxation or dislocation. The detection of subtle dynamic elbow instability is more difficult in the acute setting. However, we used the hyperpronation and gravity varus stress tests to identify and exclude patients who may have had clinically significant PMRI that warranted operative stabilization. In addition, we defined a clinically stable joint if the elbow could actively extend with the forearm in neutral rotation to a minimum of 30° within the first 10 to 14 days after injury. Finally, our data suggest that small, minimally displaced or undisplaced anteromedial subtype 2 fractures can be amenable to a careful, nonoperative rehabilitation protocol, provided that the elbow remains reduced as previously described. These injuries do not involve the sublime tubercle and sufficient medial ligamentous support may remain intact, thereby permitting early rehabilitation while the coronoid fracture and lateral ligaments heal. Unfortunately, we cannot comment on anteromedial subtype 1 fractures because we did not encounter any of these patients in our series, although a biomechanical study by Pollock et al In this study, 1 minimally displaced anteromedial coronoid subtype 3 fracture was treated without surgical fixation ( Although these 2 cases illustrate that subtype 3 fractures can be successfully managed nonoperatively, we caution against extrapolating this treatment strategy to all subtype 3 fracture types, because these fracture patterns lack critical medial and lateral ligamentous restraints and can be unstable. On the basis of a limited sample size, we believe that subtype 3 fractures should be treated surgically if there is any fragment displacement or evidence of joint instability. If patients elect for nonoperative management, the treating physician should use advanced imaging to confirm that the fracture is truly undisplaced before embarking on a careful treatment plan that includes rehabilitation and frequent reassessments to ensure the joint remains stable and that the fracture remains well aligned. In another study, Rhyou et al In our opinion, the role and accuracy of varus stress testing in the acute setting is still poorly defined for patients with anteromedial coronoid fractures. In our study, varus stress was applied using dynamic fluoroscopy in 4 patients, and none demonstrated varus posteromedial instability. However, limitations of fluoroscopic varus stress testing include pain in the acute setting and variability in the amount of force applied by the orthopedic surgeon. Further studies are warranted to document the accuracy and utility of varus stress tests for complex elbow instability. Despite this, given adequate muscle relaxation and pain relief, we expect that many of our patients would likely have demonstrated varus instability; but, similar to the management of an acute simple dislocation of the elbow, nonoperative treatment can be successful in most patients despite demonstrable instability demonstrated under anesthesia. We have also identified a difference between clinical outcomes and in vitro biomechanical results. Pollock et al Our study had several strengths, including the largest series of patients with anteromedial coronoid fractures managed nonsurgically. Despite this, the overall sample size is comparatively small. Additional investigations with multicenter collaboration would further clarify the optimal indications and treatment for this relatively uncommon fracture pattern. Another strength of our study is that all patients were monitored for a minimum of 12 months, with the longest follow-up being 83 months. They all returned for a clinical and radiographic review, completion of functional outcome questionnaires, and objective strength testing. Furthermore, we carefully applied clear and strict inclusion criteria to the patients in our series. Weaknesses of the current study include its small sample size and noncomparative and nonrandomized design. Often owing to fracture comminution, our technique for measuring maximal fragment size and displacement on CT images may produce variability, but this was not directly examined. Additional studies are also needed to better define the clinical tests for varus posteromedial elbow instability and to clarify the optimal rehabilitation after these fractures. Nonoperative treatment may be considered for patients with anteromedial coronoid fractures if they meet all of the following criteria: (1) a concentrically reduced elbow joint seen on both plain radiographs and CT images, (2) a stable ROM to a minimum of 30° of extension, and (3) normal findings on hyperpronation and gravity varus stress testing. The fractures in this study that met these criteria were typically subtype 2, and they were small and minimally displaced. As for any nonoperative management, patients should be compliant with their splinting and exercises and be available for serial follow-up to monitor for elbow instability and fracture displacement. Graham J.W. King received royalties from Wright Medical, which may be related to the subject of this work. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.