In this paper, a 
                        
                           1
                           :
                           10
                        
                      scaled dynamometric wheelset is presented. It has been equipped with two different technologies: strain gauges and distance lasers. The first one is based on the measurement of the wheel deformation with strain gauges and the second one on the measurement of the wheel web deflection with high precision distance lasers. The dynamometric wheelset has been carefully calibrated on a scaled calibration test bench. Several tests have been carried out on a 5-inch gauge scaled track to validate the dynamometric wheelset performance. The measured lateral and vertical forces of each experiment have been compared with an estimation drawn from a computational model of the scaled vehicle. A good accordance between the measurement and the model based estimation is achieved.The wheel-rail interaction is the principal factor that determines the dynamic behaviour of a vehicle, which is why the study of this interaction has become valuable for the scientific and technological community. In the railway industry, the knowledge of wheel-rail contact forces during vehicle operation is considered precious information for any manufacturer or operating company and is also required for vehicle approval. The European standard EN-14363 Railway vehicle running safety criteria are based on wheel-rail contact force magnitudes Nadal’s derailment criterion: It establishes the limiting value of Prud’homme’s criterion: It establishes the track resistance against applied lateral loads. The resultant lateral force on each wheelset must be smaller than ( Roll-over safety criterion: It is obtained from the vertical loads on each wheel of the vehicle. Its magnitude must be above a certain value. Discharge safety criterion: Discharge factor, that is a function of the static vertical load In view of these criteria that are well established within the railway industry, it can be seen that the knowledge of the wheel-rail contact forces turns out to be decisive in order to quantitatively assess the safety of the running of the rolling stock. In this context, several approaches for measuring the wheel-rail contact force have been developed through the literature. Some of them are focus on the indirect contact force measurement and others on the direct measurement. On the one hand, the indirect methods for the measurement of wheel-rail contact forces, are based on a computational model of the vehicle and the measurements of sensors which are representative of the dynamic vehicle response. These types of techniques can be framed within what is known as Model-Based Condition Monitoring (MBCM). Numerous thesis on this field can be found in the scientific literature. One of them is the presented by Wei et al. in On the other hand, methods based on the direct measurement of wheel-rail contact forces can also be found in the scientific literature. They are founded on the utilization of the so-called dynamometric wheelsets, non conventional wheelsets equipped with numerous sensors that make possible the direct measurement of the wheel-rail contact forces as can be found in The determination of the wheel-rail contact forces in the railway industry is generally based on the use of strain gauges which obtain the value of the force by measuring the strain of the points where they are placed. Depending on the position of the sensors used, the following are distinguished: method based on the axle body Dynamometric wheelset based on strain gauges metrological capabilities are studied by Cazzulani et al. An alternative to the strain gauges are the non-contact distance sensors based on laser or inductive technology (Eddy-current) Before its commissioning, any dynamometric wheelset must be submitted to a severe calibration process. The goal of such procedure is to analyse the response of the measuring instruments installed on the wheelset when different forces act on the wheels. In the railway industry, two kinds of calibration facilities can be found: static As an alternative to the methods based on the instrumentation of the wheel, wheel-rail contact force measurement made by rail instrumentation can also be found in the scientific literature. This methodology has the advantage that it does not need any sophisticated acquisition or telemetry system, since the sensors are installed in the rails themselves. Obviously the disadvantage lies in the fact that the measurements can only be carried out discreetly at specific points of the track. This approach is interesting to know, for example, the effect of the passage of the vehicle on track changes or contra-lane areas in urban trains. Song et al. presented in Considering the main aspects of the different approaches presented above to monitor the wheel-rail contact forces on a railway vehicle and the track, the model-based indirect measurement methods of wheel-rail contact forces seems to be an interesting option. There is less instrumentation involved, it is less expensive and more durable in time. The only prerequisite is the necessity of accomplishing a highly precise computational model of the vehicle and the track. The model parameters must be precisely identified to obtain a contact force measure of confidence. The goal of this paper is the development of a wheel-rail contact force measurement system based on the use of a 1:10 scaled dynamometric wheelset. Lateral and vertical forces are measured separately. Two different technologies of sensors, strain gauges and precision distance lasers, whose results are to be compared, have been used for the measurement of the lateral force. The vertical force applied on the wheel is obtained from the measurement of the deflection experienced by the primary suspension. Most of the previous studies on the wheel-rail contact force measurement found in the scientific literature are based on the use of dynamometric wheelsets instrumented with strain gauges that are installed on different locations of the wheel-core or the axle body. However, despite the advantages of the non-contact distance sensors versus the strain gauges for the lateral contact force measurement, just a few of them rely on the non-contact sensors. Thus, through this research, the validity of precision distance lasers as an alternative to strain gauges is to be tested on a scaled dynamometric wheelset. In addition, taking into account that it is not always easy to carry out an experiment on real railroad vehicles or railways facilities, the railways research group of the University of Seville is interested in a made at home experimental contact force measurement system for its experiments with scaled railway vehicles. Scaled railway vehicles This paper is organized as follows: Section As mentioned in Section In order to have a qualitative idea of the main features of the system, For a better understanding of all the mechanical phenomena that take place on the scaled wheelset when different loads are applied on it, two Due to the reduced dimensions of the scaled vehicle, a single wheel has been instrumented with force sensors. Two different technologies have been selected for the wheelset instrumentation. First, a set of twelve strain gauges (see The strain gauges have been interconnected in pairs, configured as half a bridge. Depending on the wiring configuration the strains measured by each active strain gauge of the bridge can be added or subtracted The following equation states the strain measured by the internal and external strain gauges that compose one of the strain bridges: Considering that the external load applied on the wheel is centred on the tread, the measured strains due to the normal component of the applied force on both sides To complete the lateral force measurement done by the strain gauges, three high precision lasers The two methods presented in this section measure the lateral component The methods proposed by Gómez in The method proposed hereafter is an application of the methods above mentioned to a scaled wheelset. In the algorithm formulation, a linear elastic model of the wheel, six strain bridges connected in half-bridge configuration (each of them with an active strain gauge installed on each side of the wheel), and a combination of lateral, vertical and longitudinal loads applied on the wheel-tread have been considered. The radial strain on measuring point As explained in Considering only the first This can be rewritten in compact form as: The values contained in Eq. The method presented here and summarized as Eqs. The second method proposed for the lateral contact force estimation is based on the measurement of the wheel-web deflection with three high-precision lasers installed in the bearing box of the instrumented wheel as explained in Section  The lateral displacement of the wheel reference diametrical plane can be expressed as follows:    Evaluating Eq. Before its commissioning, the scaled dynamometric wheelset must be calibrated in order to verify that all the installed sensors work properly and their measurements agree with the numerical results obtained from the developed FEM. As part of this research, a static calibration test bench has been designed and manufactured.  The six strain bridges installed in the dynamometric wheelset have been electronically balanced and their gains have been tuned. It is essential for the correct functioning of the algorithm presented in Section A similar procedure has been carried out for the high precision lateral laser calibration. Once again, calibration aims to verify that the experimental deflection measured by the lasers is in accordance with the results obtained from the FEM. Finally, it is necessary to identify the wheel web superficial roughness at the measuring circumferences where the lasers are pointing towards to. The identified roughness functions in Eq. As explained in Section The methods for the lateral contact force estimation proposed in this thesis are based on the premise that the instantaneous normal load applied on the instrumented wheelset does not have a significant influence in the strain gauges and the measurements of the lateral lasers. To verify this assumption, several numerical and experimental tests have been carried out. In all of them, the loads have been applied centred on the wheel’s tread (point 2 in  A similar experiment has been carried out with the real scaled vehicle. The bogie has been positioned centred on the scaled track (see Section The influence of the normal load on the experienced wheel-web deflection has also been analysed with the FEM. The obtained results are depicted in To conclude the scaled dynamometric wheelset calibration, the influence of the point of application of the force on the wheel thread has also been analysed for the strain gauges and the precision lateral lasers. Several simulations have been carried out applying a combination of different vertical, lateral and longitudinal loads. Those loads have been applied on three points of the wheel tread named as P1, P2 and P3 in  An equivalent test has been carried out with the strain gauges to determine how the radial strain varies when the point of application of the forces moves along the wheel tread when submitted to a combination of vertical and lateral forces. After manufacturing, instrumentation and calibration of the scaled dynamometric wheelset, its functionality is tested in a real scenario. The experiments have been carried out on a 5 inch wide scaled track built on the roof of the School of Engineering of the University of Seville (see  A set of six experiments have been carried out on the scaled track in order to validate the robustness of the dynamometric wheelset performance. In those experiments, the vehicle is tested at three different forward velocities of 1.5 m/s, 2 m/s and 2.5 m/s and in both directions of the track. In the light of the results presented in  The goal of this test is to compare the vertical and lateral force measurement carried out by the dynamometric wheelset with the estimation obtained with a computational model. To do that, a complete dynamic model previously proposed by the authors in As previously mentioned, the vertical primary suspension forces on both wheels of the instrumented wheelset are indirectly estimated by the measurement of the primary suspension deflections of the wheelset. To validate the proposed measurement system, the experimental vertical force applied on the instrumented wheel has been compared with the equivalent simulated force obtained by the computational model in In this section, the reliability of both experimental methods used to estimate the lateral force acting on the instrumented wheel is tested. To this end, It is important to note that along the straight segment of the track, from In order to further investigate the force measurement system capabilities, a frequency domain analysis has been carried out with the lateral and vertical force measurements from the experiments and their equivalent results drawn from the computational model. Because running safety criteria calculations on railways are standardized by European norms  This paper presents the design, manufacturing, instrumentation and commissioning of a scaled dynamometric wheelset. The instrumented axle has been installed on an Two different technologies have been used for the instrumentation of the dynamometric wheelset. The vehicle has been tested on a 5 inches wide scale track in order to validate the dynamometric wheelset performance in a real scenario. The forces measured on the vehicle have been compared with the numerical results drawn from a computational model of the scaled vehicle. Applied vertical force on the instrumented wheel has been satisfactorily obtained from the deflection of the primary suspension. Lateral contact force measured by both approaches also agrees with the computational results. In view of the obtained results, it can be said that the strain gauges are a better choice for the lateral contact force measurement since their results prove to be more sensitive than the ones obtained with the distance laser approach. This can be seen when the vehicle passes the large radius curve. In this scenario, the strain gauges are able to detect instantaneous impacts of the wheel against the rail due to the track irregularities. In fact, it has been checked that those impacts have an identical pattern to the irregularity of alignment on the test track. Those impacts seem to be unnoticeable to the precision lasers that capture only the average value of the lateral force at the first curve. On the small radius curve, where a continuous flange contact appears, both methods provide similar results to the computational model. However, from a practical point of view, strain gauge use is more sophisticated than using distance lasers. The quality and accuracy of the measurements obtained from the strain gauge method highly depend on the strain gauges’ mounting precision. An imprecise location of the sensors on the wheel-core will result in an incorrect force measurement. If strain gauges are installed on both sides of the wheel core, it is also necessary to drill into the wheel to wire the sensors. This can jeopardize the security of the wheel if it is not done correctly. In addition, the strain gauges need very expensive telemetry systems to transfer the information from the rotating wheelset to the data acquisition system. Brush connectors are another valid alternative to telemetry but they normally introduce considerable noise on the signals. Additionally, they are expensive to manufacture. It is also important to note that signal processing in the strain gauge method is more sophisticated compared to the precision laser approach. Due to the fact that strain gauges rotate with the wheel, harmonics will appear on the acquired signals and the force calculation algorithm must be able to remove a large part of those harmonics in order to obtain a precise force measurement. On the other hand, distance lasers are installed on non-rotating parts of the vehicle, so they do not need wireless communication. That greatly reduces instrumentation costs even though a single precision laser sensor is more expensive than a complete set of strain gauges. Laser setup is also easier as they only need to be fixed to the bearing box and pointed towards the wheel-web. The only requisite is to position them at a certain offset distance from the measurement surface. That can be easily done, for instance, with a simple slider mechanism. Another important advantage of the distance laser measurement approach is that the lasers are not affected by wheel rotation. That considerably simplifies the force calculation algorithm. In some cases, as the one studied in this paper, the wheel surface might have a surface irregularity pattern, but it can be easily registered during system calibration and later removed from the signal. A clear drawback of distance lasers against strain gauges is the fact that to guarantee a correct performance of the system lasers’ lenses, they must be always free of dust. A simple solution could be a pressurized air jet coming from the vehicle pressurized air system directed towards the sensor lens actuating at regular intervals. The wheel-rail contact force measurement methods presented in this paper have been applied to a scaled vehicle. Nonetheless, they can be extended to a full-scaled system, always provided that an equivalent preliminary FEM study of the wheelset geometry, instrumentation and calibration process is done. Taking into account that the scaled vehicle used for testing does not exactly reproduce the dynamics of a real bogie, the conclusions drawn from this thesis related to vehicle dynamics response, force magnitudes and frequency analysis must not be directly applied to a full-scaled vehicle. However, all the results obtained about instrument setup, uncertainties and precisions can be fully extended to a larger system. Furthermore, considering that the radial strains, wheel web lateral bending and primary suspension deflections in a real vehicle will be larger, these methods will work even better. The authors’ opinion after carrying out this research, is such that non-contact distance measurement sensors applied to vertical and lateral wheel-rail contact forces measurement are an interesting choice against traditional dynamometric wheelsets instrumented with strain gauges. Particularly considering the ease of installation and use of non-contact distance measurement sensors. Finally, the utilization of scale systems represents an easy, inexpensive and safe way to validate different railway computational models, wheel-rail contact force estimation methods or new running safety criteria for instance. The modelling techniques, results and conclusions drawn from a scaled system might then be extended with caution to full scale vehicles. As a future line of research, the presented work can be applied to a full scale system in order to compare both instrumentation technologies when applied loads on the wheels are much larger. In that scenario, researchers hope to find an equivalent performance of both technologies although it is yet to be proven. This research was supported by the