Traditional practice in mine planning often relies on estimation techniques that fail to account for the intrinsic uncertainty of geology and grades, which may have significant consequences in the mine operation. Dealing with this uncertainty has been a major topic in the last years, where different algorithms and stochastic optimization models have been proposed to tackle this issue. However, the increasing complexity of these stochastic models and the use of several simulations to represent the deposit variability impose a computational challenge in terms of resolution times, making them difficult to apply in large data or complex mining operations. In this paper we explore the antithetic random fields approach as a variance reduction technique, to solve a stochastic short-term mine planning problem, aiming to reduce the number of simulations required to obtain a reliable NPV value. The reliability of the result is measured by the variance of the NPV when the problem is optimized with different sets of realizations. Our results show that this technique produces a significant variance reduction in the inference of the expected NPV value in the stochastic problem for a copper deposit application, generating a lower dispersion with a smaller sample size, compared to traditional simulation techniques.Uncertainty has been a major challenge in the mining industry. Almost every decision taken in a mining project has to deal with uncertainty in some way. In the last decades there has been an increasing interest in addressing this uncertainty with new techniques that not only account for a single estimate of the uncertain attributes, but a wide range of possible scenarios of the real deposit through geostatistical simulations. This technique has allowed the planner to make decisions considering how a fixed production plan will respond to different scenarios. But a different question is how to consider this uncertainty during mine planning optimization. This is often addressed with stochastic optimization techniques, which assist the mine planner to decide the best strategy under uncertainty of the parameters such as grade, cost, price, etc. However, the incorporation of uncertainty requires a large number of grade scenarios to represent the true variability of the deposit, which makes the problem prohibitively large to solve efficiently. In this paper we tackle this issue answering the question: Can the number of geostatistical simulations in the optimization problem be reduced, without compromising the representation of the deposit's true variability? To answer this question, we use a variance reduction technique applied to geostatistical simulation, and we prove its effectiveness in a stochastic optimization problem. In the natural resources industry, one approach to reduce the number of simulations is the selection of a small set of simulations that represent the characteristics of a larger set. The final number of scenarios is fixed, based on the computational runtime of the model studied, and the challenge is finding the best subset from the larger set, which minimize some predefined distance measure between both sets based on a relevant attribute of the simulations.  Another approach has been the implementation of variance reduction techniques. These are procedures to reduce the estimate variance without increasing the number of simulations or, conversely, achieving the same estimate variance with fewer simulations tested. This usually requires modifying the simulation algorithm, in order to sample the probability space with fewer runs. A complete review of these techniques can be found in A particular methodology using antithetic variates was proposed by In this paper, we develop an implementation of the antithetic random fields proposed by Mine planning under uncertainty is the process of making the mine planning decision considering uncertainty in the parameters such as prices, grade, etc. A complete review of operations research in mine planning can be found in Uncertainty has been incorporated into the mine planning process by different means. Of particular interest in this work is the stochastic programming approach, which takes into account different decision stages in a stochastic program, to obtain a mining sequence considering the flexibility of changing some of these decisions based on new information. Among these works are a multistage approach proposed by In this paper we test the variance reduction technique implementation in a two-stage stochastic programming model that evaluates the timing of the blasthole grade information in short-term mine planning, and its effect on the NPV considering grade uncertainty. The implementation proposed in this paper is an extension of the antithetic variates technique, which is based on generating scenarios with negative correlation ( If both outcomes are independent, the value of the covariance is zero and this estimator is equivalent to the conventional Monte Carlo estimation. However, if the correlation between both values is negative, the covariance is negative and then the variance of the estimator would yield a lower result. This is the basic premise of the antithetic variates method: negatively correlating each scenario to achieve a lower estimation variance in the response. The negative correlation is then achieved by modifying the simulation process used to obtain the sample. It is relevant to notice that the transfer function must be monotonic to preserve the negative correlation of the scenarios and obtain a lower variance in the estimation of the response. For the current application, we are interested in the expected value of the net present value. The method can be applied in more general cases, to characterize any parameter of the full distribution of possible outcomes (e.g. min, max, quartiles, interquartile range, median, etc.), although the impact of this variance reduction technique for these parameters is not studied in the present work. To apply this technique in geostatistics, we will use the Sequential Gaussian Simulation Algorithm ( In Sequential Gaussian Simulation Algorithm, a standard Gaussian random variable is simulated in a spatial grid, where each node of this grid is visited sequentially in a random order, performing a simple kriging estimation using the previously simulated nodes and the normal scores of the true data to condition its value, and drawing a random number from a Gaussian distribution with mean and variance given by the kriging estimate and variance, respectively, to obtain the final simulated value. Traditionally, to generate This methodology can be applied to an arbitrary number of scenarios, where all of them exhibit negative correlation. For Since we want the lowest possible correlation coefficient From Eq. Then, to impose this correlation matrix to The correlation coefficient A matrix Then, for each node to simulate A tuple of A vector Finally, a matrix of Gaussian random numbers is constructed, Then, to get a negative correlation among For each   For each scenario   The main difference between the conventional sequential Gaussian simulation algorithm and this antithetic variant is that the random numbers are calculated beforehand. Also, the random path is fixed for each To evaluate the impact of the antithetic random fields in mine planning we will use a two-stage stochastic model proposed in In the setting that we propose, we have a set of periods Formally, the problem is described as follows: let sii Eq. The results obtained by the model depends on the set of grade scenarios, Comparison between antithetic and conventional simulation methodologies is based on analyzing the variance between solutions achieved in the optimization problem. Recall that each optimization problem is solved using a number Thus, the procedure to compare the use of conventional and antithetic realizations is: A large number of realizations is generated with each method: For the conventional realizations, 600 scenarios are generated. For the antithetic realizations, the same number of scenarios (600) is generated in sets of The dispersion resulting from solving problem (5) as a function of the type of simulation and their degree of correlation is analyzed. Problem (5) is solved 30 times using samples of size For the conventional realizations, 30 sets of For the case of ARF2, 30 sets of paired realizations are selected for the case of samples of size For the case of ARF10, 30 pairs of realizations belonging to the same set of ARF10 are selected for the case of samples of size A statistical analysis is performed over the 30 optimal values of the objective function obtained in each case. The mean value is an estimator of the true objective function value, while the variance is a measure of the precision of this estimation. Therefore, the performance of the antithetic random fields technique can be measured in terms of the variance obtained in this procedure compared to the variance of conventional scenarios.  The results of this variance reduction technique with and without conditional data are presented, to verify the effect of correlating the random numbers among different scenarios. The non-conditional simulation is performed in a regular grid with 1 m separation between nodes, in a domain of  More information can be gathered calculating the experimental correlation coefficient of every scenario. The model described in Section The results are presented in It can be seen that the mean converges to a value of 19.4 MUS$ for the largest sample size ( Since every type of simulation converges to a similar value, the standard deviation is a measure of the precision of this estimation. As it was expected, the larger the sample size It is relevant to notice that the simulation type that achieves the highest reduction depends on the sample size, In the case of Considering different sample sizes, using ARF10 with a sample size of This kind of analysis raises the question of the minimum number of scenarios necessary to achieve a good representation of the deposit. As it can be seen in A possible extension of the antithetic simulation methodology is taking advantage of the fixed path for each tuple. For a fixed path and neighborhood, the kriging weights remain the same for each scenario, reducing the computational cost of the simulation algorithm. The use of a single fixed path is often discouraged since it can lead to artifacts and poor reproduction of the covariance, but recent research has shown that this effect can be reduced using a larger neighborhood and a multi-grid approach ( An application of a variance reduction technique for a geostatistical simulation framework is presented. This application was successful in generating scenarios with negative correlation in non-conditional simulations, as well as scenarios with lower correlation coefficient than the conventional algorithm in conditional simulation. This led to a significant reduction of variance in the estimation of the expected NPV value for a short-term stochastic scheduling problem, compared to the conventional simulation algorithm. This variance reduction technique could be used to solve very costly computational models with fewer scenarios, although the magnitude of this scenario reduction depends on the optimization model and the deposit variability. We acknowledge the support of the The proposed algorithm is implemented in The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at