Phase-separated metallic glasses in the ternary Ni–Nb–Y system were prepared by rapid quenching of the melt. For Ni-rich alloys, an early stage of spinodal decomposition or an almost homogeneous glassy state is obtained due to a lowering of the critical temperature of the liquid–liquid phase separation near to the glass transition temperature. In-situ small-angle X-ray scattering at elevated temperature gives evidence for ongoing phase separation of the glass prior to crystallization. The structural changes during isothermal heat treatment point to a spinodal mechanism of the decomposition. For glass with low Y-content (5 at%), no indication for phase separation is found in accordance with the composition dependence of the metastable miscibility gap of the supercooled liquid. Upon heating, the phase separated glass acts as a precursor and is the reason for the nanostructure of the Ni2Y-phase formed during the first stage of crystallization.Decomposition and phase separation in the liquid occur in several binary alloy systems due to a large positive enthalpy of mixing between elements like Nb–Y, Al–In, and Pb–Al Recently, we succeeded in preparing phase separated glasses in the Ni–Nb–Y system with a fluctuation length in the nanometer range Pre-alloyed ingots were prepared by arc-melting elemental Ni, Nb and Y with purities of 99.9% or higher in a Ti-gettered argon atmosphere. To ensure homogeneity, the samples were remelted several times. From these pre-alloys, thin ribbons (3 mm in width and 30 μm in thickness) with nominal compositions Ni The XRD patterns of as-quenched Ni  In order to understand the structure formation of the rapidly quenched alloys one has to analyze the phase diagram. In the ternary Ni–Nb–Y system a miscibility gap exists in the equilibrium melt ranging from the binary Nb-Y liquid up to about 60 at.% Ni Phase-separated metallic glasses can be prepared in the ternary Ni–Nb–Y system by rapid quenching of the melt. The microstructure formed is essentially determined by the critical temperature The authors thank S. Donath, M. Frey and B. Opitz for sample preparation. Financial support of the