The past 20 years have been characterised by limited interest in the economic viability of deep seabed mining with the exception of those mineral ores rich in precious metals such as polymetallic sulphides. This paper goes against the tide. After reviewing the most significant literature, it compares the economic feasibility of mining polymetallic manganese nodules and cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts in a scenario of mutual exclusivity. It uses a new indicator, the cobalt–nickel price ratio, whose aim is to verify at what metal prices the net present value of the two mining projects equalises. Previous research has shown that the turning margin between manganese nodules and cobalt crusts is a cobalt price of $50/kg. The present paper revises this by showing that the choice between mining crust and nodules depends on fluctuations in the price of nickel. A Monte Carlo simulation proves that cobalt crust mining could be reasonably preferred to manganese nodules at cobalt prices of $40–60/kg if the price of nickel fell below $11/kg. Within this condition, investors would receive the minimum acceptable internal rate of return of 15%, which is at a level of risk closer to the land-based mining. However, when the price of nickel passes the $11/kg threshold, the equilibrium between the two ventures can be reached only at a cobalt price greater than $100/kg, causing cobalt crust to become uncompetitive. Finally, the paper, recognising that prices are not unique drivers, introduces legal, political, technological and environmental concerns to show that the final choice between the two mining ventures cannot be merely driven by economic issues.Many studies on the economics of deep seabed polymetallic manganese nodules (here manganese nodules) have been produced since the 1960s, along with research on cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts (here cobalt crust), sustained mainly by the high price of cobalt caused by the political crisis of the major African producers at the end of the 1970s. Conclusions about the economic viability of ocean mining, however, are somewhat conflicting, and a clear picture of its profitability has not been drawn. Moreover, the non-materialisation of predicted metal shortages, relatively low-level mineral prices and high projected costs have consistently inhibited nodule and crust mining efforts Owing to this renewed interest in nodules, the object of this paper is to reopen the debate, after years of silence, on the economics of manganese nodules and cobalt crust mining in the context of mutual exclusivity, a condition that makes one mining venture exclude the other in the first commercial phase. Several reasons justify the mutual exclusivity between two mining ventures: firstly, the limited size of the cobalt market (60,000 At present, there are no commercial operations, only mining trials in shallow waters There are recent studies that suggest that prices of cobalt of at least $50/kg are necessary to sustain cobalt crust mining Results are based on cost of mining estimated by Yamazaki for Japanese licensed deposits To present the economic features of a typical seabed deposit, taking as examples manganese nodules licensed to Japan in the Clarion Clipperton Fracture Zone (CCFZ) and cobalt crusts in the outer Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of Japan. To define the lower and upper bounds of mineral prices that would make manganese nodules and cobalt crust economically feasible at an IRR of 15%. To show that the convenience of one mining venture over the other in a mutually exclusive scenario can be explained by the cobalt–nickel price ratio. To strengthen the results obtained in the previous task using a Monte Carlo simulation. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. With the exception of the first positive appraisal reported by Brooks The first study on the viability of cobalt crust mining in Hawaii applied similar conclusions to manganese nodules Notwithstanding the unanimous results, these economic assessments have been characterised by many difficulties, because of the limited information provided by commercial investors on the mining target areas and the technical details of mining systems. Therefore, many assumptions have characterised almost all the feasibility studies published so far Other research has attempted to define the temporal variation in capital and operating costs as well as the differences between land- and marine-based costs, without reaching unanimous conclusions. Through the observation of declining average costs over time, Marsh The uncertainty in establishing exact costs supports the idea of switching to marine mining only in cases of the extreme depletion of land mineral resources, even though it is not fully recognised that metals such as nickel, copper and cobalt cannot be economically mined from the deep seabed until resource exhaustion is not going to affect land-based deposits It must also be recognised that a real change in the technology has not occurred, and this would be a priority, especially if metal prices do not rise. Some new technological ideas can be found in Handschuh et al. The basic costs of carrying out a financial analysis for manganese nodules can be deduced from several studies published since the 1980s  As regards the cobalt crust, the information is less comprehensive, and only a limited number of economic analyses have been published since the 1980s As regards the mineral processing, the same metallurgical methods (smelting with hydrochloric leaching) are selected for both resources, with the production of three metals (cobalt, nickel and copper), while a fourth metal recovery (manganese) is not considered The economic analysis is carried out with a twofold aim. To determine the price range of cobalt and nickel that makes manganese nodules and cobalt crust economically exploitable at reasonable conditions for the industry and, secondly, the turning margin (expressed in terms of cobalt price) between the two ventures when a mutually exclusive condition prevails Besides comparing the results of Yamazaki's cash flow The second objective is to show the most convenient project in the case of mutual exclusivity. Within a more detailed cash flow, similar to that proposed by Yamazaki To define this indicator, the equilibrium condition that makes the discounted net revenue of nodules equal to the discounted net revenue of crust must be imposed: Then, from Eq. This section is divided into three parts. The first analyses the impact of mineral price sensitivity on the NPV of the two resources by The economics of manganese nodules are presented in The differences from the Yamazaki cash flow arise mainly from the specificity of The sensitivity analysis makes evidence of the minimum price of nickel that determines a positive NPV when 2010 mining costs are used. In the scenario with the lowest price of cobalt ($13.43/kg) and copper ($1.37/kg), a positive NPV occurs only if the nickel price is over $22/kg ( As shown in   Using 2004 figures, there could be equilibrium if the price of cobalt was 11.5 times higher than the nickel price, while this ratio for 2006 and 2010 rises to 26.36 and 29.09, respectively. Therefore, the equilibrium price of cobalt should be $159/kg, $580/kg and $786/kg in 2004, 2006 and 2010, respectively. These equilibrium values, caused by the rapid increase in the price of nickel during the 2000s, cannot be feasibly recorded in the future years, given that the average annual price of the series in the past 110 years has been $48/kg, expressed in 2010 USD. From this result, it seems that there is low possibility of preferring crust to nodules in a mutually exclusive mining operation. The robustness of the cobalt–nickel price ratio can be tested by Monte Carlo analysis. Mining costs are assumed to be uniformly distributed, with a lower bound equal to the 2010 average costs reduced by 50% and upper bound equal to the 2010 average costs increased by 50%. The prices of copper and nickel are triangularly distributed (see The simulation is based on 10,000 observations of each random variable. The histogram of the cobalt–nickel price ratio (CNPR, Looking directly at the price of cobalt (PCO, in The distribution of the cobalt sample means, obtained from 1000 repetitions, shows that the 95% confidence interval is $63–84/kg, higher than the real average price ($48/kg in 2010 USD). Thus, there is only a probability of 36% that the average of the sample mean of cobalt price in the interval $30–60/kg (the price range commonly recorded) is sufficient to determine the equilibrium between cobalt crust and manganese nodules. However, if the modal value of nickel was arbitrarily set up at $11/kg instead of $12/kg, the 95% confidence interval of the average cobalt price at equilibrium would be $37.7–57.5/kg, justifying the proposition that a nickel price lower than $11/kg could be the requirement for cobalt crust to be exploited first This paper revises the economics of manganese nodules and cobalt crust, focusing mainly on the relative effects of the prices of the two most important minerals (nickel and cobalt), in a scenario of mutual exclusivity. Manganese nodules and cobalt crust mining ventures compete with each other in metal production: when one enters a mining operation, the other one may lose the chance for development. This condition of mutual exclusivity Two different models have been employed to define the price requirements of viable economic mining and the equilibrium between the two resources. The results reinforce each other. The sensitivity analysis carried out under Eq. These figures confirm that nodules mining could become economically viable assuming that the overall required profit levels could be reduced from an IRR of 30% to 15% as those for land mining have When a mutually exclusive scenario is assumed, the cobalt–nickel price ratio seems more appropriate to describe the profitability of the two resources. This indicator partially reproduces the results found in the literature To obtain more robust results a Monte Carlo simulation was employed in a cautionary scenario where the extreme prices of the times series of nickel, occurring with low frequency, were not considered. Nevertheless, the average price of cobalt at equilibrium ($72/kg) remains much higher than the recorded price if the nickel price of $12/kg (modal value of the past 110 years) is assumed. Only when a price of $11/kg is chosen will the turning margin between crust and nodules be achieved at price of $40–60/kg for cobalt (95% confidence interval). Combining the results from the cobalt–nickel price ratio with the outcome of the sensitivity analysis carried out under Eq. Although the present paper focuses on the economics of seabed mining, other drawbacks may address the choice of the first commercial mining ventures. Complex legal requirements in the Area, the ocean floor that is beyond national jurisdiction and is under the stewardship of the International Seabed Authority (ISA), where nodules are found, may slow down the transition from exploration to commercial phase in favour of those deposits, such as crusts, that can be recovered in territorial waters. Mineral resources in the Area are considered a Other issues influencing project economics are the environmental consequences related to the direct and indirect impacts of seabed mining The final consideration regards the transition from land to marine mineral extraction. Land scarcity and high prices will be the signal to change our way of production In the case of entry into the market of marine minerals, a drop in prices is expected This study shows better opportunities for manganese nodules than for cobalt crust within the perspective of a 15% IRR. This low rate clarifies why the ISA has issued only licences for exploration, not production, and all for nodules, and all to governmental or quasi-governmental agencies (of China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Russia, South Korea and an Eastern European consortium) The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful critical comments on a draft of this paper discussed during the Ocean Mining Symposium held on 21st–24th June 2011 in Maui. Particular thanks to Prof. J. Chang, president of the Ocean Mining Symposium, and Prof. K.H. Park, metallurgist at the Korean Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources. Finally, we are indebted to all who participated to the internal debates, during informal meetings held at National Oceanography Centre, Southampton, within the UNCLOS Group. Finally, our gratitude to Dr. Russell Wynn, head of the Marine Geoscience Group at National Oceanography Centre for a last reading of the manuscript. See