Air recovery, or the fraction of air entering a cell that overflows the cell lip as unburst bubbles, is an important measure of froth stability as it affects the flow of bubble surface to the concentrate. An experimental campaign was carried out over the first four cells of the rougher bank at a South African platinum mine in order to find the relationship between froth stability and flotation performance as a function of air flowrate.
                  The results showed that a peak in air recovery was observed as the air rate increased. Furthermore, this corresponded to the air flowrate at which the highest overall recovery was obtained. This can be explained by understanding the resulting changes in the structural features of the froth such as bubble loading and the flow of bubble surface and suggests that improved flotation performance can be achieved by operating a bank under conditions that result in a maximum in froth stability.Froth stability and structure are known to play a significant role in flotation performance. Recent studies have shown that changes in concentrate grade and recovery can be linked to changes in froth stability as operating parameters are varied ( In recent years, the importance of cell air rate in determining the flotation performance has been the focus of much research; in particular several studies ( The work of They found that the ‘increasing–decreasing’ profile resulted in a higher grade at the end of the combined rougher-scavenger bank than either the ‘as found’ or ‘decreasing–increasing’ profiles for the same recovery. Additionally, they showed that by the final cell in the rougher bank, not only did the ‘increasing’ profile across the rougher stage yield a higher cumulative grade than either the ‘as found’ or ‘decreasing’ profiles; it also resulted in a higher cumulative recovery.  The effect of changing the air profile on flotation performance was simulated by Whilst these studies have underlined the importance of air profile over a bank of cells in determining the bank flotation performance, there remains a need to understand the link between air flowrate and froth stability, and the resulting effect on flotation performance. In contrast to previous experimental studies, in this work the total volume of air to the bank is not kept constant, and the work does not seek to find the optimum air profile to the bank; rather, the chief aim is to explain changes in the bank performance with varying air rate by understanding the changes in the froth structure and stability. Studies by The air recovery,  In addition to air recovery, A technique for measuring the solids loading on bubble surfaces was developed firstly by Using this technique, Experiments were carried out on the rougher cells of the primary flotation circuit at BRPM, South Africa. The rougher cells are 70 Samples of feed to the bank, and concentrate and tails for the first four cells of the rougher bank were taken for each experiment. In addition, the design of the cells allowed for the concentrate mass flowrates to be measured. The solids content of the samples was determined on plant, with platinum content being determined by off plant laboratory analysis. The solids loading of the bubble lamellae was measured using the method of In order to determine the air recovery, digital video cameras were set up near the lip of the outer launder above the overflowing froth surface for each of the four cells. Under steady state conditions in each experiment the top surface of the froth was video recorded for off-line analysis using the image analysis software Smartfroth ( The key operational variable manipulated during the study was cell air flowrate. A uniform air profile down the bank was maintained for all experiments. The air flowrate was varied between three levels; “low”, “standard” and “high”, corresponding to 6, 8 and 12 The variation in air recovery down the bank for the three air rates is shown in Considering the cumulative air recovery across the bank of four cells, shown in The effect of air rate on the bank grade and recovery is shown in It is not practicable to show the performance results on a cell-by-cell basis, since the air rate to each cell in the bank was changed simultaneously, resulting in feed changes to cells further down the bank that are dependent on the operation and performance of preceding cells. It can be seen that as the air rate increases, concentrate grade decreases due to an increase in the entrainment of unattached particles, both valuable and gangue. Moreover, the maximum recovery of platinum from the bank is observed at 1.0 The reduction in froth stability down the bank, as mentioned previously, is believed to be a result of the depletion of stabilising hydrophobic particles. The cumulative overflow of bubble surface down the bank for the three experiments is shown in At low rates of aeration, long bubble residence times in the froth and low froth stability result in low overflow rates of bubble surface. An increase in cell air flowrate, hence a decrease in bubble residence time in the froth, combined with a more stable froth lead to a high flow of bubble surface over the weir at 1.0 At low aeration, therefore, the bubbles are more highly coated with stabilising hydrophobic particles, however the froth is less stable. Furthermore, as the bubbles become less coated with particles at 1.0 At very low air flowrates, the stabilising effect of high particle attachment is compromised by the lower froth mobility, leading to the bursting of bubbles before overflowing the weir and a low air recovery. These conditions favour high concentrate grade, since fewer gangue particles are entrained under low rates of aeration ( Conversely, at very high air flowrates, the froth becomes unstable with low solids loading. Although the high overflow velocity ensures a high flow of bubble surface across the weir, the low loading results in a low flowrate of attached solids. High air rates are associated with increased entrainment of unattached particles (both valuable and gangue), resulting in lower concentrate grade. It is the recovery of unattached valuable particles, however, that gives rise to a higher overall recovery at 1.4 At the air rate of 1.0 The effect of air flowrate on the flotation performance of a bank of cells has been related to changes in froth stability. The results show that there is a peak in the stability of the froth as the air rate is varied, measured both using air recovery and the froth stability column. Furthermore, operating at this peak in stability results in improved recovery of valuable material to the concentrate compared with the lower and higher air rates. The peak in recovery of valuable for the bank has been shown to be linked to changes in the froth behaviour and mobility, such as the flow of bubble surface over the cell lip and bubble solids loading. In this study, the air profile to the bank was uniform, and was not optimised cell-by-cell, however the link between operating a bank at the maximum froth stability and improved bank performance shows potential for future optimisation studies. These results have wide reaching implications for the control and optimisation of flotation circuits. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Anglo Platinum and Rio Tinto and the contribution of Nicolas Barbian.