The distribution, dimerization and dissociation constants of dialkylorganophosphorus acidic extractants XYP(O)OH affecting their behaviour in the two-phase liquid systems involving ‘dry’ solvents have been correlated with the properties of solutes and solvents in accordance with the Kamlet and Taft and Leggett models. It has been demonstrated that dialkyl derivatives of phosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids could be regarded as members of the same family of acidic extractants. As a result, the distribution, dimerization and dissociation constants as well as the products of these constants can be estimated from the appropriate statistically valid correlations involving the molar intrinsic volumes and Kabatchnik constants of considered acids and solvatochromic parameters π*, α and β of ‘dry’ solvents. Both compared models are adequate for the analysis and estimation of equilibrium constants of dialkylorganosphosphorus acids; however, the Leggett model has been found as more convenient than the Kamlet and Taft model.The known empirical models of solvation effects in the solutions apply the linear solvation energy relationships The Kamlet and Taft model of solvation effects is one of the most frequently used models. It uses the dimensionless parameters of dipolarity/polarizability ( There are over 170 pure solvents for which the recommended values of Apart from the processes and phenomena occurring in the solutions which are one-phase liquid systems, the model of Kamlet and Taft is also applicable when two-phase liquid systems are considered, for instance, the distribution of organic solutes in the octanol/water, ‘dry’ solvents/water and ‘wet’ solvents/water systems In the previous papers of Apostoluk and Szymanowski, the model of Kamlet and Taft has been used with very good results in correlation and prediction of the mutual solubility and interfacial tension, parameters of adsorption of extractants and modifiers (aromatic hydroxyoximes, higher alkanols) at liquid/liquid interfaces, distribution of homologous series of extractants (aromatic hydroxyoximes, 8-hydroxyquinoline and its derivatives, carboxylic acids, dialkylphosphoric and phosphinic acids) and metal complexes in two-phase liquid systems, also including the systems with mixed hydrocarbon diluents. Within the homologous series, the hydrophobicity of extractants has been found to be a main factor which governs their distribution in the two-phase liquid systems. It has also been demonstrated how the Kamlet and Taft model can be modified, for example, in order to obtain the solution of a particular problem in the form of a single correlation, valid for all solutes and solvents considered. The simultaneous application of the model with the hydrophile–lipophile balance (HLB) or hard and soft acid and bases (HSAB) approaches has also been suggested Dialkyl derivatives of phosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids have been used for years as efficient extractants in hydrometallurgy of uranium, rare earth and non-ferrous metals The main aim of the present paper is to demonstrate that dialkyl derivatives of phosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids can be regarded as members of the same family of acidic extractants. Consequently, the properties of these extractants in the two-phase liquid systems can be discussed taking into account their hydrophobicity and property parameters of diluents in the organic phase. The equation of extraction of metal cation M The dissociation constants of di( The dissociation constants of considered acids in water differ from those determined in aqueous solutions of electrolytes. The latter depend upon the ionic strength and the type of ionic medium in the aqueous phase. For di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid which is a typical example, the values of its dissociation constant determined at different ionic strengths may differ significantly and as much as 60% difference can be expected Kolarik The distribution constants cannot be determined independently; they are evaluated together with the dimerization constants of considered extractants from the distribution data It should be pointed out that the equilibrium constants of extractants affect not only the metal extraction equilibria, they also play a crucial role when the interfacial phenomena in the metal extraction systems are considered Apart from the previous criticism — — — — For further purposes the additional dataset of dissociation, distribution and dimerization constants of dialkylphosphoric, phosphonic and phosphinic acids has been chosen from the reviews, handbooks and monographs Both KTM and LM linear multiparametric models For six dialkylphosphoric acids, namely, DEPA, DBPA, DPPA, DHxPA, D2EHPA and DOPA, the following correlations have been derived: The term containing parameter Σ It is noteworthy that the standard deviation of correlations obtained for the dimerization constants is much higher than the standard deviations of correlations derived for the products of constants The obtained results prove that each property of six dialkylphosphoric acids in 14 two-phase liquid systems can be described by means of a single correlation equation. They also confirm the general conclusion Having in mind the branched structure of alkyl chains in D2EHPA a question arises from the fact that the distribution and dimerization constants of this acid in four systems with solvating diluents (4-methyl-2-pentanone, benzene, toluene and nitrobenzene) were analyzed by Sastre et al. The set of data in A question arises from the absence of monoalkyl esters of phosphonic acids in the analyzed set of data. The lack in literature of the appropriate data for dialkylphosphonic acids in the system benzene/water makes any deeper discussion impossible. For instance, for 2-isopropyl-5-methylhexylester of methylphosphonic acid in the system benzene/water the following values of p The set of data in The derived correlations do not involve the contribution of The results obtained confirm that each equilibrium constant of dialkylphosphoric and phosphinic acids in the systems with different diluents in the organic phase and the same composition and ionic strength in the aqueous phase can be described by means of a single correlation equation involving the contributions of property parameters of solvents and solutes, respectively (see Among different XYP(O)OH extractants the most important are those commercially available and widely used in hydrometallurgy, namely, di(2-ethylhexyl) derivatives of phosphoric (D2EHPA), phosphonic (PC-88A) and phosphinic (PIA-8, P229) acids and di(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272). The branched C For practical purposes the extractants could be dissolved in various commercial hydrocarbon diluents, for example, aliphatic kerosene or Solvesso-150 with 97% content of aromatics The final comparison of different dialkylorganophosphorus acidic XYP(O)OH extractants in the systems with aqueous solutions of electrolytes ( It has been shown that both compared models of solvent effects are adequate for the analysis and estimation of equilibrium constants of XYP(O)OH extractants in the two-phase liquid systems. The Leggett model has been found as more convenient than the Kamlet and Taft model. The origin of this effect can be attributed to the cavity term contribution which is usually nil in the correlations obtained with the model of Kamlet and Taft and statistically significant in the correlation derived by means of the Leggett model. However, the diluents in the organic phase of 14 considered two-phase liquid systems are essentially ‘dry’ solvents. This is the case when the water content in water-saturated solvents does not exceed 13% (mol/mol). Therefore, the conclusion cannot as yet be related to the systems involving XYP(O)OH and ‘wet’ diluents. On the other hand, for the proper application of the Kamlet and Taft model, the property parameters It should be mentioned that the Abraham model The work of W.A. and M.M. has been sponsored by University Grant PW/W-3 342131. The work of B.G. was supported by KBN Grant 3TO9B 02712. J.S. thanks for KBN donation DS 32/221/99.