In the context of the international experimental campaign Hygroscopic Aerosols to Cloud Droplets (HygrA-CD, 15 May to 22 June 2014), dry aerosol size distributions were measured at Demokritos station (DEM) using a Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer (SMPS) in the size range from 10 to 550nm (electrical mobility diameter), and an Optical Particle Counter (OPC model Grimm 107 operating at the laser wavelength of 660nm) to acquire the particle size distribution in the size range of 250nm to 2.5 μm optical diameter. This work describes a method that was developed to align size distributions in the overlapping range of the SMPS and the OPC, thus allowing us to retrieve the real part of the aerosol equivalent refractive index (ERI). The objective is to show that size distribution data acquired at in situ measurement stations can provide an insight to the physical and chemical properties of aerosol particles, leading to better understanding of aerosol impact on human health and earth radiative balance. The resulting ERI could be used in radiative transfer models to assess aerosol forcing direct effect, as well as an index of aerosol chemical composition. To validate the method, a series of calibration experiments were performed using compounds with known refractive index (RI). This led to a corrected version of the ERI values, (
                        
                           
                              ERI
                           
                           
                              COR
                           
                        
                     ). The 
                        
                           
                              ERI
                           
                           
                              COR
                           
                        
                      values were subsequently compared to model estimates of RI values, based on measured 
                        
                           
                              PM
                           
                           
                              2.5
                           
                        
                      chemical composition, and to aerosol RI retrieved values by inverted lidar measurements on selected days.The refractive index of a medium is a pure number that describes how fast light propagates through it. The light intensity scattered by an aerosol particle in all angles can be calculated by the Mie theory, provided the particle is spherical, and that its refractive index and geometric diameter are known ( Instruments used for the measurement of the aerosol size distribution have different measurement techniques, each depending on another aerosol property. The Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer (SMPS) measures the number concentration in a range of electrical mobility diameters. An Optical Particle Counter (OPC) measures the optical size of aerosols, which depends on the particle refractive index, geometric size and shape. These quantities are generally unknown for atmospheric particles. Constructing a complete size distribution from 10 In one method, ( The international experimental campaign Hygroscopic Aerosols to Cloud Droplets (HygrA-CD), organized in the Athens Metropolitan Area (AMA), Greece, from 15 May to 22 June 2014, provided an extended record of data on aerosols and their role in cloud formation ( The instruments that were in operation during the campaign included: an SMPS to acquire the particle size distribution of atmospheric aerosol in the size range from 10 to 550 an OPC (Grimm 107@660 an AE33 dual spot aethalometer in order to acquire the equivalent black carbon concentration (EBC) at seven wavelengths (370, 470, 520, 590, 660, 880, 950 an Ecotech 3-wavelength nephelometer to acquire the aerosol scattering and backscattering coefficient at 450, 525 and 625 a Sunset Lab Elemental Carbon - Organic Carbon (EC/OC) measurement instrument. The instrument acquires one measurement every 3 a Droplet Measurement Technologies (DMT) streamwise thermal-gradient CCN counter. Throughout the campaign, the instrument was operated at a total flow rate of 0.5 LPM, with a sheath-to-aerosol flow ratio of 10:1, and a top-bottom column difference, a multi-wavelength Raman lidar system (EOLE) deployed at the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) (37.97 Inlet aerosol flows are dried to relative humidity (RH) below 40%, while particle losses due to diffusion in the pipe lines are calculated and corrected for SMPS. Other losses are not corrected for the OPC and the SMPS, as their inlet line is vertical and therefore losses in the size range 0.2–1 The analysis of An accredited according to EN14902 high-resolution energy dispersive X-Ray fluorescence spectrometer Epsilon 5 by PANanalytical (XRF). Epsilon 5 is constructed with optimized Cartesian-geometrical design for lower background and with extended K line excitation 100 Ion Chromatography (IC). The concentrations of The aerosol particle's scattering process is described by four amplitude functions, where x is the size parameter ( The following assumptions apply for OPC measurements: Absorption is negligible and particles are spherical. The aerosol is internally mixed. The size distribution measured by the OPC represents particles of sizes equivalent to those corresponding to PSL spheres with a real part of refractive index equal to 1.585 at 660 The fitting procedure consists of several steps. In the first step, the algorithm assumes that RI can range from 1.3 to 2.2 in steps of 0.1 (i.e. 1.3, 1.4, etc.). For these refractive indices, the Grimm size distribution is recalculated for size bins corresponding to SMPS. The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the difference between the SMSP and OPC number size distributions (NSD) is calculated: where n is the number of size bins in the overlapping range of SMPS and OPC size distributions. Based on the assumptions mentioned earlier for the OPC,  where D is particle diameter, and a,b derived fitted constants. This provides a good approximation in the particle size range from 100 to 1200 In order to invert the OPC size bins particle size for any other RI, we calculate In order to evaluate the method for the ERI retrieval, a series of calibration experiments were made. For this purpose, we generated test aerosol of known chemical composition. Bulk materials were chosen from common chemical species found in the atmospheric aerosol or used in instrument calibration, with RI values according to the literature: Ammonium Sulfate (RI = 1.53@580 Based on the PSL experiment it was concluded that The next step is to find a correction factor for aerosols with RI different from PSL spheres, incorporating all experiments. The final ERI correction equation for the dependence on aerosol RI follows: The calibration procedure, setup, and results in detail are presented as supplementary material. Regression analysis of the literature RI and ERI derived from the calibration procedure, yielded an overall standard error (uncertainty) of The DEM station is a background station and the overlapping range of SMPS and OPC is in accumulation mode, therefore After fitting the SMPS and the OPC size distributions obtained at DEM station during HygrA-CD campaign, we acquire the optimal solution ERI, as depicted in We observe that the original SMPS - OPC size distributions are quite different in these 4 cases, leading to large differences in ERI retrieved. In We have to keep in mind that the ERI is not the actual RI of the aerosol measured by SMPS and OPC, but rather a number describing the optimal solution of a fitting procedure between the size distributions of the two instruments. Aerosol RI could be variable even within each size bin measured by the OPC. We expect it to be closely related to an average overall RI of the size distribution, but the relation might depend on factors like aerosol mixing state and the presence of more than one modes in the overlapping range. The transfer functions of the two instruments and subsequent data treatment, also lead to discrepancies in the size distributions measured. This optimal solution in In order to correct for the relation of ERI to RI, as observed in the calibration experiments, we apply Eq. According to ( In In order to evaluate the In In order to compare Some corrections were however applied to this formula to take into account sea-salt contributions to A filter sampler was deployed at the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) (37.97 The density and refractive index data for the mass constituents calculated are presented in According to ( The aerosol density was computed from the chemical analysis data following ( where The volume-weighted method was used (Eq. where In The 6-wavelength Raman lidar system (EOLE) was operated at National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) (37.97 During daytime, using as input a constant Although full overlap of EOLE occurs at 600–700 Aerosol backscatter coefficient at 355, 532, and 1064 In As indicated in As the sulfur per organic carbon ratio increases,   Overall, the SMPS-OPC system is considered a valuable method so as to estimate real part of RI for ambient aerosol. This is supported by the chemical composition RI ( Further work on the subject should include acquiring detailed aerosol composition of PM1, in order to estimate RI in a size range corresponding to The authors gratefully acknowledge Professor George Kallos, as the dust mass concentration output of SKIRON model was used to quantify the Sahara dust influence on aerosol measurements in the AMA. This research has been co-funded by the EnTeC FP7 Capacities program ( Development of lidar retrieval algorithms was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 