The effect of carrier payload and mixing time on the redispersion of drug particles from adhesive mixtures during inhalation for two different drugs (budesonide and disodium cromoglycate) has been investigated. A special test inhaler which retains carrier crystals during inhalation was used at 30 and 60 l/min. The special inhaler enabled the analysis of residual drug on the carrier yielding so called carrier residue (CR) values. Mixtures with carrier size fractions of 32–45; 150–200 and 250–355 μm, derived from marketed lactose brands, with increasing carrier payload (0.4–6.0% w/w of drug) were prepared. It was found that with increasing carrier payload, the CR increases for the coarse carrier fraction, decreases for the fine fraction and remains roughly constant for the intermediate fraction at 30 l/min. At 60 l/min, the CR decreased for all carrier fractions with increasing payload. The effect of powder bulk properties on the adhesive forces between drug and carrier (during mixing) as well as changes in the balance between adhesion and separation forces (during inhalation) explain the results found. An improved understanding of the different effects is obtained through the recently introduced force distribution concept. The ratio of (mean) separation force to (mean) adhesion force increases with the flow rate. The adhesive forces (during mixing) increase with increasing carrier diameter (higher press-on and kneading forces) and longer mixing time.Interest in the delivery of therapeutic drugs via the respiratory tract using dry powder inhalers is rapidly expanding. For an effective inhalation therapy, micronized drug particles in an aerodynamic size range of 1–5 μm The dominant interaction forces between the drug and carrier particles in adhesive mixtures are Van der Waals forces Stephenson and Thiel In another study, Staniforth et al. In various studies, it has been shown that in vitro respirable fractions obtained from smaller lactose particles are higher than those obtained from coarse lactose particles Various attempts to improve the delivery efficiency of drug particles to the lungs have been made by controlling the particle shape and surface (roughness, smoothness and impurities). Increasing the smoothness of the carrier has shown to increase the fine particle detachment of drug particles In previous studies, the effect of carrier particle size The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of carrier particle size (bulk property) on the fine particle detachment during inhalation, using two different drugs (budesonide and disodium cromoglycate), different carrier payloads and different mixing times. The study was carried out with four different α-lactose monohydrate sieve fractions derived from marketed brands. A special test inhaler Fractions of crystalline alpha lactose monohydrate as carrier material were derived from different Pharmatose types (DMV International, Veghel, The Netherlands) by 30 min vibratory sieving (Fritsch Analysette 3, Germany) followed by 20 min of air jet sieving (Alpine A200, Augsburg, Germany). Pharmatose 100 M was used as starting material for the fraction 32–45 μm, whereas Pharmatose 80 M yielded the fractions 45–63, 150–200 and 250–355 μm. Sofotec (Frankfurt, Germany) supplied two different budesonide samples (due to insufficient material), which is a hydrophilic drug, whereas disodium cromoglycate (dscg; a lipophilic drug) was supplied by Sicor (Italy). A test inhaler, University of Groningen ( Particle size distributions of the starting materials were measured with a Sympatec HELOS compact KA laser diffraction apparatus (Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany), using a RODOS dry powder dispenser (at 3 bar). Lenses of 100 mm (for the budesonide and dscg samples) and 200 mm (for the lactose fractions) were used and calculations were based on the Fraunhofer theory. All data given are the mean of two measurements. The formulations for the carrier payload experiments were prepared by mixing 25 g lactose (from each of the different fractions 32–45, 150–200 and 250–355 μm) with 0.4, 1.6, 3.0 and 6.0% (w/w) budesonide, respectively dscg, in a stainless steel container of 160 cm For calculating the coverage of drug particles onto the carrier crystals, some assumptions have been made. It has been assumed that all particles of each kind are spherical and monodisperse with a diameter that equals volume median diameter (X Homogeneity was determined for 20 samples of 25 (±1.0) mg per mixture. The samples were dissolved in 20 ml of solvent (pure ethanol for budesonide mixtures and pure water for dscg mixtures) and the ultraviolet (UV) adsorptions were measured at 243.7 nm for budesonide and 327.6 nm for dscg, using a Philips PU 8720 UV/VIS scanning spectrophotometer (Eindhoven, The Netherlands). In vitro deposition of the mixtures was tested with a multi-stage liquid impinger of the Astra type (Erweka, Heusenstamm, Germany), using the induction port as described by the European Pharmacopoeia 4th Ed. 2002 with a special coupling flange for the test inhaler. Each impactor stage was filled with 20 ml solvent (pure ethanol for budesonide and pure water for dscg), except for the final stage, in which a 76 mm dry glass filter (Gelman Sciences, type A/E, MI, USA) was inserted. Flow rate through the pre-calibrated test inhaler was adjusted to 30 or 60 l/min on the basis of differential pressure measured at the position of the coupling flange. For the test inhaler, pre-weighted doses of 25 mg were inserted manually. After completion of a series of ten inhalations of 3 s, the drug fractions on the impactor stages were allowed to dissolve for at least 1 h before they were removed for further processing. Prior to UV measurement (at 243.7 nm for budesonide and 327.6 nm for dscg with a Philips PU 8720 UV/VIS), the solutions were clarified by removing non-dissolved lactose particles with a centrifuge (Hettich Rotana, Tuttlingen, Germany) during 5 min rotation at 3000 rpm. Carrier fractions that were retained from the test inhaler after inhalation were treated similarly. The amount of residual drug in these fractions was extrapolated towards 100% retainment and presented as carrier residue (CR). The Fine Particle Fraction is defined as the deposition on the 3rd and 4th stage of the cascade impactor plus the deposition of the glass filter. The theoretical cut-off values of the second stage of the cascade impactor are 12.4 μm (aerodynamic diameter) at 30 l/min and 8.8 μm at 60 l/min. All data given are the mean of two series of ten inhalations. Double-sided adhesive tape was placed on top of an aluminium specimen holder and, after stripping off the protective covering, a small amount of particles was then scattered manually on the tape. The particles were coated with approximately 10–20 nm gold/palladium, using a sputter coater (Balzer AG, type 120B, Balzers, Liechtenstein). SEMs were taken at different magnifications for each sample with a JEOL scanning electron microscope (JEOL, type JSM-6301F, Japan), using an acceleration voltage of 1.5 kV. The volume median diameters obtained from laser diffraction analysis are 1.32 (0.64–2.87) μm for budesonide and 1.73 (0.53–4.28) μm for dscg; the values between the brackets represent the X  The differences in the behaviour of the fine and coarse carrier fractions at 30 l/min can be explained by means of the difference in carrier bulk and surface properties of these fractions. For this explanation, initial percent carrier coverage (with drug particles) and both initial and residual amount of drug per unit carrier surface area (mg/m For the finest carrier fraction, the theoretical coverage of the carrier particles increases from 4.6 to 69.2% (as percent of a monolayer of drug particles) between 0.4 and 6.0% (w/w) of drug in the mixture. For the coarsest carrier fraction, which has a much lower specific surface area, this increase is much higher from 36.2% (at 0.4% drug) to 543.5% (at 6.0% drug), as shown in The much higher residual payload, at 30 l/min, for the coarsest carrier fraction with 0.4% drug (144.6 mg/m With increasing carrier payload, the differences between the carrier fractions increase. The residual payload increases from 23.0 to 166.9 mg/m The reason why the effect of kneading increases with increasing carrier payload for the coarser carrier fraction, is explained with the type of rugosity for this carrier fraction. Generally for marketed lactose brands, crystal irregularity increases with increasing crystal size in terms of coalescence and large surface projections. These mostly large scale irregularities of coarse carrier particles have steep faces against which drug particles may accumulate and where they find shelter from press-on forces during the mixing process. Such places are not necessarily active sites where multiple contact points (with the carrier surface) are possible or otherwise increased adhesive forces exists. With increasing carrier payload, the excess of drug particles relative to the places where they can find protection from the press-on forces during mixing decreases and the kneading becomes more important. At the higher flow rate of 60 l/min, much higher separation forces are generated in the test inhaler, which exceed most of the adhesive (and cohesive) forces in the mixture. Consequently, only a minor fraction of the drug in the mixture is not detached and carrier residues are minimized. Theoretically, the smallest drug particles are not released, as the ratio of removal forces (F The given explanation for the observed changes in carrier residue ( For the finest carrier fraction, only minor changes in the size distribution for the adhesive forces are expected from an increased drug content in the mixture. An increase in carrier coverage results in a better utilization of the active sites. But it may be expected that the increase in the number of strong adhesive forces for the particles attached to active sites is smaller than the increase in the number of particles attached to non-active sites of the carrier crystal. A slight decrease in the size of the adhesive forces is also likely from a gradual increase in drug-to-drug interactions with increasing carrier payload. And finally, a higher carrier payload results in some drug particle agglomeration due to kneading of the particles during the mixing process, although the kneading is not so extreme as for much larger carrier particles. This has been shown previously For the coarsest fraction, changes in the adhesive forces with increasing carrier payload are much more substantial. They result from the high press-on forces occurring during the mixing process ( Scanning electron microscopy has been applied to support the given explanations.  Some additional support for the given explanations (in the previous paragraph) has been obtained from varying the mixing time for a fine and coarse carrier fraction. Using a different budesonide sample (X For the mixtures with low drug concentrations, a substantial increase in carrier residue has been obtained with increasing mixing time (from 2 to 120 min): an increase which is larger for the coarse carrier. For the mixtures with 4.0% drug, the increase is also significant, but less extreme and now in reversed order of magnitude (larger for the small carrier fraction). There is also a clear difference in the CR pattern: at low carrier payloads the increase is ongoing between 10 and 120 min mixing time, whereas for the 4.0% mixtures only a minor increase after approximately 30 min mixing time is obtained. The observed trends seem to agree with the explanations given for the results from the carrier payload experiments. For the coarse carrier fraction at the low carrier payload (0.4%), drug particles can find shelter from press-on forces in the large surface irregularities. Particles accumulate around surface projections, as can be observed with SEM ( For the fine carrier fraction, a certain migration from less to more active sites may also be expected, although the surface irregularities are not of the same large scale as those for the much larger carrier particles. In addition, the kneading of the powder is less violent compared to mixtures with coarse carrier fractions, which is the result of the poor flow properties (lower impact and friction forces during mixing). Thus, the pressing of drug particles against the carrier particles, shifting the adhesion forces to a higher value, is a much slower process which is continued up to 120 min mixing time (again, under the applied conditions). For the coarse carrier fraction, the high drug content of 4.0% equals a theoretical carrier coverage with approximately four monolayers. Therefore, migration of drug particles to sites where press-on forces can be exerted is virtually of no relevance. Instead, kneading of the powder starts from the beginning of the mixing process and has reached its maximum effect after about 30 min under the given conditions. The carrier residue at longer mixing times is lower than that for the 0.4% mixture, because drug-to-drug interactions are predominant (particles attached to the carrier surface with higher adhesive forces are predominantly not detached at 30 l/min). At 60 l/min, when the removal forces are quite high relative to the adhesive forces, more than 90% of the drug is detached for all mixtures after 2 min mixing time. The quite substantial (relative) increase in CR for the low concentration mixtures with increasing mixing time reflects the firm pressing of the drug particles against the carrier surface after long kneading times. The present results show that the carrier residue (CR) strongly depends on: (a) the size distribution (relevant to the bulk properties of the powder) of the carrier crystals used; (b) the carrier payload; and (c) the mixing time, at lower flow rates through the test inhaler used. It was found that a high carrier payload in combination with coarse carrier crystals is unfavorable due to kneading effects during the mixing process. However, a coarse carrier in combination with a low carrier payload (with a short mixing time) can be favorable in combination with inhalers generating inertial removal forces, when drug particles are protected in the carrier surface irregularities against press-on forces generated during the mixing process. The detachment of drug particles from small carrier crystals was found to increase with increasing carrier payload (at 30 l/min) due to the low kneading potential of these carrier crystals (poor flowability during the mixing process), while median carrier crystals showed roughly a constant CR with increasing carrier payload. At 60 l/min, the high detachment forces generated in the test inhaler, in relation to the adhesive forces caused the CR of all fractions used to decrease. A negative effect on the drug particle detachment from carrier crystals was found when the mixing time was increased, the CR increased most for the mixtures with the lowest drug content. Thus, the choice of carrier fraction should be made carefully and not only be based on the carrier surface properties; the carrier payload ratio and the bulk properties of the carrier should also be taken into account.