A new approach was developed to prepare nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) by a post-doping method at 700–900°C. In this technique acetonitrile is passed over pre-synthesized CNTs in a CVD tube so that N (and C) deposit on the CNT surface. Our results showed that no significant change in the morphologies between CNT and the synthesized N-CNTs at temperatures up to 800°C were observed. This indicates that N-CNTs produced by in-situ (contains a bamboo structure) and post-doping procedures (hollow tube) have different morphologies. When the post-doping temperature was increased to ≥850°C, spherical carbon was formed on the N-CNTs. The N-CNT yield and nitrogen content in the N-CNTs increased almost linearly with increasing post-doping temperature, whereas the surface areas of the N-CNTs decreased with increasing temperature due to tube cavity shrinkage and the deposition of spherical carbon. Raman spectroscopy data showed a decreased I
                     D/I
                     G ratio up to 850°C, suggesting a change in the graphitic structures with temperature. TEM-electron energy loss spectroscopy (TEM-EELS) mapping and XPS showed that the nitrogen atoms were homogeneously dispersed on the N-CNTs and they were pyridinic N atoms, quaternary N atoms and N atoms from pyridinic oxide. Fe catalysts supported on both CNTs and N-CNTs (containing 1.75% nitrogen) functionalized under both mild and harsh acid conditions were prepared in order to investigate the effect of the doped-nitrogen atoms on the performance of the Fe catalysts in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS). It was found that the incorporation of nitrogen atoms into CNTs did not significantly change the Fe oxide particle sizes. The Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts prepared under a mild pretreatment had large Fe oxide particles, while the Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts pretreated using harsh conditions presented small iron oxide particles. For Fe catalysts supported on CNT and N-CNT pretreated at mild or harsh conditions, the Fe/N-CNT catalysts are less reducible than the corresponding Fe/CNT catalysts due to the incorporation of nitrogen atoms. The interactions between iron oxides and carbon supports significantly affected the FTS performance: the Fe/N-CNT catalysts have superior FTS activity than Fe/CNT catalysts, irrespective of whether they were pretreated at mild or harsh condition. Furthermore, the pretreatment conditions affected the FTS activity of both Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts and the Fe catalysts pretreated at harsh conditions presented an improved FTS activity over the iron catalysts pretreated at mild conditions.Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a catalytic surface reaction that generates CH In the past decade, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been successfully used as catalyst supports in the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis The conventional method for preparing nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes is to simultaneously add the N atoms in the form of CH We have recently explored the application of nitrogen-doped carbon materials as supports in catalysis The present study is a continuation of our study on Fe catalysts supported on nitrogen-doped carbon materials in FTS. Specifically, nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) were synthesized by the proposed post-doping method using acetonitrile as the nitrogen source. We firstly investigated the effect of synthesis conditions on the morphology of the post-doped N-CNTs using techniques that included N A post-doping method was developed to prepare nitrogen-doped CNTs. This involved two steps: In the first step, the CNTs were produced and purified, then in the second step the purified CNTs were treated with a nitrogen containing precursor at elevated temperatures (700–900 The post-doping process was carried out using the same set-up as was used for the preparation of the CNTs with a slight modification to allow for the introduction of the nitrogen source. In this experiment, the purified CNTs were spread in a boat and placed in the CVD reactor. The reactor was then placed in a horizontal furnace. A bubbler containing acetonitrile was placed in the reactor inlet line. High purity argon was used as a carrier gas and was bubbled through acetonitrile at 78 Iron catalysts supported on both undoped CNTs and post-doped N-CNT-750 functionalized with acid were prepared. First, both the CNTs and N-CNT-750 were treated with nitric acid under two conditions: (i) at room temperature for 2 Then, Fe catalysts (10 The surface area and pore volume of the samples were determined by N The Fischer–Tropsch synthesis was performed in a fixed-bed micro-reactor. Gas cylinders containing H Catalyst (0.5  The N-CNT yield and the nitrogen content in the N-CNTs were calculated after 2 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in an air atmosphere was used to investigate the effect of doping nitrogen atoms on the thermal stability of the synthesized N-CNTs. The derivative peak width slightly decreased with increasing post-doping temperatures up to 850 Raman spectroscopy was used for determining the degree of structural ordering and the presence of defects in graphitic carbon materials. The Raman spectra of the purified CNTs and N-CNTs are shown in It is also observed from Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping was used to obtain the visualization and location of the elements on the N-CNTs. The N1s XPS spectrum of N-CNT-750 was recorded and de-convoluted to gain an understanding of the types of the nitrogen-containing species and the chemical bonding configurations of N in the sample prepared by post-doping method. As shown in Representative TEM images of the N-CNTs prepared via the post-doping method performed at different temperatures are shown in No bamboo-like structures were found in any of the TEM images of N-CNTs as is observed in the case of N-CNT prepared by in-situ synthesis. This means that, the mechanism of N incorporation for N-CNTs prepared by post-doping is different from that of the N-CNT prepared by in-situ growth. As shown in Fig. S3 (Supplementary material), the in-situ growth mechanism of the bamboo-like N-CNTs involved the decomposition of nitrogen-containing hydrocarbon on the catalyst to form carbon and nitrogen atoms at high temperature. Then, the atoms dissolve and diffuse through the catalyst (or move over the catalyst surface) and further nucleate to form the bamboo-like N-CNT structure. However, no catalyst was used in the proposed post-doping method here. Previous studies have shown that the gas phase hydrocarbon can decompose firstly to form carbon rings (pentagonal, heptagonal and hexagonal carbon networks) and secondly to form spheres at high temperature without a catalyst In a number of studies N doped CNTs have been made using an in-situ process, in particular using CH Thus the method used here allows the effect of N doping versus acid treatment on the properties of N-CNTs to be established, since the underlying CNT structure has not been modified in the synthesis process. On the basis of the characterization results, it can be seen that as the post-doping temperature increased, the surface area of the N-CNTs This support was hence used in the FT studies and denoted as N-CNT in the following sections of this paper. Both the purified CNTs and the N-CNT were treated under a mild (room temperature for 2 Elemental analysis revealed that the nitrogen content of the Fe/N-CNT catalysts before and after acid treatment hardly varied (1.75 The XRD patterns of the prepared Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts are displayed in The average crystallite size of iron oxide was measured from the line broadening of the peak at 2 The morphology of the Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts prepared after mild and harsh treatments was investigated using TEM images and data are shown in Fig. S7 (Supplementary material). It is clearly seen that the Fe/CNT-m and Fe/N-CNT-m catalysts have a different particle size distribution from the Fe/CNT-h and Fe/N-CNT-h catalysts. The Fe oxide particles are small and uniform on the Fe/CNT-h and Fe/N-CNT-h catalysts. The difference in the Fe particle size can be attributed to different pretreatments, which resulted in different amounts of functionalized groups on the support surface H The first peak corresponds to the reduction of Fe The catalytic performance of the Fe catalysts supported on CNTs and N-CNTs pretreated under both mild and harsh conditions were evaluated in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) ( It can be seen from The Fe/N-CNT-h catalyst showed the lowest selectivity to methane and the highest selectivity to C It is clearly shown that the Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts pretreated under the harsh condition have superior FTS activity compared to the Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts pretreated under mild acid conditions. The superior catalytic behavior of the Fe catalysts prepared after acid harsh pretreatment can be attributed to the presence of the smaller Fe particles As shown in It is observed that the Fe/CNT and Fe/N-CNT catalysts pretreated under the mild condition have a negligible olefin/paraffin ratio (o/p), while the catalysts pretreated under the harsh condition show significant formation of low olefins. Furthermore, the N-CNT supported iron catalyst presented a higher olefin/paraffin ratio than the CNT supported catalyst, after the carbon supports were pretreated under the harsh condition. This indicated that the doping of N atoms into CNT enhanced the formation of low olefins in FTS. Recently, the production of low olefins through the FTS process using an iron/carbon catalyst has been proposed as an alternative to the production of chemicals and fuels Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs) were synthesized by post-doping of purified carbon nanotubes (CNTs) at different temperatures (700–900 Both CNT and N-CNTs (synthesized at 750 The present study revealed that both the presence of nitrogen atoms and pretreatment methods for N-CNTs are crucial to the FTS performance of the Fe/N-CNT catalysts. The doped N atoms can act as electron donors which enhance the dissociation of CO in FTS and thus increase the FTS activity. However, functionalizing the N-CNT at harsh conditions created more surface functionalized groups to anchor metal particles in addition to the effect of the doped N atoms. Fe supported on these N-CNTs occurs as smaller particles with a narrow size distribution and exhibits significantly improved activity and C This work was supported financially by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: