The increasing demand for palladium for technological application requires the development of ion exchange chromatography. Recently ion exchange chromatography has developed largely as a result of new types of ion exchangers available on the market of which two types are widely applied. One of them are selective (chelating) and modified ion exchangers and the other one are liquid exchangers.
                  Two types of ion exchange resins such as chelating (Lewatit TP 214, Purolite S 920) and cationic (Chelite S, Duolite GT 73) ion exchangers are used for the recovery of palladium(II) complexes from chloride media (0.1–2.0M HCl–1.0M NaCl–0.0011 M Pd(II); 0.1–2.0M HCl–2.0M NaCl–0.0011M Pd(II)). The influence of concentration of hydrochloric acid, sodium chloride as well as the phase contact time on the degree of recovery of palladium(II) complexes was studied. Moreover, the amount of palladium(II) chlorocomplexes sorbed onto ion exchangers, the working ion exchange capacities and the weight and bed distribution coefficients were calculated in order to judge which of two types of resins possesses the best performance towards palladium(II) complexes.In the past few decades, several processes have been developed to recover and separate platinum group metals from synthetic and industrial effluents, including ion exchange, sorption, solvent extraction and related processes, involving impregnant resins and liquid membranes. These are very promising and powerful techniques but some of them are not free from some environmental drawbacks. Liquid–liquid extraction can be used in recovery of PGMs due to the fact that noble metal ions can easily form species which are extractable into an organic phase with various reagents, but a high cost of reagents and the recovery as well as storage of organic solvents during the solvent extraction process could be outweighed by the value of noble metals thus produced. Ion exchange chromatography developed largely although it needs large size equipment and longer process time. Ion exchange resins exhibit lower mass transfer rates compared with those of liquid–liquid extraction. However, the equipment is simple, easy to operate, and there are basically no problems with reagent losses or disengagement of phases. For these reasons and the fact that a large number of new ion exchange resins (cationic, anionic or selective and chelating resins) are produced, sorption and ion exchange chromatography are commonly applied for PGMs. Nowadays very good results have been obtained in sorption and separation of trace and milligram amounts of palladium(II) complexes using chelating ion exchangers. These resins are polymers with the functional groups able to form complexes with selected ions. In contrast to the conventional ion exchange resins, chelating resins combine with ion exchange and complexing reactions, and hence can exhibit high selectivity for some ions or groups of ions, providing a wide range of practical use and industrial applications both in hydrometallurgy and analytical chemistry. The properties of chelating ion exchangers depend on the type of functional groups, though to a lesser extent on grain size and physical properties. Slow sorption kinetics is their undesired characteristics. The most widespread chelating functional groups are: thiol (Duolite GT 73, Spheron Thiol 1000) The second group of ion exchange resins which can be used in recovery of PGMs are cationic resins. It is well known that anionic palladium(II) chlorocomplexes cannot be exchanged into this type of resins. However, it is possible when the resins contain chelating functional groups possessing a donor atom. Leśniewska et al. used cationic resins; Dowex 50 WX-8, Dowex 50 WX-2, Dowex HCR-S, Varion KS (sulfonic functional group), Cellex-P (phosphonic acid functional group) for palladium separation from other interfering ions: Al, Fe, Pb, Zn, Ni, Cu, Y. After elimination of matrix ions the anion exchange sorbent—Cellex-T was used for the separation of palladium and platinum. Of the five cationic resins the Dowex 50 WX-8 is characterized by the best performance Duolite GT 73 was used by Iglesias for recovery of palladium(II) and gold(III) from dilute liquors. The adsorption for palladium(II) was faster but smaller than for gold(III) (Au, 0.58 In the present work, the ion exchange method was chosen as an alternative one for recovery of palladium(II) from chloride medium (0.1–2.0 The choice of chemical composition of solution was caused by the fact that palladium(II) can be brought to the solutions using the mixture of acids, e.g. nitric (HNO Aqueous Pd(II) stock solution was prepared from solid PdCl All other reagents produced by POCh (Poland) were of analytical grade. Four different ion exchangers were tested: Lewatit TP 214, Purolite S 920, Duolite GT 73 and Chelite S. The characteristics of the chelating and cationic exchange resins used in the studies are listed in A laboratory shaker (type 358 S, Elpin The detection of Pd(II) concentration in the eluate is based on derivatization reaction with KI. The reaction is very favoured and leads to the formation of PdI The amount of palladium(II) complexes sorbed onto ion exchange resins, The columns used in the dynamic method were filled with the proper water swollen chelating or cationic ion exchanger in the amount of 10 Chelating ion exchangers are polymers with the functional groups able to form complexes with selected ions. This type of resins combine ion exchange and complexing reactions, and hence can exhibit high selectivity for some ions or groups of ions. Based on the hard and soft acids and bases theory (HSAB), the ion exchangers of the functional groups containing one or more donor atoms such as nitrogen atoms (e.g. N occurring in azo groups, nitriles, amides or amines), oxygen (e.g. O occurring in phosphoryl, carbonyl, phenolic, ether, hydroxyl or carboxylic groups) or sulfur atoms (e.g. S occurring in thiols, thiocarbamates or thioethers) interact strongly with soft acids. Soft metal ions, for instance palladium(II), gold(III), silver(I) ions show affinity for soft bases with donor atoms: O Moreover, it is well known that palladium(II) chlorocomplexes cannot exchanged into cationic resins. However, it is possible in the case of resins containing chelating functional groups such as, e.g. thiol groups possessing donor atoms. For the above mentioned reasons, the ion exchangers (Lewatit TP 214, Purolite S 920, Chelite S and Duolite GT 73) examined in this work can be used in palladium(II) complexes recovery. Considering the 0.1–2.0 As follows from the presented results: the breakthrough curves of palladium(II) complexes ( Moreover, additionally Values of the working ion exchange capacities as well as the weight and the bed distribution coefficients of Pd(II) complexes depend on hydrochloric acid concentration and ionic strength of the solutions in the systems under discussion and decrease with the increasing hydrochloric acid concentration and ionic strength. The best results of ion exchange capacities are obtained in the solutions with small ionic strength (in solutions without sodium chloride—0.1 Capacity drop with the increasing HCl concentration is attributed to a different mechanism of Pd(II) complexes binding. The mechanism of palladium(II) complexes sorption on the ion exchangers under discussion (cationic and chelating resins) can be anion-exchange, chelating (coordinating) or mixed. The anion-exchange mechanism is predominant at high acidities whereas the chelating or coordinating one at low acidities. Depending on pH of the medium, isothiourea groups can occur as free base (1) and acid conjugated form (2) which tend to the acid–base equilibrium. Palladium(II) sorption on the chelating resins (Lewatit TP 214 and Purolite S 920) may be:     The sorption of Pd(II) complexes was also examined by the static method. As follows from the static studies, the amount of Pd(II) complexes sorbed onto the chelating ion exchangers, Lewatit TP 214 and Purolite S 920 is large and independent of hydrochloric acid concentration. The same dependence is observed for all the systems as well as for the cationic resin Chelite S. Different behaviour was observed for Duolite GT 73 which achieved smaller values of The uptake of Pd(II) complexes by the examined resins is a reversible process. Palladium(II) complexes and other soft metals can be desorbed from the cationic (Duolite GT 73, Chelite S) and chelating ion exchangers (Lewatit TP 214, Purolite S 920) using a selective eluant or a mixture of eluants. Desorption of Pd(II) complexes from the loaded resin with the thiol groups (Duolite GT 73) was investigated by Iglesias et al. Acidic solutions and complexing agents like thiocyanate, acidified thiourea (0.5 The selectivity towards palladium(II) complexes of the chelating ion exchangers Lewatit TP 214, Purolite S 920 and the cationic resin Chelite S (however not Duolite GT 73) with the thiol groups is high in the chloride systems. Based on the calculated values of working ion exchange capacity, the affinity series of palladium(II) complexes for the chelating and cationic ion exchangers is as follows: