The extraction of iron(III) from hydrochloric acid solutions has been investigated using a mixed solvent system consisting of tributyl phosphate (TBP) and methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK). The results demonstrate that iron(III) is extracted as HFeCl4 with 2 mol of the solvent. Extraction and stripping isotherms were obtained using the solvent mixture consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK with a typical solution containing 1 M of iron(III) and 2 M of hydrochloric acid. The potential of the mixed solvent system for the recovery of high purity iron(III) chloride from waste chloride liquors of titanium minerals processing industry has been assessed.The management of the waste acidic chloride liquors from the titania industry containing heavy metals represents a major environmental issue, affecting every industrialised country in the world. Although the most frequently employed techniques for the disposal of the spent acid residues involves either the neutralisation–precipitation–discharge sequence or the pyrohydrolysis of the waste liquors to recover hydrochloric acid, these practices are increasingly being questioned because of the environmental consequences related to stocking of toxic solid waste. Further, many valuable metal species are not recovered. Nowadays, the liquid–liquid extraction technique has been increasingly employed to combat the iron control problem in many hydrometallurgical industries Tributyl phosphate and methylisobutyl ketone, supplied by Aldrich Chemical, USA were used without further purification. Distilled kerosene (boiling range 160–200°C; composed of aliphatic hydrocarbons) was used as a diluent. All other reagents and chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade. A Hitachi 220 double beam microprocessor controlled spectrophotometer was used for measuring absorbances. ICP-AES (Labtam, Australia) was used for elemental analysis of the feed and product solutions of the waste liquors of titania industry. An Orion, USA, ion analyser was used for the pH measurements. Solvent extraction and stripping experiments were carried out in separatory funnels of suitable volume at 303±1 K. Preliminary experiments showed that the extraction equilibrium was attained within 5 min. After phase separation, the iron(III) content in the aqueous phase was determined by the standard SnCl As is well known, iron(III) extraction with MIBK is lower than that of TBP at any given acid concentration. Very high concentration of HCl (>6 M) is required to achieve complete extraction of iron(III) with MIBK The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration (1–3 M) on the extraction of iron(III) (1 M) has been studied using a mixed solvent system consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK. The extraction of iron(III) was found to increase with the increase in acid concentration. The effect of hydrogen and chloride ion concentrations by employing HCl+NaCl mixtures on the extraction of iron(III) has been investigated using the mixed solvent system and the results are presented in Based on the preceding studies, the extraction equilibrium for iron(III) using a mixed solvent system consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK can be represented as The above extraction equilibrium is in good agreement with the earlier reports for the extraction of iron(III) from HCl solutions using TBP as an extractant A solvent mixture consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK was used to generate an extraction isotherm for iron(III) from 2 M hydrochloric acid solutions. The McCabe–Thiele plot for a feed solution containing 55.85 g L The developed solvent extraction procedure using the mixed solvent system consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK was applied for the recovery of high purity iron(III) chloride from the waste liquors of titanium minerals processing industry. The typical composition of waste chloride liquor containing multivalent metal chlorides is given in Batch type counter-current extraction and stripping studies were made at laboratory scale using separatory funnels at 303+1 K. The extraction process for the recovery of iron(III) chloride from the waste liquor comprises the steps of (1) chlorination of waste chloride liquor and adjustment of acidity in the feed, (2) selective extraction of iron(III) chloride from the chlorinated waste chloride liquor in three stages of counter-current extraction (aq/org=1:2) using the mixed solvent system consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK, and (3) stripping of the loaded organic phase using distilled water in three stages (aq/org=3:2) to recover high purity iron(III) chloride. The schematic diagram of the process adopted is shown in The present investigations clearly highlight that high purity iron(III) chloride can be selectively recovered from titania waste chloride liquors through a solvent extraction process using a mixed solvent system consisting of 70 vol.% TBP and 30 vol.% MIBK. Further, the problems associated with the TBP and MIBK when used individually for the extraction of iron(III) could be overcome by using the mixed solvent system. This work was supported by Science, Technology and Environment Department, Government of Kerala. The authors wish to thank Dr. G.D. Surender, Head, Minerals Process Engineering Division and Dr. G. Vijay Nair, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Trivandrum for their constant encouragement.