In this study the removal of sulfur and arsenic from a refractory flotation gold concentrate by microwave heating was investigated. The results showed that cooling pattern of the heated products, heating time, temperature and atmosphere had significant effect on the removal of sulfur and arsenic.Primary gold ores are often refractory because the gold is locked (small disseminated particles or solid solution gold) within the sulfide matrix. Pretreatment of the primary ores or their flotation concentrates is usually necessary to oxidize the sulfide matrix and allow leaching reagents (such as cyanide) access to the ‘liberated’ gold particles. The oxidation pretreatment processes mainly include thermal treatment (roasting), pressure oxidation, chemical treatment, biological treatment ( Microwave heating is being developed as a potential thermal pretreatment process, because of its unique advantages over conventional heating and the differences of ore minerals in absorbing microwaves ( The main minerals in the refractory gold concentrate were arsenopyrite, pyrite, pyrrhotite and quartz. The grades of some of the important constituents of the concentrate were 27.58% S, 14.95% As, 31.7% Fe, 20 Microwave heating tests were conducted on 20 Two heating atmospheres were adopted: an oxygen-free atmosphere and an oxidizing atmosphere, respectively. The former prevented the ore sample having contact with the outside air by keeping a lid on the crucible during heating, while the latter allowed air contact by removing the lid of the crucible. Once the microwave power was switched off, the crucible was taken out of the oven to cool to room temperature. The sample in the crucible was removed and weighed, and eventually sampled for assaying and XRD and the DTA analysis. Three cooling patterns were employed to cool the samples heated under the oxygen-free atmosphere. For the uncapped-crucible pattern the crucible lid was removed and the sample exposed to air for cooling. On the contrary, the lid was always kept on the crucible in the capped-crucible cooling pattern. For the half-open cooling pattern a 5 The removal efficiencies of sulfur and arsenic were calculated based on the weights and the grades of the samples before and after microwave heating.  The effect of cooling patterns is attributed to different reactions as a result of different cooling processes, which was discussed by   The removal of sulfur and arsenic from a primary refractory gold concentrate was investigated. The results showed that cooling patterns of the microwave heated products produced under oxygen-free atmosphere affected the removal of arsenic and sulfur. The uncapped-crucible (oxidizing) pattern yielded the highest removal efficiencies of arsenic and sulfur. The removal of arsenic and sulfur occurred only at heating temperature above 400 This work was financially supported by the Fund of Excellent Academic Talent Leader in Higher Education Institutes of Guangxi of China.