Strips of cold-rolled gadolinium have been produced starting from an ingot of 99.9%-pure metal. The rolling has been carried out in a particularly severe regime, the thickness has been reduced 550 times. The rolled strips feature significantly (several times) diminished 
                        Δ
                        T
                      and 
                        Δ
                        S
                      effects, as well as a very large induced magnetic anisotropy, estimated to be between 10 and 15MJ/m3.Magnetic refrigerants are always used in comminuted form. This is because the required rapid heat transfer over distances of several centimeters can only be achieved in a two-stage process combining thermal conduction and forced convection. The former is a slow process and a bottle-neck of the whole scheme; it necessitates a close contact between the solid refrigerant and the heat exchange fluid. This was pointed out in the pioneering work of Brown Cold rolling (or drawing) is a simple and cost-efficient way of producing refrigerants reduced in one (or two) dimensions. The downside is that work hardening may affect the magnetocaloric properties of well-characterized bulk materials in an undesirable way. This Letter reports a rather unexpected and dramatic loss of the Our main experiment consisted of preparation and characterization of cold-rolled Gd strips. The starting material was 99.9%-pure gadolinium metal purchased from Grirem Advanced Materials, Beijing. It came as a 20 Direct measurements of adiabatic temperature change  The trend persists also at other values of the final magnetic field An X-ray diffraction analysis revealed no significant change of structure, lattice parameters, or widths of the diffraction lines in the cold-rolled samples. No foreign phases were detected either, apart from traces of gadolinium oxide and hydroxide (most likely, left-overs of an incomplete descaling after the annealing). In order to gain an idea of whether comminution always results in a depression of the MCE, a number of additional samples were studied. Firstly, a piece of very thin (0.025 The The cause of the drastic reduction of the MCE in cold-rolled Gd becomes clear from This is a very large figure. For comparison, the anisotropy energy of YCo Considering possible reasons of such a strong induced anisotropy in Gd, one can discard right away the mechanism proposed by Chikazumi et al. In our view, the only anisotropy mechanism able to account for such a high energy density is the single-ion one. Thus, e.g., the anisotropy energy of Tb metal amounts to 88 In conclusion, severe cold rolling leads to a significant (several times) decrease of both