The main purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of reaction temperature and NH4HCO3 on the overall performance of a pH swing mineral carbonation. The overall performance of the pH swing process is investigated in terms of carbonation efficiency and product purity. Initially, 2M H2SO4 is used for red gypsum dissolution at 70°C. Then in the second stage, NH4OH is added for increasing the solution pH and removing the impurities from solutions. Finally, CO3
                     2– is introduced to calcium rich solution in the form of pure CO2 and NH4HCO3. The experimental results show that using NH4HCO3 improves carbonation efficiency and product purity. Carbonation efficiency attains a maximum value at 75°C and then decreases gradually with increasing temperature up to 300°C, with both CO2 and NH4HCO3. In this research, CaCO3 with the maximum purity of 99.05% is produced successfully when NH4HCO3 is used as a CO3
                     2– source.Global warming and the consequent change of climate are the main environmental concerns in the 21st century. Huge amounts of greenhouse gases, and in particular CO Carbon capture and storage (CCS) consists of the separation of CO Mineral carbonation, the reaction of metal ions such as calcium, magnesium and iron with CO Red gypsum has received significant attention recently to sequester CO In this study, the effect of reaction temperature (25–300 Initially, H Red gypsum samples were taken from landfills of red gypsum in Kemaman, Terengganu, Malaysia. After sample collection, hydrated samples were dried in an oven at 45 The pH swing experiments consist of three main steps as illustrated in A three-necked glass reactor with 500 Three sets of dissolution experiments are performed in general. Two sets are used for carbonate precipitation with CO The second step of the pH swing process is to remove impurities from the solutions by NH The third step of the pH swing process is carbonate precipitation. In this step, 50 The concentrations of calcium and iron are used to calculate iron and calcium removal efficiency. Eq. Calcium carbonation efficiency is calculated using Eq. The final products are analyzed with FESEM, XRD, and TGA. The composition and morphology of the products are analyzed using a FESEM JEOL JSM-6400 with 20  In the second step of the pH swing process, NH Carbonation efficiency of pH swing experiments is calculated by considering the concentration of calcium and iron in filtrate 1 and filtrate 3. On the other hand, removal efficiency is determined using the values of calcium and iron in filtrate 2 and filtrate 3. The reaction temperature increases from 25 to 300 The pH swing experimental results show that reaction temperature affects carbonation efficiency significantly. The minimum calcium carbonation efficiency is at 25 Similarly, calcium removal efficiency exhibits the same behavior as carbonation efficiency. Initially, calcium removal efficiency increases with increasing the reaction temperature up to 75 On the other hand, iron removal efficiency exhibited different behavior, as it resulted in 100% removal efficiency in all experiments. Due to the low concentration of iron ions before the carbonation stage (iron concentration in F2 solutions), all iron ions reacted with CO The results achieved in this study are comparable with the literature data. Santos et al. ( CO Carbonate precipitation is mainly controlled by the reaction between calcium ions and CO Another observation from the experimental results is that carbonation efficiency is much higher when NH TGA results are used to determine the purity of carbonates. Both calcium and iron ions are successfully reacted with CO CaCO It is stated in the literature that the most common structure of vaterite is spherical, calcite is rhombohedral and aragonite is needle shaped (  The main weight loss of FeCO This study investigated the effect of different reaction temperatures on the overall efficiency of mineral carbonation of red gypsum using CO In general, the experiments conducted using NH The experimental results show that carbonation efficiency exhibits two different behaviors with increasing temperature. Carbonation efficiency increases to a maximum value when the temperature is increased from 25 The carbonation results show that all iron ions prior to carbonation stage are carbonated successfully, which results in an iron carbonation efficiency of 100% in all experiments. High purity CaCO The authors would like to appreciate the Department of Petroleum Engineering, Marvdasht Branch, Islamic Azad University, Marvdasht, Iran for the provision of the laboratory facilities necessary for completing this work. We would also like to thank Dr. Peter Dunning from University of Aberdeen for English proofreading of this manuscript.