Thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) behaviour of a nitrogen-alloyed type 316L austenitic stainless steel under in-phase (IP) and out-of-phase (OP) cycling conditions in different temperature domains has been reported. Tests were performed under mechanical strain control mode, at a fixed strain rate of 6.4×10−5
                     s−1 and a strain amplitude of ±0.4%. It was observed that OP TMF yielded lower lives compared to IP TMF in the sub-creep regimes, whereas the reverse was found true in the creep temperature domain. The variations observed in cyclic lives and the cyclic stress response behaviour under isothermal and TMF were examined in relation to the dynamic strain ageing (DSA) effects occurring in the intermediate temperature ranges. The development of dislocation substructures under TMF cycling was evaluated and discussed in relation to the DSA and creep processes. Extensive carbide precipitation was observed under TMF cycling that contributed to an enhanced stress response compared to isothermal cycling at the peak temperature.Thermomechanical fatigue (TMF) is a widespread cause of failure in components of industrial machinery and structures exposed to thermal and mechanical loads that change with time. In structural materials, loading of a mechanical origin is frequently superimposed on the thermally induced stresses. Typically, designers use isothermal fatigue properties at the peak temperature of the design cycle to compute the fatigue life of the component with an implicit assumption that the isothermal fatigue life at the peak temperature would always yield a conservative lower bound for the TMF life. However, many materials have been shown to display poor lives under TMF conditions 316L(N) stainless steel employed in the present study was subjected to a solutionising treatment at 1100 The cyclic stress response of the materials under both LCF and TMF conditions displayed in general, initial hardening during the first 70–100 cycles followed by well-defined saturation that prevailed till the onset of crack initiation ( The progressive reduction in the difference between the TMF and peak temperature LCF lives seen in The dislocation substructure evolution as a result of mechanical cycling depends on various factors such as the stacking fault energy, the temperature and strain range of deformation and the applied strain rate. Austenitic stainless steels subjected to mechanical cycling at elevated temperature are known to exhibit a well-defined cell structure at ambient and elevated temperatures A greater propensity for the precipitation of carbides was noticed under TMF cycling in comparison with the isothermal LCF carried out at the peak temperature of TMF cycling. The carbides, which were identified by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis as type M Thermomechanical fatigue behaviour of 316L(N) stainless steel was evaluated under different temperature regimes using IP and OP cycling. Creep and oxidation were seen to play a significant role in the damage under IP cycling when the peak temperature of TMF cycling encompassed the creep range. Isothermal cycling at the peak temperature of TMF yielded lower lives compared to both IP and OP cycling. However, the difference in isothermal and TMF lives was seen to diminish with increase in the peak temperature of TMF cycling which was seen to be associated with the dynamic strain ageing effects that operated in the intermediate temperature range. Recovery during the high temperature deformation resulted in a wall structure that evolved into a crude cell formation as the peak temperature of cycling was raised into the creep range. Extensive carbide precipitation, coupled with occasional grain boundary serrations, was observed under TMF cycling compared to isothermal LCF cycling at the peak temperature. The carbide precipitation was believed to be partly responsible for the enhanced stress response obtained under TMF in comparison with isothermal LCF cycling. The authors wish to acknowledge the encouragement received from Dr. Baldev Raj, Director, IGCAR, Dr. T. Jayakumar, Director, Metallurgy and Materials Group, IGCAR and Dr. M. D. Mathew, Head, Mechanical Metallurgy Division, IGCAR, Kalpakkam. Helpful discussions with Dr. V.S. Srinivasan and Shri. G.V. Prasad Reddy, Mechanical Metallurgy Division, IGCAR, are acknowledged. Assistance rendered by Smt. M. Radhika and Shri. D. Natarajan in the SEM and TEM investigations respectively, is also acknowledged.