Errors due to microbial colonization in the rumen (determined using 15N techniques) on neutral (NDF) and acid (ADF) detergent fibres and on the N bound to both these fractions (NDIN and ADIN, respectively) were evaluated using in situ (experiment 1) and in vivo methods (experiment 2). In experiment 1, the ruminal degradation of Italian ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum Lam.) hay was studied in 6 and 72h incubation residues, as well as in a composite sample (CS) representative of the rumen outflow of undegraded feed particles. The colonization errors of ruminal and duodenal digesta samples derived from a mixed diet were controlled in experiment 2. Three double-cannulated wethers (rumen and duodenum) were used in each study. In experiment 1, mean proportions of microbial-N in all tested fractions increased with the incubation time. The lack of correction for microbial colonization led to inaccuracies in the estimates of fibre fractions and its degradability. These errors were dramatic for NDIN, high for ADIN, moderate for NDF and low for ADF. The 15N enrichments recorded in experiment 2 showed large microbial colonization of NDF and ADF in ruminal and duodenal samples. However, estimates based on adherent bacteria probably overestimate this colonization, because evidence of a large presence of free bacteria was also found in these samples. Direct ADF extraction shows a lower efficiency in eliminating microorganisms than sequential NDF–ADF or NDF procedures. Results demonstrate the need for correcting the microbial colonization to obtain accurate conclusions about the ruminal digestion of cell wall proteins. These errors should also be considered when analyzing NDF using in situ and in vivo techniques.Measurements of ruminal digestibility of fibre constituents are usually considered true estimates due to the lack of endogenous components. However, feeds are subjected to colonization by adherent microorganisms during their residence in the rumen–reticulum. Therefore, errors may occur if the fibre isolation methods are not able to remove this colonization. In addition, it is helpful to know the rumen degradation of cell wall associated N, whose estimates may be affected by this potential colonization. Digestion in the abomasum may contribute to microbial detachment and therefore checking the possible residual colonization of fibre in duodenal samples is important to assure the accuracy of Studies were performed in two different experiments carried out using A belated first-cut of Italian ryegrass ( Two incubation series at times of 3, 6, 12, 24, 48 and 72 This equation was used to determine the ruminal outflow in each interval and the weight proportion in which each incubated residue should be included in the CS. The ruminal effective degradability (RED) of the tested fractions was calculated from the concentrations (DM basis) of these fractions in the CS sample ( The applied procedures to measure the particle comminution and outflow rates of the Italian ryegrass hay, the determination of rumen undegraded DM, the correction of microbial colonization, as well as resulting data, are also shown in Three wethers fitted with ruminal and duodenal cannulae, identical to those previously described, were fed with a 45:55 mixed diet of Italian ryegrass hay (chopped at 8–10 The Nitrogen was determined using a Leco FP-528 combustion analyzer (Leco Corp., St. Joseph, MI). An Ankom fibre analysis system (Model 220, Ankom Technology Corp., Macedon, NY, USA) was used to determine NDF ( In the The microbial contribution to all fibre-tested fractions showed large and consistent increases between 6 and 72 The lack of colonization correction led to underestimation of the ruminal degradation, which was large for NDIN and moderate for ADIN ( Mean chemical composition of ruminal and duodenal samples are shown in The Present results showed that the analytical procedures of NDF and ADF isolation do not remove all microorganisms associated with these residues in ruminal samples. This colonization implies an underestimation in the degradability estimates varying with fibre fractions and with the ruminal residence time of feed particles. Both the disappearance of soluble components and the slower degradation of fibre compounds than other feed fractions were responsible for the large increase of NDF and ADF concentrations in incubated residues related to the original composition of the Italian ryegrass hay. However, the decrease of their corrected concentrations between the 6 and 72 The large errors due to microbial colonization recorded for the concentration of NDIN in rumen incubated samples and for the degradation of both NDIN and ADIN highlight the need for correcting the microbial colonization to obtain valid conclusions on the ruminal digestion of proteins included in fibre residues. Thus, the overevaluation of these concentrations due to ignoring this correction in CS was dramatic for NDIN (99.8%), large for ADIN (24.2%), but moderate for NDF (3.34%) and low for ADF (0.48%). The associated underevaluations on the RED of these fractions were 34.1% (NDIN), 8.79% (ADIN), 4.41% (NDF) and 0.51% (ADF). Therefore, effects of microbial colonization should be taken into account in Mean corrected values of RED of NDIN (0.743) and ADIN (0.728) in CS were lower than the corrected RED of total N (0.857) of this same sample ( The higher efficiency for microbial elimination observed with the ADF procedure was due (as probed by the The microbial colonization of fibre fractions has been also shown in duodenal digesta samples. In addition, results supply some evidence that this colonization is not only due to adherent microorganisms but also due to free microorganisms in directly lyophilized ruminal or duodenal samples. The lower fibre concentrations and the higher contents of total CP, especially in the sample of particles, in duodenal rather than in ruminal digesta is probably a consequence of the ruminal physiological mechanisms determining that digesta flowing out of the rumen was mainly composed of fine particles. As indicated above most adhered microorganisms disappear during intestinal digestion. However, as feed particles may be colonized in the large intestine, it would also be of interest to investigate the microbial colonization of fibre residues of faeces, especially for NDIN. The above cited article by The direct ADF extraction showed a lower efficiency to eliminate insoluble protein and/or microorganisms than the sequential NDF–ADF procedure and even than the NDF extraction as shown by the higher values of direct ADIN×6.25 than NDIN×6.25 in the whole ruminal sample (140 The procedures of fibre isolation with detergent solutions do not totally remove the microorganisms adhered to fibre residues of samples obtained from the rumen or duodenum. Therefore, ruminal digestion of fibre is higher than that obtained with these procedures. The residual colonization after fibre extraction leads to large overevaluations of NDIN and ADIN concentrations and therefore to an underestimation of the degradation of these fractions. Therefore, to correct the microbial colonization it seems necessary to obtain more accurate estimates of the ruminal digestion of cell wall proteins. These errors are especially high in The authors disclose any actual or potential conflict of interest including any financial, personal or other relationships with other people or organizations within three years of beginning the submitted work that could inappropriately influence, or be perceived to influence, their work. This work has been supported by the