Based on the available thermodynamic description and experimental diffusivities, the diffusion mobilities of Ni, Cu and Mn for fcc Ni–Cu–Mn ternary alloys have been investigated in the present work. Interdiffusion coefficients for fcc Ni–Mn binary alloys with Mn content up to 60at% and for Ni-rich fcc Ni–Cu–Mn ternary alloys were measured using diffusion couple method combined with Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer (EPMA) technique. During the assessment of diffusion mobilities by means of the CALPHAD method, experimental interdiffusivities for Cu-rich fcc Cu–Mn–Ni alloys were also taken into account. Comparisons between the results calculated using the diffusion mobilities assessed in the present work and the experimental data show that a good agreement has been obtained for the diffusion data such as the diffusion coefficients, concentration profiles and diffusion paths. Thus it is believed that the diffusion mobilities for fcc Ni–Cu–Mn alloys obtained in the present work can be applied for a wide composition range.Alloys containing Ni, Cu and Mn with various physical properties have found numerous applications in wide fields such as electronics and electrical industry The diffusion simulation based on the thermodynamic description and the diffusion mobility permits prediction of almost all aspects of diffusion-controlled phenomena, such as diffusion coefficients, concentration profiles, microstructural stability and lattice plane displacement Sun et al. In Zhang et al.'s work The experimental diffusivities summarized and adopted in Zhang et al.'s work All the critically reviewed diffusion coefficients for fcc Ni–Cu alloys given by Wang et al. Using the diffusion couple method together with EPMA, interdiffusion coefficients for fcc Ni–Mn alloys with Mn content up to 60 The fcc Cu–Mn system was assessed by Zhang et al. Zhang et al. Alloys and pure Ni blocks were prepared in an arc melting furnace in a high purity argon atmosphere. Raw materials were high-purity Ni (99.95 The experimental concentration profiles of the diffusion couples were analyzed by the error function expansion (ERFEX) method as shown in the following equation The interdiffusion coefficients determined from binary and ternary diffusion couples were obtained by the Sauer–Freise For the Ni–Mn binary diffusion couples, according to the Sauer–Freise method, Fick's second law of diffusion can be expressed as, For the Ni–Cu–Mn ternary diffusion couples, Fick's second law of diffusion can be expressed as, Using the modeling for diffusion mobility In the present work for fcc Ni–Cu–Mn system, it is shown that The tracer diffusion coefficient, The interdiffusion coefficient with For a Ni–Cu–Mn ternary diffusion couple where the partial molar volume of each component is assumed to be constant, the rate of compositional change in the diffusion zone can be described by the continuity equation,  In this work, five diffusion couples, F1, G1, H1, F2 and G2, were found to be “Darken-type” couples. For a Darken-type couple, the two concentration profiles from a single diffusion couple determine one main and one cross-diffusion coefficients at the composition of the extreme. The interdiffusion coefficients for Ni–Cu–Mn diffusion couples determined in this work are listed in As shown in The thermodynamic description for Cu–Mn–Ni system obtained by Sun et al. Based on the work by Xu et al.  Liu et al. Zhang et al. In this work, the diffusivities for Ni-rich fcc Ni–Cu–Mn alloys at 1173 and 1373 In conjunction with the Ni–Cu–Mn thermodynamic data, the assessed diffusion mobilities can be used to predict the diffusion behavior of the ternary diffusion couples. In the present work, the interdiffusion coefficients for fcc Ni–Mn binary alloys and Ni-rich fcc Ni–Cu–Mn ternary alloys were determined by means of diffusion-couple method combined with EPMA technique. Based on the available thermodynamic and experimental diffusivities, the diffusion mobilities of Ni, Cu and Mn for fcc Ni–Cu–Mn alloys were assessed by means of the CALPHAD approach. The optimized diffusion mobilities can be employed to satisfactorily reproduce the experimentally measured diffusion coefficients. A further verification of the diffusion mobilities obtained in the present work was also achieved by successfully predicting the concentration profiles and diffusion paths in a series of ternary diffusion couples. The diffusion mobilities assessed in the present work are capable of applying to the fcc Ni–Cu–Mn alloys with a wide composition range spanning from the Ni-rich to the Cu-rich part of the ternary system. The financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 