Spark plasma sintering is one of the best fabrication techniques for producing products with little grain growth and control of microstructures. Ti6Al4V alloy strengthened with 4 vol.% TiN was produced by spark plasma sintering method. In this study, the influence of nanoparticle ceramic addition, dispersion behaviour and interfaces reaction existence on the sintered titanium matrix composite were investigated. The microstructural characterization of the sintered composite was analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) with an attachment of electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique for phases identification. The results show that TiN nanoparticle was evenly dispersed in the sintered composite which resulted in the formation of grains with changes in crystallographic orientations after the addition of nanoparticle material. Moreover, the TKD attempt has been made to reveal TiN interface sub-grains structures formed at the grain boundary during the process of spark plasma sintering.The process of producing low-cost titanium alloys and strengthening mechanism with particulate makes mechanical alloying as one of the relevant techniques that’s resourceful viable and economically useful [ The use of different powder metallurgy sintering methods such as hot press sintering, microwave sintering, pressureless sintering (PS), laser sintering and hot isostatic pressing to consolidate these materials usually brings about the process of grain growth and further has effects on the properties of the ultimate products [ Titanium and titanium alloys are class of material that offers exceptionally attractive combinations of properties which makes them more preferred over other materials in various applications which includes aerospace, biomedical and other modern engineering fields. However, in spite of superior definite strength to weight ratio, excellent corrosion resistance and biocompatibility they possess, strength and hardness are lacking which restrain their use for high-temperature applications [ Ti6Al4V powder delivered by TLS Technik, Germany (purity 99.9%; APS 25 μm) and TiN delivered by Nanostructured & Amorphous Materials, USA (purity 97%; APS 20 nm) were used in their powder form in this study. The powders were mechanically mixed for 8 h using a Turbula T2F shaker mixer in a dry medium. For the process of sintering, the powder mixture of Ti6Al4V +4 vol.% TiN was prepared and sintered using spark plasma sintering (SPS) HHPD-25 FCT model. Thus, the following sintering parameters were used; sintering temperature of 1000 ℃, applied pressure of 50 MPa, at a heating rate and holding time of 100 ℃/min and 10 min respectively. The temperature in the furnace was monitored with a top mounted pyrometer at 3 mm from the die. A cylindrical specimen of 30 mm diameter and 5 mm thickness were produced from the sintered compact. The density of the sintered composite was measured by the Archimedes’ principle with distilled water as the immersion medium in accordance with ASTM B962 standard, while the microhardness test was carried out using a full load of 100 gf with 15 s dwelling time. The microstructures were examined using JSM-7100F (JEOL) scanning electron microscope equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using Philips diffractometer (PANalytical Empyrean PW1710) with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA was used for measurements. The surfaces are prepared metallographic by various methods of grinding, polishing and etching with Kroll's reagent to reveal the microstructures features in better details. Phase analysis of the crystallographic orientation of grains was performed under a high-resolution JSM-7100F (JEOL) scanning electron microscope with EDS and a camera for EBSD. The EBSD microstructural analysis was done at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV, the specimen tilt angle of 70.05° and speed of acquisition was 40.50 Hz. EBSD data recorded a hit rate of 97.39%, this recommends a decent match among both the determined and probing Kikuchi patterns. The EBSD analysis was accomplished using TSL OIM software and ICSD PDF database format. Microstructural studies were further performed using a transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD) in a scanning electron microscope and the samples were cut into a thin foil specimen of approximately 60 nm for allows passage of electrons and to obtain TKD maps with high-quality Kikuchi patterns and indexing rate. TKD analysis was done by mounting the thin foil samples horizontally at a specimen tilt angle of 20.01°, a hit rate of 78.23%, the speed of acquisition was 39.76 Hz and an accelerating voltage of 30 kV to create the Kikuchi patterns.   The densities of the sintered samples decrease upon reinforcing with nanoceramic (TiN) as shown in  EBSD technique was used to further study the exact phase identification and this is presented in The EBSD crystallographic orientation of Ti6Al4V with 4 vol.% nanoparticle-TiN is presented in The Ti6Al4V +4 vol.% TiN composite contained the crystal structure of hexagonal close-packed (HCP) with lattice parameters a = 2.95 Å, c = 4.68 Å while for body-centered cubic (BCC) was a = 3.31 Å; c = 3.31 Å. Slight twinning deformation in The titanium alloys reinforced with TiN nanoparticles interface were characterized to access the degree of grain boundary distribution of nanosized nitride after sintering.  The Ti6Al4V alloy shows microstructures comprising two distinct alpha and beta phases, a lamellar structure with intergranular β and indication of prior β grain boundaries. While upon the addition of nano-sized TiN into titanium alloy exhibited a bi-modal distribution of interconnected equiaxed primary α grains with a colony-type lamellar matrix of alternating α and β plates within small β grains. The addition of nano-sized TiN to titanium alloy results in a refinement in prior-β grain size that can be attributed to the growth restriction mechanism during sintering and TMCs with fine grain size might be prepared by the application of mixing and use of spark plasma sintering technique. Nanostructured grains were observed by means of EBSD/TKD after SPS consolidation and evenly distributed nanoparticle-TiN precipitates were observed at the matrix. Little twinning deformation was observed from EBSD orientation maps provided in the produced microstructure upon the transformation from lamellar into a bimodal structure. The authors would like to thank