Several theories have been proposed to explain enhancement of coal flotation in salt solutions. In this paper, surface chemistry aspects of coal flotation in bore (hypersaline) water were examined using bubble-particle attachment time experiments, zeta potential measurements, cyclic measurements of contact angle and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). The attachment time experiments showed that the bubble-particle attachment in deionized water was instantaneous and independent of the particle size. The attachment in bore water required longer time, which increased with increasing particle size. The cyclic measurements of contact angle on a flat coal surface showed that the coal hydrophobicity as measured by the advancing (maximum) and receding (minimum) contact angle did not change in the presence of salt ions. The zeta potential measurements show that both the coal particles and air bubbles were negatively charged in bore water. The AFM studies showed that bore water reduced repulsive surface forces between the coal particles and air bubbles but had little effect on the force of adhesion. The overall results suggest that enhancement of coal flotation in hypersaline water is not entirely attributed to the surface chemistry aspects as previously proposed.In the 1930s, researchers in the former USSR found that naturally hydrophobic minerals such as coal could be floated in electrolyte solutions without use of collectors and frothers ( The hypotheses discussed above have only partly explained the enhancement of coal flotation performance in salt solution. The aim of this paper is conduct a comprehensive study of the role of salt ions in enhancing coal flotation. In particular, the paper focuses on surface chemistry aspects of coal flotation in bore (ground) water which is frequently used as process water in several flotation plants in Australia ( The coal samples used in this study were obtained from Peak Down and Saraji, BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA), Australia. Peak Down coal is more hydrophobic than Saraji coal. The volatile matter for Peak Down and Saraji coal is less than 22% ( The bore water used for the flotation experiments was received from the MKO plant (BHP Billiton, Australia). The chemical analysis of bore water is presented in The density of bore water was 1060 kg/m The coal samples were crushed to less than 1 mm and classified into three different particle size fractions by a sieve shaker: 0.5 Zeta potential measurements of coal particles were carried out using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern, UK). Measurements were performed by the laser Doppler electrophoresis technique. The 106 In addition to coal particles, electrophoretic mobility measurements of the bubbles were determined using a zeta meter (Rank Brothers, UK). The apparatus and procedures used for the electrophoretic mobility measurements have been described in a previous paper ( Bubble attachment times for coal particles in distilled water and bore water in the absence of collectors were measured with attachment timer device. Three different particle sizes, 0.5 For the Bubble-particle attachment experiments, first, a bubble of about 3 mm in diameter was generated using a micro syringe and then the distance between the bubble and the surface was decreased until the bubble contacted the particle bed using the three-dimensional micro-translation stage and the driver head. Next, the bubble was kept in contact with the bed of particles for a given time from 10 to 7000 ms. Then, the distance was increased to separate the bubble from the particle bed, and the attachment of coal particles onto the bubble was visually observed through the lens and CCD camera on the monitor. Twenty measurements were performed at different areas of the particle bed and the observations were recorded. The bubble-particle attachment time was calculated as the time for which 50% of the observations resulted in attachment (number of observations with attachment divided by the total number of observations). A polished coal surface was used for the contact angle experiments in DI water and bore water. Advancing and receding water contact angles were measured on a given coal surface by the sessile drop method using a PAT-1 tensiometer system (Sinterface Technologies, Germany). Measurements were performed at five locations on the coal surface and the contact angles averaged. Before the measurements, the coal surface was immersed in the liquid of interest for 5 min, and dried at room temperature (22 °C). In this method, a pendant droplet of DI water or bore water was deposited on the coal surface. Then, the volume of droplet was continuously increased to a maximum volume and then continuously decreased to a minimum volume using a syringe pump while the contact area was kept constant. The air–liquid interface was imaged, digitized and fitted to the Young–Laplace equation to obtain contact angle as a function of the increasing or decreasing liquid volume, giving a cyclic loop of contact angle versus drop volume. The droplet volume changed between 6 µL and 21 µL. A MFP-3D (Asylum Research, USA) Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) was used for the force measurements. The schematic representation of the experimental setup is presented in The spring constants of the probes were calibrated by employing the thermal vibration method embedded in the AFM software. The cantilever used in the present set of data was found to have a spring constant of 0.324 N/m. A flat substrate of poly-tetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) was cleaned thoroughly by sonication in acetone, ethanol, and DI water followed by drying with a stream of high purity nitrogen. A drop of DI water or bore water was placed on the PTFE plate with a Pasteur pipette and then an air bubble of 800–900 µm in diameter was attached to the surface within the droplet by injecting air through a Hamilton 5 µL syringe ( Flotation of coal was carried out in bore water as a function of particle size without a frother or collector. The results for Peak Down and Saraji coal are presented in  As seen from The zeta potential measurements of the coal were also carried out in bore water. The pH (unadjusted) of the suspension was about 7.78. The result for the measurement is presented in In addition to the coal particles, the zeta potential measurements of bubbles were measured. The zeta potential values for the bubbles are shown in The bubble-particle interaction in the attachment timer device can be described as the result of three independent steps shown in The Bubble-particle attachment time experiments were carried out to measure the floatability of coal particles in their natural state in distilled water and bore water. The results for attachment time are shown in As mentioned before, the attachment time is normally determined as the contact time at 50% attachment. The attachment time for coal particles in distilled water was very short and could not be determined at 50% attachment, due to the device sensitivity. Therefore, the attachment time in distilled water was obtained as the minimum contact time at 100% attachment. It is evident that the measured attachment time of large coal particles in bore water was significantly longer compared with distilled water. Although there are some studies showing that the attachment time is reduced in NaCl solutions ( Contact angle measurements of a flat coal surface (Peak Down) in the absence of collector were performed in order to determine the relative strength of surface hydration. Experimental results for the advancing (maximum) and receding (minimum) contact angle are presented in The initial step was to examine the behavior of a coal particle interacting with an air bubble in DI water and bore water. It must be mentioned that employing a particle of such unusual geometry in AFM experiments makes quantitative analysis of the force curves impossible. Consequently, the force curves are only qualitatively compared. This procedure has been successfully used before to highlight the presence of the nanobubbles and/or slime removal on ZnS surfaces after methanol treatment (  At large separation distances, the force is zero which corresponds to an absence of interaction. During approach, the cantilever starts to deflect ( Unlike the pure water case, where repulsion was always recorded, in the case of bore water, the long range electrostatic contribution is totally screened as can be observed in Since the retraction force curves could not be recorded, a much stiffer cantilever ( The flotation results suggest that under the present test conditions the coal product can be recovered in bore water without using any frother or collector. These results agree with the earlier findings ( As shown from the zeta potential measurements, the magnitude of zeta potential of coal particles in bore water was lower than in DI water. Previous studies with coal and bubbles showed that at high salt concentrations, dissolved ions, particularly cations such as Na As shown in bubble-particle attachment tests, coal is very hydrophobic in pure water with the shortest induction time for all size fractions, while the induction time of coal in bore water depends on the particle size. According to the bubble-particle attachment time results, coal particles would be more floatable in pure water than in bore water. However, the flotation tests showed the opposite results. Therefore, the increase in bubble-particle attachment time for coal particles in bore water could not have any significant effect on the coal flotation in bore water. These results clearly indicate that the attachment time experiments could not precisely correlate with the flotation behavior of the coal particles in bore water. The Bubble-particle attachment time is related to the long-range hydrophobic interaction between the bubble and the coal particles. The long-range hydrophobic interaction depends on: (i) the hydrophobicity of the coal particles and (ii) the amount the dissolved gas in the medium ( Efficiency of flotation depends on the degree of bubble coalescence ( Results show that coal particles can float in bore water, which contains mostly Na Coal flotation in bore water was also investigated to understand the surface chemistry of coal flotation. The bubble-particle attachment time experiments carried out to measure the floatability of coal particles in pure water and bore water showed that the bubble-particle attachment in bore water is size dependent. Meanwhile, the contact angle values for a flat coal surface in bore water did not change compared to that in pure water. AFM experiments showed that the repulsive force between bubble and particle reduced in bore water. These results provide significant insight into coal flotation in hypersaline water and an important consideration in the development of improved flotation technology for the coal industry. However, additional research is required for a better understanding of the coal flotation in salt solutions which will reduce demands on scarce fresh water supplies. The Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged for financial support through a Discovery grant (AVN). BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA) is gratefully acknowledged for funding the BMA Chair of Minerals Processing at the University of Queensland (AVN) and the coal samples (Mr Ian Brake and Mr Ben Cronin). BHP Billiton Nickel West (Perth, Australia) is acknowledged for providing the bore water samples. We are indebted to Mr Maung Aung Min from the JKMRC, the University of Queensland for helping with the bubble-particle attachment time measurements.