The solubility of calcium sulphate in simulated copper sulphate electrorefining media was determined in experiments carried out on heating and cooling from 20 to 95 °C. In solutions containing 1.5 M H2SO4, the solubility of gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O) decreases with increasing CuSO4 concentrations to at least 1.3 M. In 0.7 M CuSO4 media, increasing H2SO4 concentrations to 1.0 M significantly increase the solubility of gypsum, but higher acid concentrations reduce the solubility. The solubility of gypsum in 0.60 or 0.94 M CuSO4–1.5 M H2SO4 media decreases with increasing NiSO4 concentrations to 0.5 M. In contrast, increasing concentrations of pentavalent arsenic, to 20 g/L As(V), have no significant effect on the solubility. At temperatures >60 °C, where anhydrite is thermodynamically stable, the solubility decreases as the CuSO4 and H2SO4 concentrations increase. In the absence of anhydrite seed, the transition from gypsum to anhydrite begins at temperatures above 60 °C, and is complete within two days at >80 °C. Anhydrite seed significantly promotes the reaction, and complete transformation occurs within two days at 65 °C. In all instances, the densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increase systematically with increasing concentrations of any of the major solution species and decrease slightly with increasing temperature.Approximately 85% of the world's primary copper production originates from the smelting of copper sulphide ores and concentrates. The smelting operation usually produces a matte which is subsequently converted to blister copper, typically containing 98–99% Cu ( In general, calcium sulphate has a limited solubility in aqueous media, and the limited solubility is beneficial in that it restricts the accumulation of calcium and sulphate in the processing circuit. However, the limited solubility also means that calcium sulphate can precipitate throughout the circuit, as the temperature and solution composition change. Furthermore, calcium sulphate occurs in three polymorphic forms; namely, gypsum (CaSO The solubility of calcium sulphate in water has been extensively studied ( The above discussion indicates that the solubility of calcium sulphate in copper sulphate electrorefining solutions is an important parameter, which has not been extensively investigated. To address this situation, a systematic study of the solubility of calcium sulphate in simulated copper sulphate-sulphuric acid electrorefining media was carried out over the temperature range from 20 to 95 °C. That is, the solubilities of both gypsum and anhydrite were measured, and the transformation of gypsum to anhydrite was also investigated. The simulated processing solutions contained significant concentrations of CuSO All solutions used in the study were prepared from reagent grade chemicals. The calcium sulphate dihydrate reagent from J.T. Baker contained 0.09% Mg, 0.002% Cl and < The experiments were done using a 2-L reaction vessel which was heated to various temperatures (± One and a half litres of solution of known composition were placed in the 2-L reaction vessel together with an excess of the calcium sulphate species. The experiments where gypsum was the saturating solid phase were started by heating the charged reactor to ∼ After the solution samples were taken, the reactor temperature was increased in about 10 °C increments, with samples being taken at each incremental temperature. The solution was then cooled in a similar manner to ensure that equilibrium solubilities were determined. Samples of the equilibrating solid phase were extracted at various temperatures for X-ray diffraction analysis. These samples were filtered and washed with a small amount of alcohol to displace the solution prior to drying at room temperature. The densities of the saturated solutions were calculated as a function of temperature from the measured weight of the sample and the volume at temperature as determined from the calibrated pipette. The solubility of calcium sulphate (reported as grams CaSO To assess the accuracy of the experimental procedures, preliminary experiments were carried out using pure water as the solvent. The solubilities, determined in four independent experiments, had a standard deviation of ±  X-ray diffraction analysis of the equilibrating solid phase indicated only gypsum during heating to the maximum temperature; at higher temperatures, anhydrite was detected. On cooling, anhydrite remained the dominant equilibrating solid phase to at least 40 °C, presumably because the hydration of anhydrite is kinetically slow at low temperatures. Thus, the major drop in the solubility of calcium sulphate at elevated temperatures in strongly acid media is due to the conversion of gypsum to anhydrite, which has a different solubility-temperature dependence than that of gypsum.  Although the calcium sulphate solubility decreases with increasing CuSO Both the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves, for the entire range of CuSO  Although the acid concentration has a pronounced and somewhat complex effect on the solubility of calcium sulphate in 0.7 M CuSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets obtained in the various 0.7 M CuSO Nickel is a common impurity in copper electrorefining circuits, especially those processing anodes from Ni–Cu smelting operations or from secondary sources. Nickel concentrations in copper sulphate electrolytes vary widely ( As anticipated, the density of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increases systematically as the NiSO Both the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves, for the entire range of NiSO A second series of experiments was carried out to assess the solubility of calcium sulphate in 0.94 M CuSO Copper electrorefining solutions commonly contain several grams per litre of arsenic, and in some operations, arsenic is actually added to the electrolyte to help control Sb and Bi. Arsenic concentrations typically range from a few grams per litre up to 20 g/L As ( The density of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increases systematically as the As concentration of the 0.7 M CuSO The solubility versus temperature, as well as the corresponding density versus temperature curves, were fitted to second degree polynomial equations (Eq. As suggested by Although the solubility of anhydrite decreases with increasing CuSO Both the solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature curves, for the range of CuSO The data of  Increasing acid concentrations in 0.7 M CuSO The solubility versus temperature and density versus temperature data sets obtained in the various 0.7 M CuSO As shown in  The addition of 10 g/L of anhydrite seed to a system consisting of 50 g of gypsum in 1 L of 0.7 M CuSO The solubility of calcium sulphate in simulated copper sulphate-sulphuric acid electrorefining solutions, as well as the densities of the corresponding saturated solutions, was determined on heating and cooling in a series of experiments carried out from 20 to 95 °C. In all instances, the solubilities increased monotonically with increasing temperature. That is, the solubility maximum at ∼ In solutions containing 1.5 M H Anhydrite is stable at temperatures above 60 °C, and the solubility of calcium sulphate (anhydrite) in 1.5 M H Unlike the solubilities of calcium sulphate, which are sometimes a complex function of temperature and solution composition, the densities of the corresponding calcium sulphate-saturated solutions behave in a consistent and predictable manner. The densities of the calcium sulphate-saturated solutions increase monotonically with increasing solution concentration and decrease in a nearly linear manner with increasing temperature. For a given solution concentration, virtually identical densities are measured regardless of whether gypsum or anhydrite is the saturating solid phase. The implication is that the modest variations in the solubility of calcium sulphate with composition or temperature have little effect on the density of the saturated solution, which is mostly determined by the concentrated copper sulphate-sulphuric acid electrolyte itself. The authors wish to recognize the valuable assistance provided by CANMET staff members J. Wilson with the X-ray diffraction analyses, and M. Harris and I. Lafferty with the preparation of this report. Regression data for the solubilities and solution densities of calcium sulphate (saturated with gypsum) in solutions containing various concentrations of CuSO Regression data for the solubilities and solution densities of calcium sulphate (saturated with gypsum) in solutions containing various concentrations of CuSO Regression data for the solubilities and solution densities of calcium sulphate (saturated with anhydrite) in solutions containing various concentrations of CuSO