Pretreatment of wheat straw with a combination of sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) or sodium hydroxide (NaOH) with oxygen (O2) 0.5MPa was evaluated for its delignification ability at relatively low temperature 110°C and for its effect on enzymatic hydrolysis efficiency. In the pretreatment, the increase of alkali charge (as Na2O) up to 12% for Na2CO3 and 6% for NaOH, respectively, resulted in enhancement of lignin removal, but did not significantly degrade cellulose and hemicellulose. When the pretreated solid was hydrolyzed with a mixture of cellulases and hemicellulases, the sugar yield increased rapidly with the lignin removal during the pretreatment. A total sugar yield based on dry matter of raw material, 63.8% for Na2CO3–O2 and 71.9% for NaOH–O2 was achieved under a cellulase loading of 20FPU/g-cellulose. The delignification efficiency and total sugar yield from enzymatic hydrolysis were comparable to the previously reported results at much higher temperature without oxygen.Besides energy security concerns, the increasing problems associated with CO The production of ethanol from lignocelluloses comprises of five different steps, pretreatment, hydrolysis of hemicellulose and cellulose, fermentation, product separation, and post-treatment of the liquid fraction ( Alkali pretreatments are more effective for lignin solubilization, exhibiting minor cellulose and hemicellulose solubilization compared to acid or hydrothermal processes ( In this investigation, combination of alkali pretreatment and oxygen delignification with a lower temperature (110 Wheat straw ( Enzymes used for enzymatic hydrolysis in this study were cellulase from All the chemicals were analytical grade and purchased from Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. of China and used as received without further purification. The pretreatment was carried out in a circulating digester containing 3 bombs with batch capacity of 80 The pretreated wheat straw samples were refined using a laboratory KRK refiner (Jilin, China) at 3000 Lignin, carbohydrate contents of raw and pretreated materials were analyzed using the NREL protocol ( The composition of the hydrolysate from enzymatic hydrolysis was determined by measuring glucose and xylose using high performance liquid chromatography (Agilent 1200 Series, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a refractive index detector (RID). The HPLC system equipped with a Bio Rad Aminex HPX-87H 20n exclusion column and a Cation-H refill cartridges (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) as analytical and guard column. The column temperature was 55 The composition of raw material ( Weight loss and chemical composition change of the pretreated wheat straw are two important indices for evaluating the effectiveness of the pretreatment. The solid recovery and the pH value of the spent liquor from the treatment with Na The spent liquid generated in this process mainly consists of pretreatment chemical (Na The chemical composition of wheat straw samples was determined after alkali-oxygen delignification treatment. The contents of polysaccharides, lignin and ash (based on the over dry weight of original material) in the pretreated wheat straw at different alkali charge are illustrated in Unlike cellulose and hemicellulose, lignin is solubilized by the hydrolytic reactions and is the primary intermediates in the degradation process. In the case of Na Reaction temperature, time, and the amount of applied chemicals are all important economical and environmental factors in the overall process. As previously reported by Increasing the concentration of alkali resulted in increased delignification, but also degraded polysaccharides to some extent. Carbohydrates are attacked during alkaline oxygen delignification. The alkali-oxygen pretreatment was aimed at fractionating the wheat straw into a solid fraction containing as much carbohydrates as possible and a lignin level that does not hinder enzymatic hydrolysis. The attack increases as delignification proceeds, so oxygen delignification has to be stopped when about half of the residual lignin has been dissolved ( To investigate the optimum conditions for alkali-oxygen pretreatment of wheat straw, overall conversion efficiencies of cellulose and hemicellulose based on the raw biomass need to be considered. The total sugar yield calculated as a percentage of the total mono sugars produced in the hydrolysis on the carbohydrate in the original material is used to express the overall conversion efficiency. The impacts of alkali-oxygen pretreatment at different alkali charge and enzyme loading on enzymatic hydrolysis total sugar yield on the dry original materials of wheat straw are shown in In this work, the highest sugar yield of wheat straw after Na The final sugar yield of Na Generally, it is believed that lignin is one of the major barriers for enzymatic hydrolysis, and the removal of lignin usually effectively improves the enzymatic saccharification ( The relationship of total sugar yield of enzymatic hydrolysis on pretreated solids and lignin removal in Na Alkali-oxygen pretreatment is effective for delignification of straw materials at relatively low temperature. Enzymatic hydrolysis was enhanced with the decrease lignin content. Delignification can effectively improve the enzymatic hydrolysis, but it is not necessary to remove all the lignin to achieve the maximal sugar yield. With Na The authors are grateful for the financial support from