It is well known that mathematical models which simulate comminution processes represent a useful tool in several fields of academic and industrial research, with particular emphasis on nano-material and pharmaceutical production. In the present work a mathematical model which is able to quantitatively describe comminution processes in a ball milling system (i.e., Spex-Mixer/Mill) has been developed. The proposed approach takes into account three different contributions: dynamics of the vial, dynamics of spheres motion and simulation of the comminution process. The vial dynamics has been modelled by taking advantage of an appropriate roto-translation matrix. Model results have been successfully compared with literature experimental data. The spheres motion within the Spex Mixer/Mill has been simulated using a 3D dynamic model based on classical mechanics as well as the so-called discrete element method, which is widely adopted to quantitatively describe multi-body collision behaviour. In particular, existing models of impact with dissipation as well as the classical Hertz impact theory have been taken into account. This part of the global model allows one to obtain, for different operating conditions, the impact specific energy and impact velocity as a function of time. The latter ones represent input parameters for the simulation of comminution processes that is performed through suitable population balances, where different breakage functions as well as appropriate breakage probabilities have been considered. Model results are reported in terms of granulometric distribution of powders within the mixer-mill as a function of time, minimal grain size obtainable and time needed to complete the comminution process for various operating conditions (i.e., mill frequency and charge ratio).In the last years, the demand of ultrafine powders for several industrial applications has increased the interest of scientists and engineers on comminution processes. The latter ones are widely used in nano-materials production, biomedical engineering, drugs activation, mineral engineering, agricultural engineering, microporous catalysts production, pigment production for paints and food processing, etc. Consequently, the need of techniques able to simulate the performance of comminution equipments (i.e., ball mills, autogenous mills, roller mills, hammer mills, etc.) under a wide range of operating conditions is constantly increasing. In fact, even a statistically optimized experimental strategy to increase the efficiency of comminution processes requires significant human and economic efforts. On the other hand, mathematical modelling and simulation codes may represent important and cost-effective tools for predicting process performances, scaling up and optimizing comminution equipments. In particular, an effective mathematical model should be able to properly simulate evolution of grain-size distribution of powders during comminution processes as a function of geometric and operating mill variables (i.e., impact frequency and energetic input) as well as characteristics of milled powders. For this reason three main aspects are needed in the mathematical modelling of comminution processes: (1) evaluation of milling bodies dynamics and energetic inputs transferred to powders, (2) description of the effects of such inputs on powders breakage, (3) description of powders evolution in terms of particle-size distribution. In the past, several models have been developed to quantitatively describe comminution processes taking place in various types of mills. Typically, these models make use of tools known as Discrete element method (DEM) (cf. Along these lines, the aim of this work is to propose a novel model which is able to quantitatively describe the evolution of particle-size distribution of powders in a Spex Mixer/Mill by taking into account the energetic inputs transferred to the powders as well as powders properties. The Spex Mixer/Mill is widely used in several research fields and particularly in the mechanochemical synthesis of advanced and/or nano-sized materials ( All the studies above were focused on the description of the dynamics of the milling media while In a Spex Mixer/Mill, balls and powders are placed in a vial which is agitated at high frequency in complex 3D cycles. In order to simulate the dynamic of the milling bodies within the ball milling equipment, we developed a model which takes into account the motion of one sphere therefore subjected to wall–sphere impacts only. In order to identify when an impact between the vial wall and the sphere occurs, it is required to know position, velocity and acceleration of each point of the vial and of the sphere during the process. For this reason the 3D vial motion has been firstly simulated by considering the apparatus mechanics. According to the scheme, shown in The second rotation, indicated with the symbol The translation vector is defined by the shaft-arm, as it may be seen in By combining the three movements above, the roto-translation matrix, which allows one to simulate the motion of each point of the vial with respect to the inertial system, is then given by Such a matrix allows one to obtain the coordinates of each point of the vial under the inertial system as a function of its coordinates related to the non-inertial system as reported in the following equations: It should be noticed that the same result is obtained by Once the movement of the vial is quantitatively described, the next step is to simulate sphere motion in order to check its possible impacts with the vial wall and to quantify the energetic inputs related to the corresponding impacts. The latter ones are assumed to occur when the following criteria are satisfied: An impact between the An impact between the sphere and the bases of the vial (cf. For the impact simulation, the model proposed by When considering the tangential component When sphere rolling upon cylindrical surface of the vial occurs, also a resistant torque opposite to the rolling motion of the sphere has to be considered. As suggested by Once forces and momenta acting upon the sphere are evaluated, it is possible to express the equations of motion for the sphere By integrating, as described in the sequel, Eqs. In order to make use of the population balances to simulate comminution processes within the Spex Mixer/Mill the following assumptions have been adopted: the powders are uniformly dispersed in the mill; the apparatus is of batch-type; continuous growth of particle or aggregation phenomena are not considered; powder material is considered to be brittle, thus no plastic deformation occurs; the only variable describing the population is the mass fraction Death rate term is obtained as the product of the probability It should be noted that in the approach proposed by By indicating with The breakage probability describes the fraction of particles which is destroyed when they undergo one or multiple impacts. In particular, we assume the corresponding function formulated by The death rate contribution appearing in Eq. When only breakage phenomena are considered, the birth rate term is strictly related to the death term. In fact birth of fragments of size Various empirical formulations have been proposed in the literature for the “breakage function”. However, it has been almost invariably suggested to perform experimental runs and to derive the function that best fits the experimental results. In the present work the literature breakage functions reported in By considering all terms in Eq. As for the numerical methods adopted, Eqs. On the other hand, the population balance of Eq. First of all the mathematical model described in the previous section, and particularly Eq. Once the motion of the vial is correctly simulated, by considering the algorithm to evaluate the occurrence of impacts between sphere and vial wall, let us analyse the solution of the equations which describe the motion of the sphere within the vial. Model parameters values used in the simulation of sphere motion within the Spex Mixer/Mill are reported in Another significant output of the model is the impact frequency or number of collisions per second, since such output is related to the birth and death rate terms appearing in the population balance The statistical distribution of impact angles is shown in By considering that among the operating parameters of the Spex Mixer/Mill reported in So far it is shown that by simulating the behaviour of milling device through Eqs. From the knowledge of the dynamics of the Spex Mixer/Mill as well as the minimum reachable powder size, it is possible to evaluate the particle-size distribution as a function of time by solving the population balance of Eq. It is worth noting that breakage functions are strictly related to the material comminuted ( Results related to the breakage function of Further simulations were performed employing a breakage function which takes into account a breakage mechanism that allows the formation of two particle of same size from a mother particle (cf. Finally, the analysis of the effect of the charge ratio on the time required to convert 99.99% of the feed to the smallest size, has been performed for the two breakage functions investigated. Results of such analysis are shown in A model for prediction of comminution performance of Spex Mixer/Mill has been developed. The model, which quantitatively describes milling bodies dynamics, highlights that trajectories of spheres have a disordered behaviour. Moreover, it has been observed that after a relatively small time the system reaches stationary conditions and stabilization of impact frequency occurs. When typical configuration of Spex Mixer/Mill is taken into account, average impact velocity is about Moreover, a specific model for the description of powders comminution within the Spex Mixer/Mill has been developed. This model, based on population balance equations, takes into account energetic inputs to powders, material properties of powders, initial granulometric composition of powders, and two different breakage functions. Only breakage mechanisms are considered by this model while potential coalescence or agglomeration phenomena are neglected. Model results show that when the main dynamic parameters (i.e., charge ratio and mill frequency) of the milling device are identified, a well-defined minimum size may be reached and smaller particles cannot be obtained even by increasing milling time. Therefore, when milling parameters are defined and a specific material to be milled is selected, a characteristic time  The financial support of Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (MIUR), Italy, through the project “Nuove tecnologie per la bonifica e il ripristino ambientale di siti contaminati—PON Ricerca Scientifica, Sviluppo Tecnologico, Alta Formazione 2000-2006”, is gratefully acknowledged. This work has been also carried out with the financial contribution of the Sardinian Regional Authorities.