Background
                  The purpose of this study is to retrospectively evaluate the clinical outcomes of 18 patients with large coronal shear fractures of the capitellum and lateral trochlea that underwent open reduction and internal fixation with headless compression screws.
               
                  Methods
                  Eighteen patients were identified (16 women, 2 men) with an average age of 45 years and an average follow-up of 26 months. Fractures were classified according to the Dubberley classification as 11 type-1A injuries and 7 type-2A injuries.
               
                  Results
                  All patients, with the exception of 1, had good to excellent functional results by the Broberg-Morrey scale (mean score, 93.3). Average arc of motion was 128° in flexion/extension and 176° in pronation/supination. Radiographically, 3 patients had subsequent development of avascular necrosis and 5 developed arthrosis. No significant negative correlation was noted between the development of avascular necrosis and clinical outcome. Minor complications occurred in 2 patients, but there were no re-operations.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Headless compression screw fixation allows for stable fixation in patients with large coronal shear fractures of the distal humerus without posterior comminution.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  4Fractures of the humeral capitellum are rare injuries. The classification of capitellar fractures has evolved over the years with several systems proposed; however, no single classification has been universally accepted. Treatment strategies for these injuries have evolved over time from conservative management to open surgical approaches. While favorable outcomes have been reported with cast immobilization, this treatment is not routinely advocated because of the inherent difficulties with maintenance of the reduction in a cast. Eighteen consecutive large coronal shear fractures of the capitellum and lateral trochlea were treated with internal fixation, using headless compression screws between December 2001 and March 2008. The senior author did all 18 surgeries. Patients were consecutively enrolled into the IRB-approved study upon diagnosis of a capitellum fracture. They were subsequently followed clinically and radiographically with subjective and objective outcome measures obtained. No patients were excluded or withdrawn. Sixteen patients were female and 2 were male. All patients were available for a minimum of 12 months of follow-up. The average age in the present series was 45 years (range, 20-68) and the average follow-up period was 25.5 months (range, 12-64). The mean time from presentation to internal fixation was 10 days (range, 2-22 days). All injuries were the result of trauma (fall), and the nondominant side was affected 89% (16/18) of the time. The most common mechanism of injury was a ground level fall ( Fractures in this study were classified according to the Dubberley classification: type-1 injuries involved primarily the capitellum with or without the lateral trochlear ridge; type-2 injuries involved the capitellum and trochlea as one piece; type-3 injuries consisted of fractures of both the capitellum and trochlea as separate fragments. Headless screw fixation was used in all cases. Acutrak Mini headless compression screws (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR) were placed from anterior to posterior with the screws buried beneath the articular cartilage. An associated lateral collateral ligament (LCL) injury was observed at the time of surgery in 3 of 18 cases (17%). In these cases, the LCL was repaired to the bone with heavy suture passed through drill holes. Unless the LCL was already injured, it was protected during surgery and not released surgically for purposes of improving exposure. Operative stabilization was performed through the lateral Kaplan approach utilizing a nonsterile tourniquet. After appropriate exposure was achieved, the lateral column was identified. The extensors, in conjunction with the anterior capsule, were then elevated off of the supracondylar ridge as a full thickness sleeve of tissue. The posterior flap containing the LCL was not disrupted, unless there was a LCL injury that required repair. The posterior flap provides vascular supply to the posterior aspect of the distal humerus and damage to this flap can disrupt the blood supply to the capitellum. The elbow was flexed 45° and a large blunt Hohmann retractor was placed beneath the anterior capsule and around the medial column of the humerus. This maneuver provided access to the capitellar fragment, metaphyseal fracture site, and anterior articular surface of the distal humerus. To minimize the risk of injury to the posterior interosseous nerve, anterior placement of retractors on the radial neck was avoided. Fibrous tissue and hematoma were curetted from the free capitellar fragment. The metaphyseal bed was then prepared to ensure that there was no posterior comminution and adequate bone stock remained to accept headless screw fixation. To reduce the capitellar fragment anatomically, the proximal metaphyseal edge and trochlear articulation was visualized. Because of plastic deformation, perfect reduction was not always possible, but bone graft was not utilized in any case. The fragment was then reduced to the anterior surface of the humerus using a small bone tenaculum or dental pick. The capitellar fragment was provisionally fixed using Kirschner wires (K wires), which were placed along the fracture margin so as not to interfere with placement of headless screws Guide wires for the Acumed mini Acutrak headless screws were placed into the central portion of the articular surface of the capitellum and driven out the posterior cortex of the humerus distally. Two to 3 screws were placed to ensure rotational stability ( Postoperatively, patients were held in a splint at 90° of flexion in neutral rotation for 5-7 days. Patients were then allowed to come out of the splint and perform a home exercise program for the ensuing 4 weeks. The program consisted of gravity-aided, active-assisted supine flexion and upright extension. Patients were instructed to perform these exercises a minimum of 3 times each day. Patients were evaluated 6 weeks postoperatively and radiographs were obtained during that visit. Range of motion and function were also evaluated and patients were placed into a supervised occupational therapy program if they lacked a 100° arc of flexion and extension. Clinical outcomes were evaluated postoperatively at approximately 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year. After the 1-year visit, patients were called back for re-evaluation for the purposes of this study. At each follow-up clinic visit, range of motion (ROM) in flexion/extension and pronation/supination was recorded. The Broberg-Morrey (BM) scale, which is a functional rating based on a 100-point index, and the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) scores were used. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the patient's elbow were taken at each follow-up clinic visit at the above-mentioned time periods. The latest available radiographs at a minimum of 1-year of follow-up were evaluated by 3 independent orthopaedic surgeon reviewers who were not involved in patient management. Radiographic outcomes evaluated included presence of union or nonunion (yes/no), avascular necrosis (present/absent), joint line step-off (none/≤1-mm/>1-mm), hardware failure (present/absent), and instability. Arthrosis was evaluated subjectively using the system described by Broberg and Morrey as: grade 0 if there was no signs of arthritis; grade 1 if there was slight joint-space narrowing and minimal osteophyte formation; grade 2 if there was moderate joint-space narrowing and osteophyte formation, or grade 3 if there was severe joint-space narrowing with gross destruction. The Sign test was used to determine if the occurrence of capitellar fractures was significantly more common in females than males, and if nondominant extremities were more commonly involved than dominant extremities. The outcomes of fractures in terms of BM scores and ROM in flexion/extension were compared using independent samples Based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, all continuous data types were normally distributed. Age, time between injury and surgery, ROM in flexion/extension, and BM scores were compared using a correlation coefficient. Additionally, in order to determine if age was a confounding factor in the development of arthritis, the relationship of ages >45 or >50 and the presence of arthritis were evaluated using the Fisher exact test. Finally, the presence or absence of avascular necrosis (AVN) was compared with the BM clinical result (excellent or not excellent), arthritis (present or absent), and age (>45 or >50) using the Fisher exact test. In all cases, statistical significance was set at All fractures united by 1-year follow up. The average Broberg-Morrey score was 93.3 points (57-100) with 12 excellent, 5 good, and 1 poor rating ( Radiographically, there were 5 patients with a minimum of grade 1 radio-capitellar arthrosis at their last follow-up, 3 patients with avascular necrosis, and 3 patients with class I heterotopic ossification. There were no instances of instability, nonunion, or hardware failure on the most recent radiographs ( Statistically, there were significantly more females (16/18 or 89%) than males ( Age was not associated significantly with postoperative ROM ( There were 2 patients with complications in this study and no re-operations ( The patient with a poor BM clinical outcome (BM score Several studies using headless compression screws have shown mostly good to excellent results (using varying rating systems) for all types of capitellum fractures over a wide range of follow-up (5 months to 9.3 years). Based on our experience, we have devised a treatment algorithm for capitellum fractures. Internal fixation of capitellum fractures requires near anatomic reduction and compression at the fracture site. We have elected to use headless screws placed from anterior to posterior to avoid further disruption of the remaining blood flow. Our surgical approach for fixation of these injuries has been a lateral column exposure. In all types of injuries, an effort is made to leave the LCL intact. Release of the ligament would be recommended only if enhanced exposure is required to achieve an anatomic reduction of the articular surface, but this could potentially disrupt the blood flow to the capitellum. Attention should be directed to the integrity of the LCL with type-2 injuries, as it was torn in 43% of cases in the present series and required repair. No LCL injuries were demonstrated with type-1 injuries. Similar to other studies, several patients in the present series developed AVN (17%), degenerative joint disease (28%), or heterotopic ossification (17%). There are 2 interesting trends noted in the fractures in this series. The first trend is that 16 of 18 of the fractures occurred in women ( The second interesting trend in this series is that 16 of 18 capitellar fractures occurred in the nondominant extremity ( Open reduction and internal fixation using headless screw compression via a lateral approach is a reliable treatment for large coronal shear fractures of capitellum and lateral trochlea, and results in stable fixation and restoration of a functional arc of motion. Statistical analysis of our study population demonstrated that the majority of capitellum fractures occur in female patients and involve the nondominant extremity. Although our study had a larger sample size than any other previously reported in the literature, an even larger sample size would be beneficial to completely rule out the possibility of a type-II statistical error. The authors acknowledge that the short-term follow-up period is one of the main weaknesses of the present study and understand that a longer follow-up period is necessary to determine the true incidence of post traumatic arthritis of the elbow. The classification system utilized is a subject of debate; however, the Dubberley system takes into account the complexity of these fractures and helps us predict which fracture patterns are best treated through a lateral approach. Our clinical results are similar to the findings of Dubberley, that good results can be expected of coronal shear fractures of the distal humerus without associated posterior comminution. The authors wish to express a special thanks to the medical staff at University Community Hospital where the majority of the surgeries were performed. The authors would like to acknowledge Michele Pliner, of the Foundation for Orthopaedic Research and Education, for her editorial assistance and Jean Bonnette for her illustrations.