CT scanning with 3D reconstructed images are currently used to study articular fractures in orthopedic and trauma surgery. A 3D-Printer creates solid objects, starting from a 3D Computer representation. We report from 3 year of multicenter experience in 3D printing of articular fractures. 3D printing of articular fractures are innovative procedures that achieve a preoperative tangible, highly useful evaluation of the fractures to plan intervention and educate patients.Literature studies show that 3D printed models in orthopaedic and trauma care can improve surgeons’ evaluation of patient-specific anatomy and pathology by way of tactile and visual experience. 3D printing, also known as additive manufacturing or “rapid prototyping”, is a low cost technology that uses a 3D computer representation to create solid objects from a feedstock material. However, it’s still discussed how models may support the surgeons’ treatment and which effect they may have on patient’s understanding (and in some cases on their approval) of the surgical procedure they will undergo. In this paper, we present our experience preparing and using anatomic 3D printed models of distal radius fractures and we have described their effect on surgical planning and on patient’s understanding [ In our study we enrolled 120 patients (age 18–60 y old, 80 male and 40 female) from November 2014 to April 2017, all affected with a distal radius fracture (n.50), tibia plateau fracture (30), tibial pilon (10), calcaneus (25) and astragal (5) fractures, eligible for surgery because of the presence of instability, dislocation of fragments and displacement. In all cases, to study the fracture pattern, we performed a CT scan with a thickness of 0.625 mm. The obtained sections (DICOM files) were uploaded into OsiriX Viewer Software (Pixmeo, Geneva, Switzerland), rendered to a “surface-model” of the fractured radius and finally exported to a “stereolithography” file (STL-file), which is widely used for rapid prototyping. ( The surgeons evaluated the printed fractured bone and used it for preoperative planning, selection of the surgical approach and the placement of plate and screws selected for the osteosynthesis; in particular, the surgeons evaluated the ideal location of the screws and their orientation. ( These 3D-printed-models were afterwards showed to the patient to illustrate the fracture morphology and the surgical technique. A simple questionnaire ( Surgeons rated the use of models most useful for articular fractures (+2 points%) with articular gaps or steps of ≥2 mm, or if there was a multi-fragmentary pattern. For simple and methaphyseal fractures, the models did not improve any parameter in either group. The surgical planning was not changed after viewing the 3D printed models, but the plates selected during the planning fitted perfectly during the operation. Most of the patients, on the other side, referred a substantial improvement in comprehension of the fracture before and after seeing the 3D printed models (the grading scale improved of an average of +3 points) ( Adding 2D and 3D CT scan to the standard X-Rays, leads to improve the diagnosis of fracture line comminution and the involvement of the articular surface, articular gaps or steps. The introduction of a 3D printed model for the fracture’s study provides an additional tactile and visual experience, increasing the appreciation of articular surface gaps of ≥2 mm and the displacement of bony fragments. From the technical capabilities of the machine depends the accuracy of the 3D print; commercial 3D printer have an accuracy of 0.1 mm, which hardly has a major effect on accuracy, because of the slice of 0.625 mm of thickness, by which DICOMs images are processed. Generally we noticed some inaccuracy on details and displacements of 1 mm or less because of digital post-processing performed on the 3D data (surface rendering algorithms and smoothing filters), things that have been also described in the literature [ While in our study we did not notice that any changes on surgical decisions, evaluations of lesion and fracture displacement were generally improved. Additionally, the possibility to select pre-operatively the ideal plate was appreciated by surgeons, reducing spent of time during surgery and reducing sterilization costs. Considering the general trend to reduce health care costs and the increasing trend to sterile-packaged single-use kits for specific standard surgeries, 3D printing may open additional opportunities. Further studies with more patients should be conducted in the future to quantify the benefits and cost reduction in regard to OR time and expenses for sterilization. Recommendations regarding the use of this technology should be based on both diagnostic performance characteristics and clinical impact. To facilitate tangible pre-operative evaluation of the fracture pattern, three-dimensional printed models are an innovative method, helping the planning of a surgical procedure and improving patient’s compliance through better understanding for the informed consent.