In this study, aripiprazole (APZ), a weak alkaline drug with pH-dependent solubility, was selected as model drug to examine the feasibility of preparing nanosuspensions using nanoprecipitation/homogenization technique based on acid–base neutralization. The related substances in nanosuspensions prepared under optimal conditions were slightly increased as compared with APZ raw material. The resultant APZ nanosuspensions showed a mean particle size of 350nm with polydispersion index (PI) value of 0.20. Good physical stability was kept for over 40days. SEM observation showed the morphology of oval crystals with rough surface. Nanosuspensions significantly increased the solubility as well as the dissolution of APZ due to the decreased particle size. Differential scanning calorimetry and powder X-ray diffractometry confirmed the crystallinity of APZ in nanosuspensions. APZ nanosuspensions got maximum absorption rate and extent comparing with APZ commercial tablet and suspensions with relative bioavailability of 123.43±12.98% and 171.41±14.62%, respectively. This technique has the potential to prepare nanosuspensions of insoluble drugs with pH-dependent solubility.At present about 40% of the drugs under development and approximately 60% of the drugs coming directly from synthesis are poorly soluble ( Based on Noyes–Whitney equation ( Typically, nanosuspensions can be prepared by two types of methods: antisolvent precipitation of dissolved drugs (bottom-up) ( Many hydrophobic drugs are weakly acidic or basic, which thus imparts pH-dependent solubility to them ( Aripiprazole (APZ) is an atypical antipsychotic drug with good therapeutic effect on schizophrenia ( In this study, APZ nanosuspensions were prepared by nanoprecipitation based on the acid–base neutralization reaction. The resultant nanosuspensions were characterized by solubility test, dissolution, physical stability, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and powder X-ray diffractometry (PXRD). Oral bioavailability in beagle dogs was also evaluated. APZ raw material and tablet were all provided by Shanghai Zhong Xi Pharmaceutical (Group) Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Poloxamer 188 (Lutrol APZ was first solubilized by 0.9 APZ nanosuspension was further spray-dried (Buchi Nano Spray Dryer B90, Swiss) to obtain APZ nanocrystal powders. The operation parameters were as follows: compression air velocity: 130 The particle size of APZ nanosuspensions was determined by Malvern Zetasizer Nano Morphology of APZ raw material, dried nanocrystal powder, redispersed nanocrystals and nanosuspensions was observed under scanning electron microscope (Philips XL30 Series, Holland). APZ raw material and solid nanocrystals were directly fixed on a brass stub using double-sided tape, while diluted APZ nanosuspensions and redispersed nanocrystals as treated in particle size test were dropped onto a slice of silicon and air-dried, which was also fixed on the brass stub using double-side tape. Samples were gold coated in vacuum by a sputter coater and observed under an excitation voltage of 10 APZ was determined by HPLC method with Agilent 1200 series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Inc, Santa Clara, CA) composed of a quaternary pump, a degasser, an autosampler, a column heater, and a tunable ultraviolet detector. The mobile phase was a mixture of methanol and 0.1% triethanolamine aqueous solution in volume ratio of 90:10. APZ was separated at 25 The related substances were detected using the same chromatographic conditions. The chromatogram was recorded until two times of APZ retention time. APZ raw material or prepared nanosuspensions were dissolved with mobile phase to a concentration of 0.2 The solubility of APZ raw material, physical mixture with stabilizers, and nanosuspensions were compared respectively in hydrochloric acid–potassium chloride buffered solution (pH 1.2), acetic acid–sodium acetate buffered solution (pH 4.0) and PBS (pH 6.8, pH 7.0 and pH 7.4). Samples equivalent to 20 The dissolution was carried out using ZRS-8 APZ nanosuspensions were kept in glass vials at room temperature to study the physical stability. The changes in appearance, particle size and polydispersity index were recorded for 50 A DSC 204A/G phoenix An X’pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (Panalytical, Holland) was utilized to perform PXRD test, where the tube anode was Cu with A CMC-Na aqueous solution (1%, w/v) was selected as suspending agents, in which appropriate amount of poloxamer 188 and HPMC-E3 was respectively dissolved to a concentration of 0.2%. APZ raw material was added to the suspending agent and dispersed uniformly with water bath sonication. The final concentration of the APZ suspension was set as 2 Six male beagle dogs weighing 14–16 The commercial APZ tablets and APZ suspensions were set as control groups. A randomized three-period crossover study after an oral dose equivalent to 4 APZ in dog plasma was determined using the Agilent 1200 series HPLC system. The mobile phase was composed of acetonitrile, methanol, 20 The plasma (0.5 The pharmacokinetic parameters were obtained from the plasma concentration-time curves. Since nanosuspensions can be regarded as pure drug particles stabilized by stabilizer with theoretical encapsulation of 100% (  The effects of homogenization pressure and cycles on particle size and PI were shown in Taking together all factors mentioned above, the stabilizer concentration, drug concentration, homogenization pressure and cycles was set as 0.5% (each in 0.25%), 0.5%, 1000 To facilitate later processing, the prepared nanosuspensions were concentrated by centrifugation. The amount of APZ in nanosuspensions and in supernatant after centrifugation was respectively determined by HPLC. There was only 0.77% APZ remained in the supernatant. And the recovery for nanosuspensions in condensate was 99.23%. The clear and transparent appearance of the supernatant also indicated that the loss of residue solid particles could be ignored. Then the final concentration of APZ in nanosuspensions was adjusted to 2 Nanosuspensions prepared from the optimum formula and technology got a mean particle size of 350 The morphologies of APZ raw material, nanocrystals, redispersed nanocrystals and nanosuspensions were shown in The solubility of APZ nanocrystals was compared with that of APZ raw material and physical mixture of APZ and stabilizers in different media ( APZ got a solubility of 83.97 Although the order of dissolution rate for all tested samples in pH 4.0 acetate buffered solution was the same as in pH 1.2 hydrochloric acid solution, higher dissolution rate and degree were achieved for APZ raw material, physical mixture and commercial tablet in the former solution ( Because APZ was poorly soluble in PBS (pH 6.8 and 7.4), Tween 80 was added in to keep sink conditions. With 2.5% (w/v) Tween 80 as solubilizer, APZ got solubility of 95.92 DSC thermograms of APZ raw material, poloxamer 188, HPMC, physical mixture and nanocrystals were shown in The PXRD diagrams of APZ raw material, poloxamer 188, HPMC, NaCl, physical mixture and nanocrystals were shown in Although some white aggregates deposited at the bottom of the glass vials in the process of storage, they could be easily redispersed through gentle shaking. The particle size and PI value of nanosuspensions increased after storage, which nevertheless presented no significant differences within 40 In addition, the narrow particle size distribution as well as the crystalline state instead of amorphous nanocrystals in APZ nanosuspensions also contributed to the robust stability of nanosuspensions. Ostwald ripening is caused by the differences in dissolution pressure/solubility between large and small particles, which will lead to the continuous growth of large particles and disappearance of small ones ( The plasma APZ concentration versus time profiles after administration of APZ tablet, suspension and nanosuspension were shown in Dissolution is the rate-limiting step for the absorption of APZ. Nanosuspensions showed the maximum dissolution rate and extent due to increased surface area and solubility, and thus showed the maximum bioavailability. APZ is a weak alkaline material and has good solubility in acid conditions, as indicated in The nanoprecipitation/homogenization based on acid–base neutralization could be used to prepare stable nanosuspensions of poorly water-soluble drugs with pH-dependent solubility without concerns of increased APZ degradation. Good physical stability of APZ nanosuspensions was achieved due to the steric hindrance from adsorbed stabilizers, narrow distribution of particle size and the crystalline state of the drug. APZ nanosuspension showed significantly increased solubility and dissolution, which were the main factors contributing to enhanced oral bioavailability. This work was financially