Using concepts derived from the French literature, particularly the concept of the ‘thalamus’, the authors review the anatomy of the calcaneus and its biomechanics, particularly with regard to fracture patterns. They review the imaging of the fractures and describe a computer-based fracture classification based on modern imaging and describe their preferred techniques for internal fixation of the fractures based on biomechanical principles.Calcaneal fractures, probably more than any articular fracture, pose particular difficulties for the treating surgeon. This is due to the complex shape of the bone, with three functionally linked joints, the complex nature of many fractures whose patho-mechanics are still debated, the difficulties of the operative exposure, and the difficulties of achieving fixation. This paper is not intended to advocate open reduction and internal Fixation (ORIF) of calcaneal fractures nor does it aim to discuss the multiple therapeutic possibilities. A century ago Destot The lateral wall of the calcaneus is flat ( The anterior process of the calcaneus ends at the cuboidal facet, a saddle joint, concave in the sagittal plane, and convex in the transverse plane. It must not be forgotten that in the transverse plane, the joint is oblique posteriorly and medially ( The calcaneus has three functions: a lever arm for the triceps surae (gastrocnemius/soleus complex), balance of the hindfoot, length of the lateral column. The calcaneus is an efficient lever arm to transmit the strength of the triceps surae to the forefoot ( The balance of the hindfoot depends on the shape of the calcaneus both in coronal and sagittal planes. Normally the hindfoot is in slight valgus. Any more than 5° of additional valgus or move into varus is very deleterious for both sub-talar and ankle joints ( The length of the lateral column depends on the length of the anterior process. As in a congenital pes plano-valgus there is a shortening of the lateral column which can be treated by a lengthening osteotomy of the calcaneal anterior process so a traumatic shortening of the anterior process induces a secondary pes plano-valgus (  The sub-talar joint is one of the more complex joints in the body, and has been much studied. Put simply, The joint has two functions. Firstly, it allows the foot to adapt to uneven surfaces ( The calcaneocuboid joint has only a secondary role. By changing the shape of the calcaneo-pedal block, it can slightly modify the position of the hindfoot which permits the whole of the forefoot to remain in contact with the ground and thus augments the movement of the sub-talar joint during gait. While less important, preservation of the calcaneocuboid joint is essential if hindfoot movement is restricted after fracture. Thus, while extension of a plate osteosynthesis of the calcaneus to the cuboid is advocated by some, if there is there is insufficient purchase of screws in the anterior process is advocated by some The talus is eccentrically located on the body of the calcaneus and its axial load is borne by both sustentaculum tali and the posterior facet. Due to the cantilever form of the sustentaculum tali there is a large stress on the medial cortex, just below the sustentaculum. When there is excessive axial loading, such as in a fall from a height, it is widely agreed that the first stage of injury is a shear fracture, There is still much debate about the position and the direction of these various fracture lines. Utheza, If the primary fracture line runs laterally ( Thus the Essex-Lopresti tongue-type fracture is associated with a medial primary fracture line, but the joint depression type is actually one of two different entities, either a medial fracture line with a secondary fracture line running around the posterior facet, or alternatively a lateral primary fracture line. The main therapeutic consequence is that the primary fracture line is a variable curve, which, whether or not it involves the anterior facet or the calcaneocuboid joint, is always centred on the sustentaculum tali ( There are of course some intermediate cases, and also some additional accessory fracture lines. In case of a double primary fracture line (of the Sanders type 3 The lateral view permits assessment of loss of height, and of Böhler's angle Standard axial views are generally of poor quality in these patients because pain precludes full dorsiflexion. Intra-operatively the axial view can be very useful to check the axis of the hindfoot, and to ensure that no screw protrudes through or beneath the sustentaculum tali. Broden's view is very easy to perform ( Dorso-plantar and oblique views can be helpful in some cases to check the calcaneocuboid joint. CT scan is mandatory for any calcaneal fracture. Even if the fracture looks undisplaced on standard X-rays, CT is the only way to confirm the absence of displacement, before deciding on conservative treatment. Additionally it will show otherwise unsuspected additional fracture lines, and very often a sub-thalamic trabecular impaction. The diagnosis of otherwise unsuspected associated fractures of the talus and/or anterior tarsus is not uncommon. Coronal sections, which are generally performed as oblique coronal cuts are the most important as they allow the size and the position of the three main fragments (thalamic, sustentacular, and tuberosity) to be shown. This is the basis for the Sanders classification Horizontal (axial) cuts will demonstrate the primary fracture line especially through the calcaneocuboid joint, and of secondary fractures lines, especially through or anterior to the sustentaculum tali. While sagittal cuts do not show much more than the standard lateral view, they are useful to visualize better the depression of the thalamus within the body of the calcaneus. 3D-reconstructions are essential. Most surgeons are familiar with one or two of the many classifications of calcaneal fractures. In the English literature, the Essex-Lopresti classification However, the most widely used classification is that of Sanders Within the AO Foot and Ankle Expert Group, we were asked to prepare a new classification of foot fractures. After much debate, we concluded that the only worthwhile classification is purely descriptive. There are four types: extra-articular fracture articular fracture fracture dislocation pure dislocation This is a completely new way of thinking. Earlier classifications attempted to put an injury into a specific ‘box’. However, the sheer number of different possibilities means that all such “box classifications” are inefficient. Modern computers mean that a descriptive classification is not a problem. One has only to click on the bone to be classified, on his different fractured parts and joints and to precisely how it is broken etc. and it can be taken to any level of precision. While for clinical use it is of interest to note not only the obvious lesion (e.g. the posterior facet) but also the status of the other joints, and the direction of the fracture lines, for research purposes a description of each involved part is the only way to ascertain associated patterns of injury. For example, how does the calcaneocuboid joint involvement (or that of the sustentaculum tali) influence the general prognosis of the posterior facet fracture, and how should this be surgically managed? This classification can embrace all the earlier classifications, particularly Sanders, but captures more information for research. It is a purely descriptive classification, which, unlike the Essex-Lopresti classification is not treatment based, nor is it based on a specific diagnostic tool like the frontal CT cuts. It will probably be improved with better diagnostic modalities, but is unlikely to become obsolete. The basic principles are the same as for any long bone articular fracture; first of all, reduce the joint surface anatomically, and then fix the reconstructed epiphysis to diaphysis, taking care to maintain length and axial alignment. As all displaced thalamic articular fractures have as a common feature depression of the thalamus, the treatment stages are (    Our preferred technique is to use a 3.5 AO reconstruction plate, adapted to the lateral side of the calcaneus. With the exception of one or two posterior screws, descending obliquely from above the tuberosity, all screws converge to the strong sustentaculum tali, below the thalamus, thus making a kind of ladder, on the rungs of which the reconstructed thalamus sits comfortably ( It is useful to have a plastic model calcaneus in the operating theatre for reference.   The incision goes straight down to bone and a full thickness flap is developed. The distal part of the flap is detached from the abductor of the fifth toe and then from the lateral wall of the calcaneus. The peroneal sheath is minimally opened, just sufficient to detach it from the bone, but the tendons themselves are not dissected out. The dissection of the vertical part is undertaken with care to avoid damage to vessels. Occasionally the sural nerve is seen at the upper part of the incision. Dissection of the lateral flap can be facilitated by a Schanz screw or Kirschner wire (K-wire) in the tuberosity. At all times excessive traction on the soft tissues is to be avoided. A longer rather than a shorter incision is preferable, as it will provide good exposure without the necessity for excessive traction. Retraction of the soft tissues is best achieved using K-wires ( Exposure of the upper part of the anterior process of the calcaneus is not essential. It is possible to carefully detach the soft tissues in front of the Gissane area and thus reach the anterior sub-talar joint. If necessary another K-wire can be placed in the neck of the talus. Posterior to the malleolus, it is possible to extend the exposure by separating the lower part of the fascia cruris, but care should be taken with the large branch of the posterior tibial artery, which crosses the tuberosity behind the talus and anastomoses with the lateral calcaneal artery.  A percutaneous Schanz screw, A transverse screw through the incision in the posterior part of the tuberosity Our preference is to use a K-wire held in a calliper.  Articular reduction of the thalamus is then achieved by one of three methods: indirect, direct and under fluoroscopic control. The indirect method is the simplest but it is not precise. Once it is confirmed that the sustentacular fragment is perfectly in contact with the talus, it is fixed by a plantar K-wire. Then all the other articular fragments are pushed into contact with the “ceiling” of the talar posterior facet. However, it is impossible to ensure that the reduction is perfect. The anterior part of the joint at the Gissane, and the posterior part behind the talar posterior process can usually be seen, which indicates that the joint is also probably correctly reduced. Then after temporary fixation with one or two oblique thalamo-sustentacular K-wires, it is possible to open the joint slightly (unless the medial sustentacular fragment has been previously fixed below the talus), and to check visually check the reduction to be sure there is no step left in the articular surface. However, it is difficult to assess the translation (anterior or posterior) of an intermediate fragment, and this is not an entirely satisfactory technique of reduction. Nevertheless, if there is extensive comminution, it does generally achieve an acceptable reduction. The direct method is usually performed when the main fracture line is more lateral ( Reduction under fluoroscopic control can be useful when there is a large thalamic fragment, with a very medial main fracture line, which can be difficult to assess visually (  If there is a small medial sustentacular fragment, it will necessitate thalamo-sustentacular screws, and the alignment of the K-Wires (and screws) is important. A posterior K-wire can be placed more or less horizontally, but very oblique anteriorly at approximately 45° to reach the sustentaculum. A second K-wire through the anterior part of the thalamus need only be minimally anteriorly oriented, but angled superiorly at about 20°.  If there is a smaller fragment or fragments it is necessary to fix them to one of the main fragments. Ideally they are reduced and fixed under direct vision to the lateral side of the thalamic fragment ( Fixation of very small osteochondral fragments can sometimes be achieved by the lost K-wire technique (  In most cases the construct is stable enough to allow a fluoroscopic assessment, but further provisionally stabilization by the addition of an oblique ascending K-wire and/or a postero-anterior horizontal one may be necessary. With regard to the anterior process, the main fracture line, which frequently involves the calcaneocuboid joint, will usually be found to be reduced once the sub-talar joint has been reduced. Generally it is only necessary to confirm that the visible fracture lines at the lateral side of the anterior process are correctly reduced, and to fix them with provisional K-wire(s). In case of comminuted anterior process, there is always a displacement of the “roof” of this process which is tilted and pulled upwards by the short extensor of the toes. This has to be reduced by pushing it plantarwards in order for the Gissane be perfectly reduced, so as to avoid impingement with the tip of the talar lateral process. One gets generally a good reduction criterion on the lateral cortex a few millimetres beneath the Gissane. Provisional K-wire fixation is sometimes difficult since the bone is very compact at the Gissane.  The reduction should be checked with three fluoroscopic views; there are optional additional views. A lateral view shows more or less what one can already see through the incision i.e. the overall shape of the bone and the angles. By slightly tilting the C arm it is possible to check the anterior and the middle sub-talar joints to ensure that the calcaneal articular facets exactly fit the head of the talus, since although small articular mal-reductions of either the subtalar and calcaneocuboid joints are not easily detected, Broden's view is mandatory to properly visualize the posterior subalar joint. It is easy to perform even in lateral decubitus by laterally rotating foot and tilting the C-arm. It may be that a K-wire in the lateral process of the talus used to retract soft tissues partially obstructs the view of the joint space. It may be removed, especially if another K-wire has been placed within the malleolus. Broden's view will also show any residual steps in the articular surface which should have been absolutely perfectly corrected. It may also show an interfragmentary gap without a step due to a cancellous bone fragment. If this is the case, screw compression will not always achieve perfect closure. At this stage an axial view (Harris view) is not really useful. While clinical checking of the hindfoot axis may be sufficient, but it is useful later when checking the final screw positioning. Oblique views of the calcaneocuboid joint and antero-posterior (dorso-plantar) view to show the anterior process may be helpful. Intra-operative arthroscopic control is now well recognized. Those skilled in performing this open procedure can identify up to 22% of minor steps (1–2 mm) not picked up visually or by fluoroscopy.  Fixation of the joint is generally achieved with two screws, the first of which is a cancellous bone screw (4.0 mm) or a lag screw ( The plate is then positioned on the lateral side of the calcaneus ( The plate is bent in its length and the posterior part is slightly curved over the tuberosity. The anterior part is slightly twisted to fit the lower part of the lateral wall of the anterior process, just behind the calcaneocuboid joint. It may be necessary to reduce an unbroken prominent peroneal tubercle with a rongeur if it prevents perfect fitting of the plate, but generally the broken lateral cortex is easily moulded to the plate. Screwing is a delicate and precise procedure. As the plate obviously cannot be held in place with a bone clamp, fixation begins with the two screws at either end. The first one is not tightened before inserting the screw at the other end. Thereafter the intervening screws can be progressively positioned. The direction of screws is important ( The posterior screw can be placed more or less vertically, descending within the tuberosity and if possible extending to the medial process of the tuberosity which will require a 45–50 mm screw. Sometimes it is may be possible to reach the strong medial cortex with a shorter screw of 32–36 mm by going obliquely. It is important to place the intermediate screws under fluoroscopic control to ensure they all converge into the small area of bone that is the sustentaculum tali. On the lateral side of the body, screws are inserted through or below the lower part of the thalamic depressed fragment and medially the tips of the screws should be within the sustentaculum. If there is a large antero-medial sustentacular fragment, it is acceptable for screws only to enter the medial cortex below the sustentaculum, but their purchase will not be as strong as it would be within the sustentaculum itself ( Correct screw length is essential. In a “normal” calcaneus the length should be 45 mm. If the measured length is 40 mm or less, the screw probably will not reach the sustentaculum and if the length is 50 mm or more it will probably protrude within the joint or impinge on the tendons on the medial side. If there is comminution of the anterior process, some authors If the tuberosity is comminuted, and the plate is insufficient to perfectly fix the tuberosity, then an additional oblique ascending screw (3.5 or 4.5 mm) or even a horizontal longitudinal screw (4.5 or 6.5 mm) from the tuberosity to the anterior process may be necessary.  With the technique described there is no need for bone grafting. The reconstructed joint is perfectly supported by the rungs of the ladder plate. Indeed, once perfectly reconstructed, there is often no place to put any graft anyway. In any event the space which sometimes remains below the plate corresponds to the neutral triangle of the normal calcaneus. Thus, while we never use graft, during surgery, clots and debris removed between the main fragments can be placed within the depressed area.    In some cases of a simple fracture with optimal fixation in strong bone, partial weight bearing may be permitted within the first week, but normally patients can progress to partial weight bearing after six weeks monitored by self use of bathroom scales. Patients are instructed not to exceed the pain threshold.  Understanding of the patho-mechanics means that we know that the primary fracture line is a curve centred on the sustentaculum. Furthermore, the sustentaculum itself is, in almost every case, the strongest part of the broken bone. Hence, the use of screws converging on the sustentaculum as the key part of the fixation. The essential feature of the surgery is to reconstruct the sub-talar joint, the thalamus against sustentaculum, as a strong block. Support of the anatomically reconstructed joint can be then undertaken by a variety of means, dependant on the individual surgeon's preference. We use a curved plate on the side of the bone, which confers good stability, without hardware under the critical part of the lateral flap. Osseous grafting is now obsolete. It used to be necessary because of its mechanical properties, but with modern fixation devices there are no remaining indications for its use. ORIF of calcaneal fractures is technically demanding surgery. It has a long learning curve, even after more than 300 cases we are still refining and improving our techniques. However, careful attention to detail and a carefully staged procedure has transformed the management of these fractures.