Tumbling mills emit vibration that can be captured to assess its performance. We interpret the vibration signature of a one meter diameter mill in response to changes in mill speed, rock/particle size, quantity of balls, and slurry viscosity. A ±500g tri-axial accelerometer with a wireless transmitter located on the surface of the mill shell transmits vibration signal to a receiver connected to a PC. The quality of the vibration signal is preserved due to the use of wireless transfer of data. The filtered vibration signal in the frequency domain is averaged which is then used as a parameter for comparison purpose. This approach to signal analysis is most suitable to compare vibration response of a mill to changes in operating parameters. The mill shell vibration signature turned out to be an excellent indicator to establish the differences in mill performance under wet versus dry grinding conditions, coarse versus fine grinding, changes in mill speed, ball load, etc. The broader implication of the main observations in the context of development of a diagnostic tool to assess the mill performance is highlighted.In mineral industry, the size reduction task is most commonly achieved by tumbling mills. The material inside the mill is continuously subjected to rotational motion which is transmitted from the mill shell. The motion of the charge is affected by mill speed, mill filling, ball quantity and size, type of ore, slurry viscosity, lifter shape and configuration, etc. The mill performance can be assessed for a set of operating and design parameters. These parameters can be adjusted to arrive at the optimal values. Any shift from the optimal values of the parameters affects the charge motion which in turn affects the mill performance. One could predict the mill performance up to a certain degree of accuracy based on power and throughput but quite often, recourse to additional information pertaining to mill operation would be required in order to predict more accurate mill performance. It turns out that mechanical vibration of tumbling mills can be picked up by suitably installing accelerometers (vibration sensors) on the mill surface and the signal can be interpreted to link it to the mill operational parameters. The simplest type of mill vibration is a forced vibration, typically due to variation in the center of mass of the charge at any rotational frequency. In order to correlate the vibration response of the mill to charge motion and other events that take place inside the mill, it is quite important to understand the dynamics of the charge. This way an alternative method to assess the mill performance could be established. In recent years, many researchers have attempted to develop mill diagnostic tools to study the dynamics of the charge and other processes that affect grinding efficiency. Unlike other rotating devices, tumbling mill action is quite complex and for this reason the quality of data required to make predictions is necessarily high. Difficulties arise with respect to alignment and location of the accelerometer, acquisition and transformation of the signal, etc., which affect the quality of data. It is clear from the literature that except The vibration signal is captured by means of a tri-axial accelerometer which is placed on the tumbling mill shell. We have used wireless communication to transmit vibration signal to a remote computer. The advantages of using wireless sensor in tumbling mill monitoring are manifold. Firstly, the wireless sensor can be mounted on the rotating mill to acquire data without having to resort to slip ring, connectors, etc. Secondly, wireless sensors are quite immune from noise. For example, long distance wires connecting the sensor to the data acquisition system attenuate the signal and pick up electromagnetic interferences. These noises interfere with the precious vibration signals and often mislead the analysis and interpretation. This is the main motivation for using a wireless sensor system for vibration signal capture. A new digital signal processing technique using a specific digital filter and Fourier transform has been employed for vibration signal analysis. It is felt that the information about the mill parameters remains in specific frequency bands. Hence, the signal is filtered at the required frequency bands and averaged to derive the desired features. A tumbling mill The accelerometer used in our experiment is shear type whose frequency response ranges from 2.5 The accelerometer is mounted on a stainless steel rectangular block (10 A high-speed wireless data acquisition/transmission system next to the signal conditioning circuit is used to transmit the vibration signal sensed by the accelerometer to a remote computer via its wireless Local Area Network (LAN) card. Power supply to the accelerometer and the transmitter is provided through a slip ring arrangement. LabView™ software is used for data acquisition, storage and processing purpose. Matlab™ software with its signal processing tool box is used to analyze the vibration data in order to correlate with various grinding parameters. The mill is also fitted with load cells, torque sensor and force sensor as shown in The time domain vibration signal received from the accelerometer contains lot of information about the source from which it is generated. However, the time domain vibration signal is difficult to interpret as it contains noise and comes with a range of frequencies. For this reason the signal is interpreted in frequency domain after appropriate transformation. The transformation is carried out by applying standard techniques as follows. The frequency content in a sampled signal After the transformation the amplitudes of the vibration signal can be interpreted in Fourier domain. It is found from mill vibration signature that a significant amount of energy is concentrated within a certain range of frequencies Determination of the correct sampling frequency is the first step in any data acquisition related activity. It is important to determine what sampling rate and the time period over which the data can be collected. High sampling frequency increases the computational time and low sampling frequency introduces aliasing effect and removal of high frequency signals. In our case, since the data acquisition system uses antialiasing filter which is configured based on the sampling frequency, aliasing effect is not seen. But the higher frequency signals are not captured. This is the reason for which it is required to find out the optimum sampling frequency of the data acquisition system. The following experiment was conducted to determine the optimum sampling frequency. The mill was loaded with 30% mill filling with −50 In many practical situations a continuous signal is sampled and evaluated. When the function is evaluated by numerical procedures, it is always necessary to sample the function in some manner. This is required because digital computers cannot deal with continuous functions (analog) except by sampling them. In our case it is assumed that the accelerometer with its internal electronics gives a wide frequency response from 2.5 It is easy to match the characteristic vibration frequency which is typically quite low, with that of the mill rotational frequency. For this purpose the mill was run at different speeds from 26 to 52 Vibration signal of the mill at different locations i.e., mill shell, plumber block and the mill base, were captured by positioning the accelerometer at those locations. Furthermore, the mill was run in empty condition as before at 26, 34 and 43 Milling in dry state is typically carried out in cement industry but lately several mineral processing plants also prefer to grind ores in dry state. In Orissa, a 400 The mill speed has a pronounced effect on mill vibration. In order to understand the effect of mill speed on average FFT spectra, the mill was loaded with iron ore lumps only, of size −50 To understand the effect of ball load on the vibration signal, the mill was filled up to 30% of the mill volume with iron ore as feed material. Here, keeping the overall filling at 30%, the ball load was varied from 0% to 6%. In all the experiments the mill was run at different speeds from 26 to 43 In order to understand the vibration response of the mill under different grinding conditions particularly with respect to feed size, two sets of experiments were conducted using −15 To assess the effect of slurry viscosity several experiments were conducted by changing the amount of water in the mill which changed the slurry viscosity. The mill was filled up to 26% of mill internal volume by ball and charge material. The charge consisted of −6 The vibration signals for the above experiments that started under dry conditions and later changed over to wet condition needed special treatment for averaging of filtered vibration signals. It may be mentioned that under dry conditions the characteristic vibration frequency was captured in the frequency range of 3–6 It is quite pertinent to compare the vibration response of the mill under wet and dry conditions. It can be seen that the vibration amplitude in case of dry grinding was more compared to wet grinding with 8 A diagnostic tool for tumbling mills has been developed using accelerometer to capture vibration signals during grinding. The vibration signature of the mill was interpreted under varying milling conditions such as dry and wet operation, coarse and fine grinding. Exhaustive experiments were conducted to find out the trends between the average FFT amplitude of vibration signal and mill operating conditions. The vibration response of the mill is dependent on the location of the mill sensor. The vibration signal collected from the mill shell turned out to be most useful. The technique can be used for industrial mills to monitor and optimize the mill operation. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India, for carrying out part of the work.