Aluminum is known to accumulate with age in bone and other tissues of humans, even in the absence of renal disease. Our study aimed to develop a histological staining method sufficiently sensitive to detect aluminum in plastic sections of undecalcified bone biopsies from healthy volunteers as well as from patients with renal and non-renal bone diseases. We used quantitative histomorphometry to measure the percentage of trabecular surface stained by aluminum and found that our new method was approximately 50% more sensitive for detecting aluminum than the Acid Solochrome Azurine (ASA) method which in turn was significantly more sensitive than the Aluminon method. Aluminon is widely used in pathology laboratories for diagnostic purposes despite concerns in the literature about Aluminon’s limited sensitivity for aluminum. Our histomorphometric results showed that the newly developed method stained approximately 10% of the trabecular surface in bone sections from healthy controls, 38% from renal patients, 26% from patients with vitamin D deficiency, and 29% from patients with osteoporosis. Histomorphometric measurements of aluminum-stained trabecular surfaces in sections stained with ASA were consistent with those obtained in Walton-stained sections but proportionately lower. Moreover, the Walton and ASA methods stained aluminum at similar locations in adjacent bone sections. As the ASA and Walton methods are considerably more sensitive for bone aluminum than the Aluminon method, we recommend that either of them should be used in place of the Aluminon method for routine diagnostic purposes.In recent years, the incidence of osteofragility fractures has increased multifold Some clinicians maintain that the only reliable method for diagnosing and monitoring aluminum-related bone disease is to specifically stain bone biopsy sections for aluminum Aluminon (the triammonium salt of aurin tricarboxylic acid) is a staining reagent widely used for the histological detection of aluminum in bone of renal patients In order to analyse aluminum in fractured bone from patients without renal failure, a sensitive staining method like ASA but with different attributes would be useful. Our aim in this study was to develop a sensitive method to stain aluminum in undecalcified bone. Towards this end we modified the Walton histological procedure for aluminum, a sensitive method designed to stain aluminum in paraffin sections of brain and other soft tissues We examined bone biopsy specimens from four groups of patients. These groups included (1) normal controls without diagnosis of bone disease ( The bone biopsy specimens were processed without decalcification for methacrylate-embedding and sectioned at 8  Trim section to remove excess resin, leaving a margin of resin all around the tissue. Leave section in Einarson’s chromium gallocyanin solution Stain section in 0.5% phloxine (cyanosine; C.I. No. 45410; Sigma–Aldrich Corp.) for 30 Cover section with 5% phosphotungstic acid (VWR International Ltd., Poole, UK) for 10 Differentiate stain by leaving section in 95% methanol for 30 Stain section with 0.05% fast green FCF (C.I. 42053, VWR International Ltd.) for 2 Cover section with 1% glacial acetic acid, 2 Replace with water. Spread floating section and pick it up onto filter paper. Blot section dry. Then continue drying for 4–5 To mount on slides, dip the flattened section and the slide in xylene; lay the wet section on the slide and invert them onto a coverslip streaked with DPX mounting medium (Sigma–Aldrich Corp.). To prepare Einarson’s chromium-gallocyanin solution, 5 We compared the percentage of cancellous bone surface that stained for aluminum in serial biopsy sections from the 25 subjects, processed with the three staining methods. The bone sections were evaluated under 200× magnification by a single, highly-experienced assessor (THD), using an eye-piece fitted with a 10 Due to difference in the tinctorial properties of phloxine, Solochrome Azurine, and Aluminon, the histological methods used to treat the sections were readily recognizable by the assessor. However, measurements and all other observations were undertaken in a blinded manner. The bone specimens were analysed in such way that all sections with the Walton stain were allocated to one batch with the patient’s name and diagnosis remaining blinded. The two other stains were evaluated in a similar manner. One-way ANOVA and Bone surface aluminum stains cherry red with Aluminon, blue with ASA, and magenta with the Walton method. Whereas the Aluminon and ASA methods stain bone matrix pale orange, the Walton method is multichromatic, staining bone matrix turquoise and nuclei gray while collagen and endothelial cells stain green. Erythrocytes generally appear bright magenta with the Walton stain, and blue in some ASA-processed specimens, as a result of their aluminum-positivity The Walton method appears to be as sensitive in bone as in soft tissues and it yields highly reproducible results on serial sections. In some specimens processed with the Walton stain, aluminum deposition is visible in cement lines in lamellar bone, and within poorly mineralized regions of woven bone confirmable under polarized light. Aluminum staining by the Walton method is particularly prominent near the endosteal surface. Of the Aluminon-stained bone sections we examined, few exhibited aluminum staining of the cancellous bone surface. Where Aluminon staining was observed, it was most often located along the cut outer edge of the biopsy specimen, suggestive of artifact. ASA showed this effect to a lesser extent. In order to compare the Walton, ASA, and Aluminon methods, we had to search for and choose sections Histomorphometry measurements for the individual samples are shown in As might be expected, bone sections from the renal patients exhibited the most staining for aluminum, averaging 38% of the trabecular surface by the Walton method and 24% by the ASA method. By way of comparison, the Aluminon method stained 5% of the surface in the Aluminon-positive renal group and 0% in sections from all other specimens. In cancellous bone biopsy specimens from normal adults without diagnosis of bone disease, the Walton method for aluminum stained 10%, and the ASA method 8%, of the trabecular surface. With the Walton method, specimens from patients with osteoporosis and those with deprivational vitamin D deficiency exhibited intermediate values between the renal groups and the normal group, amounting to 29% for those with osteoporosis and 26% for the vitamin D-deficient patients. When sections of cancellous bone from the same patient groups were processed with ASA, 19% and 15% of the trabecular surfaces, respectively, were stained. In the “normal” group, the Walton and ASA methods stained significantly larger proportions of the trabecular surface than the Aluminon stain when analysed with the Kruskall-Wallis one-way ANOVA on ranks test ( The intraclass correlation coefficient determined for the intra-observer reliability trial of the histomorphometric technique used for this study was 0.899 with a 95% CI of 0.731–0.983. According to Fleiss, ICCs greater than 0.75 indicate excellent reliability This paper describes a new diagnostic technique for identifying aluminum in undecalcified bone. The Walton histological method has a straightforward mechanism for staining aluminum, a hard Lewis acid which binds to oxygen donors in phosphate and carboxyl groups of protein in unmineralized bone matrix and marrow cells When the Walton stain was originally described for use in soft tissues We validated the Walton method by exposing sections of formalin-fixed organs from aged rats that had been repeatedly dosed with aluminum. Some of these sections were pre-treated with desferroxamine and others with EDTA, chelating agents known to remove aluminum from tissue. When subsequently processed with the Walton stain for aluminum, the chelated sections showed conspicuously less aluminum-staining than adjacent unchelated sections from the same specimens Our incentive for developing a sensitive method for aluminum detection in bone arose from several problems inherent in the Aluminon method. According to Kaye et al. We included several patient groups in our study to compare how the three stains for aluminum perform under different conditions. Both the Walton and ASA methods have sufficient sensitivity to detect aluminum in all bone sections examined although, as expected, both methods showed that bone sections from renal patients contained the most aluminum-staining while those from normal subjects had the least amount. Bone sections from osteoporosis patients and those with vitamin D deficiency had intermediate values. Furthermore, the two methods stained at comparable locations within adjacent bone sections. The moderately high level of bone aluminum seen in patients with vitamin D deficiency is not surprising since conditions that inhibit calcium absorption enhance intestinal aluminum absorption and elevate the levels of plasma aluminum and bone aluminum in normal animals Clearly, an association between aluminum and bone disease in patients with vitamin D-deficiency or with idiopathic osteoporosis does not establish that aluminum causes these bone abnormalities. However, if aluminum does constitute a heretofore unexpected contribution to bone pathology from vitamin D deficiency or osteoporosis, controlling the amount of aluminum in the diet by avoiding aluminum-containing food additives and alum-clarified drinking water could potentially benefit many patients presenting with these non-renal bone conditions. Given the detrimental effects of aluminum on bone metabolism  acid solochrome azurine degrees of freedom United States Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act intraclass correlation coefficient confidence interval a dye also known as Food green 3 Terrence H Diamond analysis of variance The authors have no actual or potential conflict of interest in this manuscript or in the work that is the subject of this manuscript. No commercial entity paid or directed, or agreed to pay or direct, any benefits to the authors or to any research fund, foundation, educational institution, or other charitable or non-profit organization with which the authors are affiliated or associated. The authors extend their thanks to Don Bryson-Taylor for his helpful comments on the manuscript, to Margaret Wilkinson for assistance with samples, and to the South East Sydney and Illawara Area Health Service for their funding support.