Control of crystal shape is of great importance to several contemporary industries and thus there is a need to understand the fundamental processes determining crystal morphology. Computer simulations have been widely used in an attempt to predict the morphology of crystals in real systems under a variety of conditions and this review demonstrates that great strides have been made in this area over the last 18 months.Control of the morphology of crystals is a field of vital interest to industries ranging from hydrometallurgy to pharmaceuticals, as many physical properties of crystals are implicitly dependent on their shape. It is not surprising then that morphology prediction has enjoyed over six decades of active study. During this period, computers were invented and their power has been increasing at an exponential rate that shows no sign of abating. This increase in computer speed has resulted in increasingly sophisticated simulations of crystal growth and consequently crystal morphology. Morphology prediction has matured to the point where it can be routinely applied via the Cerius The traditional method to predict morphology Brunsteiner and Price Hollander et al. Sometimes these basic morphological prediction techniques do not work and the failure of the models is often ascribed to the effect of solvent or additives Industrially, most crystals are grown from solution, with very few grown in the vapour phase. Although the prediction methods described in the previous section are in many cases adequate for crystals grown in solution, sometimes the solvent molecules interact differently with different surfaces of a crystal, affecting the morphology. Although great advances in this area were made by Liu et al. Often researchers use a qualitative method, where the surfaces are examined to assess their properties (e.g., polar, H-bonded) and inferences on how a particular solvent will interact with these surfaces are drawn. A good example of this methodology is the work of Tedesco et al. Bisker-Leib and Doherty Gale and Rohl have extended the COSMO approach for continuum solvation Many contemporary modelling studies in crystal growth focus on the effect of additives on a growing crystal. This is primarily motivated by the search for methods to precisely control the crystal growth and hence the morphology of crystals. The simplest and most common type of simulation involves studying the interactions between a flat surface and the additive. The complexity of these types of simulations varies greatly depending on the size of the additive, which ranges from a single atomic ion right through to a protein. The effects of cobalt on calcite morphology have been studied Braybrook et al. A remarkable system in which large morphology changes are observed in the presence of growth modifiers is tricalcium aluminate. Fogg et al. The two studies above utilised 2D periodic surfaces in their calculations to accurately simulate surfaces. Other studies have approximated this by cutting a chunk of crystal containing the surface. Calculations of this type which examined the interactions between barium sulfate and a series of polyphosphonates were performed by Bosbach et al. An impressive set of calculations were performed by Cheng et al. Most growth modifiers are effective at very low concentrations and thus are believed to act by binding to growth features such as step and kinks, rather than to a flat terrace. Calculations of the binding of molecules to steps and kinks have been previously undertaken Orme et al. All the simulations discussed so far assume that thermodynamics plays the most significant role in crystal growth. Although these calculations agree well with experimental observations of morphology, crystallisation is by its nature a kinetic process and cutting-edge simulations are addressing this issue. The computer program MONTY, which incorporates the effects of supersaturation via Monte Carlo techniques, has been developed at the University of Nijmegen. Their algorithm can simulate crystal growth from an isotropic mother phase in any direction on any given crystal. By calculating the probability to attach or detach growth units at every site (either 2D nucleation or spiral growth sites) on the crystal face, the growth of the face can be simulated. Thus the dependence of the crystal morphology on supersaturation can be determined once information on the relevant growth mechanism for the various faces is known. The technique has been successfully applied to explain the supersaturation dependence of the morphology of monoclinic paracetamol Molecular dynamics has also been used to study crystallisation processes. Ter Horst et al. All the work discussed to this point predicts morphology by assuming that the morphological importance of a given face is inversely proportional to the growth rate i.e., fast growing faces do not appear in the morphology at the expense of slow growing faces. In a series of papers, Prywer The derivation presented by Prywer can be used to look at different growth regimes as long as the growth rates are constant whilst a slab of crystal is deposited. This is because the equations depend on the initial size of the crystal faces and the time the crystal is growing. The effect of depositing a new slab of crystal at a different rate can be assessed by updating the initial face sizes to the sizes after growing the previous slab, and using the new crystal growth rates. Furthermore, the effect of a seed on crystal morphology can be modelled by comparing the resulting morphology from calculations in which the initial sizes of all faces are zero (homogeneous nucleation) to one where the initial sizes are set to the sizes of the faces on a seed crystal. In 2002, the long-awaited book, ‘A New Kind of Science’ by Stephen Wolfram was finally published Wolfram notes that not all crystals grow this way, however, and cites ice as an example. In this case a more complex automaton is required where at each iteration a cell becomes black only if it has exactly one black neighbour. The resulting evolving pattern switches back and forth between tree-like and facetted shapes as new branches grow but then collide with each other, with both shapes looking very similar to real snowflakes. The rule for this automaton is rationalised by the observation that adding a piece of ice to a growing snowflake is an exothermic process, which inhibits the addition of further pieces of ice nearby. These simulations also produce a testable prediction; that during the growth of a single snowflake there should be alternation between tree-like and facetted shapes. Wolfram then goes on to demonstrate that more complex rules lead to more complex shapes such as needles and dendritic forms, as well as forms that appear to be random. He concludes by stating that this randomness is a consequence of the underlying rules and not of any external forces, and suggests further that the apparent randomness sometimes observed in the morphology of crystals is not due to the conventional explanation of fluctuations in the crystallising medium. This review has demonstrated that computer prediction of crystal morphology is a very active field of research that has advanced greatly in the last 18 months. New computer programs and algorithms have been developed which simulate the effects of supersaturation and solvent on crystal morphology, and their use is expected to become commonplace in the near future. The methodology of Prywer for predicting morphology from growth rates is untested on real systems and awaits incorporation into one of the morphology prediction packages before it will be rigorously tested. Long-timescale simulations of crystal growth of real systems are in their infancy but can reasonably be expected to become more accessible in the middle term. Finally there remains much work to be done on cellular automata before it can be determined if they will play a central role in crystal morphology simulation.