A novel type of alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme has been characterized from Gram-positive methylotrophic (Bacillus methanolicus, the actinomycetes Amycolatopsis methanolica and Mycobacterium gastri) and non-methylotrophic bacteria (Rhodococcus strains). Its in vivo role is in oxidation of methanol and other primary alcohols. B. methanolicus displays activity of an NAD-dependent methanol dehydrogenase (MDH), which is strongly stimulated by a specific (activator) protein. A. methanolica and M. gastri use an N,N′- dimethyl-4-nitrosoaniline (NDMA)-dependent MDH (methanol: NDMA oxidoreductase; MNO). MDH (43 kDa subunit) and MNO (49 kDa subunit) possess similar decameric structures with five-fold symmetry. Both proteins contain Zn2+- and Mg2+-ions and tightly (but non-covalently) bound NAD(P)(H) cofactors. These nicotinoproteins share a high degree of sequence similarity; they belong to Family III of NAD(P)-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases (ADH). A. methanolica extracts also possess dye (dichlorophenol indophenol, DCPIP and 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide, MTT)-linked ADH activities. These represent the overall activities of multi-enzyme systems. MNO is part of the MTT–ADH complex. The other two proteins and their cofactors most likely participate in transfer of reducing equivalents from the NADPH cofactor in MNO to the respiratory chain.Methanol is formed in large quantities in mineralization processes in nature, mostly from degradation of the methyl-esters and -ethers that occur in plant components such as pectin and lignin. Methylotrophic microorganisms able to grow on methanol as sole carbon and energy source have been isolated frequently from soil samples. These organisms possess special metabolic pathways allowing generation of energy from methanol oxidation and synthesis of compounds with carbon–carbon bonds from methanol assimilation Methylotrophic yeasts (e.g., Methanol oxidation in Gram-negative bacteria involves a periplasmic quinoprotein methanol dehydrogenase (MDH; EC 1.1.99.8) In contrast to the well-known enzymology and genetics of methanol oxidation in methylotrophic yeasts and Gram-negative methylotrophic bacteria, little is known about the enzymes of methanol oxidation in Gram-positive methylotrophs. These bacteria lack a clear periplasmic space and generally do not possess PQQ. Several papers Three families of NAD(P)-dependent ADHs (EC 1.1.1.1) have become established  Nicotinoproteins form a recently recognized class of redox enzymes with NAD(P) as firmly bound cofactor. They catalyze a large variety of reactions, including transhydrogenation, isomerization, dismutation, epimerization of their substrates, and oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols  The affinities of MDH for alcohol substrates and exogenous NAD, as well as the The structural MDH gene of Recently, we have cloned and characterized the  Further progress became possible following the observation by van Ophem et al. MNO constitutes the first single protein with MDH activity identified in Analysis of the quaternary protein structures of the purified The mutant data obtained Tools for the genetic modification of The identification and characterization of structurally similar, NAD(P)H-containing MDHs from Further biochemical investigations are required in order to obtain a full understanding of the nature of the methanol oxidation pathways in Gram-positive, methanol-utilizing bacteria.