We report a case of successful treatment of a high, stable intertrochanteric fracture (type 1) in a 59-year-old man. He sustained the injury 8 years after the resurfacing procedure. The fracture was fixed using three 6.5-mm cannulated screws, and he has returned to his normal level of activities 8 months after the fixation. We have shown that fixation with cannulated screws may be an acceptable option for treatment of high trochanteric fractures where a stable anatomical reduction can be obtained. We have also included a review of the literature for other reported surgical treatment options of this complication.Hip resurfacing has become a popular option for the management of hip osteoarthritis especially in the younger high-demand population We present a case report of a 59-year-old patient who sustained an intertrochanteric hip fracture 8 years after Birmingham hip resurfacing and our successful management using cannulated screws. To our knowledge, no case has been described in the English literature where such a fracture has been fixed using cannulated screws. A 59-year-old man had bilateral Birmingham hip resurfacing for symptomatic osteoarthritis using a standard posterior He presented again 8 years after resurfacing after a fall from his bike with severe right hip pain and inability to walk. Plain radiographs confirmed a displaced intertrochanteric fracture of the proximal femur ( One year after the injury, he returned to his normal level of activities. Examination showed a painless range of movement equal to that of his other hip. Radiographs confirmed healing of the fracture ( We report a case of successful management of displaced intertrochanteric fracture of the femur using cannulated screws 8 years after a hip resurfacing. Although intracapsular fractures of the femoral neck are a well-known complication of hip resurfacing, intertrochanteric/subtrochanteric fractures are much more rare. This is probably because hip resurfacing increases the stress in femoral neck even in the absence of notching Aning et al Treatment of intertrochanteric fractures after resurfacing arthroplasty is, at times, challenging. The available options for treatment in the order of increasing invasiveness are nonoperative cannulated screws, intramedullary (IM) nailing/blade plating/dynamic hip screw (DHS), and revision to a total hip arthroplasty We believe that cannulated screws may be used for the management of intertrochanteric fractures complicating hip resurfacing operation. Certain considerations should be taken into account before making the decision to treat such fractures using cannulated screws. This technique should only be used in selected cases where the fracture pattern is stable and satisfactory fracture reduction has been achieved on the operating table. It is important that the fracture reduction be anatomic to avoid component malalignment, which could lead to adverse wear. It is mandatory to have a good bone stock for a stable fixation and beware of the risk of subtrochanteric fracture if the screw holes are placed distal to the lesser trochanter. Finally, it is important to follow up such patients carefully to monitor for adverse tissue response Conflict of Interest Statements