The cordierite is commonly prepared by reaction of talc, clay and gibbsite within the range of 1200–1350°C. This study deals with the effect of the amorphization by grinding of that mixture and its influence on the cordierite formation.
                  The mixture previously mentioned underwent six different treatments: mixing without grinding (A) (only mixing); non-amorphizing grinding (AM) and amorphizing grinding in oscillating mill at four different times (H samples). The phases formed by thermal treatment were studied using differential thermal analysis (DTA)–thermogravimetric analysis (TG)–DTG, dilatometries and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques in certain combinations.
                  The thermal analysis of the A and AM series were compared and they do not show significant differences, whereas the H samples present remarkable alterations in the DTA peaks as well as in the weight losses (TG). Thus, a great number of DTA peaks tend to decrease the temperature of the maximum and to lower the intensity as the amorphization time increases.
                  Calcination tests performed within the range 900–1200°C show important differences in the diffractograms obtained from the intermediate products. While at 1350°C the A and H samples reach the same final phases, within the range 1200–1360°C they present important differences in the DTA indicating that the sequence and direction of reaction are different. The same behavior can be observed by dilatometric analysis.Cordierite, whose composition is 2MgO·2Al The most common method to obtain these phases is from mixtures of solid powders such as: talc, clays, gibbsite, alumina, magnesia, etc., submitted to under thermal treatments between 1250 and 1350 Different processes can remarkably influence the reactivity of the solids. Particularly, the mechanical treatments are important as long as they can help to produce changes in the texture and structure of the solids Kaolinite The influence of the mechanical treatment by grinding on the formation of cordierite from a talc, kaolinitic clay and gibbsite mixture is studied in this work. The starting materials used were talc, kaolinitic clay and gibbsite, whose compositions are shown in A Herzog HSM 100 oscillating mill, with a frequency of 12.5 The reference mixtures were A (without grinding, only mixing) and a mix named A Both mills do not produce contamination in the milling conditions employed in the present experiences. The differential thermal analysis (DTA) and the thermogravimetric analysis (TG) were carried out with a Netzsch 409 equipment using platinum crucibles with α-Al The crystalline phases were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Philips equipment using Cu Kα radiation ( BET specific surface area was measured with a Micromeritics Accusorb equipment. Dilatometric curves were performed with a Netzsch dilatometer and a heating rate of 5 The granulometric effect of the mixtures on the DTA–TG diagrams and XRD diffractograms was studied. The results obtained for the A samples (the thicker, BET specific surface area shows an increase in the first 5 The XRD of the H samples ( The amorphization produces significant changes in the DTA–TG diagrams. The evolution of the diagrams as a function of grinding time from H5 to H20 is shown in Some peaks that took place during the intermediate steps of the gibbsite dehydration were noticeable in the pure samples but not in the A A second important endothermic peak is observed in A The A Afterwards, a small exothermic effect at 971 H5–H20 samples appear to be more active with respect to subsequent thermal treatments, as the transformation of metakaolin to spinel (Si–Al–O) phase occurs at temperatures lower than A Within the range 1150–1380 The analysis of the TG–DTG curves ( The A The grinding in the Herzog causes shifts ( Everything described up to now is consistent with the crystalline structure loss that takes place when the mechanical energy is transferred by means of milling. Thus, even though the chemical composition of the mixtures are the same, their different “crystallinity degree” and “accumulated energy” produce different behaviors during calcinations between 20 and 1200 The XRD analyses during the heating of the A Additionally, this reaction was followed by dilatometry ( All curves present a minimum from which they start to expand. This minimum tends to decrease with milling, starting from 1200° for A The maximum contraction value increases with the milling, being the minimum for A Finally, some calcination experiences have been performed at different temperatures but with variable soaking time at those temperatures. At 900 Within the range 100–1150 The kaolinite, talc and gibbsite mixtures that generate cordierite are easily activated by milling. Due to the milling, to the minerals producing the crystalline structure loss and the reactivity increase. The mineral mixtures underwent mechanochemical effects that have been analyzed. The DTA–TG and dilatometry techniques clearly indicate the structural modifications produced by milling on the kaolinite, gibbsite and talc. The mixture treated generates cordierite as the equilibrium phase at lower temperatures. The greater differences in the cordierite formation are due to the different reaction mechanisms, which explains the intermediate phases formed in the amorphized mixtures (H5–H20) and the reference samples (A–A The authors wish to thank Marı&#x0301;a Eugenia Ghirimoldi and Jorge Rinaldi for their contribution to this work.