Previous studies in mechanical and column flotation cells have shown that bubble 
                     surface 
                     area 
                     flux (Sb) is an appropriate indicator of gas dispersion in a flotation cell which has a relatively strong correlation with flotation rate constant. In the present investigation, based on extensive tests conducted in an industrial Metso Minerals CISA flotation column (4m in diameter and 12m in height) in a rougher circuit, Sb
                      as a function of the most significant operating variables which affect gas dispersion in a flotation column (i.e. superficial gas velocity, slurry density (solids%) and frother dosage/type) was modeled using artificial neural network (ANN) and statistical (non-linear regression) techniques. The models were developed taking into consideration a data set consisting of 82 experimental tests conducted in an industrial rougher column (at a copper concentrator in Iran) operating under a variety of experimental conditions.
                  This paper outlines the development of the models and validation using a number of randomly selected datasets. Limitations of the present models are discussed and comments and recommendations on further investigations are given.Previous studies have shown that bubble surface area flux ( Previous findings have also demonstrated a good correlation between flotation rate constants (i.e. collection and overall rate constants, This paper discusses the development of empirical and artificial neural network models which enable to predict Industrial experiments were carried out in a flotation column in rougher circuit of Miduk copper concentrator, located in the south-east of Iran. In this plant, around 18000 As mentioned before, the aim was to develop models to predict A full factorial experimental design comprising four variables (three variables at three levels and one variable at two levels) was performed (i.e. 54 runs). Experiments were carried out randomly based on design pattern. Afterwards, a number of repeated experiments and tests at more gas velocities ( The  According to the results, the most important variable for General form of the empirical model to predict Various linear and non-linear models were fitted to data and for each model residual analysis was performed by plotting predicted vs. observed values by STATISTICA 6.0. In each statistical test, a new model expression was proposed and then the estimated and observed values of The coefficients and exponents of the mathematical models were determined by a numerical method, called Quasi–Newton ( Standard units of operating variables were used in the model, viz. cm/s for Ordinary least squares regression assumes that the error term has a constant variance or is homoskedastic. If the error term does not have constant variance around the regression line, tests of significance are unreliable. The White test is a widely used method to test for constant variance ( In total, 82 sets of experimental values of The correlation between observed and predicted values of The results suggest that the predictive capability of the model is reasonably good except at high In a similar study It seems air flow rate is the most significant parameter which affects gas dispersion in both mechanical and column flotation cells. It is reasonable since Artificial neural network (ANN) base modeling is a relatively new non-linear statistical technique. Recently, there has been increasing interest in neural network modeling in different mineral processing applications (e.g. An ANN is a flexible and robust mathematical structure which is capable of identifying complex non-linear relations between input and output data points. A neural network consists of simple synchronous processing elements, called “neurons”, which are inspired by biological nerve systems. The neurons are connected to each other by links with their own weight factors or “weights”. Usually neural networks are trained by adjusting the values of the weights of the links between neurons, so that the network will fit its outputs as closely as possible to the represented experimental data. During training, the weight of a link multiplied by the input signal on that link defines the activation of the neuron. The sum of the activations of all inputs of a neuron defines the value of the output signal for that neuron via a transfer function. Then calculated outputs are compared with the targets and the differences between them are back-propagated through the network. This process continues in epochs until network outputs fit the targets. Once the network is trained, the weight factors are fixed and the neural network may be used to calculate the output for any arbitrary set of input data as long as it belongs to the space defined by the training data sets. A network is usually trained using a large number of input data with corresponding outputs (input/output pairs). Commonly, the process of ANN modeling includes the following steps: Database collection. Data division. Analysis and pre-processing of the data. Design and training of the neural network. Testing the trained network. It should be mentioned that the neural networks can predict the output of any arbitrary set of input data as long as it belongs to the space defined by the training data sets. In other words, extrapolation is questionable with empirical models. The design of an ANN includes the choice of architecture, training functions and training algorithms. The architecture of a network is depicted by the number of hidden layers in the network, the number of neurons and the transfer function in each layer, and how the layers are connected to each other. The nature of the problem determines the type of neural network (NN) to be used. The most commonly used NN architecture is the feed-forward hierarchical architecture. Such architecture is shown schematically in Here the neurons are ordered in layers and the information is processed in one direction, from input to output. There are many different training algorithms and transfer functions from which a designer can choose a neural network ( Sometimes, the availability of data set maybe severely limited and we may not be able to afford the luxury of keeping aside part of the data set for model comparison purposes. In such cases we can adopt the procedure of “ One of the problems that occur during neural network training is called overfitting. The error on the training set is driven to a very small value, but when new data is presented to the network the error is large. The network has memorized the training examples, but it has not learned to generalize to new situations. One method for improving generalization is called regularization. This involves modifying the performance function. The typical performance function that is used for training neural networks is the sum of squares of the network errors ( The problem with regularization is that it is difficult to determine the optimum value for the performance function parameters. The relative size of the performance function parameters dictates the emphasis for training. If Before training the network, the input/output datasets were normalized within the range of ±1. The normalized value ( A multilayer ANN for modeling the The network was trained using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm ( Similarly, 80% of datasets (66 datasets) used for training and 20% of datasets (16 datasets) for testing of the model. Furthermore, the training and testing datasets were selected randomly among datasets ( A relationship among the number of training patterns available, If the network uses The current developed model includes 11 (4 During training, the network returned 2 As already mentioned, 20% of randomly selected datasets were used to validate both models. Operating conditions of validation tests as well as experimental and predicted values of The predicted values of The leave-one-out technique was also used for modeling the In the present investigation, In statistical modeling approach, firstly, the main and interaction effects of operating variables on In ANN modeling approach, a Levenberg–Marquardt training algorithm combined with a Bayesian regularization technique was used as a learning rule for modeling Finally, ANN and statistical models were successfully validated using a number of randomly selected datasets. The model validation analysis demonstrated the capability of both models to predict It should be noted that even though the results obtained in the present study are limited to the industrial rougher flotation columns treating copper ores, however, they give a deep insight into the effect of operating variables particularly Today, by developing sensors to measure gas dispersion parameters including superficial gas velocity, gas hold-up and bubble size distribution, major steps towards gas dispersion management in flotation cells and therefore process optimization and control have been taken ( The Authors would like to thank the National Iranian Copper Industries Company (NICICo) for supporting this research. Special appreciation is extended to the operating, maintenance and metallurgy personnel of Miduk copper concentrator and R&D of Sarcheshmeh copper complex. The corresponding author would like to gratefully acknowledge useful comments and discussions received from Prof. Juan Yianatos during his Ph.D. sabbatical leave at Santa Maria University (Chile).