In worldwide, more than half of palladium is used to produce exhaust catalysts in the automotive industry. However, the recycling of palladium is a great challenge due to its low content and chemical inertness. A novel approach for recovery of palladium in spent catalyst material from automobile by a capture process of eutectic copper was proposed. In the capture process, copper is used as capture agent. The palladium is concentrated and entered the alloy phase under a certain temperature. Because the different density of the smelting slag and alloy, they are layered to realize the separation of the metals. The results were summarized as follows: (i) palladium in the spent catalyst material was captured by copper with 97% of recovery rate of Pd under optimal condition; (ii) the palladium atoms replaced to copper in Cu crystal to form Cu–Pd alloy by analysis of EDS, XPS and first principles calculation; (iii) the carrier of cordierite from spent catalyst material achieved glass transition and prepared the glass ceramics after the capture; (iv) a thermodynamic mechanism of the capture process of copper was proposed. Firstly, under molten state of the copper phase and the slag phase, palladium can be transferred from the slag phase to the copper phase when ΔEsurface = 2πrΔS1 (σpalladium-copper-σpalladium-slag-σslag-copper cosα) <0. Then, palladium atom replaced the copper atom in the Cu crystal to form the Cu–Pd alloy when the values of ΔH and Ecoh<0.Catalytic converters in automobile are primarily used to convert CO, unburned CH Conventional recycling processes of palladium mainly focus on the hydrometallurgical processes to leach palladium, followed by a process to extract palladium from other elements contained in leachates. Technologies include leaching ( Pyrometallurgy technology has attracted attention in the application of extracting palladium in spent catalyst material from automobile ( Here in this work, the aim of the study is to explore the feasibility of the capture process of copper for palladium in spent catalyst material from automobile in aspect of environmental impact and recycling efficiency. In addition, the carrier from spent catalyst material is reused to prepare glass ceramics synchronously during the capture process. Factors on recovery of palladium, morphology, microstructure and component of copper concentrate enriched palladium are studied. Furthermore, the mechanism of capture process by copper for palladium is proposed by thermodynamics and first-principles analysis. Finally, an economic assessment is carried out to calculate the costs and revenues of the recycling process. In short, this study provides theoretical foundation for recycling of palladium by the capture process, and also points out a green and efficient way for recycling and reuse of spent catalyst. The spent catalyst material in automobile was obtained from a dismantling factory of automobile. The spent catalyst material sample was crushed in this experiment. The sample was mainly composed of cordierite (2MgO·2Al2O3·5SiO2), aluminum oxide coating, platinum group metal (Pd, Pt, Rh, etc.) and additives (CeO We observed the morphology of the spent catalyst material by SEM-EDS, as shown in The crucible loaded with about 5 g of spent catalyst material with particle size of <74 μm mixed with a certain dosage of copper oxide, 5 wt % C, 30 wt % CaO, 20 wt % SiO The effects of melting temperature, dosage of capture process of copper, mass ratio of SiO Where, M The chemical component analysis of spent catalyst material was examined by X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (XRF-1800, Shimadzu, Japan). The quantitative analysis of palladium in the spent catalyst material before and after processing was measured by inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, IRIS Advantage 1000, THERMO, U.S.) after being completely dissolved with an aqua regia, HF and 68 wt % HNO Effect of melting temperature. The effect of melting temperature on the recovery rate of palladium was studied in the range from 1100 to 1400 °C at 2 of m Effect of dosage of copper oxide. The effect of dosage of capture process of copper on the recovery rate of palladium was studied in the range from 5 to 40 wt %, at temperature of 1350 °C with heating time of 2 h. The relationship between recovery rate of palladium and adding content of CuO was shown in Effect of mass ratio of SiO Where T was the temperature, S was the percentage content of SiO After the capture process of copper for spent catalyst, the palladium in the spent catalyst material was enriched and entered into the copper phase. In order to investigate the distribution of palladium in the copper phase and the interaction between palladium and copper, the morphology and microstructure of copper sphere enriched palladium was analyzed by SEM and TEM-EDS. The SEM image showed the morphology of copper concentration enriched palladium, as shown in In order to further determine whether palladium forms a continuous solid solution in copper phase. The surface composition and chemical state of the copper concentrate enriched palladium were analyzed by XPS. The high-resolution XPS spectra of Cu 2p and Pd 3d 3/2 for the sample of the copper concentrate adding 15% and 30% copper oxide, and standard Cu–Pd alloy which was composed of 70 wt % Pd and 30 wt % Cu were presented in In order to better melt and utilize the carrier of cordierite from spent catalyst, some additives CaO, SiO To sum up, the copper-palladium alloys can be as a raw material of palladium in market. In addition, the copper-palladium alloy can be further refined to extract palladium to supply market. The extracted palladium can be reused in automotive applications. The carrier of automobile waste catalyst is mainly cordierite (2MgO·2Al At present, there is no consensus about the mechanism of capture process of copper for palladium. For such a ternary system of copper, slag and precious metals, the three phases interacted and influenced each other. To our best knowledge, the capture process of copper for palladium in spent catalyst material was a complex process. Therefore, combined with some comprehensive knowledge of materials, chemical thermodynamics and first principle calculation ( For the migration process of palladium, when the reaction temperature reaches the melting point of copper and slag, the copper and slag began to melt in the ternary system of spent catalyst, copper and palladium. When the spherical inclusion of palladium transited from the slag phase to the copper phase with an infinitely small contaction of △h, the inclusions of palladium have an interfacial tension of σ After palladium entered the copper phase, can copper and palladium atoms act to form a copper-palladium alloy? Further, the thermodynamic criteria for the formation of Cu–Pd alloy should be calculated. Our computations were based on the first-principles density functional theory (DFT) approach within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) ( Where H is the formation heat, E Where E The H and E In the study, a novel capture process of eutectic copper was developed to recover palladium in spent catalyst material from automobile. Several conclusions can be listed as follows: (1) Palladium in the spent catalyst material was captured by copper in the form of a copper-palladium alloy. An optimal Pd recovery rate of 97% was achieved at the condition of 1350 °C of melting temperature, adding 15 wt % CuO, 5 wt % C, 2 of SiO This work was supported by the