We tested termite mound materials belonging to different feeding groups: Cubitermes (soil-feeder), Trinervitermes (grass-feeder) and Macrotermes (litter-feeder), as natural microbial inoculum to promote plant growth and increase nutrient supplies from soil organic matter and inorganic amendments (rock phosphate), through their effects on soil microorganisms (functional diversity of soil microflora, arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, rhizobia, fluorescent pseudomonads, actinomycetes and saprophytic fungi). Experiments were made in a pot experiment with Acacia seyal, a leguminous tree abundant in West Africa, with a sandy soil amended or not with rock phosphate. Results indicated a stimulation of plant growth with Cubitermes and Trinervitermes mound powder (plant height and shoot biomass), similar to what was obtained with rock phosphate alone. Leaf content in N was also increased in the termite treatments (except in Macrotermes soil), whereas mycorrhizal colonization was inhibited as compared to the control. The development of saprophytic fungi was significantly higher in the soils amended with rock phosphate and this effect was hypothesized to be related to the production of large quantities of oxalic acid by fungal populations. The fluorescent pseudomonad populations notably increased in the soils dually amended with mound powders and rock phosphate, and this could be due to the fact that some species of this bacterial group are able to dissolve rock phosphate. The organic and inorganic amendments decreased the soil catabolic evenness in all the mound powder treatments. Among the mound materials tested, Cubitermes mound powder had the most promising effect, especially on SIR response to oxalate. It is concluded that soils amended both with rock phosphate and Cubitermes mound soil could promote the development of microbial communities, which could help to metabolize this compound and consequently enhance plant growth.Most of the semi-arid and arid areas of West Africa are characterized by long dry periods and very infertile soils. The main limitation to plant growth is the low soil organic matter content, particularly during the establishment phase ( It has been demonstrated that pedogenesis, organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling are highly influenced by macrofauna ( We studied three different species belonging to the feeding groups as outlined above. The epigeal mounds built by these feeding groups (grass-, litter- and soil-feeding termites) could be considered as islands of higher chemical fertility in tropical areas ( In this study, we hypothesize that termite mound material of different feeding groups could be used as natural microbial inoculum to promote plant growth and increase nutrient supplies from organic or inorganic amendments (i.e. organic matter, rock phosphates), through their effects on soil microorganisms. In order to verify this hypothesis, we investigated the influence of three main feeding groups mound material on the functional diversity of soil microflora, focusing on several microbial groups development (arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, rhizobia, fluorescent pseudomonads, actinomycetes, saprophytic fungi) in a pot experiment with Termite mounds (five per termite feeding group) were sampled in a shrubby savanna, 50 km north of Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), near the small village of Yaktenga. Soils are shallow and rich in gravels above a hard-pan level. The landscape is characterized with large hydromorphic spots (so-called «bowé»), interwined with more deeper soils. Mushroom-shaped The NH Each subsample of mound powder was carefully mixed and 20 g of powder were sampled to determine the microbial biomass using the fumigation–extraction method ( Enumerations of colony forming units (CFU) were performed on King's B agar medium for the fluorescent pseudomonads and an isolation medium for the actinomycetes (Difco™ Actinomycete Isolation Agar). Ten grams fw per sample were vigorously suspended in 100 ml of sterile 0.1M MgSO Seeds of The sandy soil used in this experiment was sampled from a millet field near Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso). Before use, the soil was crushed and passed through a 2-mm sieve. Its chemical and physical characteristics were as follows: pH (H Plastic bags (1 dm After 4-month culture, plants were uprooted and the root systems gently washed. Root nodules induced by indigenous rhizobia were counted. The dry weight (1 week at 65 °C) of the shoot was measured. Ground samples of leaves were ashed (500 °C), digested in 2 ml HCl 6N and 10 ml HNO The soil from each pot was mixed and kept at 4 °C. The NH Microbial functional diversity in soil treatments was assessed by measurement of the patterns of in situ catabolic potential (ISCP) of microbial communities ( Data were treated with one-way analysis of variance. Means were compared using PLSD Fisher test ( CIA has already been used in various domains, including chemometry ( Monte-Carlo tests can be used to check the significance of the relationship between the two tables. This method consists in performing many times a random permutation of the rows of one (or both) table, followed by the re-computation of the total co-inertia. By comparing the total co-inertia obtained in the normal analysis with the co-inertia obtained after randomization, we get an estimation of the probability to encounter a situation similar to the observed situation without relationship between the two tables (i.e., a significance test of the relationship). Computations and graphical displays were made with the ADE-4 software ( NH For the microbiological characteristics, the population of fluorescent pseudomonads was larger in Rock phosphate added alone to the soil significantly increased height, shoot biomass and root biomass of Mycorrhizal colonization was significantly lower in all the mound treatments than in the non inoculated soil (control), with or without rock phosphate, except for No significant differences were recorded for NH Populations of actinomycetes were not significantly modified by mound powders and/or KRP amendments ( Compared to the control treatments, microbial catabolic richness was significantly lower in the The factor map of the SIR responses ( The comparison between  From this research work, four main points deserve discussion: (i) whether the Rock Phosphate amendment increased significantly plant growth but decreased mycorrhizal symbiosis; (ii) whether high levels of oxalic acid SIR responses were associated with the KRP amended soils; (iii) whether these organic and inorganic amendments decreased the catabolic eveness; and (iv) whether The Rock Phosphate from Kodjari contained 0.03% of soluble P which indicates that about 30 ppm had been added to each pot. Plant growth and P leaf content were stimulated (in the treatment without mound powder), whereas mycorrhizal colonization was inhibited. It is well known that high rates of available P in soil may decrease the development of mycorrhizal symbiosis ( Rock phosphates can be solubilized or weathered under the influence of water, acids, complexing agents and oxygen. Biological weathering or biochemical weathering is mediated by microorganisms, which excrete organic acids, phenolic compounds, protons and siderophores ( The organic and inorganic amendments have decreased the soil catabolic eveness in all the mound powder treatments. It has been hypothesized that soil microbial diversity is important for the maintenance of soil processes ( The effects of The main purpose of this study was to test mound materials from three different termite feeding groups, as natural microbial inoculum to promote plant growth and increase nutrient supplies to the plant. Results indicated differences between termite effects on plant growth, mycorrhizal colonization, nodulation and microbial populations (pseudomonads, actinomycetes and saprophytic fungi). The growth response of