Direct bubble–particle interactions are followed by measuring bubble sedimentation potential (BSP) and by visualization at a pendant bubble. Alumina and silica were selected as examples of positive and negative charge particles, respectively, at the test pH 6–7 along with a serpentine sample isolated from an ultramafic Ni-ore. Provided particle concentration was not too high, BSP could be measured and interactions followed. Alumina and serpentine hydrophobized by anionic surfactant made the bubble charge less negative and with silica made hydrophobic by cationic surfactant the bubble became less positive. With non-ionic surfactant (frother) and electrolyte, BSP increased with alumina suggesting an electrostatic (non-hydrophobic) interaction. The visualization experiments confirmed attachment of hydrophobic particles and revealed attachment of non-hydrophobic alumina, silica and serpentine. Non-hydrophobic interactions were explored by introducing ionic surfactant to give the bubble the same sign charge as the particles which diminished pick-up. Under these same conditions the BSP could not be measured attributed to particles being well dispersed from the bubbles and giving competing particle sedimentation potential signals. The possibility of manipulating bubble charge to depress minerals is discussed.Flotation, first developed in the mining industry is now used in a variety of industries, e.g. water treatment, petrochemical, paper manufacturing, food processing ( The recovery of hydrophilic particles is usually attributed to entrainment ( The purpose of this paper is adapt a previously developed bubble sedimentation potential apparatus ( For bubbles in water alone the iso-electric point is ca. pH 1.5–4 ( The possibility of an electrostatic origin of bubble–particle attachment in flotation systems has been entertained periodically. There is no literature apparent describing measurement of bubble electrical charge with particles present. In this study, a previously developed bubble sedimentation (swarm) potential (BSP) apparatus ( The reagents and particles used are summarized in The setup ( The measurement was validated in absence of particles by showing the iso-electric point (iep) given by pH when BSP is zero compared well with range (pH 3.2–4) determined by other techniques ( The setup consisted of a 300 Suspensions of −25 Air flow was stopped, 5 Sedimentation potential For these tests, suspensions of sized particles were prepared in a similar fashion as above. A bubble was generated in the suspension using the syringe. Stirring was continued for 1 Interpreting electrostatic interaction requires particle charge as well as bubble charge. In principle the former could be obtained by resorting to the particle sedimentation potentials (PSPs) set-up reported previously (   In contrast, the alternative systems, alumina-HTAB and silica-SHS where particles are not made hydrophobic and bubbles have the same sign charge as the particles, gave BSP signals too noisy to interpret.      Visualization tests with clinochrysotile proved difficult because the fine fibers (−25 By adapting prior equipment and procedures a technique has been introduced to determine directly interaction of particles with bubbles by monitoring the bubble swarm potential, BSP. Compared to the prior work ( A significant change in BSP was observed when particles were made hydrophobic ( Compared to being hydrophobic, the fact that the particles are charged is not significant in attachment. But there appears to be some non-hydrophobic attachment when combining the BSP and the visualization data in the presence of nonionic frother and/or electrolyte. With increasing addition of alumina, the BSP became slightly less negative ( Non-hydrophobic attachment of alumina and clinochrysotile could be ascribed to electrostatic interaction; but for silica, while heterocoagulation of like-charged particles is known (e.g. The investigation was prompted to address whether electrostatic interaction could contribute to recovery of clinochrysotile in processing an ultramafic Ni-ore. The contribution would be minor compared to entrainment but in the relentless quest to fine tune separations such recovery mechanisms may have to be faced. The BSP data were not supportive but visualization tests did reveal non-hydrophobic interactions ( Direct determination of bubble–particle interaction is analyzed using measurement of bubble sedimentation potential (BSP) and visualizing pickup at a pendant bubble. Provided the particle suspension was dilute the BSP could be measured and bubble–particle interactions followed. Attachment of hydrophobic particles is evident in the case of alumina, silica and clinochrysotile. The BSP gave ambiguous evidence of attachment of non-hydrophobic particles. Images of pickup, however, did indicate attachment of non-hydrophobic particles. Pick-up was significantly reduced by addition of ionic surfactant that gave the bubble the same charge as the particle, cationic in case of alumina and clinochrysotile and anionic in case of silica. Under these conditions BSP could not be determined which is attributed to the particles being well dispersed from the bubbles leading to too high a particle suspension concentration generating competing particle sedimentation potential signals. The findings open the possibility of manipulating bubble charge to depress unwanted minerals. The work was funded under the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by Vale, Teck Resources, Barrick Gold, Xstrata Process Support, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield, COREM and Flottec, under the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Development program.