Separation of wires from recycling streams is often desired for material recovery, quality improvement or for operational reasons. It increases the recovery of non-ferrous metals while congestion of material flows can be avoided. Tests with a new type of separator give good results for removing wires and other long particles from a granular stream of material. High recovery is achieved by repeating a simple separation step many times within one unit process. The resulting cascade system was tested with 700 kg of bottom ash, showing good agreement with theory and resulting in a complete recovery of wires exceeding 50 mm in length.In most recycling operations the presence of wires complicates the separation process. Such processes are often designed for granulate particles. The curved shape of wires and their large ratio of length and diameter create different transport behaviour than for granulate particles. For this reason, a major problem caused by wires is blocking of the material flow. Secondary benefits of removing wires are enhanced metal recovery or the reduction of the metal content of basically non-metal material streams such as plastics or wood. The present research aims to design a separation process with a total recovery of strongly elongated particles. Various solutions have been proposed to remove wires for different kinds of applications. All of the mentioned devices remove wires partially, leaving some of the wires in the bulk stream. The recovery of these separators could be improved by repeating the process many times in a cascade system. A cascade of separation steps results in an increase of grade and recovery. However, this would generally require a lot of space and energy for most separators. An important advantage of the design described here is that it is particularly suitable to repeat itself many times in one unit operation. The basic concept of each step of the cascade separator is the ability of elongated particles to pass over a gap or slot while granular particles of the same diameter will not (see Wires move along the top level of the separator while the granulate particles fall down through the ‘fingers’ in the gap to a lower level. The ‘fingers’ are positioned over the gap with a parallel orientation, to prevent wires that have a different orientation from falling through the gap. The separator works for dry and wet applications, although wet materials show some negative side effects due to sticky granulate particles, which result in a lower throughput and a lower grade of the wire fraction. A single step separation can be sufficient for applications with wires that are long compared to the size of the granular particles and for not too high capacities. At higher loads on the separator, the granular particles form a multi-layer and may cross the gap, while short wires occasionally fall through the gap. Therefore, positioning multiple gaps in a cascade is the solution for applications with a need for high capacity and sharp separation on wire length. Such a design is shown in A 5 In order to develop a predictive theory for the performance of the separator (single step and cascade system), it is helpful to take a closer look at the various elements of the process. The mechanics of the single step separation is a combination of transport and two mechanisms that prevent wires from falling through the gap. Going from the single step separation to a cascade separator can be described by statistics. Single step separation Transport velocity of particles Mechanisms that prevent wires from falling through the gap Mechanism A (fingers) Mechanism B (step) Cascade separator An important parameter for the single step process, next to the length of the wire, is the transport velocity of the particles as a result of the vibratory feeder ( Note that the coordinate system is oriented so that the A particle moving on the vibrating plate can have three possible interactions with the surface. These cases are shown in If we assume that the friction Otherwise, we get: Case 2: for larger values of the vibration amplitude or frequency, the particle reaches a higher velocity than for Case 1 and jumps high enough to catch up with the plate during the upward stroke. This mode of operation is optimal. It is required that: Case 3: for still larger values of the amplitude or frequency, the feeding becomes suboptimal (see The transport velocity for the 2nd (optimal) case was applied to the wire separation model. The first mechanism to keep wires from falling to a lower level is by being carried over by the fingers: this mechanism is shown in Wires that pass through the fingers will remain on the top level if their projection in the parallel direction, The critical length of the wire is therefore approximately given by: The critical wire length for the test device is about The single step separation combines mechanisms A and B. The recovery of a single step can now be computed for a given wire length by assuming that each orientation 0 The second part of the graph The third part The theoretical curves for the critical length of The sigmoid fit in In this formula, During the development of the separator, a set of experiments has been done to improve and optimise the design. The material mix used in these experiments is a 2–6 mm bottom ash fraction (slag product of waste incineration) sieved on a bar screen. This material consists of mainly granular and flat shaped particles, but also wires of all lengths and shapes. At first a series of experiments were conducted with the single step separator mounted on a standard vibrating feeder with wires of three length categories. The first goal was to optimise the width and height of the gap. After optimisation of the gap dimensions, the influence of the frequency and the amplitude of the feeder was tested. In a second experiment, wires from four different categories (35–39 mm, 40–44 mm, 45–50 mm and 50–54 mm) were fed with a gap of 17 mm by 20 mm (width by height) for two feeder settings (hereafter called 1 and 2). The purpose of the experiment was to find the relation between the feeder settings and A final experiment was executed to verify the theory using a 5 by 5 cascade, processing 700 kg of 2–6 mm bottom ash containing 632 wires of at least 35 mm long. The results of this experiment are shown in The recovery of the larger wires shows that the separation of larger wires is outstanding (100% recovery). A comparison of theoretical and experimental data for the 5 A cascade wire separator has been successfully applied to a granular material from bottom ash. The experimental recovery for wires longer than 50 mm was essentially complete. With increasing the speed of the wires (for larger values of the vibration amplitude or frequency) the wire has a larger probability to pass the gap. The shape of the recovery curves depends of two factors: the critical length of the wires, which is a function of the feeding speed and the cascade system. These parameters define the position and the steepness of the curve. Track vibration amplitude (m) Diameter of the gap (mm) Effective force in the Gravitational constant Height of the gap (mm) Length of the wires (mm) Critical length of the wires (mm) Body mass (kg) Probability (%) Time (s) Velocities in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively (ms Diameter between two fingers (mm) Displacements along the Angle of vibration ( Coefficient of friction between body and the track Half period of vibration (s) Orientation of the wire (