This paper addresses the optimal planning of an integrated supply chain (SC) network for waste-to-energy (WtE) systems. A mixed integer linear programming (MILP) model is presented, which simultaneously considers the tactical and operational decisions related to transportation, inventory, production, and distribution. The objective of the proposed model is to find a balance between SC costs, waste reduction, and using the generated waste efficiently. It also ensures environmental sustainability in the operations of WtE systems and continuous feedstock supply. The considered waste type is combustible non-biodegradable municipal solid waste (MSW) with low moisture content, and the employed technologies are pyrolysis, gasification, and combined heat and power (CHP) to produce electricity and heat. The proposed MILP model is formulated and solved using GAMS/CPLEX.WtE is an energy recovery process that utilizes waste conversion technologies to generate heat and electricity from non-reusable and non-recyclable waste materials. WtE excels the other waste management (WM) strategies (e.g., reusing and recycling) as it can be used to meet the increasing energy demands and to reduce the dependency on energy imports and natural resources, in addition to reducing the waste amount for disposal. WtE also provides superior economic and environmental benefits because of the produced products through the WtE processes (e.g., transportation fuels, synthetic natural gas, chemicals, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, energy), emitting less carbon dioxide (CO  The proposed model covers waste collection at cities, separation and pre-treatment of waste in separation centers, processing for energy recovery in WtE plants, and selling the energy products to the markets, as shown in The integrated WtE SC problem is formulated as an MILP model. The indices used in the formulation are: The produced MSW in a city (    The considered multi-echelon SC problem consists of two cities as waste sources and consumer locations, two separation centers for waste separation and pre-treatment operations with two pre-treatment technologies, and three WtE plants to generate electricity and heat. The total MSW generation is 1,164 kt during a year. The presented MILP model is solved efficiently in a reasonable computational time (0.22 CPU-s) using GAMS/CPLEX. Considering the pyrolysis and gasification with the energy potential of 660 kWh/ton waste and the CHP plant with the capacity of 585 kWh/ton waste, 383 GWh of electricity and 171 GWh of heat are produced in a year. The purpose of this study is to measure the environmental impacts and economic costs of the WtE SC network in order to check the economic and ecological feasibility of the entire system. In such systems, the production process, waste availability, energy demand, plant capacity, and level of energy efficiency affect the performance of WtE plants. Moreover, the coordination between SC entities has a substantial impact on the system performance by minimizing the overall costs, satisfying capacity restrictions at each level of the SC network, and fulfilling the demand requirements. The proposed model provides quantifiable information to make effective and optimum decisions regarding the treatment of waste while ensuring the most feasible (sustainable and cost-efficient) operations.