Sn–Zr and Ag-doped Sn–Zr thin films were prepared by an electron-beam evaporation method using pure separate metal sources. Electrochemical cycling performance was obtained as a function of film composition. The cycling stability of Sn–Zr film electrodes increased with Zr content. An Ag-doped Sn–Zr thin film such as Sn57Zr33Ag10 showed excellent cycling stability and capacity retention. The composition dependence on electrochemical behavior is related to the microstructural changes in the films.Lithium metal has commonly been used or proposed as anodes for rechargeable thin-film microbatteries which can be employed as power sources for microdevices. However, lithium metal has some problems for the application due to its low melting point (181 Alloy-based materials containing such lithium storage metals as Al, Si and Sn have been extensively studied as anodes for lithium-ion batteries. However, these alloy systems undergo large volume changes during Li insertion/extraction cycling In order that the above concept is feasible, it is necessary to prepare an optimized alloy film with a homogeneous distribution of constituents. From the low melting point of Sn, however, it seems inevitable that the precipitation of Sn occurs during the deposition by co-evaporation method used in this work, especially for Sn-rich Sn–Zr alloy system. As mentioned above, this may result in a poor long-term cycling stability due to the large volume changes of Sn precipitates which occur during lithiation and delithiation. These shortcomings could be overcome by using the ternary system Sn–Zr–Ag, in which the Sn–Ag alloying could probably exclude the formation of metallic Sn precipitates. Besides, as Ag is active towards Li, the addition of Ag would not limit the Li storage capacity of the Sn-based alloys differently from being expected from Zr doping. Sn–Ag alloys have been also studied as anodes for Li-ion batteries In this study, the Sn–Zr and Ag-doped Sn–Zr thin films were synthesized and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and electrochemical measurements. Sn–Zr and Ag-doped Sn–Zr thin films were deposited on a 12 CR2016 coin cells were fabricated to test the electrochemical properties of thin-film electrodes. The cells were assembled in an argon filled glove-box. The electrolyte was 1 The XRD patterns of the Sn–Zr thin films as a function of composition are given in This indicates that the alloying of Sn with Zr decreases the volume expansion and buffers the volume changes of the active phase, which leads to the stabilization of the alloy film electrode, as expected. However, this results in the reduction of capacity. Sn-rich alloy systems, exhibiting an increased capacity, also show the declining capacities during long-term cycling due to the aggregation of Sn. Moreover, these Sn-rich films appeared to have the aggregated Sn particles even in as-deposited state as shown in Here, we have prepared the Ag-containing Sn–Zr films to retard the aggregation of Sn according to the background mentioned before. Sn–Zr and Sn–Zr–Ag thin films have been prepared using an electron-beam evaporator and compared in terms of the electrochemical cycling performance as a function of film composition. For Sn–Zr thin films, cyclability is improved with the addition of Zr, although capacity then decreases. The cycling stability of Sn–Zr thin-film electrodes appear to be significantly increased by doping the film with Ag. This work was supported by the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology through the research program for “National Research Laboratory”.