Frederick M. Azar Patrick C. Toy Louis S. Stryker, Susan M. Odum, Bryan D. Springer, and Thomas K. Fehring Total knee arthroplasty occasionally does not meet expectations. This randomized clinical trial assessed the effect of restoration of the native patellofemoral height on clinical outcomes. Group I underwent standard patellar bone resection; group II underwent modified patellar bone resection that adjusted the amount of anterior condylar bone removed and the anterior flange thickness. There were no differences in anterior knee pain, Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index scores, or Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score scores. Patellofemoral compartment height restoration versus patellar height alone does not appear to significantly reduce pain or improve function. Cara Cipriano, Nicholas Erdle, Kai Li, and Brian Curtin The optimal strategy for postoperative deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis remains controversial in hip and knee arthroplasty. Warfarin causes transient hypercoagulability; however, the optimal timing of treatment remains unclear. We evaluated the effects of preoperative versus postoperative warfarin therapy with a primary endpoint of perioperative change in hemoglobin. Warfarin was dosed according to a standard nomogram. No difference in perioperative hemoglobin change was observed. The preoperative group demonstrated higher INRs. Initiation of warfarin preoperatively was not associated with any difference in perioperative hemoglobin change. Larger studies are needed to determine whether the risk of adverse events is increased with either strategy. Bryan D. Springer, Susan M. Odum, David N. Vegari, Jeffrey G. Mokris, and Walter B. Beaver Jr This article describes a study comparing 30-day readmission rates between patients undergoing outpatient versus inpatient total hip (THA) and knee (TKA) arthroplasty. A retrospective review of 137 patients undergoing outpatient total joint arthroplasty (TJA) and 106 patients undergoing inpatient (minimum 2-day hospital stay) TJA was conducted. Unplanned hospital readmissions and unplanned episodes of care were recorded. All patients completed a telephone survey. Seven inpatients and 16 outpatients required hospital readmission or an unplanned episode of care following hospital discharge. Readmission rates were higher for TKA than THA. The authors found no statistical differences in 30-day readmission or unplanned care episodes. John C. Weinlein Joshua C. Rozell, Keith P. Connolly, and Samir Mehta The optimal treatment of open fractures continues to be an area of debate in the orthopedic literature. Recent research has challenged the dictum that open fractures should be debrided within 6 hours of injury. However, the expedient administration of intravenous antibiotics remains of paramount importance in infection prevention. Multiple factors, including fracture severity, thoroughness of debridement, time to initial treatment, and antibiotic administration, among other variables, contribute to the incidence of infection and complicate identifying an optimal time to debridement. William R. Barfield, Robert E. Holmes, and Langdon A. Hartsock Better understanding of the biology of heterotopic ossification (HO) formation will lead to treatment and prevention modalities that can be directed specifically at the cellular level. Early identification of HO precursor cells and target genes may provide prognostic value that guides individualized prophylactic treatment. Better understanding of molecular signaling and proteomics variability will allow surgeons to individualize preemptive treatment to suppress inflammation and formation of HO. Careful surgical technique to avoid muscle damage is important. Damaged muscle should be debrided as a prophylactic measure. Hemostasis and avoidance of a postoperative hematoma may decrease the chance of formation of HO. Jeffrey R. Sawyer Scott Yang and Lindsay Andras Midshaft clavicle fractures in adolescents are common. Recent literature in adults fractures favors open reduction and plate fixation for significantly displaced and/or shortened midshaft clavicle fractures, although whether this applies to adolescents remains debatable. This article reviews the current literature and controversy in the management of displaced adolescent clavicle fractures. Jaime R. Denning Ankle fractures account for 5% and foot fractures account for approximately 8% of fractures in children. Some complications are evident early in the treatment or natural history of foot and ankle fractures. Other complications do not become apparent until weeks, months, or years after the original fracture. The incidence of long-term sequelae like posttraumatic arthritis from childhood foot and ankle fractures is poorly studied because decades or lifelong follow-up has frequently not been accomplished. This article discusses a variety of complications associated with foot and ankle fractures in children or the treatment of these injuries. Benjamin M. Mauck and James H. Calandruccio Christopher M. Hopkins, James H. Calandruccio, and Benjamin M. Mauck The olecranon process, coronoid process, and greater sigmoid notch are important components of the complex proximal ulna. Along with providing bony stability to the ulnohumeral joint, the proximal ulna serves as the attachment site of many important muscles and ligaments that impart soft tissue stability to the elbow joint. Management of proximal ulnar fractures continues to evolve as advances in imaging and anatomic and biomechanical studies have led to improvements in available implants; however, controversies remain, as shown in the current relevant literature. Benjamin J. Grear Shay Tenenbaum, Nachshon Shazar, Nathan Bruck, and Jason Bariteau Posterior malleolus fractures vary in morphology. A computed tomography scan is imperative to evaluate fragment size, comminution, articular impaction, and syndesmotic disruption. Despite an increasing body of literature regarding posterior malleolus fractures, many questions remain unanswered. Although, historically, fragment size guided surgical fixation, it is becoming evident that fragment size should not solely dictate treatment. Surgical treatment should focus on restoring ankle joint structural integrity, which includes restoring articular congruity, correcting posterior talar translation, addressing articular impaction, removing osteochondral debris, and establishing syndesmotic stability. Heather E. Gotha and Jacob R. Zide Displaced intraarticular fractures of the calcaneus represent a technically challenging injury. Although there is conflicting evidence regarding advantages and disadvantages of operative versus nonoperative treatment, a growing body of literature suggests operative management with near-anatomic reduction of the posterior facet and restoration of overall calcaneal morphology offers greater potential for superior short- and long-term outcomes. A thorough understanding of calcaneal anatomy, fracture pattern, and associated injuries, along with careful selection of surgical approach and timing to surgery are critical to minimize the risk of complication and maximize potential for optimal outcomes. 