Primary copper sulfides, such as chalcopyrite, represent the most important copper resource and are currently mainly exploited by pyrometallurgy. Bioleaching is considered as environmental-friendly and economic alternative, and the technical feasibility of stirred tank reactor (STR) bioleaching of copper ore concentrates using acidophilic, iron- /sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms was proven. In case of copper concentrates from Kupferschiefer-type ore the copper recovery at temperatures suitable for moderately thermophilic acidophiles was, however, incomplete due to inefficient chalcopyrite dissolution.
                  The presented study therefore aimed to enhance chalcopyrite dissolution by decoupling of growth and bioleaching activity of the acidophiles. This was achieved by a controlled temperature increase in laboratory bioreactor experiments with copper concentrate from Kupferschiefer-type ore. Total cell number and microbial activity monitoring allowed to define three stages of the bioleaching process: (i) growth phase, (ii) bioleaching phase and (iii) resting phase. The total residence time was close to seven days, according to copper recovery and iron oxidation activity. Experiments at constant temperatures (42 °C, 48 °C, 50 °C) and a controlled temperature increase at the end of the growth phase of 42/46 °C, 44/48 °C and 46/50 °C, showed that metal recovery was enhanced by incremental temperature increase and resulted in a lower redox potential. Copper recovery was improved from originally 86% to 97% by only 4–8 °C temperature increase. Mineralogical analysis confirmed an almost complete absence of chalcopyrite in the residues after the 46/50 °C bioleaching experiments. These results indicate a distinct temperature effect on copper recovery. The study defines parameters to make STR bioleaching of chalcopyrite-rich ores more efficient and economically feasible and ensures an optimal control of the process for upscaling.Stirred tank reactors (STR) are mainly used at industrial scale for biooxidation of refractory gold ores, however, also commercial base metal bioleaching has been described. Bioleaching of copper mainly takes place as heap or dump bioleaching and significantly contributes to the world copper production ( The main copper-bearing sulfide minerals in black shale are bornite (Cu The elemental sulfur produced in Eq. Chalcocite and bornite were almost completely dissolved in the first bioreactor of a three-stage STR bioleaching experiment, whereas the amount of covellite increased in the residue, but was completely dissolved in the second bioreactor. The final residue in the third bioreactor was dominated by the presence of chalcopyrite, supporting the hypothesis of its recalcitrance in bioleaching ( Chalcopyrite only dissolves in acidic medium (below pH 4) at redox potentials above 400 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode), whereas the dissolution kinetics depend on ferric ion concentration and pH value. The observed decreasing chalcopyrite dissolution over time during bioleaching is often described as the result of passivation layer formation on the mineral surface, hindering the further oxidation process ( Strategies to resolve incomplete chalcopyrite dissolution in bioleaching processes comprise (i) the application of thermophilic archaea ( Chalcopyrite bioleaching with moderately thermophilic iron- and/or sulfur-oxidizing acidophiles has received increased attention, since their optimal growth temperatures of about 45–52 °C represent a kinetic advantage over those for meso-acidophiles, and the operation costs are lower than for operations at higher temperatures for thermo-acidophiles ( The objective of this recent study was to improve copper recovery from copper concentrate derived from Kupferschiefer-type ore and to optimize the STR bioleaching process. A detailed study of metal bioleaching and the microbial community composition changes during the course of the experiment was undertaken. The idea for improved copper recovery was to slightly increase the operating temperature to achieve better chalcopyrite dissolution, but to avoid enhanced precipitation of secondary minerals and passivation layer formation. This approach was tested by either operating at constant temperature or an incremental, two-step temperature increase combined with microbial community monitoring. Analysis of the bioleaching kinetics, metal recovery and mineralogy of the bioleach residues should indicate the favored operating temperature for efficient chalcopyrite dissolution. The European Kupferschiefer-type deposits in central Europe belong to the sediment-hosted base metal deposits, which are widespread and mined worldwide ( The material used for bioleaching was a copper concentrate retrieved from black shale ore deposits (KGHM, Poland). The concentrate had a particle size of <90 μm and had the following main characteristics: 13.3 wt% Cu, 9.4 wt% Fe, 16.5 wt% S, 0.064 wt% Ag, 1.1 wt% total inorganic carbon (TIC), 9.1% total organic carbon (TOC) and an approximate particle size of <63 μm (cumulative passing 89%, Table S1). The abundance of sulfide minerals was determined by SEM-based automated mineralogy (mineral liberation analysis–SEM/MLA-GXMAP). The acidophilic, moderately thermophilic bioleaching consortium used was the BRGM-KCC consortium maintained for many years on copper concentrate ( Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 2 L pH- and temperature-controlled, stirred tank bioreactors (Electrolab, UK). The reactors were fully baffled and agitated by a dual impeller system consisting of a standard 6-blade Rushton turbine in combination with a 6-blade 45° axial flow impeller with speed set to 400 rpm. After initial acid treatment of the sulfidic material with H A preliminary test to study the relation between bacterial activity (via microcalorimetry), cell numbers (SYBR Green staining) and metal dissolution was carried out ( Data from previous experiments in continuous cascade bioreactors at BRGM indicated that sulfide dissolution and metal recovery was enhanced when temperature raised by just a few degrees from one tank to the other due to exothermic reactions during metal sulfide leaching. This observation led to the proposed two-step temperature set up, where according to the above findings, the temperature was kept close to the optimum of the bioleaching consortium for about three days to allow proper growth and colonization of the ore, and was increased by 4 °C afterwards to enhance metal bioleaching. Constant temperatures (42 °C, 48 °C, 50 °C) and two-step temperature profiles (42/46 °C, 44/48 °C, 46/50 °C) were tested. Each experiment at constant temperatures of 42 °C, 48 °C, 50 °C followed the previously described adaptation protocol ( Regular offline pH (BlueLine 18 pH electrode, Schott, Germany) and redox potential (BlueLine 31 Rx electrode, Schott, Germany) measurements were performed directly in the bioreactor pulp. Measured redox values were corrected to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) and reported as E Scanning electron microscope (SEM) investigations on carbon-coated polished sections of the concentrate and the residues were carried out using a MLA650F (Quanta 650 FEG system; FEI Company) equipped with two energy-dispersive X-ray detectors (XFlash Detector 5030, Silicon Drift Detector; Bruker Nano) for semi-quantitative element analysis without standardization. Dried and homogenized samples were stored under nitrogen until further analysis. The mineralogical composition of the rocks was quantitatively determined using SEM/mineral liberation analysis techniques (SEM/MLA-GXMAP; Total cell numbers were determined in slurry samples by microscopic counting after SYBR Green staining according to Microcalorimetric measurements were performed at the start and end of each experiment in order to determine the bioleaching activity of the cultures ( The microbial community structure and abundance were monitored in slurry samples after DNA extraction by terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) as described previously ( The performance of copper concentrate bioleaching in a STR inoculated with the acidophilic and moderately-thermophilic BRGM-KCC consortium was followed at 42 °C. Daily monitoring of total cells via SYBR Green staining clearly showed that cell numbers increased within the first three days of the experiments and stayed constant afterwards at about 5*10 First experiments were conducted in STR at three constant temperatures (42 °C, 48 °C and 50 °C). Copper bioleaching kinetics and metal recovery were improved by increasing the constant temperature from 42 °C to 48 °C, but decreased and stopped at 50 °C ( The highest copper recovery of 97% was achieved when starting the growth phase at 46 °C and increasing the temperature to 50 °C at day 3 ( In addition, the bioleaching kinetics of copper improved with increased temperature. Further analysis of the residue proved that not only the recovery of copper was enhanced at higher temperatures but also the recovery of nickel and zinc ( The pH developed similarly in almost all experiments independently from the temperature and was between 1.3 and 1.5 after 8 days (Fig. S1). Only the pH of the 50 °C experiment remained almost constant at about 1.8 during the complete course of the experiment. The final redox potential (E The microbial community showed similar activity (533–596 μW/g) during (day 3) and at the end (day 8) of the experiment for most of the different temperature profiles, apart from the 50 °C run. In the latter, activity declined to 225 μW/g at the end of the bioreactor run ( Total bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers determined by quantitative Detailed bacterial species abundance determined by T-RFLP and species-specific qPCR (Fig. S3) revealed that the microbial community at 48 °C was dominated by As in the samples from the 48 °C bioleaching run, SEM/MLA-GXMAP data reconstructed the mineralogical composition of the copper concentrate and the bioleaching residues. The copper concentrate contained 12.3 wt% chalcopyrite, 9.6 wt% bornite (+ idaite), 1.8 wt% chalcocite + covellite, 5.6 wt% pyrite, as well as other minor sulfidic minerals (mean values of two measured sub-samples). Bioleaching experiments in batch bioreactors at 42 °C housing the acidophilic and moderately thermophilic BRGM-KCC consortium were carried out at various temperatures with the aim to study the effect of temperature on the bioleaching of a copper concentrate retrieved from Kupferschiefer-type ore and to improve metal recovery. Preliminary experiments to determine the kinetics and microbial growth behavior during the bioleaching run served as basis for further tests. Daily total cell number and microbial activity monitoring allowed to determine three stages during the bioleaching experiment: (i) adaptation/growth stage, (ii) bioleaching stage, where microorganisms are active and the major part of the metal leaching occurs but cell numbers and microbial activity remained constant, and finally, (iii) resting stage, where the substrate (i.e. the metal sulfide) is depleted and bacteria are not active anymore, but cell numbers do not decrease immediately. These data clearly show that even so cells are prominent during the whole experiment, not all of them are actively contributing to metal bioleaching at all times. From these findings, it is assumed that the parameters within the first three days of the bioleaching experiment are essential for the microbial growth and should be adjusted according to the needs of the target organisms, e.g. by operating at optimum pH and temperature. In the next stage, when the desired microbial consortium has well established, the focus can be put on efficient metal extraction and the parameters adjusted accordingly. In the STR experiments, maximum bioleaching of metals was achieved after about seven days when the microbial activity reached a plateau; it decreased afterwards, indicating a termination of the bioleaching process due to the fading of substrate (metal sulfides and ferrous iron). Metal recovery and kinetics of copper and iron bioleaching confirmed results of previous experiments ( In a previous experiment, an automated temperature increase was observed in continuous STR bioleaching of cobaltiferrous pyrite due to the exothermic mineral dissolution (unpublished data). Since this temperature increase was concurrent with enhanced metal recovery, two-step temperature profiles involving a temperature increase at the end of the growth stage were tested in the current study. These temperature experiments showed that the copper recovery was enhanced with increasing temperature and reached its maximum in the 44/48 °C and 46/50 °C experiments. In contrast, experiments at constantly high temperatures of 48 °C and 50 °C did not achieve the high copper recoveries of the two-step temperature runs. Data clearly show that a three day growth phase for the microorganisms, before increasing the temperature by just 4 °C, had a positive effect on copper recovery and chalcopyrite dissolution. Furthermore, the microbial community was inhibited in experiments at constant 50 °C, indicated by low microbial activity, iron oxidation rate and metal recovery, but provided most positive results when allowing three days of adaptation at 46 °C before increasing to 50 °C for enhancing the metal bioleaching. The two-step incremental temperature procedure was clearly more efficient than running the experiment at a constant temperature level, as it allows the microorganisms to grow and to adapt first before their actual bioleaching stage. The microbial community was dominated by three key players of the BRGM-KCC consortium, which are typically found in bioleaching operations at moderate temperatures ( As temperatures increased, the microbial community became dominated by the moderately thermophilic bacteria ( Mixed communities are therefore very important when running these kind of experiments in order to assure stable process development under varying conditions. Mineralogical studies confirmed that bornite and chalcocite were immediately dissolved even at 42 °C as they are the easiest to bioleach copper sulfides with the lowest rest potential. The reported covellite formation, following chalcocite and chalcopyrite dissolution ( The presented study gives insights into the microbial effect on efficient metal bioleaching and how this process can be controlled by simply understanding the concurrence of the bacterial species, the mineralogy of the ore and the physico-chemical conditions. After detailed understanding of the microbial performance during bioleaching of the copper concentrate, a novel temperature-driven concept based on decoupling of growth and bioleaching phase, was applied to enhance metal bioleaching. The two-step temperature procedure proved to be superior to experiments at constant high temperature in terms of microbial community composition, chalcopyrite dissolution and copper recovery. A slight operating temperature increase, applied just at the end of the bacterial growth stage, lead to improved bioleaching kinetics and overall metal recovery in combination with near-complete chalcopyrite dissolution at lower redox potential. This study demonstrates efficient bioleaching of chalcopyrite-rich concentrate at moderate temperatures with the advantage of low operation costs due to lower temperatures for complete chalcopyrite dissolution. By operating the STR at moderate temperatures under the reported conditions, formation of passivation layers, precipitation of secondary iron minerals and damage to the tanks can be reduced relative to higher temperature operations. Furthermore, the enhanced recovery of various other metals from the concentrate raises the overall value of the material. This work is part of the research project  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at