The treatment of impacted distal radius fractures is complex. Internal fixation by a dorsal approach with arthrotomy should be considered, particularly when the fractures are dorsally comminuted. This was a retrospective, observational study of 26 patients operated between 2008 and 2012 who were reviewed in September 2013. In the surgical procedure, a single dorsal incision was made over the distal radius and arthrotomy performed; the fracture site was stabilized with two 2.4mm locking plates. The average follow-up was 39months. All fractures were type 23C in the AO classification. All patients were assessed with the QuickDASH and Mayo Wrist scores. Total range of motion was 82% of the contralateral side. Grip strength was 30kg in average. The mean radial sagittal tilt was +6° postoperatively. No plate movement or intra-articular screws were present. Four patients developed symptomatic early osteoarthritis. Thirteen patients had the plate removed due to discomfort. No tendon ruptures were observed. The dorsal approach remains a treatment option for specific intra-articular fractures. It offers direct intra-articular congruency control, along with a stable buttress and locking fixation for early mobilization. Our results are comparable to those using other surgical techniques for this type of high-energy fracture.Distal radius fractures make up more than 17% of all fractures The purpose of this non-comparative, retrospective study was to document the medium term results after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) through a dorsal approach of comminuted intra-articular impacted fractures that have little volar involvement. The goal was to determine if it was justified to continue including this surgical technique in the treatment arsenal for these specific intra-articular wrist fractures. A single longitudinal incision over Lister's tubercle was made on the dorsal side of the wrist. After opening the extensor retinaculum between the 3rd and 4th extensor compartments, the posterior interosseous nerve was divided to partially denervate it. By lifting the fracture's dorsal hood, it was possible to see inside the joint; an additional transverse arthrotomy was performed while preserving the dorsal radiotriquetral ligament. Lister's tubercle was resected in most cases and was used as bone autograft material when needed. We then reduced the fracture and restored the joint's congruence under direct visual control. Depending on the size of the bone defect, bone allograft granules (Allobone A short volar cast was added 24 or 48 During the postoperative phase, all patients underwent the typical clinical and radiological follow-up after surgical fixation of a distal radius fracture in our hand surgery unit; after the day 2 evaluation, follow-up visits were at 2, 6 and 12 The fixation plate was removed in the patients who complained of discomfort. An ultrasound was performed when this discomfort was subjective. The hardware was removed through the same incision as the one used for ORIF. We carried out a retrospective, non-comparative observational study of 26 patients that was approved by our hospital's ethics committee. In all, 47 patients were operated by four senior hand surgeons in our hand surgery unit between 2008 and 2012. The surgical indication in every case was discussed by the hand surgery team. A full review of the medical records was done for the primary analysis of the clinical and radiological results. A clinical review of 26 patients was carried out in September 2013. This article only pertains to the results obtained in these 26 patients. The records of the non-reviewed patients were studied to ensure there was no selection bias. The results were also analyzed by the medical statistics team. There were no exclusion criteria. The medical records included the clinical values for flexion–extension and pronation–supination (in degree) along with two strength tests. Pinch strength (kg) was measured using the key pinch test. Grip strength was measured with a Jamar The correction between the pre- and postoperative images was measured for the anatomical distal radius angles and joint congruence. The chosen standards for anatomical angles of the distal radius The date of the primary surgery and removal of the volar plate (if done) were taken from the patient's medical records. The age, gender and dominant hand of the 26 patents was documented. We recorded if the dominant hand had been operated on. Pain on a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) Objectively, the range of motion in flexion, extension, radial and ulnar deviation and pronation–supination, along with the grip and pinch strength were recorded. The QuickDASH and Mayo Wrist Score, and the total active motion and strength levels were compared between patients in whom the plate was removed and those where it was not. The average follow-up was 39 At the time of the review, 18 patients (69%) had returned to their occupation, 3 with restrictions. Five (19%) had not resumed their pre-injury occupation. Twenty-two patients (85%) had no pain at rest and eight patients (31%) had no pain during activity. In the 18 patients who had activity-related pain, the VAS ranged from 1 to 4 (out of 10) in 12 of these patients (46%) and 5 or more in the other 6 patients (23%). The QuickDASH was 20 (out of 100) on average (± The clinical examination found the flexion–extension range of motion to be 92° (± Radial deviation on A/P view was 17° preoperatively (min 5°, max 27°) and 22° postoperatively (min 15°, max 29°). The radial slope on lateral view was −5° (min +16°, max −32°) preoperatively and +6° (min 17°, max −6°) postoperatively ( The distal radio-ulnar index was −0.16 Although the angles were measured on standard X-ray views ( In X-rays taken more than 12 Tenosynovitis of the extensor mechanism was documented on ultrasonography in two patients. We are satisfied with the subjective and objective results obtained using dorsal ORIF for this type of intra-articular fracture. Nearly 70% of patients were able to return to their pre-injury occupation without restrictions, and more than 80% of their grip strength had been restored. The SANE score indicated that patients felt that more than 75% of their overall wrist function had been recovered. Our results are comparable to published results using the same technique Even if our study was not comparative, our results are similar to published ones describing other intra-articular visualization techniques (arthroscopy with pinning or volar plate) We found radiological signs of early osteoarthritis in 15% of patients. This is consistent with the reported values for this type of fracture due to high-energy trauma that mainly occurs in young patients. No matter which treatment is used, the risk of early osteoarthritis is high, if only due to the associated cartilage damage. This makes it critical to look at the radiocarpal joint and correct any incongruity, along with correcting the alignment in the frontal and sagittal planes Statistical analysis revealed that patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis had a trend toward having higher postoperative articular step-off values than patients without osteoarthritis. This finding is clearly supported by published data Direct intraoperative visual inspection also ensured that screws do not penetrate the joint. The congruence and absence of intra-articular screws were monitored on the CT images of selected patients. Moreover, direct vision allowed us to place the dorsal plate very close to the joint, while verifying that it would not impair the range of motion of the wrist later on. The average wrist extension value was 54°, no matter if the plate was removed or not. In the case shown in the figures, dorsal radiotriquetral ligament detachment and VISI carpal misalignment were not treated. These conditions may have an effect on the development of early osteoarthritis, but we did not specifically look at this factor. The other advantages of the dorsal approach are that it is easier to correct the tipping and dorsal comminution The risk of complications related to the extensor tendons previously described by dorsal fixation Patients occasionally complained of reduced wrist flexion, which averaged less than 40°. This range of motion is slightly less than that reported in two other studies We now perform a CT scan preoperatively, immediately after the surgery and 3 One limitation of the study is the small number of patients included without a control group; however the follow-up did not reveal any tendon damage in the long-term. There is also a possibility that since only half the 47 operated patients were reviewed, the others may have gone to another hospital for their follow-up care. However, our series of patients was homogeneous and our results are consistent with those of other studies describing dorsal fixation of distal radius fractures with low profile plates since 2005. The main results of these studies are summarized in Given our study findings, we are convinced that dorsal ORIF like the one described here has a place in the treatment arsenal for complex intra-articular fractures. We continue to use it for certain impacted fractures that mainly affect the distal radius. The outcomes have improved because of adjustments made during the study (described in the The authors declare that they have no competing interest.