This paper proposes a simple method to improve the flotation performance of oxidized or ultrafine coals, that is, use of a solenoid valve to change the flow pattern of air supplied to a flotation column with a bubble diffuser/sparger. In the present work, the flotation tests were carried out at semi-continuous mode using a laboratory-scale flotation column to upgrade a coking coal in the absence of collector. An investigation of the effect of the frequency of oscillatory air on the flotation performance found that the preferred frequency was around 36 Hz. Further flotation tests for the coking coal with oxidation or without oxidation, at fine and ultrafine size fractions, were carried out with oscillatory air supply at 36 Hz, and the obtained results were substantially better than their counterparts with steady air flow.Recent advances in coal mining techniques have led to the production of larger amount of fine coals with particle size less than 0.5 mm. Effective beneficiation of raw coals in the fine size fraction is commonly achieved by froth flotation ( Various methods have been proposed to increase the flotation performance of difficult-to-float coals. The common objectives of these methods are to increase the hydrophobicity difference or reduce bubble size. Specifically, the research efforts aiming to improve ultrafine coal flotation have been focused on increasing the particle-bubble collision efficiency by decreasing the bubble size with the application of micro-bubble generation techniques ( The above-mentioned propositions comprising chemical additives or advanced equipment are expensive and face difficulties in applications. It is challenging to develop a universal chemical scheme which can be applied to any difficult-to-float coals. Also, with oxidized coals, grinding pretreatment can result in the generation of greater amounts of ultrafines, which would negatively affect the overall flotation performance of fines and the following dewatering process. Use of flocculants in ultrafine coal flotation may lead to a concentrate with high ash content owing to increased degree of entrainment. A recent study ( A coal sample (A1) was collected from the feed stream of a coal flotation plant in Australia. Particle size analysis found that the 80% passing size (P80) was 300 μm. Its ash content was 17%. Preliminary test results show that there was no need to add collector during flotation and thus Sample A1 was considered hydrophobic. A proportion of Sample A1 was oxidized in an oven at 120 °C for 10 h to obtain an oxidized sample (A2). Some of Sample A1 was sieved to obtain an ultrafine sample (A3) with particle size being less than 38 μm and ash content being 30%. A proportion of Sample A2 was sieved to obtain an oxidized ultrafine sample (A4).  Prior to each flotation test, a coal sample was mixed with the process water and was agitated vigorously in the feed sump before being pumped into the flotation column using a peristaltic pump at a pre-determined rate. Oscillatory air, generated by the solenoid valve, was then introduced into the column through a sparger. During flotation, the concentrate and tailing streams were sent back to the feed sump. A small bucket, which was connected to the tailing discharge port, was used to control the pulp-froth interface. All flotation tests were carried out under the following conditions: feed slurry solid concentration of 5%, froth depth of 30 cm, superficial air velocity of 2 cm/s, no collector, 15 ppm MIBC, feed flow rate of 0.9 L/min. A period of time equivalent to three times of the particle retention time is required for a laboratory-scale flotation system to reach steady state ( Representative samples of product, tailing and feed streams were then collected, filtered, oven dried for ash content analysis. The ash content was determined as the ratio of the weight of the non-combustible residue left after the sample was thoroughly burnt (at 815 °C for 4 h) to the original weight of the sample. The flotation performance was presented using the curve of concentrate yield The solenoid valve was used to generate oscillatory air flows of different frequencies. The oscillatory air was generated by setting the valve on and off alternatingly at a certain frequency. The valve was configured to only allow one input and one output, so the mean output air flowrate was equal to the input air flowrate, which was controlled using an air flowmeter. The oscillatory frequency exerted little influence on the actual (mean) flow rate of air entering the flotation collection zone.  Further experiments at 0, 4 and 36 Hz were carried out for coal samples A1, A2 and A4, and the results are shown in   A previous study ( The present work demonstrates the success of using an alternative device to change the flow pattern of air supply and extends the applicability of the oscillatory air supply concept to the flotation of ultrafine coals, oxidized coals, or even oxidized ultrafine coals. A solenoid valve was used to generate oscillatory air flows from steady air flow. The generated oscillatory air flow was supplied to a laboratory-scale flotation column with semi-continuous mode of operation. The effect of the frequency of the generated oscillatory air on the column flotation performance was studied. The results show that use of oscillatory air flow at a relatively high frequency would improve the flotation performance, and the preferred frequency was around 36 Hz. In contrast, oscillatory air flow at a low frequency (<10 Hz) would decrease the flotation efficiency. Further flotation tests for the coal sample with oxidation or without oxidation, at fine and ultrafine size fractions, were carried out with oscillatory air supply at 36 Hz, and the obtained results were substantially better than those obtained with steady air flow. The present work extends the applicability of the oscillatory air supply concept to the flotation of difficult-to-float coals. This work was supported by