Objective
                  To evaluate regional differences in adaptation of best practice recommendations for extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) across 4 distinct geographic regions.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective study was performed using a prospective database maintained by a mobile lithotripsy provider (ForTec Medical, Streetsboro, OH). SWL cases performed in Ohio, Northern Illinois/Southern Wisconsin, Florida, and New York were included. Treatment parameters evaluated included treatment rate, use of a power ramp-up protocol, use of a pretreatment pause after the initial 100 shocks, ancillary procedures, and need for retreatment. Regional and physician-specific patterns were examined. Statistical analyses using chi-square and analysis of variance were performed with a significance of P <.05.
               
                  Results
                  Data from 2240 SWL procedures were included in the study. Overall adaptation of power ramp-up protocols and treatment rates were high (93% and 93%), whereas use of pause was lower (75%, P <.001). Retreatment rates were low (4.3%), although ancillary procedures were performed in 34% of patients, and 8.3% of patients received stents for stones <1 cm. Regional differences were present in all parameters: Florida physicians used power ramp-up less (83%, P <.001) but had good use of pretreatment pause (98%, P <.001), both Wisconsin/Illinois and New York were less likely to use slow rate (87% and 84%, respectively, P <.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The recommendations for slower shock wave rates and power ramp protocols have reached high penetration in urologic practices; however, the more recent recommendation for a pause after the initial 100 shocks has been less uniformly implemented. Inconsistencies in regional adaptation of best practices may identify opportunities for further education.Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is a common treatment for kidney stones, with an estimated use of over 1 million patients per year in the United States. To optimize stone fragmentation and limit potential adverse effects of SWL, evidence-based treatment strategies have been studied. Best practices have been established with regards to the technique of extracorporeal SWL, with aims of improving efficacy and minimizing risk. The American Urological Association released a white paper in 2009 aimed at emphasizing best practices in the delivery of extracorporeal SWL. Data were retrospectively evaluated from a database of patients undergoing SWL maintained by Fortec Medical, a mobile lithotripsy provider. All procedures were performed with the Storz Modilith SLX-F2 (all states) or Dornier Compact Delta (Ohio [OH] only) and were operated by specialized technologists. The procedures were performed in 1 of 4 regions: OH (68 physicians, 8 technicians), Northern Illinois (IL)/Southern Wisconsin (WI; 74 physicians, 5 technicians), Florida (FL; 72 physicians, 3 technicians), New York (NY; 27 physicians, 2 technicians). Patient selection, treatment protocol, and choice of anesthesia were determined at the discretion of the urologist and anesthesiologist. All lithotripsy technicians received standardized training in optimal treatment protocols for SWL. All SWL technicians received training on the basis of the best practice guidelines released in 2009 by the American Urological Association, All data were collected at the time of the procedure by the SWL technicians. Patient demographics and pretreatment characteristics were recorded and included the following: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), cumulative stone diameter, and stone location. Operative and postoperative parameters collected include the following: shock wave rate, pretreatment pause, use of power ramp-up, need for retreatment, and ancillary procedures performed (cystoscopy, stent placement, ureteroscopy, retrograde pyelogram, intravenous pyelogram, and nephrostomy tube placement). Primary endpoints evaluated were the use of a slow treatment rate (<120 spm), inclusion of a 3- to 4-minute pause at the beginning of treatment, and use of a ramp-up in voltage after 100-500 shock waves. Secondary endpoints included the use of ancillary procedures (primarily ureteral stenting), for all patients, and then specifically for that subset of patients with stone burdens <10 mm in size. Statistical analysis was performed comparing regional treatment decisions. Regions that followed SWL guidelines in >90% of procedures were considered to be at a high degree of compliance. Categorical variables were compared using chi-squared test, and continuous variables were compared using analysis of variance single factor analysis. Statistical significance was considered In total, 2240 SWL procedures were performed. The average patient age was 54.7 years, BMI of 29.9 kg/m Overall, there was good compliance with slow treatment rate and ramp-up protocol guidelines (93% and 93%; The use of a 3-minute pretreatment pause after the initial 100 shocks had a suboptimal compliance (75%, Retreatment rates overall were low (4.3%), with NY having the highest retreatment rate (14%, An ancillary procedure was done in 37% of the cases and was primarily cystoscopy with ureteral stent placement (59.5%). FL urologists were more likely to perform an ancillary procedure (44%, SWL has been a mainstay of kidney stone treatment for several decades. It is regarded by patients and physicians as a noninvasive procedure with minimal risk. However, recent animal models and clinical studies indicate that SWL may be associated with complex effects on human physiology. Acute kidney injury has long been known to result from SWL. Injury to the kidney vasculature has been demonstrated with venous structures being particularly susceptible. Evidence that SWL may also have chronic adverse effects is accumulating yet controversial. Animal studies indicate that renal scarring results from SWL in a dose-dependent fashion. To address safety concerns and optimize treatment using SWL, recent guidelines have addressed using a slow shock wave treatment rate, using a ramp-up energy protocol, and incorporating a 3-minute pretreatment pause after the initial 100 shocks on the basis of an exhaustive review of the available literature. The idea that slower treatment rates may affect stone outcomes was initially proposed in 1999 by Greenstein and Matzkin The use of a voltage ramp-up protocol decreases acute injury to the kidney. In this study, we aimed to determine how broadly these modifications to SWL technique have been adapted. We demonstrated that rate and ramp-up strategies were done in over 90% of SWLs. However, pause was used at a lower rate, being done in only approximately 75% of cases. Initially published in 2009, the pause is the most recently described strategy, Regional differences were present in all the parameters for optimizing SWL. Although demographic differences were present between the regions, those differences alone should not affect the decision to use SWL optimization techniques. The guidelines for optimization are relatively new, and this may account for the variation. If this is the case, then one would expect the regional differences to decrease with time. One would also not expect to see heterogeneity in adaptation in recommendations—states that were less likely to use a pause should also be less likely to use a ramp-up protocol. As this is a retrospective study, several limitations exist. Given the nature of the data collected, only those centers that use a mobile lithotripsy unit can be assessed. This may pose a selection bias, as these centers may not be equivalent to those who own their own units and use dedicated personnel. Although overall patterns can be assessed, comments cannot be made on individual cases and patient complexity, referral patterns, and so forth. Data were neither available on fellowship training for the urologists who participated in this study nor was a distinction possible between academic and private practice. As technologists were all trained by the same organization, differences in practice patterns are more likely related to physician driven factors. This study identifies opportunities for education to improve compliance with practice guidelines. Effective communication of the most up-to-date evidence and current recommendations for SWL will be important in assuring that optimal treatment patterns are followed.