Gold (III) chloride can be extracted by solvating solvents and this extends to polyurethane foams. This study has confirmed that gold (III) chloride can be rapidly transported through polyurethane films. The rate of transfer follows first-order kinetics with the rate-determining step being transport through the film. This has been confirmed by measuring the rate of stripping of gold (III) pre-loaded into the film and by using films of different thicknesses. Diffusion coefficients for the transport of gold (III) are compared with those from studies using liquid supported membranes.
                  The loading isotherm of gold (III) in the polyurethane film has been obtained. Iron (III) and platinum (IV) are transported at negligible rates while tri-iodide ions are strongly absorbed by the film at a lower rate.The extraction of gold (III) in chloride solutions by solvating extractants has been widely studied ( These observations suggest that it may be possible to separate gold (III) from other precious and base metal ions in chloride solutions by selective transport through thin solid polyurethane films and this study is aimed at establishing this possibility and assessing the equilibrium and kinetic aspects of such a process. It was decided to initially employ polyurethane films manufactured using polyether polyols as these are more resistant to acid hydrolysis. Previous studies of the transport of gold (III) chloro-complexes through membranes have been focussed on the use of supported liquid ( In the case of a polyurethane film, the extractant is part of the chemical structure of the film and therefore at a high concentration, is not susceptible to loss by “bleeding” and is structurally more stable than the relatively fragile supported membranes. The films used were commercial ether-type polyurethane condoms of nominal 10 and 20 μm thickness. They were carefully washed with dilute detergent and thoroughly rinsed with pure water before use. Sections were stretched over the open end of a 45/40 mm Quickfit male joint to which was welded a short length of glass tubing as shown in Solutions were prepared by dissolving high purity (99.99%) gold (III) oxide or anhydrous platinum (IV) chloride in Analar grade hydrochloric acid that was used to prepare all solutions using water from a Millipore system. AR grade sodium iodide, potassium iodate and iron (III) chloride were used to prepare the other solutions. All experiments were conducted at 25 °C. In a typical experiment, 40 mL of the appropriate permeate solution (without gold (III)) was placed in the cell and allowed to reach 25 °C with stirring. The joint containing the polyurethane film was positioned in the permeate solution and 5–15 mL of the appropriate gold containing solution at 25 °C injected into the joint at The results of a typical experiment in which gold (III) at an initial concentration of 10 mM in a solution of 2 M HCl was transferred through a 10 The slope of the linear section of the log plot gives a first-order rate constant, k. It is apparent from the curves that there is a short induction period that is due to the initial loading of the film with gold before it is transported into the permeate solution. First-order kinetics for the appearance of gold in the permeate after this induction period were observed in all experiments. While it is possible to model the initial film loading process, the data was considered to be too limited to derive kinetic parameters. Several experiments were conducted in which the agitation of both solution phases was varied in order to assess the extent to which mass transport in the solution phase could be rate limiting. Thus, The effect of the acid concentration in the permeate solution on the rate of transfer of gold i.e. the first-order rate constant is shown in It is apparent that the rate decreases somewhat with increasing acidity and this probably due to the effect of acidity on the constant K for the equilibrium between gold (III) in solution and in the film (see below) due possibly to protonation of AuCl A simple model was derived to describe the above observations of the kinetics of the transfer process. This model is outlined in the Appendix. A similar more complex model has been published ( in which A is the interfacial area, K the constant for the assumed linear equilibrium between gold (III) in solution and in the film, D the diffusion coefficient for the transport of gold(III) within the film, L the film thickness, V the volume of the permeate solution and V Thus, the diffusion coefficient can be estimated from the value of k provided K is known. As will be demonstrated below, K can be obtained from a combination of transfer and stripping experiments. Values of D have been estimated in this way for a number of experiments using both 10 and 20 μm films and the results summarized in These results will be discussed in more detail after the following section. As described above, gold absorbed by the film during a transfer experiment was “stripped” in fresh permeate solution. A number of such two-stage experiments were conducted with films of 10 and 20 The results of these experiments and estimated values of D are summarized in The equilibrium concentration of gold in the solution after a stripping experiment enables one to estimate the gold that was in the film after the prior transfer experiment. While there is still some residual gold in the film after a stripping experiment, the quantity involved was found to be negligible in comparison to that present after the prior transfer experiment. Thus, the data in The results in The values of the diffusion coefficient shown in Of interest from a practical point of view is the flux of gold (III) through the film and the initial flux can be obtained by setting C = 0 in the rate equation for the transfer reaction. Using the data in A comparison can also be made with estimated diffusion coefficients ( The fluxes in previous studies using supported membranes are about an order of magnitude lower (albeit at lower metal concentrations) than obtained in the present study. It is possible that the very high density of solvating donor atoms in the polyurethane polymer enables the protonated gold (III) tetrachloro-complex and tri-iodide species (see below) to migrate more rapidly through the polymer. It is not possible to distinguish between the ion-exchange or solvation mechanisms for extraction of gold (III). Previous studies of metal anion extraction by polyurethane ( A limited study was made of the transport of iron (III), platinum (IV) and tri-iodide ions through the polyurethane films. These were chosen as previous work ( In the case of tri-iodide ions (0.1 mM in 0.1 M HCl + 0.02 M NaI), no apparent transfer occurred after several hours. However, the film was a deep yellow colour and was obviously loaded with tri-iodide. In this case, the high absorption constant resulted in undetectable quantities of tri-iodide in the permeate. The procedure was therefore reversed in that the feed solution was placed in the cell and the tri-iodide allowed to load into the film. The decrease in the absorbance due absorption of the tri-iodide (Peak at 370 nm) could therefore be monitored. The results of this experiment are shown in Using a procedure similar to that given in the Appendix, one can derive the following rate equation for this experiment. with k = 2(KAL + V)D/(L The excellent linearity of the first-order plot supports this analysis of the data. The concentration of tri-iodide in the film can be obtained by difference from the initial and final solution absorbances and the equilibrium constant K estimated. A value of 10,500 was obtained under these conditions. This, in turn can be used to calculate a value of D of 7.3 × 10 This study has shown that gold (III) chloride can be rapidly transported through polyurethane films as a result of a concentration difference. The rate of gold transfer from feed solutions containing 5 to 10 mM gold (III) in 2 M HCl into dilute HCl solutions follows first-order kinetics with the rate-determining step being transport through the film. The rate of stripping of gold (III) pre-loaded into the film has been found to be first order and the rate is inversely proportional to the film thickness. Diffusion coefficients for the transport of gold (III) through the film have been obtained and compare favourably with those from previously reported studies using liquid supported membranes. The loading isotherm of gold (III) in the polyurethane film has been obtained. Iron (III) and platinum (IV) in chloride solutions are transported at negligible rates through the film while tri-iodide ions are strongly absorbed by the film at a lower rate. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Consider a thin film of polyurethane of thickness L and area A through which gold(III) ions are transported from a concentration C Equilibrium at the film surfaces Flux of gold in the film in which D is the diffusion coefficient of gold in the film. Mass balance of gold (assuming negligible gold in film, C Rate of appearance of gold in permeate of film dC/dt = AD/(LV). (q Combination of (A3) and (A4) and integration with c = 0 at t = 0, gives. The transfer of gold(III) is monitored by recording the absorbance (Abs) due to gold(III) in the permeate solution as a function of time. Thus, Abs = The absorbance at infinite time (equilibrium), (Abs Abs Substitution in (A5) yields. with k = AKD/LV. {(V + V Thus, a plot of ln(Abs In a second subsequent experiment after equilibrium has been established, the feed and permeate solutions are removed and a fresh solution devoid of gold replaces the permeate and gold within the loaded film is allowed to equilibrate with the fresh permeate. The kinetics of this “stripping” transfer is followed as before. It was found that the amount of residual gold in the film after a single stripping reaction was negligible under the conditions of the present experiments. Thus, the equilibrium concentration in the permeate allows one to estimate the concentration of gold in the film that is in equilibrium with the gold in the permeate from the original transfer experiment. The value of K can therefore be estimated. This value can be used to calculate the diffusion coefficient of gold in the film from the plot of eq. (A6). A procedure similar to that above can be used to model the kinetics of the stripping process assuming again that mass transport of gold in the film is rate-determining. The following expression can be derived. Thus, D can be independently obtained from the stripping data.