This work deals with the indentation behavior of Zr69.5Al7.5−
                        x
                     Ga
                        x
                     Cu12Ni11 (x
                     =0, 1.5, 7.5at.%) alloys. A comparison between their nanohardness and reduced elastic modulus values of the as-synthesized glassy phase with their nanocomposites has been made. The indentation characteristics of a novel Ga substituted glass composition corresponding to x
                     =7.5 have shown significant improvement in regard to hardness and elastic modulus. The evidence of pile up has been observed in case of as-synthesized glassy ribbons. The load (P) versus depth (h) curves for as-synthesized melt–spun ribbons displayed the presence of displacement burst, which are known as pop-ins. The amount of energy per unit volume required for the shear band formation in glassy state has been estimated based on the pop-ins observed in P–h curve. This seems to decrease with Ga addition. Based on transmission electron microscopic observations of indented glassy specimen, the possibility of nanocrystallization has been ruled out.We report indentation behavior of metallic glass (MG) and glass–nanocrystal (nc)/nanoquasicrystal (nqc) composites in the alloy system Zr The alloy ingots of compositions Zr The as-synthesized ribbons were examined using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to confirm the formation of amorphous phase. The details of structural, microstructural and thermal characterization of as-synthesized as well as those of annealed ribbons have been reported elsewhere We begin this section by giving the TEM micrograph of melt spun ribbon corresponding to Zr For knowing composition, EPMA was performed for the as-synthesized alloys of Zr In this section, we present the results of indentation behavior of the three glassy compositions and their respective composites. We have made extensive investigations on the micro-/nano-hardness studies of these materials. Having investigated the microhardness behavior of glasses and their composites we now present the results of nanoindentation. This is essential to comprehend the nature of indentation at sub-microscopic scale as well as the plastic deformation under compression of the specimen containing nc/nqc phases in their composites.  The plastic deformation of metallic glasses during nanoindentation experiment has been found to be typically associated with pop-in events Eqs. We now try to explain the change in the mechanical behavior of metallic glasses and their composites on the basis of free volume model. We begin discussion on glasses first. In metallic glass, the free volume exerts a crucial influence on the mechanical properties of amorphous materials, such as hardness, strength and plasticity We have compared the nanoindentation behaviors of Zr The authors are thankful to Prof. N.K. Mukhopadhyay, Dr. M.A. Shaz and Dr. T.P. Yadav for many stimulating discussions. We acknowledge the technical helps received in conducting TEM/SEM and AFM/Nanoindentation studies, respectively, by Mr. Vijay Kumar and Mr. Manjeet Singh. Financial assistance received from Department of Science and Technology (