The bord and pillar system of mining is still the predominant method of mining underground coal in India. Even after adoption of the longwall method of mining, bord and pillar has an edge—due to less roof control problems. However, strata control is still a major problem in underground mining. With each passing day, mining operations are becoming more and more difficult as the mining becomes deeper, resulting in more adverse geo-mining conditions. This situation requires the simulation of mine and structure prior to extraction, as well as advanced instrumental monitoring of the strata control parameters for calibrating the numerical model. Designing a coal pillar is a key issue for every bord and pillar mining operation. Mine planners have a variety of modeling methods, both empirical and numerical, for analyzing pillar stresses and determining safe pillar sizes for the various mine geometries and geotechnical conditions. Empirical methods Many researchers have contributed in the field of numerical methods for simulating coal panels This Technical note deals with the simulation of bord and pillar sub-panel ( In the present study, the sub-panel of dimensions 160 For the simulation work, 14 stages of the line of extraction have been taken (the first, seventh and final stages are shown in The salient features of the selected sub-panel are summarized in  By gray shading,  As the line of extraction starts advancing towards the pillar under consideration ( The induced stress values at the roof level were also compared with the middle level at the selected eight points indicated in When the goaf was beyond the 30–32 A comparison of results of the simulation work with the actual results obtained from the field was made at point ‘I’ (see On the basis of the present study, the following conclusions can be made. The central portion of the pillar at the roof level experiences the least induced stress; whereas the pillar corners experience the highest stress. As one goes away from the goaf edge, the induced stress decreases. It was also seen, that the induced stress on the pillar was greater at the roof level, as compared to the middle level. Also, the change in magnitude of the induced stress was almost negligible up to a distance of 30–32 The results of this numerical model were acceptable as they tally well with the results obtained from the instrumentation for strata monitoring (the stress capsule) at the Mine.