High-tech minerals (HTMs) used for manufacturing mobile phones are indispensable raw materials for emerging Chinese national strategic industries. China is the world’s largest mobile phone market, and increasing amounts of HTMs are found in the country’s excessive mobile phone waste. Thus, it is important to investigate the life cycle cost (LCC) of recycling HTMs from waste mobile phones. In this study, material flow analysis (MFA) and LCC assessment were conducted to analyze the recycling of waste mobile phones and the contained HTMs. The LCCs of recycling two types of mobile phones, i.e., feature phones and smartphones, were investigated. The results show that the LCCs of recycling one waste feature phone and one waste smartphone are approximately US$ 2.34 and US$ 6.60, respectively. The LCCs of extracting HTMs from one waste feature phone are US$ 6.035 for 1 g of cobalt and US$ 0.014 for 1 g of palladium, while the LCCs of extracting 1 g of cobalt, palladium, antimony, beryllium, neodymium, praseodymium and platinum from one waste smartphone are US$ 10.106, US$ 0.024, US$ 0.135, US$ 0.005, US$ 0.08, US$ 0.016 and US$ 0.006, respectively. Based on the LCC results, constructive suggestions and policy implications are provided for future mobile phone management in China.Material flow analysis High-tech minerals Waste electrical and electronic equipment Waste mobile phone recycling Life cycle cost Collection cost Transport cost Dismantling cost Chemical extraction cost Treatment cost after chemical extraction High-tech minerals (HTMs) are considered “energy metals” or “new age metals” and are crucial for the new energy industry ( Mobile phones have become irreplaceable devices in daily human life, and China is the world’s largest phone-manufacturing and phone-consuming country ( Previous research endeavors have focused primarily on the generation and management of waste mobile phones, the economics of waste mobile phone recycling (WPR), environmental assessments of their disposal, and mineral composition analyses for potential recycling. For example, evaluating the generation and management of waste mobile phones, In researching the economics of WPR, From research on the environmental impacts of WPR, Although many studies have been conducted to estimate and analyze the generation, management, economics, and environmental aspects of waste mobile phones, the life cycle cost (LCC) of recycling waste mobile phones and the contained HTMs, which are crucial to the implementation of WPR recycling strategies, have received less attention. The LCC is the summation of cost estimates from inception to disposal for both equipment and projects, as determined by an analytical study and an estimate of the total costs experienced during the total life ( In this study, an LCC assessment was carried out to investigate the cost of recycling waste mobile phones and the contained HTMs by considering the material flow from the waste mobile phone collection to waste material disposal after mineral extraction. The LCCs of recycling various HTMs from waste mobile phones and their market values were also compared. Based on the LCC analysis results, constructive suggestions and policies are proposed for future waste mobile phone management in China. Finally, the limitations of this study are discussed, and future research directions are suggested. Material flow analysis is the analysis of an entire process chain, including extraction or harvest, chemical transformation, manufacturing, consumption, recycling and the disposal of materials ( HTMs, according to the definition from the Key Laboratory of Strategic Studies and the Ministry of Land and Resources in China, are a group of metals, including rare earth metals (including 17 elements): antimony, beryllium, bismuth, barium, boron, cadmium, lithium, gallium, germanium, magnesium, indium, strontium, titanium, tungsten, vanadium, scandium, molybdenum, platinum group metals (palladium, platinum, and ruthenium, in particular), chromium, cobalt, cesium, niobium, hafnium, rubidium, rhenium, selenium, thorium, thallium, tantalum, tellurium, uranium and zirconium ( A review of the literature shows that the treatment cost of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is composed mainly of the expenses from collection, transportation, dismantling, recycling, and final disposal. Each of these expenses can be calculated separately and independently and summed to produce the total cost ( The LCC of WPR in China can be calculated as ( Data on the collection costs for mobile phones were gathered online at Finally, the Chinese yuan was converted to US dollars by applying the most up-to-date foreign exchange rate: To determine the cost range for the transport phase, a survey was conducted to obtain expert knowledge from fifteen industry specialists from private and state-owned Chinese electronic recycling firms. Typically, the transport cost was described as the expenses/costs involved in moving different types of mobile phones to a designated place, e.g., from a consumer’s residence to a mobile phone recycling site. The arithmetic mean value of the transport costs from fifteen industry specialists was set as the transport cost range for the Monte Carlo simulation. According to the survey results, the The cost range of the dismantling phase was obtained through the same survey. The dismantling cost was defined as the expenses/costs of dismantling and removing an item and restoring the site in which it was located. The arithmetic mean value of the dismantling costs obtained from fifteen industry specialists was set as the dismantling cost range for the Monte Carlo simulation. Therefore, according to the questionnaire survey results, the The results of the survey indicated that chemical extraction is a crucial procedure in the process of extracting HTMs from waste mobile phones. Typically, the chemical extraction cost was described as the expenses/costs of extracting chemical materials from mobile phones. The arithmetic mean value of the chemical extraction costs from fifteen industry specialists was set as the chemical extraction cost range for the Monte Carlo simulations. Therefore, according to the questionnaire survey results, the The treatment step is the final procedure in recycling HTMs from waste mobile phones. These results also come from the questionnaire. Specifically, the treatment cost included the expenses/costs of treating mobile phones after the chemical extraction phase. Additionally, the arithmetic mean value of the treatment costs from fifteen industry specialists was set as the treatment cost range for the Monte Carlo simulations. Therefore, according to the questionnaire survey results, it can be concluded that the In summary, Many influencing factors have a significant impact on the overall chemical extraction cost, for example, the extraction methodology, the chemical reagent cost and the targeted HTMs. In this study, we assume that the LCCs of the various HTMs come only from the chemical extraction phase. For data availability reasons, the recycling cost of gold recovered from urban mining is used as a proxy for the various HTMs recovered from waste smartphones and waste feature phones based on the research conducted by In total, there are four steps to estimate the LCCs of various HTMs from waste mobile phones. In step one, according to the research conducted by In this study, the research data and relevant information mainly come from published literature, enterprise recycling websites, and questionnaire surveys conducted with industry specialists from private or state-owned Chinese electronic recycling firms. The cost information for the five major phases came from two different sources: the cost information for the collection phase was obtained from the official website of Aihuishou ( Considering the similarity between precious metals and HTMs, the recycling cost of gold through urban mining is used as a proxy for the various HTMs recovered from waste mobile phones ( Due to the variety of sources for this LCC study mentioned above, the data were collected in a range format, and Monte Carlo simulation was used to reduce uncertainty. Except for the collection phase, the cost ranges of the other WPR phases were used for the Monte Carlo simulation. A uniform distribution was used, and a probability of 90% was chosen for the corresponding cost value. We also used the Monte Carlo simulation for the chemical extraction cost phase. More detailed information about the Monte Carlo simulation results is provided in In this paper, we used a Monte Carlo simulation to capture uncertainty. Specifically, for feature phones, after running the Monte Carlo simulation with 1000 iterations, the results show that there is only a 10% probability that the total LCC of recycling one feature phone will be higher than US$ 2.34. For smartphones, after running the Monte Carlo simulation with 1000 iterations, the results show that there is only a 10% probability that the total LCC of recycling one smartphone will be higher than US$ 6.60. Based on the simulation results, the total LCCs of all Chinese waste mobile phones generated from 1987 to 2035, which are estimated using the LCC method discussed in section The results indicate that the LCC of Chinese waste mobile phones from 1987 to 2035 can be separated into two time periods. First, from 1987 to 2016, the LCC of waste mobile phones shows a rapid increase from approximately US$ 11,804 in 1992 to approximately US$ 2980 million in 2016, while the total LCC of waste mobile phones over that period exceeded US$ 11.98 billion. In this period, the cumulative LCCs of the waste feature phones and waste smartphones were approximately US$ 5.47 billion and US$ 6.51 billion, respectively. The results reveal significant cost differences between waste smartphones and waste feature phones. However, all of the costs show obvious linear relationships with the number of waste mobile phones, which indicates that the more waste mobile phones there are, the higher the costs of handling them. As shown in However, the LCC of waste smartphones showed an evident evolving process of slow growth-rocket growth. The data show that the recycling cost of waste smartphones in 2001 was approximately US$ 19,367 and increased to approximately US$ 125.5 million in 2011. Subsequently, the cost of waste smartphones entered a rapid growth phase, with the cost increasing to roughly US$ 2562.4 million in 2016. Second, from 2017 to 2035, the annual cost of waste mobile phones is projected to exceed US$ 3264 million in 2017 and US$ 7,007.5 million in 2035, while the cumulative cost of waste mobile phones is expected to exceed US$ 95.3 billion during the same period. In this period, from 2017 to 2035, the cumulative costs of waste feature phones and smartphones are roughly US$ 794.4 million and US$ 94.5 billion, respectively. The difference in LCC is significant for recycling waste smartphones and waste feature phones. The LCC of waste feature phones exhibits a decreasing trend, given that fewer waste feature phones are being generated. This trend directly reflects the fact that feature phones are being phased out and are gradually moving out of mainstream use. In contrast, the LCC of waste smartphones is expected to grow continually, increasing from approximately US$ 3 billion in 2017 to approximately US$ 7 billion in 2035. In the future, it is foreseeable that an increasing amount of money will be spent on recycling smartphones instead of feature phones. After running the Monte Carlo simulation for 1000 iterations, the results show that there is only a 10% probability that the chemical extraction cost of one feature phone will be higher than US$ 0.54. Additionally, for smartphones, the results show that there is only a 10% probability that the chemical extraction cost will be higher than US$ 0.77. According to the simulation results and utilizing the LCC method discussed above, the LCCs of the HTMs stored in waste mobile phones were calculated, as illustrated in From 1987 to 2016, the LCCs of the HTMs of cobalt and palladium contained in waste mobile phones were just over US$ 24 billion and US$ 57 million, respectively. Specifically, the cumulative cost of extracting the cobalt contained in waste feature phones in China surpassed US$ 1.07 billion in 2016, while the cumulative cost of extracting the palladium stored in these waste feature phones was just over US$ 2.5 million in the same period. The cumulative cost of extracting the cobalt contained in the waste smartphones in China exceeded US$ 3.9 billion in 2016, and the cumulative cost of extracting the palladium contained in the waste smartphones in China was just over US$ 9.3 million. From 2017 to 2035, the LCCs of extracting the cobalt and palladium contained in the waste mobile phones will be approximately US$ 146.7 billion and US$ 350 million, respectively. In particular, the cumulative cost of extracting the cobalt contained in the waste feature phones in China will be only US$ 0.76 million in 2035, while the cumulative cost of extracting the palladium contained in these waste feature phones will be just over US$ 1796 in the same period. In contrast, the cumulative cost of extracting the cobalt contained in waste smartphones in China will exceed US$ 10.7 billion in 2035, and the cumulative cost of extracting the palladium contained in waste smartphones in China will be approximately US$ 25.6 million in the same year. With the evolution of technology and the ever-changing functional richness of products, smartphones contain many other HTMs, such as antimony, beryllium, neodymium, praseodymium and platinum, that are not included in traditional feature phones and are likely to increase the total cost. The LCCs of extracting these five HTMs from waste smartphones from 2000 to 2016 are expressed in A sensitivity analysis of the Monte Carlo simulation results is performed to reduce the uncertainty and improve the reliability of the results. We establish some scenarios based on the extreme values, the middle values and the base values of the Monte Carlo simulation results. Across scenarios, B stands for the base scenario; the lower limit scenario (Sl) and upper limit scenario (Su) represent the lower limit value and the upper limit value, respectively; and the middle limit scenario (Sm) indicates the middle limit value. Specifically, the base scenario corresponds to 90% of the Monte Carlo simulation results; Sl and Su correspond to 0.1% of the Monte Carlo simulation results and 100% of the Monte Carlo simulation results, respectively; and Sm corresponds to 50% of the Monte Carlo simulation results. All possible results will lie in the range between Sl and Su. In the sensitivity analysis for waste mobile phones, the scenarios between Sm and Su will cause fluctuations of approximately ±9% in the total LCC of waste feature phones. The scenarios between Sm and Su will cause fluctuations of between approximately −20% and +10% of the total LCC of waste smartphones. Therefore, the evaluation results are reasonable; the detailed sensitivity analysis results for the LCC of waste mobile phones under different scenarios can be found in Sensitivity analysis is also performed with regard to the HTMs contained in both waste mobile phone types. Specifically, the scenarios between Sm and Su will cause approximately −0.74% and −1.06% of the total LCC in waste feature phones and approximately −1.51% and +1.67% in waste smartphones for cobalt and approximately −0.69% and −1.4% of the total LCC in waste feature phones and approximately −1.66% and +1.69% in waste smartphones for palladium. The scenarios between Sm and Su will cause approximately −1.5% and +1.65% of the total LCC in waste smartphones for neodymium, −1.56% and +1.74% for antimony, −2.08% and +2.13% for beryllium, −1.25% and +1.27% for praseodymium, and −1.56% and +1.59% for platinum. Therefore, the evaluation results are reasonable, and the detailed sensitivity analysis results regarding the LCC of various HTMs in both types of waste mobile phones under different scenarios can be found in It is important to conduct LCC analyses given the ever-increasing number of waste mobile phones. Estimating the LCC of waste mobile phones will provide economic benefits for waste product recyclers and many other stakeholders as well as other potential benefits. First, conducting an LCC analysis of waste mobile phones helps to break down the costs of each step and provides a comprehensive map for recycling waste mobile phones. Most previous research has either only considered the recycling cost of waste mobile phones as a whole or has neglected the full “cradle-to-grave” process and estimated the corresponding costs mainly from the collection phase or the transport phase while ignoring the costs of other steps, which are all important for an overall LCC analysis. In addition, it is important to conduct an LCC analysis of waste mobile phones based on different mobile phones. Furthermore, analyzing the respective step costs of waste mobile phones based on the differentiation between smartphones and feature phones can provide a helpful future reference for many other types of electronic products, such as computers or televisions. Most previous research has only analyzed the cost of one specific electronic product over a short period of time, but neglecting product differences and long-term variations in trends is inadvisable. For example, With the ongoing industrial transformation and scientific revolution, HTMs are becoming one of the main areas of focus for industrialized countries and regions worldwide. HTMs are key raw materials for emerging Chinese national strategic industries, and therefore, a stable supply of those HTMs is needed to ensure their sustainable and healthy development. Estimating the LCC of the HTMs contained in waste mobile phones not only provides useful information for public policy makers but also yields many other associated benefits. First, by comparing the LCC results of the HTMs contained in waste mobile phones with real-time HTM market values, some practical cost-effective measures can be implemented. According to our estimation, considering feature phones and smartphones from 1987 to 2035, only the market value of palladium outweighs the LCC of palladium from waste mobile phones. In particular, for feature phones, the market value of palladium is approximately US$ 644 million, while the LCC of the palladium from waste feature phones is only approximately US$ 37.5 million during the same period. For smartphones, the market value of palladium is approximately US$ 6.1 billion, while the LCC of palladium from waste smartphones is only approximately US$ 367 million during the same period. Notably, the market value of platinum is also greater than the LCC of platinum from waste smartphones over the entire period from 2000 to 2035. The market value of platinum is approximately US$ 2.6 billion, while the LCC of the platinum from waste smartphones is only approximately US$ 91.8 million. Beyond palladium and platinum, all the other HTMs contained in waste mobile phones have significant LCCs that are greater than their corresponding market values, regardless of the waste mobile phone type. The gap between the LCC and the market value is approximately US$ 15.7 billion (waste feature phones) and US$ 150 billion (waste smartphones) for cobalt, US$ 2.1 billion for antimony, US$ 35.8 million for beryllium, US$ 1.2 billion for neodymium and US$ 233.9 million for praseodymium. The cost-effectiveness analysis above actually reflects some practical reasons for this situation; one such reason is the low recycling rate of waste mobile phones, which is truly a global issue. Most discarded mobile phones are either stored in households or disposed of in waste landfills. Globally, the WPR rate is approximately 3%, and the situation is even worse in some developing countries, where the recycling rate is less than 1% ( Additionally, estimating the LCC of the HTMs contained in waste mobile phones could help related stakeholders implement further measures to combat this situation. The government can intervene to address the low recycling rate of waste mobile phones by formulating relevant recycling laws or regulations based on the information provided by the LCC analysis. For example, the government should establish a “special subsidy fund” for the collection and recycling of waste mobile phones. This “special subsidy fund” could reduce the waste mobile phone collection costs and stimulate the motivation to recycle, which could ultimately increase the WPR rate. Furthermore, enterprises can evaluate themselves and improve critical dismantling technologies to enhance phone and material recycling rates based on the information provided by the LCC analysis. For example, it is necessary for enterprises to develop a technique for the dismantling phase, which is extremely important for mineral extraction. For collection enterprises, it is necessary to build a comprehensive collection system. Within the system, the proper approach would be for recyclers to collect waste mobile phones from the formal sectors. However, informal sectors should also be regulated, and an organic cooperative link should be established. Furthermore, individuals can remold their recycling behaviors and develop their awareness of recycling. An appropriate level of awareness could gradually change mobile phone consumer behaviors. Instead of storing their waste mobile phones in households, individuals could actively donate or sell their waste mobile phones to formal recyclers, which would make a strong contribution to improving the WPR rate. Additionally, individuals should be educated to adopt proper mobile phone usage behaviors during both the in-use phase and the after-use phase. Eventually, waste mobile phones could constitute a potential new resource for the sustainable secondary mining of HTMs. Based on our previous estimation and analysis, we draw the following conclusions. The total LCC of one waste feature phone is approximately US$ 2.34, and the total LCC of one waste smartphone is approximately US$ 6.60. The LCC difference is quite significant between recycling waste feature phones and recycling waste smartphones. In the future, it is likely that an increasing amount of money will be spent on recycling waste smartphones instead of recycling waste feature phones. The total LCCs for extracting the various HTMs contained in one waste feature phone are approximately US$ 6.03 for 1 g of cobalt and approximately US$ 0.014 for 1 g of palladium, while the total LCCs for extracting the HTMs contained in one waste smartphone are approximately US$ 10.11 for 1 g of cobalt, US$ 0.024 for 1 g of palladium, US$ 0.135 for 1 g of antimony, US$ 0.005 for 1 g of beryllium, US$ 0.08 for 1 g of neodymium, US$ 0.016 for 1 g of praseodymium and US$ 0.006 for 1 g of platinum. The cumulative LCC of the HTMs contained in waste feature phones is gradually decreasing, while the cumulative LCC of the HTMs contained in waste smartphones is rapidly increasing and will demand great attention in the foreseeable future. The policy implications of future mobile phone management for different stakeholders in China based on our conclusions are as follows. It is strongly suggested that China focus not only on the number of waste mobile phones and the HTMs they contain but also on the LCCs of waste mobile phones and the HTMs they contain. From a government perspective, specific mobile phone waste management policies are urgently needed, especially policies targeting waste mobile phones and the HTMs they contain, to increase the current low collection rate of waste mobile phones and the low recycling rate of the HTMs contained in them. From an enterprise perspective, there are many ways to invest. For recycling or dismantling enterprises, more research funding should be invested in advanced technology, which plays a pivotal role in the dismantling process. From the individual perspective, public awareness of sustainable waste mobile phone management and environmental protection should be advocated and strengthened by promoting environmental protection as well as resource use efficiency. Because this study aimed to investigate the LCC of recycling HTMs from waste mobile phones, it provides some new insights into this topic as well as into public policy making and managerial implications in the Chinese context. However, some limitations still exist due to data availability. Future research should expand the volume of private or state-owned electronic recycling firms examined and integrate more specialist perspectives into the database as well as mobile phone collection data from informal sectors. Additionally, future research should conduct a survey on a national scale and gather first-hand industrial data regarding the high proportion of reuse of scrap mobile phones, as well as the reuse of components (e.g., batteries and ICs). Finally, future research should take the revolution of mobile phones into consideration because a variety of HTMs are likely to be added to newer smartphones. The research work was sponsored by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at