Purpose
                  To determine factors influencing the development of posttraumatic osteoarthritis (OA) following medial tibial plateau fractures and to evaluate concomitant injuries associated with these fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A chart review of patients with operatively treated medial tibial plateau fractures admitted to our Level I trauma centre from 2002 to 2008 was performed. Of 63 patients, 41 participated in a clinical and radiographic examination. The mean age was 47 years (range 16–78) and the mean follow-up time was 7.6 (range 4.7–11.7) years. All patients had preoperative computed tomography (CT) scans and postoperative radiographs. At the end of follow-up, standing radiographs, mechanical axis, and CT scans were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Of the 41 patients, 24 had no or mild (Kellgren-Lawrence grade 0–2) OA and 17 had severe (grade 3–4) OA. Initial articular depression measured from preoperative CT scans was a significant predictor of OA (median 1.8mm vs 4.5mm, p=0.009). Fracture line extension to the lateral plateau (p=0.68) or fracture comminution (p=0.21) had no effect on the development of posttraumatic OA, nor did articular depression at the end of follow-up (p=0.68) measured from CT scans. Mechanical axis >4° of varus and ≥2mm articular depression or step-off were associated with worse WOMAC pain scores, but did not affect other functional outcome scores. Six patients (10%) had permanent peroneal nerve dysfunction. Ten patients (16%) required LCL reconstruction and nine (14%) ACL avulsions were treated at the time of fracture stabilisation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The amount of articular depression measured from preoperative CT scans seems to predict the development of posttraumatic OA, probably reflecting the severity of chondral injury at the time of fracture. Restoration of mechanical axis and articular congruence are important in achieving a good clinical outcome.Fractures of the medial tibial plateau are rare. Even though these fractures comprise only 10–20% of all proximal tibial fractures, they generally have the worst prognosis Medial plateau fractures have a high prevalence of concomitant injuries. Of these, lateral collateral ligament (LCL) and anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries are the most common, as are peroneal nerve injuries The primary objective of this study was to determine fracture- and surgery-related factors that could influence the development of posttraumatic osteoarthritis (OA). Our hypothesis was that residual articular incongruence is related to the development of OA. The secondary objective was to evaluate functional outcome and the type of concomitant injuries associated with these fractures. The local Ethical Committee approved the study and we obtained informed consent from each patient. We performed a chart review of all patients with operatively treated tibial plateau fractures who were admitted to our Level I trauma centre between 1 January 2002 and 31 December 2008. A total of 389 patients with proximal tibia fractures were identified in the hospital database. We reviewed knee radiographs and routine multi-detector computed tomography (CT) scans with axial, sagittal, and coronal reformations and classified fractures according to the AO/OTA The most common mechanisms of injury were same-level falls in 28 patients and road traffic accidents in 14 patients. Other frequent injury mechanisms included the following: bicycle accident in 9 patients, sports-related injury in 8 patients, automobile collision with a pedestrian in 2 patients, and falls from a height greater than 1 All patients were treated using the standard techniques of exposure, open reduction, and stable internal fixation. Twenty-two patients had a temporary external fixation until swelling was reduced and the remainder had a splint while awaiting surgery. The most common approach for fracture reduction was posteromedial (52 patients, 83%) and 13 of these patients also had an additional anterolateral approach performed Of the 63 patients, 41 were able to participate in a follow-up visit. The patient characteristics are summarized in One orthopaedic surgeon (MP) examined patients at the follow-up visit. Valgus and varus laxity were evaluated using manual testing in extension and in 30° of flexion. To assess anterior laxity, the Lachman, anterior drawer, and pivot shift tests were used. Posterior laxity was evaluated using the posterior drawer test. Range of motion was measured using a goniometer. Results were compared to the uninjured contralateral knee. Patients completed two validated functional outcome measurement tools; the Modified Lysholm knee score and the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis index (WOMAC) For the current study, weight-bearing knee radiographs were obtained at the follow-up visit to evaluate the stage of posttraumatic OA according to the Kellgren-Lawrence classification (grade 0 to 4) An independent biostatistician performed the statistical analysis of the data. The differences in categorical variables between patients with or without posttraumatic OA were analysed with chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test. The mean ages between patient groups were compared using two-sample Of the 41 patients, 24 had no or mild (Kellgren-Lawrence grade 0–2) OA and 17 had severe (grade 3–4) OA. Radiological results of 41 patients with follow-up x-rays are shown in Patients with median mechanical axis >4° of varus had significantly more WOMAC pain (p Six out of 63 patients had permanent peroneal nerve dysfunction. There were no vascular injuries. Six patients developed compartment syndrome necessitating fasciotomy. Ten patients (16%) had LCL repair or reconstruction performed at the time of fracture stabilisation; 7 out of 20 (35%) with isolated medial plateau fractures (B1.2, B3.2) and 3 out of 43 (7%) with an oblique fracture type (B1.3, B3.3). The diagnosis of LCL injury was based on clinical evaluation after stabilization of the medial plateau fracture. Seven patients also had MRI. Patients who had LCL reconstruction or repair performed had similar risk for OA as patients without LCL injury (p There were two open fractures. One was Gustilo grade I and the other was grade IIIB, which required gastrocnemius muscle flap coverage at the time of fracture stabilisation. The patient with the grade IIIB open fracture developed a persistent infection and the osteosynthesis material was removed after fracture healing one year from the index operation. This patient did not develop posttraumatic OA at 6 years follow-up time. The functional results of 39 patients with follow-up visits and the seven patients without follow-up x-rays are presented in The primary objective of this study was to determine fracture- and surgery-related factors that could influence the development of posttraumatic osteoarthritis (OA). Our hypothesis was that residual articular incongruence is related to the development of OA. According to previous studies, about 20–44% of the patients will develop posttraumatic OA after a proximal tibia fracture The second objective was to evaluate functional outcomes and the type of concomitant injuries associated with these fractures. The functional outcome after open reduction and internal fixation of medial plateau fractures were generally good. The median WOMAC scores were comparable to population-based normative values Concomitant injuries related to medial plateau fractures are common. Gardner et al. reported in their magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analyses that the incidence of complete LCL rupture was 57% in Schatzker IV fractures (n In one previous study medial plateau fractures were suggested to also carry a high risk for vascular injuries The current study had some limitations. Being a cohort study, there were some patients lost to follow-up. Development of posttraumatic OA is multifactorial and in a retrospective study the data is often limited regarding available variables. Since there were different fracture subtypes (split and comminuted), fracture fixation methods were not evaluated, but rather the quality of the reduction. Therefore, we cannot make any recommendation regarding the best fixation method. Only 14 out of 63 patients had preoperative MRI performed, thus we have no comprehensive data on the prevalence of meniscal injuries and only clinical data on the treatment of ligament injuries. Nonetheless, to our knowledge this is the largest study in the English literature examining the outcomes of medial tibial plateau fractures. An important strength of this study was that measurement of articular congruence was performed both preoperatively and at the follow-up visit using CT. Good functional outcome can be achieved with ORIF of most medial tibial plateau fractures, but the development of post-traumatic OA is common. The amount of articular depression as measured from preoperative CT scans seems to predict the development of OA. When treating these fractures, restoration of mechanical axis and articular congruence are important as mechanical axis >4° of varus and ≥2 None. Markus Parkkinen, Tatu Mäkinen and Rami Madanat received research support from the The authors would like to thank biostatistician Tero Vahlberg, MSc for performing the statistical analyses.