Purpose
                  This study presents the clinical results of a procedure for treating tibial eminence fractures of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) using arthroscopic reduction and No. 5 Ethibond sutures (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ).
               
                  Methods
                  This prospective study analyzed 36 patients who underwent arthroscopic reduction and suture fixation for image-proven ACL avulsion fractures of the tibial eminence. The classification of Meyers and McKeever identified 6 type II, 16 type III, and 14 type IV fractures. The mean follow-up period was 34.4 months (range, 24 to 91 months). Follow-up assessment included Lysholm knee score, Tegner activity score, International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score, and KT-1000 arthrometer (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA) and radiographic evaluation.
               
                  Results
                  The mean preoperative Lysholm score in the 36 knees was 38 (range, 28 to 54); the mean postoperative Lysholm score was 98 (range, 83 to 100). The mean preinjury and preoperative Tegner scores in the 36 knees were 7.5 ± 1.5 (range, 5 to 9) and 3 ± 1.7 (range, 2 to 5), respectively. The mean postoperative Tegner score was 7.3 ± 1.7 (range, 5 to 9). At final follow-up, 34 patients (94.5%) were classified by IKDC score as normal or nearly normal (grade A or B). The IKDC classification was abnormal (grade C) in 2 patients (5.5%). All 36 fractures achieved union within 3 months. No significant complications, such as arthrofibrosis, loss of initial fixation, or wound infection, were noted.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Treating ACL avulsion fracture by arthroscopic suture fixation by use of 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures can restore ACL length, stabilize fragments, promote early motion, and minimize morbidity.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Avulsion fracture of the tibial attachment of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is more common in children and adolescents than in adults Treatment techniques include surgical open reduction or arthroscopic approaches and internal fixation with pins, wires, or suture fixation. Between December 1999 and August 2005, this prospective study enrolled 36 patients with imaging evidence of ACL avulsion fractures of the tibial eminence who underwent arthroscopy-assisted surgery. The inclusion criteria for the study were a displaced ACL avulsion fracture and anterior knee instability of grade II or higher ( Patients were positioned supine on the operating table. Three anterior knee portals were used: anteromedial, anterolateral, and lateral midpatellar. Fracture debris and blood clots were debrided for visual access to the avulsed bone fragment and fracture site. An ACL tibial angle guide (Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Andover, MA) was used to manipulate and anatomically reduce the displaced fracture fragment ( During the first postoperative week, each patient was immobilized with a full-extension knee brace. Full weight-bearing, quadriceps-strengthening, and isometric exercises were encouraged along with straight-leg raises. During weeks 2 to 4, the range of motion (ROM) for the 36 knees was 0° to 60° in flexion. At week 8, ROM was 0° to 120° in flexion, and closed-chain kinetic exercise was encouraged. During weeks 10 to 12, stationary bicycling and straight-leg stance were encouraged. At 6 months, all patients could fully resume sports activity. All subjects underwent clinical and radiographic assessments at follow-up ( Each radiograph was evaluated by 3 observers (visiting orthopaedic staff) in a blinded fashion to assess interobserver variance. The 3 observers also classified fracture type and union time in the 36 patients. Statistical analysis determined the interobserver variance in diagnosis for secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and union time. The interobserver variability by use of the κ method in diagnosis of secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and time for fracture union was in all cases insignificant ( The subjects were 14 male and 22 female patients, and the mean age at the time of surgery was 37 years (range, 17 to 73 years). The injury mechanism was related to a traffic accident in 30 patients, related to sports in 5, and caused by a fall in 1. The Meyers and McKeever classification identified 6 type II, 16 type III, and 14 type IV fractures. The mean time from injury to surgery was 4.6 days (mean, 1 to 9 days). The mean follow-up period was 34.4 months (range, 24 to 91 months). Examination with the patient under anesthesia before surgery showed grade II anterior instability in 10 knees and grade III in 26. The Lysholm knee scoring system was used to analyze subjective symptoms. The mean preoperative Lysholm score in the 36 knees was 38 (range, 28 to 54); the mean postoperative Lysholm score was 98 (range, 83 to 100). After a minimum of 2 years' follow-up, 32 of 36 patients (89%) had achieved excellent outcomes and 2 patients (5.5%) had achieved good outcomes. The 2 remaining patients achieved fair outcomes. No patient had a poor outcome. Lysholm scores significantly differed between preoperative evaluation and final follow-up ( The mean preinjury and preoperative Tegner scores for the 36 knees were 7.5 ± 1.5 (range, 5 to 9) and 3 ± 1.7 (range, 2 to 5), respectively. The mean postoperative Tegner score was 7.3 ± 1.7 (range, 5 to 9). Improvement from preoperative to postoperative values was statistically significant ( Preinjury activity levels for all patients ranged from strenuous to moderate. At the time of surgery, only 6 of 36 patients (17%) had light activity levels, and 30 (83%) had sedentary activity levels. Of the 36 patients, 34 (94.5%) achieved strenuous to moderate activity levels at final follow-up whereas 2 (5.5%) could perform light activity. Thus activity levels significantly improved after surgery ( Of the 36 patients, 34 (94.5%) subjectively rated their knee function as normal or near normal whereas 2 (5.5%) subjectively rated their knee function as abnormal. Of the 36 patients, 97% (n = 35) reported no pain during moderate or strenuous activities; 1 patient (3%) reported inconstant and slight pain with moderate or strenuous activities. Before surgery, 7 patients (19.4%) had a 15° difference in flexion defect between the 2 sides. Of the patients, 13 (36.1%) had an extension defect exceeding 10°. At review, 16 patients (44.4%) whose normal and reconstructed limbs had a 3° or smaller difference in full extension or a 5° or smaller difference in full flexion were given a normal rating. A rating of abnormal was found in 2 patients (5.5%) (1 type III and 1 type IV) with 16° and 25° deficits in flexion. No patient had a severely abnormal rating (i.e., extension deficit >10° or flexion deficit >25°). KT-1000 arthrometer data at 89 N were available for all 36 patients. Postoperatively, all patients had negative Lachman tests, and none exhibited pivot-shift phenomena. All patients had side-to-side differences of less than 3 mm at final follow-up. The mean difference at final follow-up was 1.0 mm (range, 0 to 2 mm). There was no statistically significant difference in postoperative KT-1000 scores compared with the contralateral uninjured limb data ( By 3 months after surgery, radiologic assessments showed solid union in all 36 fractures. At final follow-up, 2 patients (10%) showed stage I degeneration according to the Ahlback classification. On the functional 1-leg hop test at final follow-up, 28 patients (78%) were able to hop 90% of the distance or greater using their healthy limbs, 6 (16.5%) were able to hop 76% to 89% of the distance using their healthy limbs, and 2 (5.5%) were able to hop 50% to 75% of the distance using their healthy limbs. The associated injuries included meniscal injury in 9 patients (25%) (lateral meniscus in 7 and medial meniscus in 2) treated by partial meniscectomy. None of the 36 consecutive patients had collateral ligament, popliteal artery, or peroneal nerve injuries. No complications were directly associated with arthroscopy. No deep infection, thrombophlebitis, or vascular injury was noted in this series. The development of effective arthroscopic techniques for treating ACL avulsion has been reported recently. Techniques using Kirschner wire, In contrast to arthroscopic reduction and fixation with implants, the suture method requires no further surgery for implant removal. Suture fixation techniques can be classified as those for treating the ACL itself (ligament suture methods) The operative technique presented here has several advantages. First, the suture fixation technique requires no further surgery for implant removal. Second, the 4 No. 5 Ethibond intraligamentous sutures are sewn into the ACL base rather than into the avulsed bone; thus even reduction and fixation of type III or IV fractures are easily performed. Suture fixation is superior to screw fixation for treating avulsion fracture of the ACL because screw fixation may potentially break the bone fragment. Moreover, multiple sutures can be used for precise repair of bone fragments. Finally, special instruments such as suture punches are unnecessary. Berg The unique features of this prospective study are as follows: (1) All arthroscopic surgical techniques were performed by a single surgeon using only 1 fracture fixation method and suture material, and all patients underwent the same rehabilitation program. (2) All 36 patients received complete follow-up and outcome assessment. However, acknowledged limitations of this study are the lack of a control group, the small case number, and the short observation period. Treating ACL avulsion fracture by arthroscopic suture fixation by use of 4 No. 5 Ethibond sutures can restore ACL length, stabilize fragments, promote early motion, and minimize morbidity.