This study was carried out on a finely disseminated gold-bearing ore from Kaymaz, Turkey. The main objective was to determine the mechanism of reaction between thiourea and Fe3+ in the thiourea leaching of gold. Thiourea consumption levels were also examined during the leaching operations for different leaching parameters, i.e., molar ratio of ferric sulfate/thiourea, pH, and temperature. The leaching using the thiourea process was compared with cyanidation. In optimum leach conditions, 85.8% gold extraction was obtained with feed of −53 μm particle size in 6 h.The conventional recovery of gold is by the cyanidation process wherein finely ground ore is agitated in vats of 0.1% sodium cyanide solution. This process recovers over 85% of the gold. Although this method has been used commercially for the past 100 years, there are ores that are not amenable to treatment by cyanide. Interest in alternative lixiviants, such as thiourea, halogens, thiosulfate and malononitrile, has been revived as a result of a major increase in gold price, which has stimulated new developments in extraction technology, combined with environmental concern Thiourea leaching technique has many advantages over the cyanidation process, including higher leaching rates. Thiourea is not restricted by the same toxicity factors as cyanide, and it has been reported to be affected to a much lesser degree by the presence of some cyanidation inhibitors. An additional advantage over cyanide exists when treating refractory sulfide gold-containing ore, requiring biooxidative pretreatments; this results in highly acidic solutions, requiring neutralization prior to cyanidation, which takes place in alkaline solution. In contrast, thiourea leaching occurs in acidic solutions that can be treated directly Thiourea (H For significant leaching rate in this reaction, an oxidant (ferric ion or hydrogen peroxide) at high concentration is required The formamidine disulfide itself is a very active oxidant and is considered to proceed at a sufficient rate to achieve gold extraction within a practical time scale. Formamidine disulfide oxidizes to produce cyanamide, hydrogen sulfide and elemental sulfur. The dissolution of gold and silver in acidic thiourea solution was initially reported by Plaskin in 1941. It was found that thiourea dissolved gold effectively and could be a potential substitute for cyanide leaching solution. Interest in this process was renewed This study is part of a broader investigation aimed to treat a gold ore with thiourea. This was carried out on Kaymaz gold-bearing ore to examine the kinetics of thiourea leaching and to determine the mechanism of reaction between thiourea and Fe The gold samples tested were obtained from the Kaymaz district of Turkey. Mineralogical studies showed that gold mineralization is in an epithermal system and associated with several phases of silicification and brecciation. Mineralogical investigations were carried out on the polished sections of handpicked samples by optical microscopy. Most of the gold was deposited in silicified serpentine and characterized by a very fine grain size in the range of 1–4 μm. Quartz, serpentine, ankerite, and dolomite were the main gangue minerals that were observed in varying quantities. The gold and silver grades of the original sample were determined as 4.0 and 7.7 g/t, respectively. The semiquantitative chemical analysis of a sample by optical spectrophotometer is given in The different size fractions of original sample (−1.7 mm) were analyzed for gold to determine the distribution of gold, which is presented in The effects of the relationship between thiourea concentration, pH and Fe Thiourea leaching is related to formation of cationic gold complex in an acidic solution in contrast to cyanidation. Air is not sufficient as an oxidant; Fe In order to examine the influence of ferric ion concentration on the changing of solution pH, ferric sulfate was introduced into 5, 10, 15 and 20 g/l concentrations of thiourea solutions. Natural pH of thiourea solution is around 5.5 and remains unchanged with increasing concentration of thiourea. Addition of 5 g/l Fe The next step was the investigation of the degree of thiourea decomposition and Fe More than 80% of thiourea was consumed or decomposed at the end of 6 h of agitation for the molar ratio of Fe  At optimum leach conditions, 85.8% gold extraction was obtained with feed of −53 μm particle size in 6 h. Throughout the study, samples of solution were pipetted out from the pregnant solution to determine the consumption of thiourea. The decomposition of thiourea to formamidine disulfide and complexation of thiourea with the iron sulfate are the main reasons for the high consumption of thiourea. On the other hand, addition of excess amount of thiourea was necessary to stabilize the weak thiourea–gold complex in the aqueous leaching medium. The thiourea consumptions were very close to each other for the tests, which are carried out with and without ores. This result demonstrates that the formamidine disulfide, which is the first oxidation product of thiourea, has an effective role as lixiviant in the leaching of gold ores. The effects of leaching parameters (Fe As demonstrated in the figures, thiourea consumption is proportional to Fe At higher temperature (60 °C), higher gold extraction rate is expected due to increased kinetics, but lower thiourea consumption cannot be readily explained. This result has been confirmed by repeated experiments and by previous studies conducted by other researchers It was difficult to accurately determine the amount of thiourea consumed. The main problem encountered was the obscuring of the titration endpoint due to presence of large quantity of dissolved iron, sulfates and other salts. Also, the nature of calculation results in large decrease in consumption values for very small decrease in volume of titrant used. On the other hand, stoichiometric calculations based on the main dissolution complexation reaction given in Conventional cyanidation and thiourea leaching conditions can be compared. In this study, no leaching test was carried out with cyanide for Kaymaz gold ore. Cyanide leaching parameters were taken from the Environmental Impact Assessment report prepared for the Kaymaz gold deposit. As seen in Benefits include smaller toxicity (formamidine disulfide is an active oxidant for gold and is toxic) environmental problems and greater selectivity with respect to several common metals. Thiourea is very effective in the recovery of noble metals which are especially refractory to cyanidation. This study demonstrated the suitability of the thiourea process for the gold recovery from Kaymaz ore at laboratory scale. The investigations indicated that at room temperature with 16.04 kg/t consumption of thiourea at pH of 1.35, it was possible to obtain a gold extraction of 85.8% for the particle size of −53 μm feed in 6 h. Without an oxidizing agent (Fe Thiourea leaching of Kaymaz gold ore with 85.8% gold extraction is technically possible. Although consumption levels of thiourea are higher than cyanide, thiourea seems to be a more promising lixiviant in terms of leaching kinetics and compatibility with small amount of dissolved metal ions. Further study is recommended for the stabilization of thiourea and prevention of irreversible decomposition of formamidine disulfide considering that thiourea is less stable in high concentration; the control of redox potential value prevents excessive oxidation of thiourea.