Numerical simulations have been undertaken for the creeping entry flow of a well-characterized polymer melt (IUPAC-LDPE) in a 4:1 axisymmetric and a 14:1 planar contraction. The fluid has been modeled using an integral constitutive equation of the K-BKZ type with a spectrum of relaxation times (Papanastasiou–Scriven–Macosko or PSM model). Numerical values for the constants appearing in the equation have been obtained from fitting shear viscosity and normal stress data as measured in shear and elongational data from uniaxial elongation experiments. The numerical solutions show that in the axisymmetric contraction the vortex in the reservoir first increases with increasing flow rate (or apparent shear rate), goes through a maximum and then decreases following the behavior of the uniaxial elongational viscosity. For the planar contraction, the vortex diminishes monotonically with increasing flow rate following the planar extensional viscosity. This kinematic behavior is not in agreement with recent experiments. The PSM strain-memory function of the model is then modified to account for strain-hardening in planar extension. Then the vortex pattern shows an increase in both axisymmetric and planar flows. The results for planar flow are compared with recent experiments showing the correct trend.In recent years there is a growing trend in the field of non-Newtonian fluid mechanics towards validating experimental results in non-trivial flows. To that effect, and regarding polymer melts, Meissner The numerical simulation for the IUPAC-LDPE melt started with the work by Luo and Tanner Since then other simulations have appeared for the IUPAC-LDPE melt, making it a Another recent work on planar flows has used the Since the new detailed experiments in planar contractions have appeared, they offer a new challenge to the computational rheological community to simulate these flows and show the ability of different constitutive equations to model such diverse behavior. It is the purpose of the present paper to undertake such simulations with the integral K-BKZ model, both with its original PSM damping function and its new modification by Olley and to provide detailed numerical results corresponding to the experimental conditions. These results can be used for further comparison with the work from other researchers and with other constitutive equations. The flow is governed by the usual conservation equations of mass and momentum for an incompressible fluid under isothermal, creeping flow conditions. The constitutive equation that relates the stresses The effect of In the case of entry flow of polymer melts in contractions, it has been customary to define the quantity The test fluid is the well-known IUPAC-LDPE melt (A or X, the latter being another batch of the same product as IUPAC A For the uniaxial elongational viscosity Since no data are given for the second normal stress difference, we have used The special numerical scheme developed by Luo and Mitsoulis The numerical algorithm for convergence is Picard iteration, i.e. direct substitution. Convergent solutions have been obtained for a wide range of experimental flow rates. The solution procedure advances slowly from low flow rates (Newtonian behavior) to higher ones by using a Simulations have been undertaken for a wide range of experimental flow rate values We have used two finite element meshes: MESH1 used in our previous work The quantities of interest are: The dimensionless The dimensionless The dimensionless For the viscoelastic runs with the integral PSM/K-BKZ model, we have pursued the simulations for a wide range of experimental values reaching up to A comparative picture of the kinematics, as seen through streamlines, is given in This behavior is better evidenced in The entrance correction is shown in It should be noted that the effect of using more negative It is interesting to study the response of the above model for the planar geometry corresponding to the experiments by Wassner et al. We have used two finite element meshes: MESH1, containing 832 elements, 2657 nodes, and 6227 degrees of freedom and a denser MESH2 having four times the number of elements of MESH1. A full view of the meshes is presented in Previous simulations for an LDPE melt (Lupolen 1810 from BASF) have been undertaken by Feigl and Öttinger It is interesting to see that our results for the IUPAC-LDPE melt with the data of In order to predict any substantial strain-hardening of the extensional viscosity in planar flow, it is necessary to either consider a totally different model, which was done by introducing the pom–pom model The response of the K-BKZ model with the new damping function is as follows in simple flows: Simple shear Simple extension uniaxial extension planar extension biaxial extension With the above damping function and the relaxation spectrum of The simulations are first undertaken for a specific value of The same good agreement was achieved for all the other results given in the Olley paper, namely the flow through a 4:1 planar contraction with both OLL-1 and OLL-2 models. It is remarkable that two different methods of calculation and their implementation in different programs give such a close agreement. Simulations are now undertaken as before for a wide range of experimental flow rate values At this point it is interesting to compare the vortex pattern from the simulations with the experimental one at Simulations are then undertaken with a single The quality of the vortex shown in The current work has provided simulations for the flow of a standard polymer melt (the IUPAC-LDPE melt A or X) in the benchmark problem of entry flow through a 4:1 axisymmetric contraction. The well-known fitting with the PSM/K-BKZ model has been used with a spectrum of eight relaxation times. Results are shown for the kinematics (vortex size and intensity) and the dynamics (pressures via the entrance correction) up to apparent shear rates of 122 The same model, when used to study the flow of the IUPAC-LDPE melt through a 14:1 planar contraction, failed to predict any vortex activity. It was found necessary to modify the damping function according to Olley Financial assistance from the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GGET) of the Ministry of Development and the NTUA is gratefully acknowledged.