A robust and reliable sensor to measure gas (air) superficial velocity (J
                     g) continuously in flotation systems is introduced. It is based on the sampling of bubbles by buoyancy with the accumulating air allowed to exit through an orifice. At steady state, pressure drop is measured and related to the J
                     g by prior calibration. The continuous device is readily automated and extended to a multi-unit set-up. The sensor and data collections are described. The governing gas flow equation and models of the dynamic response to air flow rate set point change and fluctuations in froth depth are derived. Model predictions are confirmed against plant data. By taking a moving average, the J
                     g remains valid in the face of typical plant disturbances.Air delivery is obviously a key aspect of flotation. Regardless, in many plants measurement of air rate into individual cells is often lacking, let alone any means to check air distribution inside a cell. This limits the ability to diagnose cell behavior and to manage air delivery to meet metallurgical targets. A cheap reliable measurement method is required. The measurement of air rate, along with other ‘gas dispersion’ parameters, has been the subject of increased activity over the past 10 years ( The on/off device collects bubbles into a closed space after a valve is closed and the The on/off device has been used, for example, in setting air distribution profiles to a bank of cells (i.e., “ The sensor design commonly employed is capable of on/off or continuous mode operation ( In continuous mode, the initial set-up divides into the following steps ( The tube is inserted with globe valves A and B closed, i.e., the tube is full of air, and the pressure signal reaches C. (This is preferred over inserting with the valves open because froth then enters the tube as it passes through the froth layer, which accelerates froth build-up in the tube and reduces operational time.) Valve A (on the non-orifice side) is opened and the level (of aerated slurry inside the sensor) rises until the pressure signal drops to zero. Valve A is closed and B is opened simultaneously causing the level to descend until a hydrostatic equilibrium (steady state) is reached. The pressure signal decreases until the flow of air entering and leaving equalizes. At steady state the pressure signal remains stable (D), and using the calibration for the selected orifice (examples Prior knowledge of the expected The starting point is the general mass balance for a system with variable volume and pressure, and no chemical reaction ( The continuous technique constitutes an open vessel steady-state gas flow case where The volumetric flow of gas leaving the sensor Thus, Therefore, Solving Eq. Understanding the dynamic response to a step change in variables is important to estimate how long to wait till the new steady state is reached. (This would be of particular interest if use of the sensor in control was contemplated.) A step change in air rate constitutes a case where the rate of accumulation is no longer zero. Applying the chain rule to Eq. The flow of gas leaving the sensor is expressed as follows, This is a non-linear dynamic system. To solve Eq. If Finally, the Laplace transfer function of Eq. Consider the response to a unit step change in Inverting Eq. If the step change in Eq. The froth depth (level) in an industrial flotation cell typically fluctuates about a mean with amplitude dependent on the controller. The implication of level changes, for the purpose of this communication, is that they influence the hydrostatic balance in the sensor, and the signal will respond accordingly. Pressure variations in a typical sensor will be small (< Eq. Rather than level, froth depth can be substituted using  An experiment in a bank of flotation cells illustrates the response time. The results were used to construct a calibration of    To compare with the model prediction, The results are summarized in Testing supports that the dynamic modeling is valid. The models can be used to explore the impact of other process variations that could impact the A sensor to measure local superficial gas velocity continuously (the McGill continuous  Funding was initiated (1996) under the Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Inco, Falconbridge, Teck Cominco, Noranda, and now Corem and SGS-Lakefield Research, and since January 2001 under an NSERC Collaborative Research and Development grant sponsored by Amira International under the P9 project. One of the authors (JT) also recognizes the financial contribution from the Programa de Perfeccionamiento Académico de la Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH). The enthusiastic assistance of operators and engineers at the various sites was much appreciated and is gratefully acknowledged.