This paper describes a study on microwave assisted leaching of uranium from a low-grade ore of Indian origin. The host rock for uranium mineralization is chlorite-biotite-muscovite-quartzo-feldspathic schist. The dominant presence of siliceous minerals determined leaching of uranium values in sulfuric acid medium under oxidizing conditions. Process parametric studies like the effect of sulfuric acid concentration (0.12–0.50M), redox potential (400–500mV), particle size (600–300μm) and temperature (35°–95°C) indicated that microwave assisted leaching is more efficient in terms of overall uranium dissolution, kinetics and provide relatively less impurities (Si, Al, Mg and Fe) in the leach liquor compared to conventional conductive leaching. The kinetics of leaching followed shrinking core model with product layer diffusion as controlling mechanism.Uranium is an important strategic metal where large supply demand gap is predicted in coming decades The application of microwave technology in minerals processing is pursued by isolated groups world-wide for last two decades In view of such positive factors like improved extraction efficiency and attractive leaching kinetics, investigations on application of microwaves for leaching of uranium values from a low-grade ore under oxidizing conditions using sulfuric acid as lixiviant was carried out and results discussed. MW assisted dissolution of spent nuclear fuel and thorium was reported earlier Leaching of oxides of uranium in sulfuric acid medium takes place by two steps, (i) oxidation of insoluble U (IV) to U (VI) and (ii) complexation of oxidized U (VI) by sulphate anions to form uranyl sulphates. The uranyl sulfates remain as stable aqueous complexes under specified redox and pH conditions The chemical interaction of soluble UO Satisfactory leaching of uranium values occurs by maintaining a redox potential (Eh) of 400–500 The uranium ore sample used in the present studies was collected from Narwapahar mine, Singhbhum district, Jharkhand, India. The ore was crushed and ground to 600 Identification of various phases in the ore sample was made using Siemens D500 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with CuKα radiation (1.5418 Uranium content in the ore and various product streams was determined using pellet fluorimetry on Model FL6224 fluorimeter (M/s Electronic Corporation of India Limited, India). Powdered rock sample weighing 1 Silica content in the ore was determined by UV–vis spectrophotometer (Unicam) by molybdenum-blue method. The procedure involves decomposing the ore samples (0.20 Na and K were determined by Flame photometer (Flame photometer-128, M/s Systronics, India). 0.04 All other elements (Al, Fe, Mg, Mn, Ca & P) were determined using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) (ULTIMA-2, M/s Horiba Jobin Yvon, France). The sample preparation for ICP analysis involves weighing of 0.5 The moisture content in the samples was determined by accurately weighing 1.0 The Loss on Ignition (LOI) was estimated by heating the sample in a furnace in a stepped schedule for 2 pH and Eh was measured on respective instruments (ELICO, India) both during start and end of the experiment. The values reported were those obtained after the completion of the experiment. The redox potential values reported are those taken with saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as reference. Microwave assisted leaching experiments were carried out on a microprocessor controlled ETHOS-One microwave digester (Milestone Srl, Italy) 5 The optical microscopic studies indicate that the host rock for uranium mineralization in Narwapahar ore is chlorite-biotite-muscovite-quartzo-feldspathic schist. XRD studies indicate uraninite as principal uranium bearing phase ( The main objective in the present studies is to utilize MW irradiation as source of heat during leaching. The other process variables like the particle size of ground ore, oxidant and sulfuric acid dosage were fixed at levels given in Microwave power is a factor greatly influencing the rate of microwave heating. The dependence between the applied microwave power and the increase of temperature of the irradiated system is described by Eq. The slurry irradiated at an input MW power of 300 Effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the leachability of uranium was studied in the concentration range of 0.12–0.50 The leaching of uranium is known to proceed through electrochemical mechanism as discussed in the Section Effect of particle size on the rate of leaching of uranium was studied at three grind sizes 600, 425 and 300 Effect of temperature on the leaching of uranium minerals in the ore was studied by varying reaction temperature from 35 to 95 Leaching is a rate phenomenon. Kinetics of leaching of a low-grade uranium ore is influenced by several operating factors like: nature of uranium mineralization in the ore and in specific the liberation size, the ratio of U(IV) to U(VI), reaction temperature, redox potential, ionic composition of solution, etc. The un-reacted shrinking-core model is the most commonly used mathematical relation to describe the heterogeneous reactions like leaching of mineral from ores. The model is well-known and requires only limited description In a binary reaction system in which only solids (ore particles) and solution phase exists, the rate of leaching is controlled by (i) solid or product layer diffusion and (ii) chemical reaction. The integrated rate expressions for the product layer diffusion and surface chemical reaction models are given in Eqs. The degree of linearity of the plot of left hand side of Eqs. where ‘k’ is a reaction rate constant, ‘A’ is the frequency factor, ‘Ea’ is the apparent activation energy, ‘R’ is the universal gas constant and ‘T’ is the absolute temperature. The activation energy for diffusion-controlled reactions is generally below 20 In order to understand the type of leaching mechanism prevalent for the Narwapahar uranium ore in the MW assisted leaching, the leaching kinetic data obtained at different reaction temperatures ( The mechanism of leaching was also confirmed from the apparent activation energy (E The general equation relating the important operational parameters with the rate constant ‘k In the case of leaching of Narwapahar uranium ore it was noted that reaction temperature, concentration of sulphuric acid, manganese dioxide and the particle size of the ground ore were critical variables. Therefore the kinetic plots of these variables given in The leach liquors obtained from the experiments carried out under optimized conditions (H The solid leach residues obtained under optimized conditions of leaching in microwave and conventional heating were characterized SEM-EDS technique. The morphology of leach residue ( Microwaves assisted leaching of uraninite from a low grade ore of Indian origin was investigated. The host rock for uranium mineralization is chlorite-biotite-muscovite-quartzo-feldspathic schist. Leaching was carried out under oxidizing conditions using sulfuric acid as leachant and manganese dioxide as oxidant. Process parametric variation studies investigated include the MW irradiation power, dosages of leachant and oxidant (for Eh control), particle size and temperature of reaction. Kinetics of the reaction was also monitored for elucidating the mechanism of leaching. The results of the studies indicate that about 84% of uranium values can be leached in 90 Authors are very much thankful to Dr. A.K. Rai, Director, Dr. A.K. Chaturvedi, Additional Director (R & D) and Dr. Yamuna Singh, Head, MPG Group, Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research for kind permission for publishing this research article. The authors are also thankful to MPG and Chemistry Group, AMD, Hyderabad for analytical support.