Background
                  Comminuted proximal ulna fractures are rare and reconstruction of these fractures is discussed controversially. The aim of this study was to test three currently available plate devices in a standardized comminuted four-part fracture model created in proximal ulna sawbones.
               
                  Material and methods
                  A standardized four-part fracture of the proximal ulna was created in 80 sawbones. Reconstruction was performed by five experienced test surgeons according to a standardized reconstruction protocol. Each surgeon reconstructed 4 fractures with a 3.5mm eight-hole reconstruction plate, 4 fractures with seven-hole third-tubular double plates and 4 fractures with a 3.5mm anatomical seven-hole locked angle proximal ulna plate. 4 more fractures were reconstructed with simple K-wires as a reference construct for further experiments. Outcome measurements were time for reconstruction, quality of reconstruction and stability of the reconstruction. Stability testing was done in 90° and 30° flexion of the elbow. Testing in 30° flexion was done to test the anteroposterior stability regarding the fixed coronoid process.
               
                  Results
                  Time for reconstruction was significantly less for K-wire fixation than for the plate devices. Time for reconstruction plating and locked angle plating was significantly lower than for double plating (p<0.005). Quality of reduction did not differ between the three plate systems (p<0.05). K-wire fixation showed the best quality of reduction (p<0.005). In 90° of elbow flexion the anatomic locked angle olecranon plate showed a significantly higher stability compared to the other devices. Furthermore the tubular double plating was significantly more stable than reconstruction plating or K-wire fixation (p<0.05). In anteroposterior loading at 30°, the stability did not differ between the 4 different fixation techniques (p>0.05). For all devices the testing in 30° flexion showed a significantly higher rigidity compared to 90° flexion.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The locked angle plate system showed the highest stability in 90° of elbow flexion. Each implant was more stable in 30° flexion than in 90° flexion. Testing of the anterior stability of the elbow did not show any differences between the different implants. Because of the superior stability of this device, we conclude that locked angle plating should be preferred for reconstruction of monteggia like complex proximal ulna fractures.Fractures of the proximal ulna range from simple over comminuted olecranon fractures to more complex Monteggia like fractures, which are often associated with elbow instability Recommendations for these complex fracture entities range from dorsal plating over locked angle dorsal plating to double plating or nailing of the proximal ulna 80 sawbone ulnae of the same size and density were used for this study. They were cut 15 Four different implants were tested for reconstruction of the olecranon: Four 1.6 To equalize the experience level of the surgeons, reconstruction of the fractures was performed by five senior orthopedic surgeons who finished their training at least two years ago. In a randomized trial each orthopedic surgeon reconstructed 16 proximal ulna fractures: Four fractures each were reconstructed with K-wires, double plating, standard reconstruction plating and anatomical locked angle plating. The reduction was performed either manually, with a hook retractor or with a Weber forceps. As the sawbone cut surfaces were smooth, the quality of reduction of the fractures was assessed and the reconstruction was only accepted, if the fixation was anatomically correct. The quality of reduction was measured after definitive fixation for all implants. The same reduction tools and drilling machines were used in all experimental setups. Reconstruction of the sawbone ulnae was performed either after manual, hook retractor or Weber forceps reduction of the proximal fragment with four 1.6 Reconstruction of the proximal ulna began in the above described method. As an intermediate step we performed preliminary K-wire fixation for final dorsal plating from medial or lateral. After preliminary K-wire fixation an eight-hole 3.5 Reduction and preliminary K-wire fixation was done like described for the dorsal plate above. For fixation of the anatomical plate, three screws were placed into the stem and four more locked angle screws into the further three fragments. The coronoid process was fixed with one screw. Again a 60 Reduction and preliminary K-wire fixation was done like for dorsal plating as mentioned above. As the two plates were positioned and fixed from the medial and lateral side of the sawbone in the further experiment, the preliminary K-wire fixation had to be performed from dorsal. Subsequently, two seven-hole third-tubular plates were adapted to the medial and lateral side of the ulna and fixed with 3.5 Time was measured by the first author with a commercial digital watch with an exactness of one second. Measurement started as the ulna stem was clamped to the vice-like grip, the fragments were placed on the operating table and the first K-wire was clamped into the drilling machine. The plates and screw were available for the surgeon. To determine the quality of reduction the cumulative step or offset in the medio-lateral and antero-posterior plane of the construct was measured. It was assessed twice by the first two authors with a digital hand caliptometer with a precision of 0.25 The surgically fixed sawbones were mounted on a custom designed fixation device which was securely attached to the base-plate of an electrohydraulic material testing machine (Instron, Darmstadt, Germany; Model 5882) ( For the biomechanical loading, the specimens were randomly assigned into two different groups. In group 1, the fixation device was set to an inclination of 60° to simulate a joint axis of 30° flexion ( Loading was applied onto the specimens in both groups via an idealized distal humerus-analogon with a preload of 5 The axial displacement of the specimen in millimeters was recorded and plotted against the corresponding force (N). We performed descriptic statistical analysis of the data with average, minimum and maximum values as well as standard deviation. Analysis of statistical significance between the different implants and loading angles was performed with students Time for reconstruction was the longest for double plating (mean 792s). Reconstruction plating (mean 619s) and locked angle plating (mean 629s) was significantly faster than double plating (p Quality of reduction was not different (p In 90° flexion loading, the normally distributed data showed the highest average value of 38.6 The results of the testing in 30° flexion varied widely from the 90° setup. While the locked angle olecranon plate showed the highest average value in rigidity with 106.5 Complex or trans-olecranon fracture dislocations known as Monteggia like fractures are relatively rare injuries, but they are counted among the most challenging fractures of the forearm Stable fixation of the proximal ulna as a base of treatment of these injuries is mandatory to maintain immediate postoperative rehabilitation of the elbow joint. Although there are not many clinical studies describing results and treatment options for monteggia like fracture, double plating, conventional dorsal plating and locked angle plating seem to be the implants of choice Biomechanical studies compare different implants for simple and complex olecranon fractures using cadaveric models. Implant testing in real cadaveric bones seems to imitate the clinical situation, but the higher age of the cadavers is described as a relevant drawback of this setting by many authors. They do not have the typical age for high energy trauma leading to comminuted proximal ulna fractures. Another known problem is the heterogenic size of the specimens acquired for this experiment: It is not possible to standardize the length of the available ulnar stumps before application of load To minimize the problems of different sizes and densities of the reconstructed specimens, the fracture model was not set in a cadaveric elbow, but in a sawbone model to match the experimental setup. A wide range of cadaveric olecranon sizes The sawbone model has been tested in several other parts of the body: Recently four different implants were tested in a standardized sawbone radial head fracture model We used the sawbone comminuted proximal ulna fracture model as the base of our study: In addition to a simple K-wire fixation we tested three standard plate implants with focus on time and quality of reduction and stability. K-wire fixation is not the recommended fixation of these fractures in clinical practice, but we calculated the results of this device as a base line for comparison with the different plate systems. Test surgeons with a minimum of 150 osteosyntheses per year as a prerequisite and the same fracture morphology allowed us to focus on the implants themselves. Getting a fracture to the best possible quality of reduction and stable fixation in the shortest time with a certain implant might be called handling of an implant. We know that ‘handling of an implant’ is a subjective item and difficult, if even possible to measure. The time an experienced surgeon needs for reconstruction of a standardized fracture in addition to the quality of this reduced and fixed fracture might give an idea of the weak item of ‘implant handling’. Time for reconstruction increases with the steps of reconstruction, so that double plating took longer than single plate fixation as expected. Simple K-wire fixation was obviously the fastest procedure. Furthermore the one step fixation of the K-wires showed the best quality of reduction compared to the three plate systems. Between these standard devices no significant difference in quality of reduction was detected: Thus, with an increasing rate of fixation steps and time, the risk of secondary displacement increases. Except for time of fixation in double plating, we did not see any differences in the results regarding the ‘handling of the implants’. Gordon et al. In contrast to our results obtained in 90° of flexion, we could not confirm these results in an elbow position of 30° flexion: In this situation were the elbow joint is stabilized by the coronoid process to prevent posterior dislocation all three plate system showed a similar stability. Furthermore stability testing in 30° of elbow flexion was significantly higher for each implant than in the 90° position. Keeping in mind that the stability of a joint is limited by the most unstable position, our results suggest that locked angle plates are superior to the other tested implants. According to Dornberg et al. Systematic errors were minimized by a standardized training of the test surgeons and a standardized reconstruction protocol. Despite all mentioned advantages of a sawbone model, implant testing without using human bones is a limitation of this study. Another limitation might be our stability testing model: Each sawbone was tested with an increasing force in a single position. We did not imitate a dynamic tension of the triceps tendon during elbow movement to imitate the normal daily activity of the upper extremity. In summary three standard fixation devices were tested against a baseline K-wire fixation. The so-called ‘handling of implants’ was the same due to the same quality of reduction and fixation time in a standard sawbone model. The stability of the reconstructed sawbones with locked angle dorsal plates was superior to conventional dorsal plates and third-tubular double plating. Hence, we recommend the usage of locked angle plates for the reconstruction of complex proximal ulna fractures. This study was not supported by any company. The last author got foundings from Orthofix (Orthofix™, Bussolengo, Italy), for different other research projects All results were obtained independently and without any critical comments from the company. The authors have not obtained any benefits for this study. Commercial principles did not alter or interfere with the results of this study.