An implicit Newton–Krylov finite volume algorithm has been developed for efficient steady-state computation of the power-law non-Newtonian fluid flows. The pseudo-compressibility technique is used for the coupling of continuity and momentum equations. The spatial discretization is central (second-order) for both convective and diffusive terms and the accuracy of the solution is verified. The nine block diagonal Jacobian matrix (needed for implicit formulation) is computed directly through the flux differentiation. Five-diagonal and three-diagonal block matrices (the simplified versions of the main Jacobian matrix) are used with the ILU(0 & 1) and the Thomas linear solvers for preconditioning, respectively. The performance of the Newton-GMRES solver is examined in detail for different preconditioning strategies. The effects of the power-law behavior index and Re number on the convergence rate are also studied. The performance of the Newton-BiCGSTAB and the Newton-GMRES solvers are compared with each other. The results show, the ILU(1)/Newton-GMRES is the most efficient combination that is robust even in high Reynolds number shear-thinning fluid flow cases.Non-Newtonian fluids play an important role in a wide range of industrial and medical applications. Chemical/petroleum engineering and mineral processing industries It is possible to study the details of flow fields in complex geometries (e.g. reactors, fluidize beds, etc.) through numerical simulation or computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Several approaches such as finite difference, finite volume, finite element, spectral volume, spectral element, Lattice Boltzmann, etc. have evolved throughout the history of CFD. Discussion and comparison of those approaches are beyond the scope of this research. The finite volume approach (FV) An implicit algorithm normally leads to a large sparse matrix which must be solved by an efficient linear solver. Since the size and the complexity of CFD problems have grown considerably in recent years, the classic iterative linear solvers, such as successive over relaxation family methods and/or approximate matrix solvers like incomplete factorizations have become less efficient for practical purposes. In the past decade, a new family of linear solvers based on Krylov subspace techniques The performance of the subspace method mainly depends on its preconditioning The application of a fully implicit procedure in non-Newtonian fluid flow simulations (as mentioned earlier) is not common; however, it goes back to late 1980s. Most of the studies in this field have been done using finite element (not finite volume) solvers. Carey et al. Oliveira et al. In the last decade, a reasonably good progress has been made in application of fully implicit algorithms in non-Newtonian fluid flow computation. Elias et al. In the present research, the power-law non-Newtonian fluid inside a lid-driven cavity has been studied as the test case. The lid-driven cavity, despite its geometrical simplicity, has both the convective and diffusive flow characteristics in the flow domain. The effect of these phenomena can be easily balanced and tuned by the Reynolds number setting. Consequently, it is often used as a good test case for non-Newtonian flow solvers. Pan and Hao Conservation of mass (continuity), momentum (Newton’s second law) and energy (first Thermodynamics’ law, used for compressible flows) are the principal equations governing the dynamics of all fluid flows. To simulate a fluid flow field, we need to solve these equations with proper implementation of the physical boundary conditions. In the case of the incompressible fluid flow, the continuity and the momentum equations are decoupled and some sort of coupling is needed to be employed in order to reach a valid physical solution. In the pseudo-compressibility technique, an unphysical time derivative of pressure is added to continuity equation and the unsteady form of the coupled system of continuity and momentum equations are solved by a time marching scheme (either explicitly or implicitly). The converged steady-state solution is reached where all the time derivatives of the flow quantities (i.e. the residuals) practically converge to a very small value (typically 10 Using the pseudo-compressibility technique, the continuity and the momentum equations for an incompressible power-law non-Newtonian fluid can be written as: Continuity:   In Eqs. The vector form of the 2D power-law non-Newtonian fluid flow equations can be recast as: In order to evaluate the flux vectors, a second order central differencing scheme has been utilized. The flux vector for the west face of an arbitrary cell has been presented in Eq. To form an implicit expression, we need to evaluate the flux terms in Eq. In Eq. Ghost cells are used to impose no-slip boundary condition at the walls. In the lid-driven cavity problem, the lid (upper wall) is assigned We seek the steady-state solution. The implicit pseudo-time advance scheme can be written as: Because we are interested only in the steady-state solution, we prefer to use the largest possible time-step. In the limit of infinite time-step, Eq. It is useful to use small time-step (Δ The Newton phase of the solution procedure starts when the major transient behaviors of the flow field have been damped out, and the main steady features have appeared. As a result, the linearization of the non-linear residual is accurate enough for seeking the steady-state solution. Unlike the start-up phase, our goal in the Newton phase is to perform less iteration with updates that dramatically reduce the non-linear residual. To do so, we require an accurate linearization of the flux integral (residual) at the Newton phase. Unfortunately, when we are dealing with an advection-diffusion type problem where the convection and diffusion time scales are considerably different, starting the true Newton phase is never possible except that we start from an almost converged solution. In the case of non-Newtonian flows, the velocity field and the stress tensor are highly coupled (although their quantitative values may differ in order significantly). This feature poses another challenge for the Newton phase slowing the convergence when we push the residual toward machine zero while the solution is practically converged. Here, semi-Newton iteration is designed in which the value of time-step is chosen to obtain an acceptable rate of convergence. Developing of iterative methods for large sparse linear systems has been a very active research area in the field of numerical linear algebra, and the Krylov-subspace family methods have emerged as modern iterative techniques In the present study, two different Krylov-subspace methods, i.e. GMRES and BICGSTAB have been utilized to solve the linear system of equations arising from discretization of the governing equations. The GMRES solver takes advantage of the subspace orthogonalization through Arnoldi’s algorithm The BICGSTAB solver uses incomplete orthogonalization process. In this technique, the Krylov subspace size ( In order to enhance the convergence performance of the Krylov subspace solvers (GMRES and BICGSTAB) for complicated linear systems, it is necessary to apply preconditioning. In principal, preconditioning produces a modified linear system which is relatively better conditioned than the original system and therefore that makes it easier to solve by an iterative process. Eq. For effective preconditioning, in addition to applying a good preconditioner matrix, we need to employ a good preconditioning strategy. Stationary methods such as Gauss Seidel and SOR are easy to implement and they are effective in damping high frequency errors. However, they often have restrictive stability condition reducing the benefits of Newton method especially for off-diagonal systems. At the same time, due to their inherent formulation, they are relatively slow in damping low frequency errors, and therefore they need to be used together with a proper multi-grid scheme in preconditioner. Other types of preconditioning techniques are incomplete lower-upper factorization methods (ILU- In this research, a three-diagonal block solver has been utilized to perform the preconditioning for three-diagonal preconditioner. The block ILU(0) and ILU(1) have also been employed for preconditioning of the five-diagonal block matrix. In order to verify the accuracy of the numerical procedure and to check the validity of the taken approach, the velocity field of a pressure driven channel flow is calculated as the test case. The flow inside the channel is also assumed power-law with certain behavior index ( The numerical accuracy of the solution is also evaluated. This is performed by determining the slope of the global error versus mesh size in a logarithmic scale diagram. Global error can be defined as Eq. A power-law non-Newtonian fluid in a lid-driven cavity is the flow of interest. The presented results are the convergence histories of different combinations of the preconditioners and the Krylov solvers using the same initial solution which is obtained from the start-up phase. The numerical simulations are performed for a wide range of Reynolds numbers i.e. As it was discussed earlier, the GMRES solver is an expensive solver due to the cost of orthogonalization. It is important to assess the performance of another robust Krylov solver which is less expensive in terms of computational cost compared to the GMRES. One of the well-known and widely-used solvers in CFD problems is the BiCGSTAB method. Hence, it seems reasonable to investigate the efficiency of both Krylov linear solvers for the same problem. To compare the effect of preconditioning methods on the GMRES solver, different techniques have been used in a range of Reynolds numbers (1, 10, 100 and 1000). First, we have to find a good initial solution in the start-up phase. In the case of low and moderate Reynolds numbers (1, 10 and 100), the Newton-phase is started from an approximate solution of Newtonian fluid ( For higher Reynolds numbers, the similar start-up procedure can result in a poor convergence. Therefore, another procedure was adopted for the start-up that employs the fully converged solution of It should be noted that the employed start-up procedures which have been used in this research are not considered as the optimal procedures and finding an efficient start-up phase can be a potential research topic in developing the fast and efficient Newton-GMRES CFD solvers.  In terms of preconditioning, it is clear that the ILU preconditioning technique using a five-diagonal block preconditioner matrix outperforms the three-diagonal block solver (Thomas) and the related preconditioner matrix. This becomes even more evident for higher By comparing the two members of the Incomplete LU factorization family, i.e. ILU(0) and ILU(1), it is deduced that ILU(0) is less expensive than ILU(1) per iteration; however, the accuracy of the linear system solving is better for ILU(1). Therefore, the computed update resulting from the ILU(1)/GMRES is more accurate than ILU(0)/GMRES in general and the number of non-linear iterations reduces. The difference between overall convergence time is not very large in some cases particularly for low Reynolds numbers (  To investigate the effect of the mesh size on the convergence performance of the ILU(1)/Newton-GMRES solver, we have used five sequences of grids from 25 The influences of grid size on the solution, the  The convergence rate is reduced significantly for high Reynolds numbers. As Reynolds number increases, the values of the viscous terms decrease considerably and contribute to the flux integral. As a result, some of the Jacobian matrix entries are very small (still important numbers) whose orders are considerably less than the orders of convective terms. These numbers become even smaller in the case of shear-thinning fluids ( There are two adjusting parameters in the discretized equations, namely compressibility factor ( To show that the steady state solution is not affected by the choice of In this part of current section, the convergence history results of using the BiCGSTAB preconditioned by ILU(1) are shown. ILU(1) has been utilized because of its better preconditioning results shown in Section  By investigation of As it was mentioned before, the start-up phase for high Reynolds numbers is different. The results of using the BiCGSTAB for This article presented a second-order finite volume implicit algorithm for the steady-state computation of the power-law fluid flows. The implicit formulation was constructed by direct analytical flux integral linearization leading to a nine-block diagonal matrix. The GMRES and the BiCGSTAB Krylov linear solvers were used for solving this linearized equation by several non-linear Newton (outer) iterations. A five and a three-diagonal block matrices derived from the main Jacobian matrix (via simplification) were used with the ILU(0 & 1) and the Thomas linear solvers for preconditioning the Krylov subspaces. The lid-driven cavity problem which has both the convective and diffusive flow characteristics in the flow domain was studied as the test case for The combination of ILU(1) and the five-diagonal block matrix, as the robust (examined for the GMRES) preconditioning, was used to precondition another robust Krylov iterative solver, i.e. BiCGSTAB. The start-up phase and the compressibility factor were chosen the same as ILU(1)/Newton-GMRES iterations (a smaller time-step was used compared to the GMRES due to the stability limitation). The results showed that the BiCGSTAB does not perform as efficient as the GMRES using the implicit Newton-iteration procedure which has been employed for this problem/physics setup and the GMRES outperformed the BiCGSTAB in our test case. However, drawing a general conclusion for the BiCGSTAB as a Krylov solver is not the purpose of this research since other types of outer implicit iterations may enhance the performance of the BiCGSTAB significantly