The performance of a commercial CuO/alumina catalyst used in the catalytic wet peroxide oxidation (CWPO) of 1g/l phenol solutions is investigated in a batch reactor. The effect of temperature, catalyst load, hydrogen peroxide concentration and dosage strategies on phenol mineralization, hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiencies and catalyst stability was studied. Experiments were performed at 298, 323 and 343K, using catalyst loads of 1g/l or 25g/l and concentrations of hydrogen peroxide 1.3, 2.6 and 3.9 times the stoichiometric requirement added at once or in distributed doses. The critical goal of the CWPO in terms of Process Intensification is to achieve total phenol mineralization working at optimal hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiencies while retaining catalyst stability. The present work highlights the complexity of this objective and shows viable working alternatives.
                  Results indicate that high temperatures and concentrations of catalyst and hydrogen peroxide (added at once) can be employed when fast mineralization and high pH values are required in order to prevent catalyst leaching, although oxidant consumption efficiencies are then low. However, simultaneous high mineralization and hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiencies are obtained with a proper oxidant dosage strategy at high temperature, using high catalyst load. Then, hydrogen peroxide degradation into non-oxidising (parasitic) species is minimized with final TOC conversions close to 90%. The drawback of this strategy is that the rate of reaction is lower because of the limited amount of oxidant available.Heterogeneous catalysts based on low-valence transition metals appear as a promising alternative for the catalytic wet peroxide oxidation (CWPO) of organic pollutants since oxidation efficiencies are relatively high and pH sensitivity is lower, compared with homogeneous catalysis at the same operating conditions. Moreover, solid catalysts could be recuperated by means of a simple separation step and reused. A wide variety of catalysts containing iron, copper or other transition metal precursors supported on different materials have been tested for CWPO of phenol compounds It has been generally observed that the efficiency for CWPO strongly depends on the concentration of hydroxyl radicals (HO The hydroperoxyl radicals (HO The effect of temperature in the generation of radicals has been extensively studied and the idea of thermal decomposition of H In the last years, the influence of H In this study we investigate the performance of a commercial CuO/alumina catalyst in the CWPO of phenol solutions. While copper oxides exhibit a great activity for the catalytic oxidation of organic water pollutants with air or oxygen According to these studies, the operating conditions should contemplate the rapid mineralization of carboxylic acids in order to avoid their accumulation and low pH values, so the catalyst stability is maintained. In this context, experiments were performed addressing the effect of catalyst concentration, temperature, hydrogen peroxide concentration and dosification strategies on phenol conversion and mineralization. Therefore, process intensification of Fenton's treatment was achieved through efficient use of reagents, lower reaction times and enhanced catalyst stability. Phenol CWPO was carried out in a 250 Finally, the effect of hydrogen peroxide was analyzed by varying its concentration between 1.3 and 3.9 times the stoichiometric demand. Most authors use concentrations between 0.7 and 1.3 The commercial catalyst (BASF Cu-0226 S) is a highly dispersed copper oxide (12.5%) impregnated on a high surface alumina used primarily for removing traces of O The selectivity towards mineralization ( The efficiencies of hydrogen peroxide consumption described by Zazo et al. In first place, phenol was oxidized with hydrogen peroxide without catalyst, but its conversion was very low (less than 5% after 3 Catalyst ability to decompose H The experimental data were contrasted against a kinetic model in which the rate of peroxide decomposition was assumed to be first order with respect to the hydrogen peroxide concentration. The apparent activation energy for hydrogen peroxide decomposition was evaluated as 44.9 The catalytic oxidation of phenol solutions was tested at 298, 323 and 343 The experimental data for hydrogen peroxide decomposition in the presence of phenol was fitted with a first order kinetic model and the apparent activation energy obtained was now 74 In summary, hydrogen peroxide decomposition rates are higher when no phenol is present. These results were also observed by Bach et al.  At 323 At 343 Results clearly show that the rate and degree of phenol, TOC, H Higher mineralization rates are observed at short reaction times since the reaction between hydroxyl radicals and organic compounds becomes progressively less important when TOC concentration decreases. At extended reaction times, hydrogen peroxide concentration is already small and, if there is an excess of catalyst, there is a fast rate of radicals generation. As the TOC concentration is small too, the recombination reactions between these hydroxyl radicals becomes predominant with a prevalent scavenger effect. Moreover, the hydroxyl radicals could also react to produce less active HO For simplicity, results obtained with 1 Experiments were performed increasing the molar ratio peroxide/phenol using concentrations of hydrogen peroxide 1.3, 2.6 and 3.9 times the stoichiometric requirement. Final TOC conversions and initial TOC conversion rates, peroxide efficiencies ( When 1 When 25 Several assays were performed by supplying the peroxide in sequential applications using 25 Experiments were performed at 323 Results obtained at 343 To further investigate this concept, controlled step wise addition of 3 doses of 1.3 times the stoichiometric H Results obtained at 343 Comparison with outcomes obtained with a single dose of 3.9 times the stoichiometric hydrogen peroxide shows that there is no benefit in dosification when such large ratios of hydrogen peroxide are used. Results obtained with the single dose are already satisfactory in terms of mineralization, pH and leaching. Anyway, the pH and colour evolution change when dosage is applied, which clearly evidences that a different intermediate distribution is obtained. When three doses of 1.3 times the stoichiometric each one are used, the pH reaches lower values for longer periods (especially at higher temperatures), so it is not recommendable in terms of metal leaching. Hydrogen peroxide efficiencies ( Here, the effect of temperature, oxidant and catalyst concentration on efficiencies and selectivity will be discussed when the H For all experiments, The selectivity towards mineralization ( As expected, the maximum selectivity is found at 343 When the concentration of catalyst increases, the amount of active sites for the generation of radicals is greater. Therefore, the mineralization is enhanced and According to these results, mineralization and selectivity are favoured at high temperatures, large doses of oxidant and great catalyst loads. In terms of The multiple step addition of 1.3 times the stoichiometric results in a more efficient H Results clearly indicate that hydrogen peroxide is one of the most important factors to control the mineralization of phenol. It is evident that keeping residual hydrogen peroxide in solution with enough mass of catalyst allows generating more free radicals, which are efficient in the mineralization process. When the 3.9 times dose is distributed in three additions of one-third each, only slightly lower phenol and TOC conversions are obtained but at longer time. These small differences in the final TOC removal explain the slight reductions of the selectivity and efficiencies. When the second one-third dose of hydrogen peroxide is added, the TOC concentration is already low, so the reaction between hydroxyl radicals and the excess of H In any case, proper dosage strategically designed is clearly beneficial when small doses of hydrogen peroxide are distributed throughout the time in the presence of sufficient catalyst at high temperature. Under these conditions, the scavenging effects are better avoided and good phenol conversions, TOC reductions and hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiencies are obtained. The drawback is that the oxidation rate is lower because of the limited amount of oxidant present at any time. For all the experiments performed, liquid samples were withdrawn at the end of the reaction and copper concentration was measured to determine the degree of leaching. When the pH reached values below 4 during long reaction times, a leaching of about 0.6% (17 In order to discriminate between heterogeneous and homogeneous contribution, the results obtained from the heterogeneous reaction at 323 Although this approach is used by several authors, the experiment may overestimate the homogeneous contribution since, as stated by Hudgins and Silveston Hydrogen peroxide and TOC conversions were found to be quite low, 20 and 9% respectively. The radicals generated from the H Phenol conversion (75%) was slightly higher than the value obtained in the heterogeneous system (71%). Santos et al. The global activity obtained under the heterogeneous conditions was higher than the activity shown in the homogeneous reaction. Therefore, the activity of the commercial catalyst mainly owns to a heterogeneous phenomenon and the contribution of the leached copper must be taken as minimal. With respect to homogeneous experiments using 17 Overall, to minimize the amount of leaching, the operating conditions should be severe enough as to prevent the accumulation of carboxylic acids (responsible of the low pH values attained in some conditions). For the experimental conditions tested in the present work, better results are achieved with higher catalyst load, hydrogen peroxide concentration and temperature. Dosage strategies should be tuned up (i.e., higher temperatures) to avoid the lasting presence of organic acids. The performance of a commercial catalyst (BASF Cu-0226 S) for the CWPO of phenol solutions was tested addressing the effect of temperature, catalyst load and hydrogen peroxide dosage on phenol mineralization and hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiency. Under proper reaction conditions, this catalyst is characterized by a high rate of hydrogen peroxide decomposition and generation of radicals, which enables the application of dosage strategies. Also, the leaching measured under extreme conditions (pH below 4) was relatively low (0.6%) and could be reduced under adequate operating conditions. The ultimate goal of the CWPO is to attain complete phenol mineralization working at optimal hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiency. The present work highlights the complexity of this objective and presents viable alternatives. Several competing effects may contribute to obtain an optimal rate of mineralization. If a high concentration of catalyst is used, more hydroxyl radicals are produced and are therefore available for phenol mineralization. However, the mineralization could be affected by two factors. First, there are several side reactions which produces less active HO Phenol, TOC, H To reduce catalyst leaching, minimum pH values should be kept above 4. This condition is never fulfilled for small catalyst loads. To obtain high pH values and TOC conversions, high concentrations of catalyst and hydrogen peroxide should be employed. Also, at higher temperatures, the pH increases. In terms of Process Intensification concepts, higher temperatures and concentrations of catalyst and hydrogen peroxide added at once may be employed when a faster mineralization rate and high pH values are required. On the other hand, high hydrogen peroxide consumption efficiencies and conversions could be obtained with a dosage strategy at high temperatures, with sufficient catalyst load and small doses of H Financial support from