A biomimetic nanocomposite scaffold with HA formation on the electrospun poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL)/nanocellulose (NC) fibrous matrix was developed in this study. The electrospun PCL/NC fiber mat was built and then biomineralized by treatment in simulated body fluid (SBF). Using such a rapid and effective procedure, a continuous biomimetic crystalline HA layer could be successfully formed without the need of any additional chemical modification of the substrate surface. The results showed that the introduction of NC into composite fibers is an effective approach to induce the deposition of HA nucleus as well as to improve their distribution and growth of a crystalline HA layer on the fibrous scaffolds. The water contact angle (WCA) of the PCL/NC/HA scaffolds decreases with increasing NC content and mineralization time, resulting in the enhancement of their hydrophilicity. These results indicated that HA-mineralized on PCL/NC fiber can be prepared directly by simply using SBF immersion.In recent years, the bone tissue engineering scaffolds of various biomaterials with good biocompatibility and suitable mechanical properties for repairing and regenerating bone tissue have drawn more and more attention ( As one of the important bone filler materials, hydroxyapatite (HA) has been widely used to manufacture various bone repairing scaffolds because of its similarity in composition to the inorganic component of natural bone ( To the best of our knowledge, very few studies have reported about electrospun PCL scaffolds with mineralized HA ( In this study, the electrospun PCL/NC scaffold with HA-mineralized on the surface to mimic the component of the native bone was prepared directly by simply using electrospinning and SBF immersion methods. In order to investigate the influence of NC content on the degree of mineralization, three different NC concentrations were used in creating HA crystal. The morphology and hydrophilicity of PCL, PCL/NC, and PCL/NC/HA fibers were observed by SEM and contact angle system, respectively. The composition of the produced mineral was studied by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL, Capa 6500), with a molecular weight of 50,000 PCL pellets were dissolved overnight in The SBF used for the biomineralization was prepared as previously reported ( SEM images were collected on a HITACHI S-3400N instrument with an accelerating voltage of 15 A Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (VERTEX-70, Bruker Co., Germany) was used to analyze the chemical group transformation, by acquiring and averaging the spectra at a resolution of 4 To investigate the surface wettability (hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity) of the scaffolds, the water contact angle (WCA) of the PCL, PCL/0.2%NC and PCL/0.5%NC fibers before and after incubation in SBF for different times, was measured by a video contact angle system (SL200B, China). The DI water droplet volume was set to 30 Swelling ratios (or water retention properties) of the PCL, PCL/0.2%NC and PCL/0.5%NC fibers were determined by gravimetric methods. Dry samples were weighed and then placed in capped bottles with deionized water at 37 Uniaxial tensile tests were carried out on specimens with dimensions of 10 The morphology of the electrospun PCL fibers, namely PCL without NC, PCL/0.2%NC, PCL/0.5%NC, is shown in The FTIR spectra of electrospun PCL, namely PCL without NC, PCL/0.5%NC fibers are displayed in To investigate the effects of the NC content on the mineralization process, the morphology of the mineralized PCL, PCL/0.2%NC, and PCL/0.5%NC fibers were examined by SEM. In The formation of the mineral crystal on the surface of the PCL/0.5%NC fiber, after incubation for different times, was clearly evident upon examination of the SEM images, as shown in The chemical characteristic of the mineral crystal on the surface of the PCL/0.5%NC fiber incubated for 7 days was investigated by EDS and XRD. The EDS spectrum, shown in Three types of apatite occur in natural bone tissue formation. During the early mineral phase in bone development and in the bone fracture healing process, brushite (dicalcium phosphate dehydrate, DCPD) minerals are formed, which are a non-apatitic mineral phase ( The mechanism of formation of HA is proposed as shown in The surface chemistry of a polymer scaffold, such as hydrophilicity, functional groups, and topography play a major role in cell adhesion, migration, and proliferation ( The WCA of the PCL/0.5%NC scaffolds at different mineralization times of 1, 3, 5, 7 days are presented in Swelling ratios of PCL, PCL/0.2%NC, and PCL/0.5%NC fibers at different immersion times of 1, 2, 3 days are provided in  In this study, HA mineralized PCL/NC fibrous scaffolds were prepared by combining electrospinning and induced mineralization on the surface of PCL/NC fibers to simulate the composition of native bone. The SEM examination of the formation of HA crystals on the electrospun fiber under different NC content revealed that the HA crystal was only possible to form on the surface of PCL/NC composite fiber than that of pure PCL fiber. Both of the PCL/0.2%NC and PCL/0.5%NC fiber mats displayed a large number of HA particles with high uniformity after 5 days of incubation in SBF. In addition, longer mineralization time would bring about the formation of more HA particles, and the surface of the PCL/0.5%NC fiber was completely covered by HA particles after mineralization for 7 days. In this study, the XRD and EDS results indicated that the produced minerals were composed of HA. Moreover, the hydrophilicity of the PCL, PCL/0.2%NC and PCL/0.5%NC fiber mats was increased by the introduction of NC and HA particles. The decrease of the WCA of the PCL/0.5%NC fiber to 86.9° and 61.7° after 5 and 7 days of incubation in SBF, respectively, indicated the presence of a characteristic complete hydrophilic surface. These results demonstrated that through the use of the simple method of immersing composite fiber into SBF at 37 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the