Radar observations of 214 near-Earth asteroids (NEAs) reveal a very strong correlation of circular polarization ratio with visible–infrared taxonomic class, establishing distinct differences in the centimeter-to-several-decimeter structural complexity of objects in different spectral classes. The correlation may be due to the intrinsic mechanical properties of different mineralogical assemblages but also may reflect very different formation ages and collisional histories. The highest ratios are measured for groups associated with achondritic igneous rocky meteorites: the E class, whose parent body may be 3103 Eger, and the V class, derived from the mainbelt asteroid (and Dawn mission target) 4 Vesta.Meteorites are samples of small, Earth-orbit-crossing asteroids, which in turn are primarily derived from the main asteroid belt ( A radar echo's circular polarization ratio measures the wavelength-scale roughness of the target's surface ( Here we report 3.5- and 13-cm-wavelength radar observations of 214 near-Earth asteroids ( NEA SC/OC estimates range from zero to 1.5, with a mean of All twelve classified objects with SC/OC exceeding 0.6 are in the E, V, or X classes ( The bulk of classified targets in the tables are C or S, which include carbonaceous and ordinary chondrite analogues ( How can the striking correlation of SC/OC with spectral class be understood? One possibility is that mineralogy has played a major role in determining the centimeter-to-decimeter structural complexity of NEA surfaces, perhaps to the point that mineralogy is entirely responsible for the correlation in It is also possible that the correlation in If we suppose that formation age rather than mineralogy is primarily responsible for the trend seen in NEAs have higher polarization ratios than mainbelt asteroids (MBAs). A recent radar study of 82 MBAs ( The differences between the NEA and MBA SC/OC distributions indicate that the two populations have dramatically different surfaces. This is not surprising given that NEAs are younger, smaller, and have much weaker gravitational fields. Whereas MBA surfaces are dominated by mostly fine-grained regoliths that have matured during several billion years of impact bombardment, NEA surfaces retain only the low-velocity tail of the impact ejecta distribution, which is likely to involve a size partioning that favors large ejecta. Our results are consistent with the production of larger particles and their resistance to erosion from meteoroid bombardment being dependent on mineralogical composition. The 25 binary NEAs observed by radar have a mean The correspondence of centimeter to decimeter-scale surface (or near-surface) structure to VIS/IR spectral class supports association of classes with distinct mineralogies and meteorite types, and reveals distinct differences in the macroscale structural complexity of objects in different spectral classes. The two radar-detected NEAs visited by spacecraft, the S-class objects 433 Eros and 25143 Itokawa, have Why are E class NEAs so abundant in our sample? The E class is thought to be rare among NEAs ( Perhaps the aubrites are sufficiently fragile that few reach Earth's surface. Or, the flux could vary strongly with diameter, so that comparisons between the meteorite and NEA populations are not meaningful. [On the other hand, the V class objects in our sample constitute ∼6% of the sample, a number very similar to the abundance of HED meteorite falls ( We thank the technical staffs at the Arecibo Observatory and the Goldstone Solar System Radar for help with the observations, L.M. Carter for providing the 2004 VG64 data, I.N. Belskaya, R.P. Binzel, S.J. Bus, F. De Meo, M.D. Hicks, and V. Reddy for providing NEA taxonomic classifications in advance of publication, K.G. Ellsworth for help with