Purpose
                  This is a functional and epidemiological long-term study of tibial pilon fractures treated in our hospital over a five-year period. Our aim was to determine the long-term evolution of these fractures, to assess the potential effect of the quality of the reduction obtained and of the condition of the soft tissues on the final outcome and to evaluate the relationship between fracture type, radiographical degenerative signs and the results obtained.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Ninety-one tibial pilon fractures were reviewed in 87 patients (4 bilateral ones), 29 of which were women (31.9%) and 62 men (68.1%). A retrospective study was carried out of all clinical records, further to which patients were called in to be evaluated with respect to the Duquennoy ankle scale and to have their parameters objectively assessed and their radiographs updated.
               
                  Results
                  On the Duquennoy scale, the factors most significantly affected by the fracture were the ability to run and to jump, with a mean value of 1.6/5 points and walking on uneven ground (2.6/5). The factors least affected by the injury were the need of a walking-stick (4.3/5) and the gait perimeter (8.4/10). There was a high incidence of initial complications to reduce (27.1%) and/or fixate (12.8%) the fracture. There were also a few early complications such as soft tissue-related problems in the area around the fracture and some late complications such as a high incidence of joint stiffness (51.4%) and malunions (24.3%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Tibial pilon fractures are often associated to a high complications rate that makes it very difficult to anticipate long-term results. There is a direct relationship between the presence of radiographic signs of arthritis and poor long-term results. An excellent joint reduction does not guarantee the attainment of excellent long-term results; but it does lead to a higher probability of success.