Genetically engineered protein polymers (GEPP) are a class of multifunctional materials with precisely controlled molecular structure and property profile. Representing a promising alternative for currently used materials in biomedical applications, GEPP offer multiple benefits over natural and chemically synthesized polymers. However, producing them in sufficient quantities for preclinical research remains challenging. Here, we present results from an in vitro cellular response study of a recombinant protein polymer that is soluble at low pH but self-organizes into supramolecular fibers and physical hydrogels at neutral pH. It has a triblock structure denoted as 
                        C2SH
                           48C2
                        
                     , which consists of hydrophilic collagen-inspired and histidine-rich silk-inspired blocks. The protein was successfully produced by the yeast Pichia pastoris in laboratory-scale bioreactors, and it was purified by selective precipitation. This efficient and inexpensive production method provided material of sufficient quantities, purity and sterility for cell culture study. Rheology and erosion studies showed that it forms hydrogels exhibiting long-term stability, self-healing behavior and tunable mechanical properties. Primary rat bone marrow cells cultured in direct contact with these hydrogels remained fully viable; however, proliferation and mineralization were relatively low compared to collagen hydrogel controls, probably because of the absence of cell-adhesive motifs. As biofunctional factors can be readily incorporated to improve material performance, our approach provides a promising route towards biomedical applications.Genetically engineered protein (block co)polymers (GEPP), with blocks inspired by animal extracellular matrix proteins, have great potential in modern medicine First of all, structural elements found in nature, such as (triple) helices, β-sheets and β-rolls, can be combined in GEPP with great flexibility, enabling control over structure and material properties. Second, a desired number of biofunctional domains, such as cell binding sites, can be incorporated into the protein sequence. These benefits allow the design of biomimetic scaffolds that resemble the structure and composition of native extracellular matrix, and can induce desired cell responses Although the field of GEPP offers many possibilities, some critical challenges remain. One of the main limitations for the use of GEPP in preclinical materials research is the low product yield and the resulting small quantities of material that are typically obtained in the laboratory Here, we present a thorough characterization of the properties of The development of a The Protein purity was assessed by SDS–PAGE using the Invitrogen NuPAGE Novex system, with 10% (w/v) Bis–Tris gel, MES SDS running buffer and SeeBlue Plus2 molecular mass marker. Gels were stained using Coomassie SimplyBlue SafeStain. N-terminal sequencing by Edman degradation was performed for the SDS–PAGE gel band corresponding to apparent mass of ∼62 Amino acid composition analysis after acid hydrolysis was performed by Ansynth Service B.V. (Roosendaal, The Netherlands). To determine the polysaccharide content in the purified protein, a phenol–sulphuric acid sugar assay was performed. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization–time of flight (MALDI–TOF) mass spectrometry measurements were performed using an ultrafleXtreme mass spectrometer (Bruker). The matrix consisted of 5 Freeze-dried protein was dissolved in 10 Protein solutions in 10  Samples of 800 Scaffolds with two different protein concentrations were prepared: 2% (w/v) Collagen samples, used as a reference, were prepared using BD Cryopreserved primary bone MSC isolated from Wistar rats (6–7 To half of the gels, 500 To assess cell viability, a LIVE/DEAD Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Life Technologies) was used. At days 3, 7, 10, 14 and 21, three samples of each gel type (SilCo-2, SilCo-5 or collagen) were removed from the incubator and washed twice with 1 To determine cell proliferation, DNA content was measured at different time points. At days 3, 7, 10, 14 and 21, three gel samples of each type were removed from the incubator, washed twice with 1 To estimate osteogenic differentiation, the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and calcium content were determined for three gel samples of each type after 3, 7, 10, 14 and 21 For determination of the calcium content, samples were washed once with 1 The molecular structure of mineral deposited in the samples was studied by attenuated total reflectance–Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR; Spectrum One, Perkin Elmer) and analyzed with Spectrum version 0.1. Cell culture results are presented as the mean The Protein identity and purity were assessed with SDS–PAGE, MALDI, N-terminal sequencing and amino acid analysis. The purity of the proteins was estimated to be ∼98%, based on amino acid analysis and subsequent linear least-squares fitting to the observed data of (i) the theoretical composition of the pure protein and (ii) the composition determined for host-derived proteins present in the medium. MALDI ( SDS–PAGE of the final product (lane 3, To investigate the nature of the clearest minor band migrating to ∼62 As large amounts of polysaccharides (phosphomannans) are present in the extracellular medium of  The setting time and kinetics of gel formation strongly depended on protein concentration, in agreement with our previous study After complete gelation, the Non-covalently crosslinked networks composed of fibrils often show strain hardening and can heal after breaking  The erosion study was performed under standard conditions that involve the presence of collagenase 1A. As a control, samples without collagenase were also prepared. No effect on the erosion rate was observed, in accordance with the absence of collagenase target sites in the After studying gel formation and stability, cell behavior on the hydrogel scaffolds was analyzed. Primary rat bone MSC were seeded onto SilCo-2, SilCo-5 and collagen gels. Cell viability and proliferation were measured after 3, 7, 10, 14 and 21 A LIVE/DEAD assay confirmed the viability of MSC on the Cell proliferation, as determined by measuring the DNA content, is shown in Differentiation of the cells into osteoblasts was analyzed by studying early and late mineralization markers. The results for early cell differentiation are shown in The extent of mineralization, which is a late marker for osteogenic differentiation, was measured by quantifying calcium accumulation. The data presented in In view of the low ALP activity of cultures on The above-discussed attraction of calcium by the In this study, we described the production and cell culture of de novo designed GEPP with a central pH-responsive silk-like block and flanking collagen-like blocks ( The authors thank the Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 2–8 are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full color images can be found in the on-line version, at Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 