Background
                  Pilon variant posterior malleolar (PVPM) fractures significantly disrupt joint congruency and cause tibiotalar instability. They are often underestimated and inadequately treated.
               
                  Purpose
                  This study assessed the outcomes of surgical treatment of this subtype of malleolar fracture, and examined the importance of computed tomography (CT) in diagnosis and surgical treatment.
               
                  Material and methods
                  CT images and radiographs of 67 patients with trimalleolar ankle fractures were retrospectively analyzed. Fourteen patients (6 women and 8 men) were studied. The mean age was 37.7 (range, 21–58) years, and mean follow-up period was 17.1 (range, 12–24) months. All patients underwent open reduction. Reconstruction of the joint surface was assessed with postoperative CT images. The outcomes were assessed with the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) and Osteoarthritis (OA) scoring systems.
               
                  Results
                  The ratio of PVPM fractures to trimalleolar ankle fractures was 20.1%. Postoperative CT images demonstrated that anatomic reconstruction was achieved in 11 patients. The mean AAOS scores were 85.6 in Type 1 and 81.1 in Type 2 cases. The mean OA scores were 1 in Type 1 and 1.1 in Type 2 cases (P
                     >0.05). The only statistically significant difference between the 2 groups was in osteochondral impaction (P
                     <0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  CT imaging is essential for the accurate diagnosis and management of PVPM fractures. Posteromedial and posterolateral incisions enable direct exposure, and therefore facilitate joint surface reconstruction.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study.The posterior malleolus is involved in approximately 19% of all ankle fractures; however, there is still no consensus on the contribution of the posterior fragment to ankle stability, or the indications and methods for surgical fixation This fracture comprises 6–8% of all ankle fractures The posteromedial fragment is critical for the stability of the subluxation of the talus The radiographs and CT images of 67 patients with trimalleolar ankle fractures treated from 2012 to 2014 were retrospectively evaluated. Fourteen patients (6 men and 8 women, mean age: 37.7 (range: 21–48) years) who fulfilled these criteria were diagnosed with a PVPM fracture and were included in the study on axial CT, presence of a vertical fracture line on the sagittal plane, in addition to the posterior coronal fracture line, indicating the presence of at least 1 posteromedial fragment apart from the posterolateral fragment; disruption of posteromedial tibial crest integrity; and/or presence of impacted osteochondral free fragments on sagittal CT. The injury mechanisms are shown in Surgery was performed within 8 A short leg cast was used for 2 weeks. Partial weightbearing was allowed after the 8th week in the 5 patients with articular impaction, and after the 6th week in the remaining 9 patients. Full weight bearing was allowed after the 12th week. Fracture reduction was evaluated with CT. Articular step-off of 1 Data were evaluated using SPSS 17.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The chi-square test was used to determine the associations among ordinal data. The Wilcoxon test was applied to continuous data. The significance level was set at The mean follow-up period was 17.1 (range, 12–24) months. The follow-up evaluation at the 12th postoperative week showed fusion in all patients. The presence of a bridging callus in at least 3 cortices or the disappearance of the fracture line was accepted as radiological union. Articular impaction and free osteochondral fragments were present in only 1 patient with a type 1 fracture, and in 4 with type 2 fractures. CT images demonstrated that anatomic reduction had been attained in 11 patients ( The common characteristic shared by the patients in the study was the presence of a vertical fracture line in the sagittal plane, in addition to the coronal fracture line located posteriorly. As a result, the anatomic integrity of the posteromedial tibial crest was disrupted There is no ideal treatment for these fractures. Loss of posterior bone and soft tissue support results in significant talar instability Posterior malleolar fractures can be fixed with posterior buttress plating, screws from anterior to posterior, or screws from posterior to anterior. Numerous studies have reported that sustainable reduction cannot be provided with indirect reduction and screw fixation from anterior to posterior The limited number of patients, retrospective nature of the study, the short follow-up period, which was insufficient for assessment of osteoarthritis, and the absence of a comparison group are the main drawbacks of our study. For a more definite judgment, studies in which patients with simple fractures of the posterior malleolus are used as a control group or studies with more patients with or without impacted fractures of the posterior malleolus are required. The most appropriate surgical incision providing direct exposure to the most comminuted part of the fracture site may be designated with the help of CT assessment. This facilitates elevation of the impacted fragments under direct vision, thereby increasing the chance of anatomic reduction. Thus, we believe that this is an important study as it shows that preoperative and postoperative CT assessment is indispensable in the diagnosis and management of PVPM fractures. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.