The research program outlined in this paper starts with the assumption that if there is a significant relationship between drilling and cutting specific energies in atmospheric conditions, there would also be a significant relationship between these variables in hyperbaric conditions. Five “model rock samples” having uniaxial compressive strength varying from 9 to 160 MPa were subjected to full-scale laboratory drilling tests with polycrystalline diamond compact (PDC) drill bits and a core drill, as well as laboratory full- and small-scale linear cutting tests with a conical and chisel cutter in atmospheric conditions. As a result, significant correlations between drilling and cutting specific energies were found for atmospheric conditions of laboratory. PDC drill bits and core drill bit used in laboratory tests were also used in the subsea drilling operations under hyperbaric conditions in Bismarck Sea. The conical cutter used in the laboratory tests are intended to be used on mechanical miners for subsea metal production. Core samples taken from Bismarck undersea mineral deposits were also subjected to physical and mechanical property tests in the deck and separately in the laboratories of Istanbul Technical University; and small-scale linear cutting tests were also applied in the university. Significant correlations were also found between the results of small- and full-scale cutting test. It is concluded that the capabilities of in-situ measurements will permit to detect some physical and mechanical properties of undersea mineral deposits. These properties interpreted with laboratory drilling and cutting tests would serve a basis to predict performance of mechanical miners to be used in hyperbaric conditions.It is believed that in general mining of subsea minerals will be of great concern in the near future in developing new resources for the good of human being. Since its inception in 1982, the International Seabed Authority (ISA), charged with regulating human activities on the deep-seafloor beyond the continental shelf, has issued 27 contracts for mineral exploration, encompassing a combined area of more than 1.4 million km Seafloor massive sulphide (SMS) deposits, found at water depths up to 3,600 m, are products of high-temperature hydrothermal activity associated with seafloor volcanism. SMSs are considered for future commercial exploitation because of the presence of rich metal content such as copper, zinc, gold and silver. Physical parameters (geotechnical and geophysical) of SMSs are important for mining purposes to allow estimation of both the size of deposits and the amount of ore. The first commercial enterprise, expected to target mineral-rich sulfides in deeper waters, at depths between 1,500 and 2,000 m on the continental shelf of Papua New Guinea, is scheduled to begin in early 2020. The main commercial focus of Nautilus Minerals is the Solwara 1 project to extract high-grade copper and gold from SMS deposits located at depths around 1,500–2,000 m in the Bismarck Sea. In 2009, Papua New Guinea granted Nautilus Minerals an environmental permit for the development of Solwara 1 in the Bismarck Sea for a term of 25 years and then, in 2011, awarded the company its first mining lease, which covers an area of ~59 km Nautilus Minerals together with SMD (Soil Machine Dynamics Ltd) and Deltares, at the University of Delft have developed a subsea rock cutting model based on the rock hardness, fracturing and water confining pressure. The analysis was based on geotechnical data collected from 2007 exploration program and tests carried out by Deltares on core samples obtained from Solwara 1 deposit and selected sets of model rocks. Full-scale cutting tests were carried out under hyperbaric pressures up to 350 bar to analyze the cutting behavior as hyperbaric pressure increases. The hyperbaric model was developed relating cutter velocity and depth of cut to cutting specific energy based on permeability and cone indentation strength of the rock. Nautilus Minerals and Istanbul Technical University (ITU), Faculty of Mines, Mining Engineering Department improved and validated also a model to predict the cutting performance of mechanical miners planned to work undersea through a laboratory and subsea test program. Within the scope of this paper, the drilling mechanical specific energy values obtained in the Bismarck Sea with core drills were compared with the results of other researchers obtained for seafloor hydrothermal deposits in the waters off Okinawa Island and it is believed that the similarities between two research results in respect to the ratio of drilling mechanical specific energy to uniaxial compressive strength of rocks will open new horizons in understanding the subject. Specific energy is defined as the amount of work required to break a unit volume (or mass) of rock and used to predict performance of mechanical miners. Some of the studies Eq. Recognized that the specific energy could not be represented by a single, accurate number since the drilling process was characterized by wide fluctuations of the drilling variables due to its complex dynamics and the heterogeneous nature of rock. The relationship between uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), sliding friction (μ) and mechanical efficiency and the relationships between drilling parameters were also studied. It was pointed out that cutting specific energy was closely related to drilling rates of percussive drills permitting to predict the performance of roadheaders. A research study demonstrated that the specific energy calculated from the boring data was found to be closely related to the mechanical properties of the hydrothermal deposits and its distribution beneath the seafloor was determined from boring data. Modeling algorithms were described for mechanical rock-cutting wheels for subsea rock trenching and they emphasized that hydrostatic pressures could affect the cutting at depths. A test set-up was designed, constructed and successfully tested, at Ifremer (Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea) in France, for the measurement of cutting forces under both atmospheric and hyperbaric conditions. Cutting experiments were carried out using a single PDC cutter on a marble sample at atmospheric pressure and later under different hydrostatic pressures. A new method was described for determining the cutting forces resulting from brittle failure, still based on original ductile models, but with a correction for the stresses. A novel technique was described for mining of seafloor massive sulphides based on the vertical cutting approach. The method applied in this study is summarized in Optimum specific energy of a mechanical miner to be used in hyperbaric conditions may be predicted based on the statistical relationships found according to Step 1: Prediction of uniaxial compressive strength of seafloor rocks (UCS) based on the relationship between drilling mechanical specific energy, SE Step 2: Prediction of optimum cutting specific energy obtained from full-scale linear cutting tests, SE Step 3: Prediction of drilling specific energy, SE Step 4: Estimation of the ratio of SE Step 5: Prediction of optimum specific energy of the mechanical miner to be used in seafloor, SE Or: Step 1: Prediction of UCS based on the relationship between SE Step 2: Prediction of specific energy obtained from small-scale linear cutting tests, SE Step 3: Prediction of SE Step 4: Prediction of SE Step 5: Estimation of the ratio of SE Step 6: Prediction of SE The specific energy notations used in this study are explained and summarized below: SE SE SE SE SE The relationship between drilling (SE Within the scope of this paper, subsea 269 core samples obtained from different locations of the seafloor deposit were evaluated. For each data point, if possible, lithology, ore type, density, porosity, uniaxial compressive strength from point load test (UCS Five different rock (model) samples including beige marble, diabase, nodular limestone, soft limestone (or Kufeki limestone) (~15.6% porosity) and travertine (~18.9% porosity) were collected from different mining and quarrying sites located in Turkey and subjected to physical and mechanical property tests using NX core samples taken from the block samples based on suggestions of the ISRM (International Society for Rock Mechanics). No stratification, foliation, or bedding plane was observed in the samples, except for travertine. The mechanical testing and cutting directions for travertine was perpendicular to the bedding planes. The travertine sample had some visible vesicular pores. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and static elasticity modulus (E Due to limited core length, some uniaxial compressive strength tests were carried out on seafloor core samples having L/D = 2 ratio and some having L/D = 1 ratio. Size correction factor was used for justifying test results as given by. Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) tests were conducted on core samples having diameter of 54 mm and a length to diameter ratio of around 0.5. The tensile load on the specimens were applied continuously at a constant stress rate such that failure would occur within 5 mm of displacement. Acoustic P- and S-wave velocities (P Water absorption tests were performed on core samples with diameter of around 40 mm. The results of the test were used for estimation of apparent porosity (ω), dry (γ Liquid permeability (k Specific destruction energy (SE Some of the properties of the samples have already been published in. Nautilus Minerals provided core samples obtained from 36 different locations of seafloor and the samples were subjected to a wide range of physical and mechanical tests with a total number of 218 tests. Some of the subsea core samples are seen in The results of physical and mechanical properties of the core samples obtained from Bismarck Sea are summarized in A total of 21 UCS tests were carried out, 8 tests on samples having L/D (length/diameter) ratio of 2 and 13 samples with an L/D ratio of 1. Size correction factor given by Thirteen Brazilian (indirect) tensile strength (BTS) tests were carried out. In one drill hole location SD227 (lithology RI sulphide dominant rock), the ratio of UCS/BTS was measured at 6, indicating low brittleness and potentially tough rock conditions from a cuttability viewpoint. At drill hole location SD229, the UCS/BTS ratio is higher at 11 with a higher UCS. Acoustic P- and S-wave velocity tests were performed on 20 core samples to estimate dynamic elasticity modulus (E Eight tests were carried out for static elasticity modulus (E Fifteen samples were subjected to porosity measurements. The apparent porosity (ω) values were found to fall between 8.2% (in sample ID 10685) and 40.7% (in sample ID 10656). The density of the core samples ranged from minimum 1.49 to maximum 4.69 g/cm Cerchar abrasivity tests were carried out on 36 samples. The values ranged between 0.3 and 2 in core samples from the sites ID P247G, P247H, and P221G. However, high Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) values were found in core samples representing site ID P221H with values varying between 1.15 and 4.05. It was interesting to note that higher CAI values were found in the samples having low porosity, high density and high UCS. When the relationships between the physical-mechanical properties of the seafloor core samples are analyzed, it is seen that porosity and density are the most dominant parameters effecting mechanical properties. Abrasivity of the core samples increases as rocks become stronger. Grouped data according to lithology give more significant correlations. Within the scope of this study, core drillings were realized from the deck of a ship covering different locations of the mineralized zone. Totally 5,915 drilling data (at different depths of each borehole) were recorded and 269 core samples were subjected to different physical and mechanical tests in deck. Due to the difficulties encountered in core recovery; uniaxial compressive strength, porosity and density could be measured only on 146 samples. Histograms of density, porosity, uniaxial compressive strength (from point load tests, UCS UCS The variations of mechanical specific energy values with number of drilling data points are seen in Brazilian tensile strength tests were realized on 22 seafloor core samples. Histogram of Brazilian tensile strength values obtained from seafloor samples is presented in Variations of Brazilian tensile strength and ratio of compressive to tensile strength values obtained from seafloor samples along with the data points are presented in Full-scale linear cutting test equipment and procedures (applied in this study) is explained in detail at. The (s/d) The results of full-scale linear cutting tests showed that SE Horizontal drill rig is used for drilling experiments. Detailed procedures for this testing system can be found in. The drilling tests were carried as dry and the chipped material was allowed to flush out by gravity through the grooves of the drill bits. The rotational speed for each test was kept at 85 rpm. Sumping of the drill bit was first realized and to avoid crushing the drilling debris and to minimize experimental errors, only few centimeters of drilling up to 50 mm was used for each thrust force level. Drilling specific energy (SE The relationships between thrust and drilling rate for five rock samples from Turkey are found linear for low strength rocks (travertine and soft limestone). However, this relationship is found to be a power function for the other rocks and a threshold force encountered in higher strengths rock samples. A minimum thrust force is found necessary for the penetration of PDC bits into the high strength rocks, thereafter the relationship is found to be linear. A typical curve between thrust and drilling rate for sandstone is seen in One should be careful about making a conclusion as to which bit having the same diameter (i.e. small or large cutter PDC) penetrated faster in the rock types tested. Test data did not allow to make any conclusions as whether one bit has better performance than the other. However, for the beige marble, data shows a definite difference in the penetration performance of each bit with the smaller cutter giving higher performance once a threshold thrust is exceeded. This would be excepted since the high strength of this rock combined with the thrust values used probably to cause effective chipping of the rock by the large cutters due to low stress concentrations under the cutter. In most cases, the difference between drilling rates of large and small cutter PDCs were not very distinguishable. One of the great significances from the test results is the relationship between specific drilling rate and the rock UCS, as displayed in Drilling specific energy (SE SE Due to inefficient (low) rotational speed of the test rig, only travertine and soft limestone could be drilled with the core drill, which could not be advanced in the other rock specimens. However, due to the small debris created when drilling travertine and high value of permeability, SE In soft limestone, it is found that drilling (coring) rate increases linearly with thrust and SE SE The relationships between SE The results of the experimental and statistical analyses carried out by The small-scale linear cutting machine (SLCM) Small-scale linear cutting tests were performed on nine different core samples from seafloor representing 4 different lithologies. SE The results and correlation given by SE Based on these results, let's take the seafloor sample with UCS Since SE Since SE It is known that net cutting rate of a mechanical miner can be roughly predicted by using Eq. The core samples taken from seafloor and representing different lithology of massive sulfides shows that porosity and density are the most dominant parameters effecting mechanical properties of core samples. This supports the results of, Small-scale linear cutting tests were performed to test the cuttability characteristic of subsea core samples. For different locations and different lithologies, specific energy values were found directly related to compressive strength of the samples. Based on this fact, the results support the conclusions arrived by Full-scale linear cutting tests were carried out on five different rock samples using a conical cuter which was intended to be used in undersea mechanical miners. Test results showed that optimum specific energy was closely related to rock properties. The most dominant rock properties effecting specific energy are basically S-wave velocity, P-wave velocity, dynamic elasticity modulus, static elasticity modulus, uniaxial compressive strength, indirect tensile strength and destructive specific energy. These trends were found similar with those already published by. Same rock samples as tested in full-scale linear cutting were also subjected to full-scale drilling tests using two PDC drill bits and one core drill bit. Each PDC drill bit had 4.4 inches (11.3 cm) of diameter, one having 10 cutters (large) and the other 18 cutters (small); they will be called thereafter large cutter PDC drill bit and small cutter PDC drill bit. PDC cutters have 5 mm of height; so when choosing maximum thrust force level, special attention was paid to not pass 4 mm advance per one revolution of drill bits. One of the main conclusions derived from the drilling tests was that there was only ±10% difference in test results for small and large cutter PDC drill bits depending on rock type. For drilling tests executed with PDC drill bits, the relationships between thrust and drilling rate for five rocks were found linear for low strength rocks (uniaxial compressive strength being less than 16 MPa). However, this relationship was found to be a power function for the other rocks and a threshold force encountered in higher strengths rock samples. A minimum thrust force was found necessary for the penetration of PDC bits into the high strength rocks, thereafter the relationship was found to be linear. In this study, the slope of this linear portion in [penetration rate/thrust in (m/h)/ton] is called specific drilling rate and it is found linearly related to UCS. Drilling experiments showed that SE In general, SE For the drilling tests realized with the core drill in soft limestone, it was found that SE It is worth to investigate in more detail if the difference between these two values of 10.3 and 7.7 corresponds to transition from atmospheric to hyperbaric drilling conditions. If it is considered that the difference is due to transition from atmospheric to hyperbaric drilling conditions, then it might be easy to find a coefficient of around 1.3 to 1.35 (10.3/7.7) to obtain the optimum specific energy of a mechanical miner to be used for subsea mining under hyperbaric condition, by simply multiplying SE It is also interesting to note that a study It should also be mentioned that it was experimentally indicated The results of the laboratory and field measurements performed in this study look very promising for further analysis to develop a reliable model to predict in-situ (hyperbaric) cutting specific energy of mechanical miners to be used in hyperbaric conditions. This may help better planning of the future mining activities under hyperbaric conditions in terms of scheduling and costing. Drilling and cutting results together with the physical-mechanical properties of rocks look highly promising towards the ultimate goal of being able to develop a reliable model to estimate the in-situ cutting specific energy based on field drilling data. One of the great significances from the test results is the relationship between specific drilling rate and uniaxial compressive strength of rocks. A definite relationship between these two parameters is shown to exist, which could mean that by calculating the specific drilling rate during the field drilling operation, one might be able to estimate in-situ rock strength and therefore predict in-situ production rates of mechanical miners excavating undersea in hyperbaric conditions. The study may be further continued by especially performing drilling in-situ hyperbaric conditions with small and large polycrystalline diamond compact drill bits such as used in laboratory experiments in this study and their mechanical specific energies (hyperbaric) may be correlated with the rock properties (in deck) obtained in atmospheric conditions. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. The research presented in this paper was supported by Nautilus Minerals Inc., which is greatly appreciated by the authors. The authors also appreciate Istanbul Technical University.