Catalytic ozonation of Methylene Blue, Methyl Green, Methyl Orange and Methyl-thymol Blue was investigated in the presence of ion-exchanged montmorillonite (NaMt and Fe(II)Mt), crude bentonite and acid-activated counterparts. An original approach never tackled so far consisted in correlating the basicity and hydrophilic character to the dye-catalyst interactions occurring on the catalyst surface. This was achieved through CO2 and water thermal programmed desorption. Kinetics study revealed that ozonation starts in the bulk solution, and dye adsorption turns out to be an essential requirement for high catalytic effectiveness. On NaMt, dye molecules appear to adsorb mainly via hydrophobic interaction. On Fe(II)Mt, the contributions of hydrophobic interaction, cation-exchange and Fe2+ mobility to the catalytic activity prevail. Acid activated clay catalysts exhibited lowest hydrophilic character favoring adsorption through organophilic interaction and affording thorough and fast dye mineralization. This was explained in terms of increased number of silanols and –Si-O-Si- groups. For all catalysts, short ozonation of all dye molecules resulted in similar end-chain products, which were totally eliminated after prolonged reaction times. This result is of great importance because it provides valuable theoretical findings that allow envisaging total mineralization of organic molecules by recyclable metal-free clay catalysts.Textile manufacturing is undoubtedly the major source of dye-rich wastewaters [ However, total mineralization of organic substrates often requires higher ozone consumption than necessary due to the low solubility in water. Catalytic ozonation may allow overcoming this drawback, and solid catalysts appear as being much more interesting because dissolved catalysts are potential sources of water contamination [ Many types of catalysts [ Montmorillonite (Mt) is a low cost and widely available aluminosilicate that can acquire optimal acid-base and hydrophobic interactions with organic species in water through mere and convenient purification and modification. These properties strongly influence the adsorption-desorption equilibrium of ozonation intermediates and products, whose presence usually induces pH fluctuations that determines the charge and dispersion of Mt lamellae. Less oxidized and bulkier intermediates must behave differently as compared to short chain acids with respect to the clay surface. Deeper insights in the catalyst basicity and hydrophilic character can allow elucidating the catalyst interactions with the organic substrate, water and ozone in correlation with the structures of both the catalyst and dye molecule. This is the main objective of this work that was achieved through thermal programmed desorption (TPD) of carbon dioxide (CO Two cationic dyes (Methylene Blue, MB and Methyl Green, MG) and two anionic counterparts (Methyl Orange, MO and Methylthymol Blue, MTB) provided by MERCK (USA) were used as probe molecules (Table S1). The clay catalysts were prepared starting from a crude bentonite (1.24 μm particle size) supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (USA). For simulating dye-rich wastewaters after primary treatments, aqueous 10 Dye ozonation was investigated in the presence of ion-exchanged montmorillonite (NaMt and Fe(II)Mt), crude bentonite and acid-activated counterparts (HMt). The starting bentonite was previously purified into a fully ion-exchanged Na For deeper insights in the effect of silicon content, additional catalysts (HMt-1, HMt-4, HMt-8, HMt-15 and HMt-24) were prepared through acid activation of bentonite. For this purpose, 200 g clay samples were impregnated by 1000 mL of aqueous 5 M sulphuric acid solution at 80 °C for various contact times (1, 4, 8, 15 and 24 h, respectively) under mild stirring as fully described elsewhere [ All catalysts including crude bentonite were characterized by X-ray diffraction (Siemens D5000, CuK Ozonation tests were performed in different samples exposed to various ozonation times at room temperature (RT) in cylindrical PVC vessels (28 × 115 mm) containing 20 mL samples of 10 After ozonation and catalyst removal by centrifugation, the supernatant each ozonated sample was analyzed by UV–vis spectrophotometry using a 1 cm quartz cell and a Varian-Cary 5000 instrument (Agilent Technologies, USA). Highly linear calibration plots (Fig. S1-S2) and accurate assessment of the molar absorptivity (Table S2) were achieved between 190 nm and 800 nm only within the 0-10 The evolution in time of the ozonation process for all UV–vis bands was assessed through determination of the residual concentration using calibration curves with 1–2% accuracy (Fig. S1-S2). The dye conversion yield was calculated using the UV–vis bands appearing at the highest wavelength, with a standard deviation of 2%. For the sake of accuracy, the reaction mixture was also analyzed by liquid chromatography (HPLC, Waters 2487 Dual λ absorbance detector coupled to a Waters-Alliance 2695 equipment, 100 mm x 4.6 mm C Quick tests of 5 min ozonation of the studied dyes induced marked changes of the UV–vis spectra, characterized by a total discoloration of the respective aqueous solutions of MB, MTB and MO ( Similarly, marked depletion of the 465, 277 and 200 nm bands for MO ( As a general tendency, all band absorbances decreased with decreasing dye concentration, i.e. when ozone is bubbled in excess with respect to the dye amount. Increasing dye concentration resulted in lower ozonation efficiency, as supported by the increase in intensity of the residual UV–vis bands remaining after discoloration ( This intensity increase appears to be much more pronounced for the 210–212 nm UV bands (2, 4, 6 and 8), most probably due to the formation of oxidized derivatives and H-bridge interaction with water. The other bands (1, 5 and 7) totally disappeared after 5 min for dye concentration below 2 × 10 Deeper insight in the effect of the ozonation time revealed marked intensity depletion for most bands (Fig. S3). Paradoxically, the intensity of those appearing at 214–220 nm increased in time ( The total disappearance of the 498 and 403 nm bands of MB after only 1 min ozonation was accompanied by a total discoloration of the solution after 2 min. This is supported by the marked depletion of the 660 nm, which indicates a fast degradation of the chromophore [ Analysis of the effect of the ozone-to-dye ratio revealed that ca. 10000–60000 ozone molecules per dye molecule are needed for the total disappearance of the visible bands in the absence of catalyst. This accounts for large amounts of unused ozone, whose solubility in water is the main constraint. For comparable ozone dosages, non catalytic ozonation gave higher conversions yields as those reported for more oxidized chemical species, but in the same magnitude as other organic molecules [ Catalyst addition resulted in more pronounced changes in time of the relative absorbances of most UV–vis bands below 350 nm, due to the formation of oxidized derivatives [ Addition of NaMt produced noticeable changes in the UV–vis spectra of all dye molecules (Fig. S5). This agrees with the specific ozone consumption by each structural group of a given dye molecule (Fig. S6-S7). The effect of catalyst addition appears to differ depending on the UV–vis band and exchangeable cation (Fig. S11-S13). Fe(II)Mt showed higher activity in the discoloration of cationic molecules (MB and MG), as supported by a faster decay of the 660 nm band as compared to NaMt. Deeper insights in process kinetics and catalyst surface properties could be useful in this regard. Model validation for all UV–vis bands based on R High linearity of Eq. Catalyst addition should induce fluctuations in the ozone concentration in the bulk solution through adsorption. The predominance of the 2nd order kinetics for almost all UV–vis band and higher rate constants for catalytic ozonation provide evidence of this contributions of the catalyst surface and exchangeable cation. Crude bentonite gave lower dye conversion yield not exceeding 25–35%. This lower catalytic activity was already by the presence of carbonates and higher amounts of non smectitic impurities (Quartz, cristoballite, carbonates,…). This is supposed to reduce the density of exchangeable cations and of surface charge [ Longer ozonation times of 20 min were required for achieving degradation yields of 69–100% for cationic dye and to 84–98 % for anionic molecules with NaMt. These performances are much higher than those reported for many catalysts such as simple or metal-doped metal oxides, carbon nanotubes, zeolites and others for ozone dosages in the same magnitude order [ The higher effectiveness of Fe(II)Mt was already explained in terms of partial Fe Unlike with NaMt, much more pronounced Fe The bathochromic effect of the 660, 280 and 234 nm red shifted to 670, 296 and 250 nm can arise from diverse interactions between the non-binding electron pairs of dye N and S atoms, oxidized species and free water molecules. The magnitude of this effect is expected to strongly depend on the acid-base properties and hydrophilic character of the clay surface. Interesting, fast and almost thorough decomposition of MTB and MO was noticed after only 2 min with both NaMt and Fe(II)Mt. This result clearly demonstrates that the exchangeable cation plays a key role in the ozonation of cationic dye, and showed no influence in that of anionic molecules. Here, Fe NaMt addition was found to raise the initial pH of MB, MG, MTB and MO solutions from 5.47, 5.12, 7.61 and 5.40, respectively to 6.77, 6.73, 7.96 and 7.76. This is supposed to confer neutral charges to cationic dyes (MB and MG) but negative charges to anionic ones ( This should induce changes in water:dye interaction, as reflected by a bathochromic shift of the visible band beyond 600 nm of these molecules, explained in terms of molecule conformation [ On one hand, by analogy with pure silica, deprotonation should prevail on NaMt at pH level higher than 2 [ With Fe(II)Mt, the initial pH decrease confers positive charges to all silanols groups and ammonium groups of most dye molecules but neutral charges on MG ( The most significant factor in such a process is undoubtedly pH, which determines the catalytic activity and selectivity of aluminosilicates in ozonation processes in water. In neutral to acidic pH, ozone is stable, and barely starts decomposing beyond pH 9. Under these conditions, the oxidation reduction potential of ozone (ORP) almost remains at its highest level of 2.07 V, and should not vary significantly upon slight pH fluctuations, more particularly for relatively high ozone concentration in the range 0.4-0.45 mmol L The key role of the silanol groups was herein demonstrated by deeper insights using iron-free bentonite samples obtained through acid activation at different contact times. Increasing Si/Al ratio was found to reduce markedly the initial pH in all dye solutions, but which still remains higher than those induced by addition of Fe(II)Mt. ( Higher Si contents are known to enhance the Lewis acidity at the expense of Bronsted acidity as a result of a depletion of the cation-exchange capacity of the clay catalyst [ Unlike Fe(II)Mt, NaMt displayed an additional desorption peak around 70–110 °C corresponding to weakly basic sites. In contrast, Fe(II)Mt is expected to display higher acidity and hydrophilic character, assuming that cation basicity decreases with increasing charge and decreasing size [ The resulting decreases of surface positive charge and proton release are expected to produce pH decrease leading to changes in dye:water, water:catalyst and dye:catalyst interactions. This can be accentuated by unavoidable protonation of both types of silanols, which will attract negatively charged SO The globally higher catalytic activity of HMt samples ( Weaker dye degradation was noticed for anionic dyes after 05 min ozonation, as supported by lower UV–vis removal yields for the bands below 400 nm. Here, due to the absence of charges in MTB and MO at pH 3.92–4.18 induced by HMts ( As a common feature, ozonation of all dyes gave similar intermediates and products but in specific distributions according to the molecular structure. This is well argued by LC-ToF-MS analysis which revealed similar low-molecular weight organic products after ozonation of MB and MO without and with catalyst (Fig. S16). For MB, C-S The same products were also identified after Fe(II)Mt-catalyzed ozonation, but with lower intensity. The marked decrease in time of the peak intensity for the positive ion of MB ( MO ozonation for 1 min produced the same peaks at 201,185 and 172.5 amu before and after addition of Fe(II)Mt (Fig. S17). Here, also, the predominant peaks at 121 amu, 137 (C The results obtained herein allow concluding that clay catalysts improve dye ozonation. CO This work was supported by grants from Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: