An experimental investigation was carried out to assess the self-healing characteristics of aluminium hybrid composites reinforced primarily with mixed proportion of silica sand and bamboo leaf ash. Charpy impact test samples with 45° notch were machined from the aluminium hybrid composites and a ϕ1mm hole was drilled at 1mm away from the notch. Two different self-healing treatments were given to the test samples prepared from the composites. In the first treatment, a 3mm diameter hole was drilled along the sample and a low melting point alloy (60Sn-40Pb) which served as secondary reinforcing material was pierced into the hole and then heat treated at a temperature of 250°C. The second treatment that was adopted involved subjecting the test samples to two-steps under-ageing treatment. The first step involved ageing at 160°C for 15min and quenched in water. Thereafter, the second ageing treatment was carried out at 50°C for 24h. The samples were then subjected to Charpy impact testing. The results show that the composites had lower absorbed energy compared with Al-Mg-Si alloy. Self-healing treatment improved the energy absorbed in healed samples when compared to the damaged samples. Although, the under-aged samples had a slightly higher absorbed energy in comparison with the samples containing 60Sn-40Pb, the presence of silica sand and bamboo leaf ash did not have significant influence on the absorbed energy. The highest healing efficiency obtained using the low melting point alloy approach was 61%.The possibility of achieving varieties of property combinations that are not possessed by conventional monolithic materials has been the drive for the increasing interest in the design and development of composites materials Stir casting remain the most utilised method for producing AMCs commercially In previous studies, interfacial bonding between the metallic matrix and ceramic reinforcements has been improved by using magnesium as a wetting agent Recently, self-healing approach is being developed to ensure that damage that occurs in materials systems due to propagation of defects like porosity, micro cracks formation or flaws during in-service operations, are managed through a self-repair process These benefits have allowed significant progress to be made in the synthesis of self-healing polymer and polymer based composites The introduction of ceramic materials as reinforcements in metallic alloys to develop composites introduces more porosity into the composites. Since porosity serves as nucleation points for failures in materials systems used for structural applications, the introduction of self-healing design concept as a damage management strategy becomes appealing if catastrophic failures are to be prevented. This research aims to investigate the adaptability of self healing phenomena to the development of aluminium based composite. The existing approaches used in achieving self-repair characteristics in metallic system include: formation of under aged precipitates The materials utilised in this research are Al-Mg-Si alloy as the matrix, bamboo leaf ash and Igbokoda silica sand as the primary reinforcing materials and low melting point 60Sn-40Pb alloy as the secondary reinforcing material (self healing agent). The compositions of the matrix alloys and primary reinforcement are presented in Detailed description on the production process of the aluminium hybrid composites used in this study is presented in This approach was carried out in accordance with Hautakangas et al. For studies on healing induced by incorporation of 60Sn-40Pb low melting alloy as secondary reinforcement, the Charpy test samples ( Self-healing efficiency achieved using both treatments was determined using the absorbed energy values according to Eq. where U The full composite microstructure has been discussed elsewhere The results of the impact tests carried out on the unreinforced Al-Mg-Si alloy and primary reinforced Al-Mg-Si/BLA-SS hybrid composites are presented in The lower absorbed energy observed in the composites could be as a result of the introduction of the primary reinforcing materials (BLA and SS) which are basically ceramics and known to be inherently brittle. The presence of the ceramic particles and the ceramic particle/matrix interface can accentuate a state of stress triaxiality within its vicinity which increases susceptibility to brittle mode fracture characteristics (reflected by a low impact energy) Although the difference between the energy absorbed by the composites is marginal, it can be observed that sample A2 absorbed higher impact energy than the other aluminium hybrid counterparts. This can be attributed to the lower porosity levels in the composite as reported in our previous studies on this composite grade  It is worth mentioning that the self-healing efficiency of the composites is low when compared to values reported in The secondary electron images of the fracture surface of sample A2 subjected to secondary ageing and self-healing treatment are presented in The self healing characteristics in aluminium hybrid composites were investigated using two different approaches: secondary ageing at under-aged temperature and secondary reinforcement with low melting point alloy. The unreinforced alloy had a higher self-healing efficiency as compared to aluminium hybrid composites (composites with secondary ageing) resulting from the presence of ceramic particle/matrix interface in the composites, thus increases susceptibility to brittle mode fracture characteristics. The composites subjected to secondary ageing treatment absorbed a slightly higher impact energy when compared to samples that were reinforced with 60Sn-40Pb low melting point alloy. The highest self-healing efficiency that was obtained in samples reinforced with 60Sn-40Pb low melting point alloy was 61%. Poor interfacial bonding and presence of porosity in the composites are the likely reasons for the low self-healing efficiency observed in the composites. SEM images confirmed the presence of dimples, micro voids and cleavages which are features of mixed mode fracture. This work was supported by the