To selectively separate chalcopyrite from pyrite, the effect of konjac glucomannan on the flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite was investigated in this study. The results of single mineral flotation tests showed that konjac glucomannan had a stronger depression effect on pyrite than traditional organic depressants (Starch, Dextrin, Guar gum) with the pyrite recovery less than 5% at the pH range of 5–11, while it had little influence on chalcopyrite flotation over the whole pH range. Flotation tests of mixed minerals were conducted to further study the selective depression effect of konjac glucomannan, and a copper concentrate with CuFeS2 grade of 83.69% and Cu recovery of 85.64% could be obtained from a feed containing 47.20% CuFeS2. This was due to the greater adsorption of konjac glucomannan on the surface of pyrite than that on chalcopyrite surface, which was also proved by the results of zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements, and FTIR studies. Furthermore, XPS test results manifest that konjac glucomannan adsorbed on pyrite was via physical adsorption. Hydrogen bonding and Bronsted acid-base interaction were considered as the main driving forces.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The key point of selectively separating chalcopyrite from pyrite is the depression of pyrite. During the last decades, a lot of researches have been conducted to separate chalcopyrite from pyrite using selective depressants, including inorganic and organic depressant. In current industrial practice, lime and cyanides are most commonly used as depressants to separate chalcopyrite from pyrite ( Konjac glucomannan (molecule structure see In this study, konjac glucomannan was used as a selective depressant to separate chalcopyrite from pyrite by single mineral flotation tests and artificial mixed mineral micro-flotation tests, and the selective depression mechanism of konjac glucomannan was investigated through zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements, FTIR studies, and XPS analyses. The chalcopyrite and pyrite single minerals used for all the experiments were obtained from Dexing, Jiangxi Province and Yunfu, Guangdong Province, respectively. The pure mineral crystals were crushed and then dry ground by using an agate mortar; the ground samples were dry-sieved to the designed fraction. The +38–74 μm size fraction was collected for flotation tests, adsorption measurements, and XPS tests. The BET surface areas of +38–74 μm chalcopyrite and pyrite were 1.88 m The depressant konjac glucomannan (molecular mass: 200–2000 kDa, the purity of glucomannan >92%) used in this study was purchased from Shangdong Yousuo Chemical technology Co., Ltd. Dextrin and guar gum were obtained from Aladdin Industrial Corporation, China. Starch was supplied by the Tianjin Kemiou Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. The common xanthate sulfides collector PBX (Potassium butyl xanthate) with 98% purity and MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) were employed as collector and frother in this work, respectively. The stock solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were adopted to adjust pulp pH. All reagents were of analytical grade. Distilled water was used in all experiments. Micro-flotation tests were conducted on an XFG-C type mechanical agitation flotation machine at 1800 rpm with a 40 ml cell. Chalcopyrite and pyrite pure minerals were treated by 5 min ultrasonic pretreatment to remove surface oxides before the flotation experiment. Mineral suspensions were prepared by adding 2.0 g of single minerals (1 g chalcopyrite and 1 g pyrite for artificial mixed minerals) to the cell with 35 ml distilled water. The pH regulator, depressant, and collector were added according to the reagent scheme successively and each dose was conditioned for 3 min before adding the next reagent. 20.44 mg/L frother was then added to the pulp and conditioned for 1 min, and then the flotation process for 3 min was carried out. Flotation recovery was calculated based on the mass ratio between the floated products and un-floated ones. Each micro-flotation test was repeated at least three times, and the average value was adopted as the flotation results, and the standard deviation was calculated and presented as an error bar. For artificial mixed mineral micro-flotation tests, the grade of Cu in concentrate and tailing were assayed to calculate the distributions of chalcopyrite between the concentrate and the tailing. Zeta potentials of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the absence and presence of konjac glucomannan as a function of pulp pH were measured using Coulter Delsa 440sx Zeta Potential Analyzer in 1 × 10 For adsorption studies, 1 g of samples were placed into a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask, then 100 ml of distilled water was added, and the mineral suspensions were placed on a magnetic rotator to stir evenly. The suspension pH was adjusted to a desired value by adding HCl and NaOH, then konjac glucomannan and PBX were added according to the reagent condition and conditioning time. After that, the suspensions were centrifuged and filtered, and the filter liquor was collected for adsorption measurements. Each measurement was repeated at least 3 times, and the average value and standard deviation were calculated. The adsorption measurements of konjac glucomannan and PBX were conducted on a TOC analyzer (Vario TOC, Elementar, Germany) and a UV-2001 ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Rayleigh, Beijing, China), respectively. The infrared spectrums of chalcopyrite, pyrite, and minerals treated with konjac The XPS tests were carried out on a K- Single mineral flotation tests were conducted first to evaluate the effects of pulp pH and depressants dosage on the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite and pyrite using PBX as collector, and the flotation results are exhibited in As reported in previous studies, starch, dextrin, and guar gum are three traditional organic depressants usually used to prevent the flotation of pyrite and commonly adopted in the separation process of pyrite and other valuable minerals ( It can be observed from The results exhibited in Effects of pulp pH on the flotation of the chalcopyrite and pyrite in the absence and presence of konjac glucomannan were investigated. The results are exhibited in Based on the results of single mineral flotation tests, flotation tests of mixed binary minerals were performed to verify the selectivity of konjac glucomannan. The traditional organic depressant dextrin was chosen for comparison purposes. In order to uncover the adsorption mechanism of konjac glucomannan on chalcopyrite and pyrite surfaces, the surface charge of both minerals with and without konjac glucomannan as a function of pulp pH was investigated, and the results are shown in Adsorption measurements of konjac glucomannan and PBX on chalcopyrite and pyrite surfaces were performed under different reagent schemes at pH 9, and the results are shown in  The adsorption of PBX on chalcopyrite and pyrite surfaces as a function of dosage in the absence and presence of konjac glucomannan was investigated, and the results are shown in To obtain a better understanding of the adsorption mechanisms of konjac glucomannan on two mineral surfaces, FITR spectrometry was conducted to investigate the changes of surface characteristics of chalcopyrite and pyrite with and without the pre-treatment of konjac glucomannan. The FTIR study results are shown in As for the IR spectrum of konjac glucomannan, the peaks at 3393.2 cm  The IR spectrums shown in The adsorption results and FTIR study results both prove that konjac glucomannan prefers to adsorb on pyrite surface. However, the underlying interaction mechanism between konjac glucomannan and pyrite remains unclear. Thus, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) technique was utilized to investigate the mechanism between konjac glucomannan and pyrite. The XPS spectra of C 1s and Fe 2p, S 2p are shown in As can be seen from  Many researchers have studied the adsorption mechanism between polysaccharides and pyrite. The most widely proposed mechanisms are chemical complexation, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interaction, and Bronsted acid-base interaction ( As for the depression mechanism of konjac glucomannan on pyrite flotation, electrostatic interaction was ruled out because konjac glucomannan is non-ionic. Besides, chemical complexation was ruled out due to the negligible changes shown in high-resolution spectra of Fe 2p and S 2p. Therefore, hydrogen bonding and Bronsted acid-based interaction may play roles in the adsorption of konjac glucomannan on pyrite surface. In addition, the similarity of the molecular structures between konjac glucomannan and guar gum further prove this hypothesis. For pyrite, the oxygen existed in the weak alkaline mineral pulp causes the surface of pyrite oxidized through the reactions: After adding the polysaccharide For chalcopyrite, the oxidization-reduction reactions in flotation conditions are shown as follows: Chalcopyrite obtains higher lattice energy than pyrite. Moreover, sulfide ions in the lattice structure of chalcopyrite are located in the inner layer compared with copper and iron ions. Under neutral or alkaline conditions, the oxidization-reduction reactions on chalcopyrite surface are harder to occur than those on pyrite surface. Therefore, the metal hydroxylated sites formed on chalcopyrite surface are tiny minority, which caused the weak adsorption of konjac glucomannan on chalcopyrite surface. And it may be the reason for the selective depression of konjac glucomannan on pyrite. In this study, konjac glucomannan is used to selectively depress pyrite in the flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. From the results of flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, adsorption measurements, FTIR measurements, and XPS tests, conclusions can be reached as follows: Konjac glucomannan is an effective depressant for pyrite. The addition of konjac glucomannan can depress pyrite efficiently while it has a negligible influence on chalcopyrite flotation. The results of zeta potential measurement and adsorption measurement show that konjac glucomannan are adsorbed on both chalcopyrite and pyrite. However, the adsorption density of konjac glucomannan on pyrite surface is stronger than that on chalcopyrite, which was further confirmed by the FITR study results. The adsorption difference allows the flotation separation between chalcopyrite and pyrite under neutral and slightly alkaline conditions. XPS study results show that the adsorption of konjac glucomannan on the surface of pyrite is physical adsorption. Hydrogen bonding and Bronsted acid-base interaction are considered as the main driving forces. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge the support of the