Background
                  In the last 20 years, surgical approach to the orbitozygomatic fracture has evolved to limit skin incisions and minimize external scars.
               
                  Methods
                  The treatment approach to the orbitozygomatic fracture was evaluated by a retrospective chart review from 1992 to 2012, and advantages, disadvantages, and complications were studied.
               
                  Results
                  Surgical approach to the orbitozygomatic fracture has evolved from a subciliary to a transconjunctival approach and to a novel extended transconjunctival approach without skin incisions in the last 20 years. The greatest advantage of using an extended transconjunctival approach is the wide exposure of the inferior orbital rim, orbital floor, lateral orbital wall, and the frontozygomatic suture in an unobstructed operative field without any skin incisions. Precise assessment of the reduction at the sphenozygomatic suture is possible with a wide exposure of the lateral orbital wall. As the dissection plane in a transconjunctival approach is entirely posterior to the lacrimal apparatus, the medial incision can be placed medially beyond the lacrimal punctum and by combining this approach with the transcaruncular approach, a wide operative field for the medial orbital wall can be obtained, which is the most advantageous point for choosing a transconjunctival approach over a subciliary approach. The complication rate was comparable to a subciliary approach.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The author advocates an extended transconjunctival approach for orbitozygomatic fractures to avoid skin incisions and to precisely assess the reduction status.Although three-point fixation has been the traditional gold standard for zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fracture fixation, the recent trend toward minimally invasive approach has been to limit skin incisions to minimize external scars. An extended transconjunctival approach has been developed to overcome this limitation of restricted operative field and to enable fixation of the frontozygomatic suture without any skin incisions. This study was carried out to review the evolution of the surgical approach to the orbitozygomatic fracture and to evaluate its advantages, disadvantages, and complications. A generous conjunctival incision was made from the lacrimal punctum to the lateral edge of the tarsal plate just inferior to the inferior tarsal margin, which is about 5 mm from the lid margin. Then the dissection is anterior to the orbital septum (preseptal approach) to avoid a prolapse of the intraorbital fat. A periosteal incision was carried out inferior to the arcus marginalis, the lateral periosteal incision is extended superolaterally along the lateral orbital rim, and the conjunctival incision is also extended accordingly. By retracting the orbital content medially with a malleable retractor and the soft tissue lateral to the lateral orbital rim laterally with a Ragnell retractor, the lateral orbital rim appears as a ridge line. The periosteum along the lateral orbital rim will be incised by inserting one blade of scissors under the periosteum and cutting this ridge line until the frontozygomatic suture is reached ( No Frost sutures are placed to support the lower eyelid postoperatively. In order to prevent postoperative lower eyelid descent, the periosteum is closed at the inferior orbital rim and the lateral orbital rim. If the periosteum is found to be fragile or severely torn and does not support the lower eyelid, the soft tissue around the periosteum of the lower eyelid is sutured to drill holes made at the inferior orbital rim to prevent lower eyelid or cheek sagging. When postoperative chemosis is anticipated, lateral and sometimes medial temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed for several days. All orbitozygomatic fractures treated by the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery at Okinawa Chubu Hospital, Uruma City, Japan were evaluated by a retrospective chart review. Institutional review board approval was obtained. All facial fracture cases were extracted from the prospectively maintained operating room database from 1992 to 2012 with keywords of “facial fracture” or “orbital fracture.” A total of 339 cases were found excluding an isolated nasal fracture. Of these 339 cases, a retrospective chart review was carried out and fracture sites, fixation sites, operative approaches, mechanism of injury, follow-up period, complications, and outcomes were input into a FileMaker Pro 12 database, FileMaker, Inc. CA, USA. Fractures involving ZMCs (195), orbital floor (139), and medial orbital wall (32) accounted for 275 cases. Of these 275 cases, 15 secondary reconstruction cases were excluded, with the remaining 260 being acute orbitozygomatic fractures. One case with excessive bleeding for which transarterial embolization and an open reduction along with internal fixation of only the lateral buttresses was carried out without orbitozygomatic exploration was excluded. Two cases with minimally displaced ZMC that did not require orbitozygomatic exploration were excluded. Excluding these three cases, the remaining 257 cases underwent orbitozygomatic exploration. Of these 257 cases, no out-patient records were available in six cases and the follow-up period was <30 days in 47 cases. These 53 cases were excluded, with the remaining 204 orbitozygomatic fracture cases for detailed evaluation. All evaluated cases involved surgical approach to the orbit. There were 170 male and 34 female patients of age ranging from 12 to 74 years with the average age being 36.1. Follow-up period ranged from 45 to 2493 days with the average of 401 days. Statistical analysis was carried out by chi-squared test. These 204 orbitozygomatic fractures involved 145 ZMCs, 111 orbital floors, 25 medial orbital walls, 22 naso-orbito-ethmoids (NOE), 17 maxillas without Le Fort fractures, 28 Le Fort fractures, eight split palates, two sphenoids, four superior orbital rims, seven frontal bones, and 18 mandibles. Some overlaps of the fractures existed, for example, 60 cases of ZMC fractures with orbital floor fractures. There were 87 right-side and 99 left-side fractures with 18 bilateral fractures. For detailed evaluation of the surgical approach and the outcome, each side was treated as an individual fracture and the evaluation was made based on fracture sides, not on fracture cases. This converts 204 orbitozygomatic fracture cases to 105 right-side and 117 left-side fractures with a total of 222 orbitozygomatic fractures. These 222 fractures were treated by 29 subciliary approaches (right 16 and left 13) and 179 transconjunctival approaches (right 80, left 99), which included 11 extended transconjunctival approaches (right four and left seven) introduced in 2009 ( Of these 204 orbitozygomatic fractures, ZMC fractures accounted for 145 cases (right 65, left 75, bilateral five, total 150 sides). This converts 145 ZMC fracture cases to 70 right-side and 80 left-side fractures with a total of 150 ZMC fractures. These 150 ZMC fractures were treated by 24 subciliary approaches (right 10, left 10, and bilateral two) and 117 transconjunctival approaches (right 50, left 61, and bilateral three), which included 11 extended transconjunctival approaches (right three, left six, and bilateral one). Out of 150 ZMC fractures, the frontozygomatic suture was fixated in 118 (78.7%), the inferior orbital rim was fixated in 135 (90.0%), and the lateral buttress was fixated in 138 (92.0%) through a gingivobuccal sulcus incision. The frontozygomatic suture was accessed by lateral brow incisions in four fractures (3.4%), lateral upper blepharoplasty incisions in 21 fractures (18%), lateral canthotomies in 44 fractures (37%), extended transconjunctival approaches in 11 fractures (9.3%), coronal incisions in 11 fractures (9.3%), and lacerations in the remaining 27 fractures (22%; Coronal incisions were performed in 15 out of 145 cases (10%) or 18 out of 150 fractures (12%, 12 unilateral and three bilateral ZMCs) mainly for reduction and fixation of the zygomatic arch and NOE fractures (zygomatic arch and NOE fixation in six cases, zygomatic arch fixation in four cases, NOE fixation in two cases, superior orbital rim fixation in one case, superior orbital rim and zygomatic arch fixation in one case, and calvarial bone graft for medial orbital wall fracture in one case). After introduction of an extended transconjunctival approach in 2009, only one coronal incision was performed for fixation of the zygomatic arch and the superior orbital rim. Of these 204 orbitozygomatic fractures, 120 orbital floor and/or medial orbital wall fractures were found. ZMC, NOE, maxillary, and Le Fort fractures were excluded from these 120 fractures; the remaining 48 cases with pure orbital floor and/or medial orbital wall fracture were considered for evaluation. There were 19 right orbital floor/medial orbital wall and 29 left orbital floor/medial orbital wall fractures; no bilateral cases were found. Orbital floor fractures accounted for 40 cases and medial orbital wall fracture 15 cases with seven combined orbital floor and medial orbital wall fractures. Forty-seven cases were treated by a transconjunctival approach and one case was treated by a subciliary approach. Calvarial bone graft was performed in 32 cases, rib graft in one case, and hydroxyapatite implant in five cases; no graft material was used in 10 cases. Fifty-three cases of complications were detected among all 222 orbitozygomatic fractures. Among these 53 cases, 34 complications not associated with the surgical approach were excluded. These 34 cases overlapped and were not exclusive, which included nine infectious complications, seven cases of posttraumatic enophthalmos, four cases of facial deformity from original injury, for example, lower lid avulsion, four cases of ocular motility disorders, three cases of exposed hardware, three nasolacrimal drainage obstructions from the original injury, two cases of abnormal tooth sensation, one case each of tooth injury during anesthetic induction, carotid-cavernous sinus fistula from the original traumatic event, postoperative hematoma, loosened intermaxillary fixation, malposition of intraorbital calvarial bone graft, malunited ZMC fracture, cheek sagging, posttraumatic eyelid ptosis, and inflammatory intraorbital mass adjacent to hydroxyapatite orbital floor implant. Excluding these 34 complications, the remaining 19 were directly associated with the surgical approach. Two cases of transient scleral show and ectropion were detected in the 29 subciliary approaches (6.9%). In the 179 transconjunctival approaches including 11 extended transconjunctival approaches, three symblepharons were detected (1.7%). Two of the three symblepharons were released under local anesthesia as an office procedure. Six cases of entropion, one case of ectropion, and two cases of trichiasis occurred after transconjunctival approach (3.4%, 0.6%, and 1.1%). Two lacrimal canaliculus avulsions were detected after transconjunctival approach (1.1%), both of which were repaired intraoperatively under microscope without long-term sequelae. Four conjunctival granulations were detected after transconjunctival approach (2.2%), three of them disappeared spontaneously and the other one was excised under local anesthesia as an office procedure. One out of 53 cases of lateral canthotomy after transconjunctival approach caused granulation formation at the lateral canthal area with lateral ectropion, which required lateral canthal revisional surgery (0.19%). In summary, complications resulting in lower lid deformity were 6.9% after subciliary approach, all of which involved transient ectropion, and 4.5% after transconjunctival approach ( The criticism against a transconjunctival approach which is a limited operative field for the lateral orbital wall and the lateral orbital rim was overcome by adding a lateral canthotomy. In 2009, an extended transconjunctival approach was first used for a displaced ZMC fracture of a 12-year-old girl and three-point fixation was feasible without any skin incisions ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary video related to this article can be found at The advantage of using an extended transconjunctival approach is the wide exposure of the inferior orbital rim, orbital floor, lateral orbital wall, and the frontozygomatic suture in an unobstructed operative field. In selected cases, plate fixation of the sphenozygomatic suture is possible, which is very useful when other fixation point is comminuted and the facial projection is lost with laterally displaced zygomatic arch and a coronal approach would otherwise be required. Because the dissection plane in a transconjunctival approach is entirely posterior to the lacrimal apparatus, the medial incision can be placed medially beyond the lacrimal punctum and by combining this approach with a transcaruncular approach, a wide operative field for the medial orbital wall can be obtained, which is the most advantageous point for choosing a transconjunctival approach over a subciliary approach. Currently, we are extending the transcaruncular approach further superiorly and the frontomaxillary suture can be accessed without skin incisions. We started using this extended transcaruncular approach for fixation of single-segment type I naso-orbito-ethmoid (NOE) fracture One of the most concerned aspects of applying this extended transconjunctival approach is disruption the posterior limb of the lateral canthal ligament from the Whitnall's tubercle. Paul Manson et al. stated that canthal reattachment is not required in acute fracture treatment. For the purpose of sparing skin incisions to access the frontozygomatic suture, upper lid transconjunctival approach has been reported. Regarding the complications, a transconjunctival approach was associated with lower complication rate of lower lid deformity as compared to a subciliary approach (4.5% vs. 6.9%), which is in accordance with the previously reported series These high complication rates might be a result of excessive traction for difficult reduction of displaced ZMC fractures, and a separate analysis between ZMC fractures and pure orbital floor/medial orbital wall fractures was undertaken. If all the complications were included, 18 complications (six cases of entropion, one lateral canthal malposition, one ectropion, two lacrimal canaliculus transection, three symblepharon, one trichiasis, and four granulation) were noted in 117 ZMC fractures (15.4%), as compared to two complications (one each of trichiasis and granulation) in 47 pure orbital floor/medial orbital wall fractures (4.3%). Although statistical significance was not achieved ( The greatest advantage of using an extended transconjunctival approach is wide exposure of the inferior orbital rim, orbital floor, lateral orbital wall, and the frontozygomatic suture in an unobstructed operative field without any skin incisions. It can be combined with a transcaruncular approach to further extend the operative field to include the medial orbital wall and frontomaxillary suture for fixation of a single-segment type I NOE fracture. None. None.