In this paper, a novel system for leaching of low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore is presented, in which ammonia–ammonium sulfate is chosen as leaching agent, meanwhile adds a small amount of sodium citrate to strengthen the complexation behavior. The thermodynamics is studied by using chemical equilibrium modeling to predict the zinc species distribution diagrams for the Zn (II)-NH3-Cit3− system. Through employing various analytical technologies, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), chemical analysis, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), compositions, bond structures and chemical states are obtained. Moreover, effect of sodium citrate is studied by X-rays photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis, and it can be established that addition of sodium citrate is favorable for zinc leaching by inhabiting the formation of low complexation compound Zn(NH3)i
                     2+ (i
                     =1, 2) and lowering the fraction of Zn(NH3)3
                     2+. The leaching rate can reach 96.91% with a cit3− concentration of 0.2M/L. Once above it, diffusion rate of zinc would decrease, which causes the dropping of zinc leaching.With the depletion of natural sphalerite and increasingly stringent environmental legislation, zinc oxide ore such as willemite (Zn Nowadays, hydrometallurgy in ammonia solutions has been considered as a prospective medium in the extraction industry of zinc for advantages of low vapor pressure, low cost, low toxicity, good complexation ability and easy regeneration ( The attempts of applying ammonia solutions in recovering zinc ore began in 1880 as ‘Schnabel Process’ ( In this investigation, we attempt to leach low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore in ammonia–ammonium sulfate solution, and add sodium citrate ligand to improve the leaching rate. Meanwhile, by analyzing the changes of phase compositions, functional groups and chemical states, optimum level of sodium citrate is determined and its detail function mechanism is discussed. The low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore used in this study was obtained from Lanping County of China. Its main chemical compositions and mineralogical analysis are presented in XRD pattern of low-grade zinc oxide ore is shown in The FT-IR spectrum of low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore is shown in XPS survey spectrum of low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore is shown in One important feature to be noted in X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is utilized to characterize the composition phases. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analysis is used to identify the functional group and track the course of chemical reactions. The FT-IR spectra are acquired on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Nicolet IS 10 FT-IR spectrometer with a DTGS detector, a KBr beam splitter spread with Ge, an interferometer driven by plane mirrors electromagnetic force and longer lifetime middle/far infrared source. Its ASTM linearity is lower than 0.1 Leaching experiments are carried out in a CJJ-93/HJ-65 six-connected magnetic stirrers. In each case, a sample of 10 In this leaching system, there may exist the following zinc chelation phases: Zn(NH  It can be referred from the XRD patterns of leaching slags ( The FT-IR spectra of leaching slags are shown in From  A novel technique for leaching of low-grade and multiphase zinc oxide ore is discussed in this paper. The thermodynamics is studied using chemical equilibrium modeling to predict the zinc species distribution diagrams for the Zn(II)-NH This work was supported by