Geological information can play a key role in addressing challenges of sustainable development such as land degradation and groundwater protection, and contribute to improved decision-making processes. In this paper we: (a) provide a review of previous research on the economic value of geological information and other earth observations as well as related products, services and infrastructure; and (b) identify important lessons from this work as well as methodological challenges that require increased attention in future research. The review of prior research shows significant economic benefits attached to the generation of this type of public information. The value of geological information has typically been measured in terms of avoided costs. Still, it is difficult to compare results across studies since they differ in scope and make alternative assumptions concerning which sectors to cover. Furthermore, previous research is not uniform in their treatment of potential (rather than only existing) users, and employ varying conceptions of avoided costs. The paper concludes that future research should devote more attention to the public and experience good characteristics of this type of information, thus highlighting the preconditions for information adoption as well as addressing the role of potential users. A number of specific methodological challenges also deserve further scrutiny in future research, such as the use of discount rates and benefit-transfer approaches. We also provide some thoughts on how to proceed with such research.Earth observations (e.g., of a geological, meteorological or topological nature) may have profound impacts on our everyday lives, but most people are generally not well informed about the economic values attached to this type of information. In this review paper we address the ways in which such values can be comprehended and measured, report results from previous studies, and identify important issues and challenges for future research. Natural processes and human activities often cause stress to the environmental system׳s capacity. Having reliable information about such impacts is therefore a critical input into a large number of decision-making processes involving potentially significant environmental impacts ( In brief, geological information could be – and is often – useful for decision-making in a wide range of societal activities, such as: (a) the development, sustainable use and protection of groundwater; (b) environmental impact assessments; (c) the exploration and development of minerals and fuels; (d) understanding and managing the causes of geologic hazards; (e) the construction of infrastructure projects; (f) city planning including zoning and landscaping; and (g) regional planning such as siting and permitting industrial facilities ( A noteworthy example of a product containing geological information is the geological map. It describes the physical world by linking spatially based information, geological materials and geologic structures. Geological maps also add time and space interpretations on how these materials and structures interact. Improved geological information in terms of novelty and resolution, e.g., communicated through a geological map, may generate several benefits. It could influence mineral exploration and investment by reducing the risks at the early stages of the exploration process ( The costs of providing geological information are connected to the collection of the information and subsequently to the compilation, database construction, publication and distribution. The bulk of the costs are borne up front, in part since the gathering of new geological information such as maps is labor intensive, and requires field work and a highly skilled staff. The distribution costs are instead relatively low, and the costs of serving an additional customer are therefore also low. Moreover, the costs of providing geological information can be accessed via existing market prices, such as wages for skilled workers ( However, whereas the costs of providing geological information are fairly straightforward to assess, this is typically not true for the economic benefits of such provision. First, the costs occur in the present while the benefits are allocated over time, thus motivating the use of appropriate social discount rates. Second, several users can appropriate the benefits of the information at the same time (i.e., non-rivalry in consumption), and the information is in part non-exclusive in use. Due to these public good characteristics geological information is typically not effectively priced in existing economic markets. Since public goods typically are underprovided in the free market, this sets the stage for the government׳s interest in the provision of geological information. Geological information is mainly collected and analyzed by national government-funded geological survey agencies. In addition to this, critique has been expressed concerning the amount of government funding towards the generation of geological information and the existing distribution trends of such information. A comprehensive assessment of the value of geological information and other earth observations is not only important for judging the viability of investments in information collection and provision ( The potential societal and environmental importance of geological information motivates a closer scrutiny of how the associated economic values have been defined and assessed in previous work. Such a review of existing research in terms of theoretical foundations, and methodological and empirical scope is important for identifying gaps in the academic literature as well as unresolved challenges that ought to be addressed in future research. The objectives of this paper are to: (a) provide a review of previous empirical research on the economic value of geological information (including any related products, services and infrastructure); and (b) identify important lessons from this work as well as issues and challenges that deserve increased attention in future research. The paper focuses on previous research that has assessed the economic values of either geological information or other earth observations. The literature on earth observations is broad and fragmented into different fields, including geological, meteorological and topological research. The inclusion in this paper of studies assessing also non-geological information based on other types of earth observations is motivated by the similarities in the qualities – and economic characteristics – of such information. The methodological challenges involved in the valuation of information are also very similar across these research fields. Previous work ranges from analyzing the value to many users of a marginal increase in the overall quality of the information to assessing the economic value of information in the context of specific decision-making situations (e.g., monitoring water quality with the help of satellite information or for mineral exploration decisions). Moreover, a number of studies explicitly address the value of spatial data infrastructure, including technological standards or policies that enable the use of, for instance, geological information in society. This latter work therefore provides a more complex picture of any associated information products and services. In our search for previous research on the value of geological information, we employed a combination of different keywords. Specifically, we carried out searches on combinations of terms such as “societal value” or “economic value” on the one hand, and “geological information”, “earth observations”, “geodata” or “spatial data infrastructure” on the other in key bibliographic databases such as Web of Science, Science Direct, Wiley Online Library and Google Scholar. In order to find recently published literature, we forward-followed quotations on the articles identified by this keyword search. In addition, since the economics literature on assessing the economic value of geological information is relatively narrow a keyword search was also conducted on a wide range of national geological surveys in order to identify additional relevant work on the topic. In total about 25 reports and 11 peer-reviewed articles involving the economic assessment of geological information and/or closely related earth observations have been reviewed. Most of the reports are – even if not all are peer-reviewed in line with academic standards – well described (and cited) in the scientific literature. The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss geological information as an economic good, as well as the theoretical foundations for valuing such information. Most empirical work broadly defines this value in terms of the expected cost savings from having access to such information compared to not having access to it. The interest in the economic value of earth observation information has increased over the last decade, and at a number of recent workshops the value-generating processes have been discussed. Geological information, such as geological maps, is a non-rival good as it can be reused and accessed by several users at the same time, without any congestion costs ( Nevertheless, scholars tend to agree that there are extensive positive economic externalities associated with the production of geological maps (e.g., Geological information is also a knowledge-creating good (e.g., In this paper we argue that since the economic benefits of geological information only emerge along with its use, these benefits possess some important characteristics associated with so-called experience goods ( A straightforward approach to elicit the economic value of geological information is to ask directly for the user׳s maximum willingness-to-pay ( At a general level geological information creates value by improving different types of decision-making processes. The assessment of these values requires an understanding of how more or improved information could lead to superior decision-making while at the same time incorporating the individual objectives of the decision-maker. The decision-makers may in turn range from private companies such as mineral exploration firms ( In both cases the benefit assessment may be analyzed by comparing the economic impacts of decisions that would be made using the new information relative to decisions based on the already existing information. In monetary terms the value of information can therefore be expressed by identifying the losses averted from having access to the information and/or as a reduction in uncertainty. In the case of geological information the potential value may come from: (a) direct savings in terms of avoided costs from contaminations or erosion; (b) reduced potential for liability; (c) lower costs for groundwater protection; (d) safer infrastructure; and (e) improved mineral exploration efficiency ( From a theoretical view the benefits of geological information can therefore be evaluated through a comparison between different cost minimization problems. In the following we outline the theoretical framework provided by The expected cost of preparing a project report of a given quality is denoted In Bhagwat׳s and Ipe׳s framework the economic agents׳ objective is to choose the level of effort By employing this simple theoretical framework we can compare the expected costs under two different situations, one with baseline information and one in which new or improved geological information is available. In the first of these situations there is only limited prior information about the geological conditions, here indicated by the subscript In the alternative situation new or improved geological information is available, and this increases the credibility of the project report. We use the subscript Eqs.  Although the above approach has been frequently used in previous empirical research, it poses a number of practical and conceptual difficulties. Clearly, collecting the needed data is far from straighforward ( Our review of previous research studies on the economic value of geological information (including other types of earth observations) is summarized in Some previous studies on the economic importance of geological information are government and consultancy reports addressing not so much the societal value of such information, but rather the turnover (i.e., market size) of related products and services (e.g., geological maps), and/or the costs of providing these products. Thus, while it is useful to provide a brief review of such work it should be noted that these studies do generally not build on an appropriate theoretical notion of economic value. Another important feature of this category of studies is that they primarily focus on aggregate – rather than marginal – values. In spite of this, though, some of these studies offer a decent description of the size of the markets related to geological information. Examples of this type of work include Input-based approaches provide only limited and arguably biased assessments of the real economic value of geological information or other earth based observations. Such studies assume that geological information is efficiently priced in the market place, and they therefore ignore important public good characteristics, which may include important spillover effects. Hence, the aggregate market value of a product, such as geological maps, will provide an underestimation of the total benefits by ignoring the size of the total consumer surplus. Overall these studies fail in addressing the full economic value of geological information due to the significant difficulties associated with defining and valuing the benefits of activities that generate public information. Achieving this purpose directly through the value of marketable goods and services represents a biased approach. These difficulties are also connected to the fact that geological information are usually not the final products or services but rather inputs into other planning processes ( Most empirical work assessing the economic benefits of geological information focuses on the avoided costs and improved decision-making (e.g., in terms of higher productivity or reduced uncertainty) of having access to information compared to the cases where such information is not available. One of the first studies with this scope was Another important U.S. study is The While the above studies address a wide variety of geological map users, another set of studies focus on the value of geological information in specific empirical contexts (e.g.,  Both The research on the economic value of geological information is similar to work on other types of earth observations (e.g., meteorological and topological information). Much of this latter work focuses specifically on the value of public investments in spatial data infrastructure (SDI) supplying such information. Since the methodological challenges in terms of benefit assessment are very similar to the work addressing geological information, it is useful to provide a brief review also of this work. The research on this topic also employs a multitude of methods, and the literature includes work using aggregate economic indicators (e.g., An early study by A similar approach based on avoided costs is adopted in  Geological information can play a key role in addressing the challenges of sustainable development, such as land degradation and groundwater protection, and it can in this way contribute to improved decision-making processes. For this reason, it is important to assess whether improved information should be provided. We have noted that some studies, although labeled as benefit assessments, merely present indicators of the importance of those sectors using geological information and/or reproduce sales figures. These studies do thus not provide explicit information about the economic values attached to the information. The more theoretically consistent studies are either based on user surveys investigating the self-reported avoided costs of having access to improved information or on revealed preference approaches addressing how the decision-making process has improved (e.g., become more efficient in terms of higher productivity in mineral exploration efforts). The empirical results from previous research indicate that overall significant economic benefits can be attached to the use of publicly available geological information. Nevertheless, our understanding of how to assess the benefits of investing in geological information is still limited. The academic research is scarce and there exist a need for comparisons of methods. In the remainder of this section we identify a number of important issues for future research and initiate a discussion of how these issues can – and should be – addressed. One methodological challenge connected to the value assessment of geological information is that the information generates different benefits (and costs) depending on the context in which it is used. The literature ranges from studying specific decision-making processes (e.g., The benefit transfer method is the adaptation of existing information to new contexts, e.g., estimating economic values of ecosystem services by transferring available information from studies already completed in another location. While the economic values of geological information typically are highly context-specific, it will remain too complicated to conduct explicit benefit assessments for each and every situation. In such situations we could instead draw on previous experiences in a systematic and transparent manner. The environmental economics literature has devoted a lot of attention to benefit-transfer and important lessons can be drawn from this work also in the case of valuing information. For instance, the literature expresses site correspondence as a necessary condition for benefit transfer ( The access to primary studies data on geological information is today very limited, hence we suggest that a database with similar structure as, for instance, the so-called Environmental Value Reference Inventory (EVRI) should be considered. EVRI includes information about value assessments from a wide range of environmental goods. For each study there is information concerning references, area studied, method(s), variables included and a summary of the study. Increased access to prior collected data could also enable meta-analysis, which summarizes the results of existing studies by estimating statistical relationships between the values reported. This would capture the heterogeneity within and across studies and help identify the criteria needed form future benefit transfer studies. Our review shows that survey-based methods (based on avoided costs assessments) are the most commonly used, but they are also complemented by other types of value-elicitation methods (e.g., simulation models, revealed preference approaches etc.). Some scholars argue that as of yet there has not been a convergence in terms of the reference methodology (e.g., Within the environmental economics field there is also growing literature on how one can combine methods to improve valuation models. For example Another methodological issue that is important to address in future research is to what extent it is meaningful to assign values to geological information as such, thus separating it from the services delivering the information. Arguably, the value is derived from the use of the information (i.e., service or decision-process) rather than from a specific data set. We argue that the quasi-public good qualities (e.g. non-rival but with licensing restrictions) of geological information should therefore be further examined by discussing the interoperability of this information with other statistical information sources. Our review indicates that more attention has been devoted to this question in the empirical context of other types of earth observations, and less so with respect to geological information. Many studies acknowledge that while the investments in geological information are made upfront the benefits are typically generated over a certain time period, and therefore need to be discounted into a present value. The choice of an appropriate discount rate is an important issue in all cost-benefit analyses of public projects, and the case of geological information is no exception. Nevertheless, we do find significant differences in the assumptions made on the discount rate. These assumptions are within the 0–10 percent range. However, both of these end points are hard to motivate. A ten percent discount rate may be appropriate for private companies with relatively high rate-of-return requirements (e.g., due to higher risk-taking), but appears less motivated in the case of public investments in geological information. A zero discount rate also appears misleading for many reasons. First, it suggests that the social rate-of-return on alternative public investments – such as health care or education – is very low (zero), which is unlikely to be the case. In addition, from a consumption perspective the logical implication of zero discounting is the impoverishment of the current generation in favor of all future generations (e.g., Progressing from the specific methodological issues of benefit assessments, it should also be noted that these benefit assessments are conducted both This carries at least two important implications for future research. First, while the estimated benefit-cost ratios could be biased  Moreover, one could consider the adoption of new information as a process similar to those explained in the research literature on innovation. The rate of adopting information could then be perceived influenced by compatibility with prior conditions (e.g., previous practices and norms) and the complexity connected to adopting new information (e.g. new software or standards). This paper has provided a review of empirical research on the economic value of geological information. The results from previous research indicate that significant economic benefits are attached to the use of geological information. Still, the methodological approaches differ and there is a need to understand more about the strengths and weakness of each of these. Specific attention should also be devoted to the use of discount rates, benefit-transfer approaches, and the relationship between geological information and the products that provide such information. This paper argues that geological information have clear experience good qualities, which have been disregarded in the prior literature, but should have several implications for the societal value. First economic values assessed, Financial support from the