Spodumene is the most important lithium containing hard rock mineral. In order to extract lithium from spodumene concentrate by leaching, the crystal structure of spodumene must be converted from the natural monoclinic α-form to the tetragonal β-form. The technical possibilities to generate the heat to the conversion process of spodumene concentrate via microwaves were studied. The heat treatment experiments were carried out with a domestic microwave furnace (700W) with silicon carbide susceptor and with the conventional resistance heated furnace as a reference. In the microwave furnace the phase transformation of spodumene began after 110s of heating and samples were converted almost completely to β-spodumene after 170s. Partial melting of gangue minerals was observed in samples after 170s of heating. Heating in microwave furnace for 170s corresponded with the heating of approximately 480–600s at temperature of 1100°C in the conventional furnace. In addition to α- and β-forms an intermediate phase, hexagonal γ-spodumene, was identified from samples heated with both furnaces. The conversion of spodumene samples was verified with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and with field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM).Lithium is the lightest metal and it has a high electrochemical reactivity. Because of its properties, lithium is a desired raw material of growing battery industry. Principally lithium is traded in the form of lithium carbonate or lithium hydroxide. Mainly due to the growth of the battery industry, the demand of lithium chemicals has increased worldwide in recent years. There are few commercially exploitable lithium minerals occurring in pegmatites. Spodumene (LiAlSi Spodumene is a single-chain silicate and belongs to pyroxene group. Pure spodumene has the stoichiometric chemical composition of 8.0 The most commonly lithium is processed to form of lithium carbonate. The production chain of lithium carbonate from spodumene ore comprises four main steps: mining, beneficiation, heat treatment and lithium extraction. Spodumene can be concentrated with flotation or heavy liquid separation that produce concentrates with spodumene content at least of 75 Microwave energy has been found to have potential for wide range of applications in mineral treatment and metal recovery processes such as heating, roasting and smelting ( Based on their ability to absorb microwaves materials can be classified as transparent materials, conductors or absorbers. The primary parameter that illustrates this ability is the dielectric loss factor. The aim of this study was to explore tentatively the technical possibilities to generate the heat to the conversion process of spodumene concentrate with microwaves. The objective was to examine the technical potential of microwaves for heat treatment of spodumene concentrate, not so much to evaluate the energy consumption of different heating methods. In the preliminary studies was observed the same fact which literature had revealed before, of spodumene being a transparent material and not heating up directly with microwaves at room temperature. Therefore the hybrid microwave heating with silicon carbide tube (SiC) susceptor was used in microwave experiments. Experiments with a conventional furnace were carried out as a reference. The phases of samples were identified and relations of spodumene polymorphs were determined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). Different particle sizes, heating times and temperatures were used in experiments. The results of different heating methods were compared. The material used in experiments of this study was pegmatitic spodumene ore from Ullava in Central Ostrobothnia (Finland) ( The microwave furnace used in this study was a normal domestic microwave oven. The microwave furnace consisted of a 2.45 The reference experiments were carried out in a conventional resistance heated furnace. The purpose was to determine the temperature and time in which spodumene sample is completely converted into β-spodumene and compare the results with the results gained from the microwave experiments. The furnace was heated up to the required temperature. A 2 The samples from both the microwave and conventional experiments were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) method (Siemens 5000) using a Cu tube as a radiation source. Samples were ground to fine powder with an agate mortar. Measurements were performed using diffraction angle range of 10–50° and scanning rate of 0.02°/s. The main phases were identified from obtained diffraction patterns by Diffrac SiC tube heated up very rapidly leading to rapid conversion of all the spodumene samples. The calculated relative fractions of spodumene polymorphs and temperatures of 2.0–4.0 The hexagonal β-quartz solid solution Li The X-ray diffraction patterns of the first experiments with conventional furnace are represented in Changes in the relative fractions of the three spodumene polymorphs as a function of microwave heating time is presented in The cylindrical SiC tube was chosen as a susceptor because of its good dielectric and refractory properties. Additionally, the SiC had been used as a susceptor in many hybrid microwave sintering studies where room-temperature-transparent materials were successfully heated ( As seen from Changes in the relative fractions of three spodumene polymorphs as a function of heating temperature and heating time are presented in According to X-ray patterns and Rietveld analysis 170 Tetragonal β-spodumene has been prepared from natural monoclinic α-spodumene in many 1-atm studies in which lithium was extracted from β-spodumene with different methods ( Monoclinic α-spodumene can be converted to hexagonal γ-spodumene via amorphization of the structure. It is widely known that while heating a glass with a spodumene composition the first crystallizing phase is γ-spodumene which in elevated temperatures transforms into β-spodumene. Preparing of γ-spodumene in this way is very common (  In this work γ-spodumene appeared as an intermediate phase in a phase transformation of α-spodumene into β-spodumene after 2 Spodumene is normally extracted by leaching process from tetragonal β-spodumene. The formation of γ-spodumene should be monitored in industrial applications. If pure β-spodumene without α- and γ-residuals is the desired outcome, the heating time of spodumene should be adequate. If the heating time is too short, residuals can exist in the conversion product and complicate the following leaching process. This could cause losses in the yield of lithium. The high temperature and long heating time favor the progression of phase transformation. On the other hand, the excessive heating will cause the partial melting and agglomeration of concentrate resulting in losses in the recovery of lithium. The partial melting of concentrate can begin at multiphase grain junctions already below the temperature of 1000 The SiC could be viable tube material for the indirect fired rotary kiln when converting spodumene concentrate. The relatively high conversion temperature of spodumene is above usable limits of ordinary metals such as carbon steel or stainless steel whereas SiC has a high mechanical strength and high thermal conductivity at high temperatures. The indirect fired rotary kiln with microwave heated SiC tube could be viable industrial application for the technique used in present study. The present study shows that phase transformation of spodumene from α- to β-form can be performed by hybrid microwave technique with SiC susceptor. Conversion of spodumene samples occurred very rapidly when concentrate was heated with SiC tube in the microwave furnace. Samples were converted almost completely to β-spodumene after 170 This research was a part of the Compact, Combined and Co-working Pretreatments for Mining Industry (CCCP) research project in Green Mining Programme. The Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES) and other companies which have been funding this work are acknowledged. Center of microscopy and nanotechnology (CMNT) is acknowledged for its analysis services. Mr. Tommi Kokkonen and Mr. Riku Mattila are thanked for their technical support.