As the principal repository for calcium in the body, the skeleton is tasked not only with the role of protecting our inner organs and being a scaffold for locomotion but also serves as a necessary source of calcium to maintain normal serum calcium levels during fasting or other times of inadequate supplies of dietary calcium, including compromised active calcium absorption in vitamin D deficiency. In the following, a review will be provided on health aspects of calcium and vitamin D supplementation and the implications for clinical practice and public health.As the principal repository for calcium in the body, the skeleton is tasked not only with the role of protecting our inner organs and being a scaffold for locomotion but also serves as a necessary source of calcium to maintain normal serum calcium levels during fasting or other times of inadequate supplies of dietary calcium, including compromised active calcium absorption in vitamin D deficiency. Because of the safety implications it is useful to briefly reconsider how calcium homeostasis is regulated in normal physiology. Keeping serum calcium concentrations within a narrow range is absolutely necessary for normal neuromuscular and cardiac function whereas the body is tolerant to relatively large decreases in bone mineral content, at least in the short term. Accordingly, the normal parathyroid׳calcium axis is finely tuned through the sigmoid calcium-PTH curve to respond to small decreases in serum calcium by large and rapid increases in PTH which will increase mobilization of calcium from the skeleton and increase renal reabsorption of calcium. From a practical point of view this means that skeletal calcium content is the junior partner in the relationship between bone and the extracellular fluid, so that the calcium need of the skeleton is sacrificed to maintain adequate serum levels in circumstances of inadequate supply. It is possible to override part of this regulation by treating patients with potent anti-resorptive drugs, in which case the skeletal stores of calcium cannot be mobilized by an increase in PTH and in such circumstances patients may develop hypocalcaemia if not calcium and vitamin D replete. As shall be briefly addressed below, incorporation of calcium and phosphate into osteoid is an active, vitamin D dependent process so increasing serum calcium will not in itself promote bone mineralization, let alone bone formation. The PTH axis is not so well tuned for dealing with increased serum calcium levels as PTH levels are fully suppressed at very modestly elevated serum calcium levels with no additional decrease possible. However, renal autoregulation responds to hypercalcemia with hypercalciuria and polyuria. The latter reduces the risk of nephrocalcinosis but comes with a risk of dehydration, which may ultimately worsen hypercalcemia. Apart from into the urine and into the skeleton, calcium can be deposited into plaques in atherosclerotic vessel walls or in extreme circumstances—such as renal failure with a high calcium phosphate product—into other soft tissues. It has become clear that vascular calcification, too, is not driven by passive diffusion but results from an active, highly regulated and incompletely understood process as reviewed in detail elsewhere ( As for vitamin D, 1,25-OH Osteomalacia denotes a delayed mineralization of newly formed bone tissue. This may have many causes but the most common one and the only one relevant to this article is vitamin D deficiency. By bone biopsy with tetracycline double labelling the diagnosis is simple and straightforward, with the delay in mineralization evident through increased thickness of the osteoid (above 12.5 Low calcium diets are unusual in Western Europe and the United States, except in persons with lactose intolerance, but such diets are prevalents in large parts of the world ( Interestingly, meaningful preservation of BMD in older persons after vitamin D treatment appear to be confined to those with 25OHD levels below 30 As a sole treatment, calcium and vitamin D given in combination appears to marginally reduce the risk of osteoporotic fractures in older persons (  Aside from actual vitamin D intoxication, which remains a rarity, the safety concerns—justified or not—associated with calcium and vitamin D supplements at representative doses of 10–20 It is important to be aware that vitamin D fortification is far from universal in the Western world and when in place it is generally there to prevent only severe rickets, not to achieve “normal” serum vitamin D levels of 50 or 75 We are fortunate that some large vitamin D trials with multiple health outcomes are in progress and should be reporting in the next years. Hence, first reports from the New Zealand VIDA study—in which 5100 healthy volunteers aged 50–84 There is ample evidence that very low vitamin D levels should be avoided as they translate to a higher risk of low BMD and fractures. Osteomalacia is imminently treatable and results in improvements in BMD that surpasses what can be achieved in osteoporosis. There is no consistent evidence that vitamin D supplementation given without calcium supplementation reduces the risk of osteoporotic fractures in the general population but some evidence that small reductions in fracture risk can be achieved in older people if supplemented by modest amounts of calcium and vitamin D, likely due to a large effect in a small number of people and no effect in the majority. Given the relatively low quality RCT evidence it is difficult to be dogmatic about the need for calcium and vitamin D supplements, at least in healthy people in the Western hemisphere with a varied diet. There seems to be a tendency for prescribers to use somewhat small calcium and vitamin D supplement amount as adjuncts to osteoporosis medications compared with what was used in the pivotal RCTs; this pragmatic approach is not unreasonable though it is nominally a deviation from the principles of evidence based medicine. If we have learned one thing from the past two decades of vitamin D and calcium research then it is that one size does not fit all and that supplements should be given according to individual requirements. 