The objective of this study is to combine two proven technologies, namely galvanic and microbial assisted leaching of chalcopyrite in a novel way. Using a commercial chalcopyrite-rich flotation concentrate and pure natural pyrite samples from an Iranian copper mining complex as well as mixed cultures of moderately thermophilic microorganisms, continuous electrochemical bioleaching tests were performed in stirred bioreactors at 50 °C as a first step towards a commercial application of microbially assisted galvanic leaching of chalcopyrite.
                  From the results of this study, the importance of oxidation reduction potential (ORP) on the catalytic interaction between chalcopyrite and pyrite could be pointed out as a main parameter for successful bioprocessing of chalcopyrite concentrates. Optimization of the particle size of feed (D80) and adjusting the ORP in the range between 400 and 500 mV are important criteria, governing the electrochemical bioleaching rate of chalcopyrite concentrates. It is believed that the main reason for increased copper recovery could be the control of chalcopyrite passivation resulting from improved galvanic interaction between chalcopyrite and pyrite in the selected ORP range and the bacterial assisted oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+. Under optimum conditions of this study (T = 50 ± 2 °C, pH = 1.1 ± 0.2, ORP = 400–500 mV, solid load = 10%, stirring rate = 300 rpm) the copper extraction from chalcopyrite flotation concentrate during continuous electrochemical bioleaching operations in stirred bioreactors was >95%, which should be high enough to justify the process economically.Copper is known as the third most worldwide used metal in terms of tonnage. It is usually present in the earth's crust as sulfide minerals mostly as chalcopyrite, which is usually beneficiated by flotation method to achieve a concentrate ( Hydrometallurgical processes such as pressure oxidation, bioleaching and chloride leaching have been considered as alternatives for extraction of copper from chalcopyrite flotation concentrates. Galvanically-assisted atmospheric leaching of copper concentrates is one of the promising technologies for leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate. This technology is based on the anodic dissolution of chalcopyrite (oxidation of sulfur) and cathodic reduction of Fe During the past 30 years operations using microorganisms for metal recovery have progressed from dump and heap bioleaching of low grade ores to controlled oxidation and bioleaching in designed bioheaps for secondary copper sulfide ores and refractory gold ores and in stirred bioreactors for recovery of cobalt and also refractory gold ( During microbial assisted electrochemical leaching of copper sulfide minerals (chalcopyrite), iron-oxidizing microorganisms catalytically generate the necessary leaching agents (Fe Representative chalcopyrite-rich flotation concentrate samples for this study were obtained from the main Iranian copper processing complexes, Sarchechmeh, Kerman. The samples were dried and blended proportionally by weight to produce the final sample. The final sample was milled to the target D A mixed culture of moderately thermophilic iron- and sulfur oxidizing bacteria mainly containing The mineral and chemical composition of the chalcopyrite concentrate, hand selected pyrite samples and leach residues were determined by phase analysis and chemical element analysis techniques, respectively. The mineral species were analyzed using Leica phase contact microscope (British Standard 3406-part4) and a D/max-3B X-ray powder diffractometer through Cu K α radiation (XRD). Scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDS) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) was used to determine the chemical composition of solids. The copper and iron concentrations in pregnant leach solutions (PLS) were measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy in the liquid fraction from centrifuged pulp samples. The leaching experiments were performed in a continuously operated system which consisted of three stirred tank reactors (CSTR). The feed circuit consisted of an agitated slurry feed/pump tank to which inoculum could be added together with milled samples to produce the target solid density of 10 w/w %. The slurry feed was then pumped from tank to tank using a peristaltic pump. To prevent the undesirable change of process parameters, all tanks were equipped with external heating and monitoring instrumentation (pH, T, ORP and aeration system). Three consecutive reactors had the following volumes and residence times: Reactor 1: 5 L, 42 h; reactor 2: 5 L, 42 h; and reactor 3: 10 L, 84 h. The reactor runs comprised an average total particles leaching time (residence time) of about 168 h. The leaching tests relied on former studies ( In the first phase of this study ( In the second part of these tests ( To investigate the effect of grinding on copper and iron recover, tests no 13–18 were added to the experimental program. The results of these runs were summarized and presented in Pyrite is usually one of the most abundant mineral phases in copper concentrate, especially in the concentrates obtain from bulk flotation of porphyry deposits. A number of studies have reported the catalytic effect of pyrite on the chemical and electrochemical bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates ( Novel electrochemical bioleaching techniques have been recently introduced for recovering copper from flotation concentrates. Controlled redox potential electrochemical bioleaching experiments showed that this type of dissolution mechanism could be beneficial in the presence of galvanic interaction between sulfide minerals. Prevention of chalcopyrite passivation resulting from improved microbially assisted galvanic interaction between sulfide minerals, especially chalcopyrite and pyrite, in the optimum ORP range and the particle size of feed are the important parameters. It is believed that microbially assisted electrochemical leaching in an ORP range between 400 and 500 mV has a high potential for selective dissolution of copper from pyritic flotation concentrates. The required amount of pyrite for enhancing the galvanic interaction between pyrite and chalcopyrite is dependent on process conditions. Under the condition of microbially assisted electrochemical leaching (this study), a maximum Py: Cp ratio of about 1 was sufficient to achieve a copper recovery of >95%. This process is selective for copper sulfide minerals over pyrite. The formation of elemental sulfur can be controlled by partial oxidation with sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. Therefore, this process can be considered as a potential alternative for extraction of copper from high grade chalcopyrite concentrates. However, the economic aspects of this technology need to be investigated and compared with other well-established commercial hydrometallurgical methods. The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical supports of the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR), Hannover, Germany as well as financial supports of