As a promising rapid manufacturing technology, incremental sheet forming (ISF) has been tentatively applied in forming prototype parts in many industries, such as aerospace, automobile etc. One of the problems facing scientists and engineers is that geometric accuracies of the parts formed by typical open-loop ISF processes cannot meet dimensional requirements in industries. To address this problem, linear model predictive control (MPC) approaches have been developed that optimize the ISF tool paths to reduce geometric errors. However, in the ISF process, the geometric response of the formed part relative to the tool perturbation is highly non-linear. Due to model mismatch, existing linear MPC path control approaches have been successfully applied to simple geometries only. In contrast, this paper proposes a generic and systematic tool path control approach for forming parts with varying wall angles which have more complex geometric features. In particular, a Switched MPC framework based on linearizing the non-linear ISF geometry response with linear parameter-varying (LPV) state-space models is developed. Then, optimized tool paths to compensate geometric errors were determined by solving convex optimization problems. Experiments were conducted to validate the performance of the developed control approach. The results show that the developed Switched MPC was able to reduce the maximum geometric error by 72 %, 49 % and 80 % in the wall, conjunction and base zones of the formed “funnel”-shaped part respectively. Compared to the Conventional MPC, the Switched MPC improved the maximum geometric error in the wall zone by 0.21 mm. The Switched MPC control algorithm is then shown to be robust on two other complex shapes with varying wall angles.In industry, the demand of rapid prototyping has been booming in recent years [ The path followed by the moving tool in the ISF process determines the part geometry. To increase the adoption of ISF technology in industry, a variety of approaches to adjust the ISF tool path have been attempted to reduce the geometric errors of the formed parts. Some researchers have developed multiple improved tool path planning methods to replace the traditional CAM generated z-level tool path, such as a spiral [ To avoid repeated forming processes, other researchers proposed several on-line tool path control approaches, in which the measurements of the partially formed parts were used as the feedback and the future tool path was optimized at each intermediate step to compensate for the geometric errors that had occurred in the past and future steps until the part was fully formed. Allwood et al. [ In ISF processes, the response of the geometry of the formed part relative to the tool perturbation is highly non-linear [ The industrial parts likely have very complex geometric features, including varying-angled side walls, which drives the demand for more effective and generic ISF tool path controllers. Therefore, in this work, a Switched MPC approach was proposed, aiming at improving the geometric accuracy of the finished part which has side walls with varying wall angles. In the Switched MPC control framework, the ISF process was regarded as linear parameter-varying (LPV) systems in discrete-time, i.e. the parameters in the system model vary at different sampling steps. In this way, the non-linear ISF process was split into a series of linear sub-processes, and the balance of the controller performance and the computational cost could be achieved. In the following context, a linear parameter-varying geometry predictive model will be proposed, and a Switched MPC control approach will be developed based on the proposed model and a quadratic optimizer. The performance and robustness of the developed control approach will be validated by experiments. In this section, preliminary analyses of the control problem will be conducted first, including identification of the control variables and parameterization of the geometry. Then, the geometry predictive model will be developed, and the switched model predictive path control framework will be established. In addition, the procedures of the experimental validation of the developed controller will be described. In an ISF process, a tool tracks a series of points in three-dimensional space, which are referred to as tool path points in the following context. The path control problem becomes the determination of the positions of each tool path point. The tool path is divided into a certain number of horizontal tool path contours which are parallel to each other, as shown in The geometric error of the formed part is decomposed and parameterized in vertical and horizontal directions, and the details are explained in Section For a formed or partially formed part, the geometric error is the dimensional deviation between the achieved and the target geometries, which can be parameterized by the distances of all the points on the (partially) formed part to their nearest neighboring points on the target part. The two control variables, step-depth The (partially) formed part, geometry can be represented by an infinite number of points, but the computational cost will be too high. Due to limited computational resources, several points on the part are selected as the geometry representation points to represent the entire part, and the positions of these points are used to parameterize the geometry. To this end, the part is sampled in the vertical direction at several typical positions along its edge. For example, the part with a geometric feature of a circular edge is sampled at eight cross sections A–F, as demonstrated in The superscript The formed and the target parts are mapped to the same grids in a Cartesian coordinate system. Since the vertical geometric error mainly occurs in the flat surface area, the grid points surrounded by the tool path contour The superscript At each step, the horizontal and the vertical geometric responses of the formed part relative to the step-over and the step-depth are linearized, and can be respectively expressed by the state-space model as, The prediction horizon is initially constant but will shrink when the remaining forming step is smaller than the prediction horizon, since the number of forming steps is limited in an ISF process. The predictive model outputs over the prediction horizon In any step of the ISF process, the states of all the geometry representation points can be directly measured, thus For any element  Let the horizontal response be, The developed switched model predictive control framework contains a horizontal module and a vertical module coupled in a sequential manner. The geometries of the partially formed parts in the intermediate steps were measured as clouds of points and the geometric errors of the geometry representation points were used as feedback to the controller. The horizontal module runs in each cross section to optimize the step-over values The aim of the controller is driving the geometries of the (partially) formed parts in future steps to their corresponding target geometries, thus a cost function can be formulated, In Eqs. The performance of the developed Switched MPC was determined experimentally. The experimental settings that are shared in all the tests are introduced first in Section Single-point ISF experiments were performed on an Amino computer-numerical-control (CNC) machine at The University of Queensland. All the used specimens were aluminum 7075 with sizes of 290*290 mm and thicknesses of 1.6 mm. A tool with a round end was used in the tests, and its radius was 20 mm. A backing plate was placed under the specimens to avoid unwanted bending in the surrounding area. The upper surface of the specimen was covered with lubrication oil, aimed at reducing the friction between the specimen and the end of the tool. The nominal tool paths were initially generated by Siemens NX and further processed by an in-house program. The MPC controller was implemented after each step. This process includes:     The development platform of the controllers was Python 3.6, and the package of A “funnel”-shaped part which has varying wall angles was chosen as the target part in the benchmark test. As varying step-depth z-level tool path is more suitable for forming parts with varying wall angles [ The “funnel”-shaped parts were formed in two closed-loop ISF processes controlled by the developed Switched MPC and the Conventional MPC respectively, as well as an open-loop process with controller disabled for comparison. In the Switched MPC controller, the parameters The specimen is initially flat. Before the process “stabilizes” and the geometric response become localized to the end of the tool, global deformations are evident and the geometry of the side wall of the part is not formed to the full extent [ To quantitively assess the accuracy of the formed part, the test part was viewed in four zones, i.e. edge (bending), wall, conjunction and base, as illustrated in To further ensure the performance and generality of the developed Switched MPC control approach, additional tests were conducted in which another two parts with varying-angled walls, i.e. a “two-sectional truncated cone”-shaped part and a “bowl”-shaped part, were formed. Nominal tool paths with constant step-depths and varying step-depths were respectively generated for the two target parts, as illustrated in The geometries of the formed parts in the benchmark test and the additional test will be graphically presented in both sectional and global views. Statistical analyses of the achieved geometric accuracies in the experiments will be conducted. The performance and the generality of the developed controller will be discussed. In this benchmark test, the “funnel”-shaped part which had varying wall angles was formed by closed-loop processes controlled by the Switched MPC controller and the Conventional MPC controller and an open-loop process with the controller disabled, respectively. In the closed-loop process, the step-depth and step-over trajectories were optimized by the controller. The deviations of the optimized step-depths and step-overs from their corresponding nominal values of all the forming steps in the entire process were shown in   As the vertical modules of the Conventional MPC and the Switched MPC controllers were identical, similar performances were observed in the base zone. In the horizontal modules, the model parameters were constant in the Conventional MPC, while varying with the step index In addition, a closed-loop process controlled by the Switched MPC controller with the parameter Thickness changes were not measured during the processes, since thickness was out of the scope of this work. However, the previous work [ In the additional tests, another two parts with varying wall angles, i.e. a “two-section cone”-shaped part and a “bowl”-shaped part, were formed by open-loop ISF processes and Switched MPC controlled closed-loop ISF processes. Again, the parts were divided into different zones following the standard illustrated in For the “bowl”-shaped part, the maximum errors of the formed parts in the open-loop and closed-loop processes were 1.67 ± 0.04 and 0.68 ± 0.04 mm respectively in the wall zone; 1.71 ± 0.04 and 1.04 ± 0.04 mm respectively in the conjunction zone; 2.09 ± 0.04 and 0.42 ± 0.04 mm respectively in the base zone. The maximum geometric errors were reduced by 59 %, 39 % and 80 % respectively in the above zones. In general, the geometric accuracy was greatly improved over the entire part. However, it can be noticed that the geometric error in the conjunction zone of the part formed by the closed-loop process was relatively larger than that of the other zones and was not as low as those achieved in the “funnel”-shaped and the “two-sectional cone”-shaped parts. This is related to the special geometric feature of the “bowl”-shaped part. For the “funnel”-shaped and the “two-sectional cone”-shaped parts, the target geometries of their walls “bend” towards the inside. However, for the “bowl”-shaped part, the target geometry of the wall “bend” towards the outside. Because of this geometric feature, in the later period of the ISF process, the absolute values of the tool step-depths are smaller than those of the step-overs. The metal in the flat surface area was more likely to be extruded into the inside, leading to the occurrence of pillow effects [ The additional tests proved that the developed Switched MPC approach can be applied in various parts and significantly improve the geometric accuracies of the formed parts. The performance and the generality of the developed approach were further confirmed. In this work, a switched model predictive path control approach for incremental sheet forming was proposed, aiming at improving the geometric accuracy of forming the parts with varying wall angles. The developed switching method is shown to provide effectiveness in handling changing wall angles while maintaining low computational cost of a linear MPC. A “funnel”-shaped part was formed as a benchmark by an open-loop process with the controller disabled and two closed-loop processes controlled by the Conventional MPC and the Switched MPC approaches respectively. In the tests, the Conventional MPC and the Switched MPC reduced the maximum geometric errors by 57 % and 72 % respectively in the wall zone, by 44 % and 49 % respectively in the conjunction zone, and by 80 % and 80 % respectively in the base zone. Compared to the Conventional MPC, the Switched MPC improved the maximum geometric error in the wall zone by 0.21 mm. The results indicated that the Switched MPC had a better performance than the Conventional MPC, as the parameter-varying horizontal geometry predictive model can better capture the non-linearity of the geometric responses in the ISF process than the parameter-invariant model. The optimization of the future tool path trajectory at each sampling step cost approximately 1 s only. To further confirm the performance and generality of the developed Switched MPC controller, two additional tests were performed, in which a “two-section cone”-shaped part and a “bowl”-shaped part were formed. In forming the “two-sectional truncated cone”-shaped part, the controller reduced the maximum geometric errors in the wall, conjunction and base zones by 73 %, 44 % and 84 % respectively. In forming the “bowl”-shaped part, the controller reduced the maximum geometric errors in the wall, conjunction and base zones by 59 %, 39 % and 80 % respectively. The additional test results proved that the developed control approach applied to various parts. In the three case studies, the walls of the target parts had various geometrical features, i.e. arc towards inside, arc towards outside, and two-sectional straight line. However, the target parts shared the same geometrical feature of the horizonal contours, i.e. circle. In future works, tests on parts with various geometrical features on both the walls and the horizontal contours will be performed. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge  See A controller test was performed by forming the benchmark part using the nominal tool path to the middle (step 11) and running the vertical module of the controller by predicting 6 steps ahead. The results show that based on the implemented predictive model, the vertical module was able to minimize the vertical geometric error in the flat surface area within 2 steps, as shown in