An industrial-scale biotrickling filter for the removal of high concentrations of H2S is described in this work. The system has been operating at H2S inlet concentrations between 1000 and 3000ppmv at acidic conditions. A decrease of pH from 2.6 to 1.8 did not affect the biological activity inside the biofilter while reducing the water make-up consumption up to 75%. The current oxygen supply system, based on direct injection of air to the liquid phase, has demonstrated to be inefficient for a long-term operation leading to elemental sulfur accumulation in the packing material (i.e. promoting clogging episodes). The present study demonstrates it is possible to partially remove (40.3%) the deposited elemental sulfur by bio-oxidation when biogas is not fed. In normal operation conditions, the implementation of an aeration system based on jet-venturi devices has shown quite promising results in terms of oxygen transfer efficiency and robustness. Such improvement of oxygen transfer was translated in a better conversion of H2S to sulfate, which increased around 17%, prolonging the lifespan operation at low-pressure drop.The use of renewable and alternative energy sources is an effort to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. In this sense, the biogas produced in the anaerobic digestion in both municipal solid wastes (MSW) and wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) is a prominent, renewable energy source. Burning biogas in a combined heat and power (CHP) plant is an interesting option to reduce the emissions and the operational cost of a WWTP. However, prior to biogas burning it is necessary to remove the hydrogen sulfide (H Biological removal of H Depending on the oxygen availability for the microorganisms in the bioreactor, the final product of the oxidation can be either sulfate (high O Several studies can be found in the literature about the optimization of several parameters in biological-based systems for H Another equivalent strategy for H At industrial scale, oxygen (or air) is often supplied directly to the H Recent studies on oxygen transfer improvement have shown the suitability of venturi-based devices for intensive gas–liquid mass transport ( The BTF is located in the Manresa-Sant Joan de Vilatorrada (Barcelona, Spain) WWTP and has been intermittently operating since 2007. The design of the BTF was based on previous studies performed in a lab-scale pilot plant ( The identity of the oxidizing bacteria responsible of the hydrogen sulfide degradation in the BTF was not studied. Since the studied system is a full scale plant, it is quite difficult to justify a shutdown procedure just for biomass sampling purpose. Some studies in the literature working at similar conditions as those tested in this study (e.g. The BTF treated biogas flowrates between 1000 and 3000 During the period 2007–2010 the BTF was operated at a biogas pressure of 0.1–0.5 pH, percent volume of methane and pressure inside the BTF are controlled automatically for optimal BTF operation. The pH set-point was set at 1.8, being this value adjusted by means of the addition of make-up water (effluent from the WWTP containing average values of 5 The percent volume of methane is an important safety variable in the system, since methane is explosive in the range from 5 to 15 The pressure in the system was automatically controlled with a pressure regulating valve. However, some operating problems such as clogging of the bed, pressure changes upstream and downstream of the BTF or low biogas production can affect the pressure inside the BTF. For this reason it was necessary to control the blower operation as a function of the pressure in the BTF. If the BTF pressure is higher than 0.52 The reactor monitoring included continuous measuring of the pressure inside the tank (Desin, TPR 18), dissolved oxygen (DO) (Hach lange, LDO), pH (Crison, Model 5330), biogas flow (Endress Hauser, Proline t-mass 65), air flow (Georg Fischer, Model SK11) and percent volume of methane (Prevensigas). H The inoculation of the BTF was carried out several times during the lifetime of the reactor due to different shutdowns and operational troubleshooting. Since the use of activated sludge from WWTPs has been shown to be suitable alternative for the inoculation of sulfide removing biotrickling filters at low- and high-loads of H  Despite the highest H During the operation at pH 2.6 the average water consumption was around 19.5 Overall, the reactor performed well in both operational periods. However, a significant better performance was found at the lowest pH in terms of RE, EC, water consumption and H To understand the problems associated with dissolved oxygen limitation, the low-pH operating period (November 8, 2011 to January 23, 2012) has been selected. The lowest RE (63.73%) was found on day 76 of operation (H The operation with the blower has shown to be poorly reliable and very sensitive to pressure changes in the BTF. Despite the removal efficiencies obtained were acceptable, the fluctuations observed in the air supply system suggests the possibility of uncompleted H The elemental sulfur accumulation was calculated with a mass balance in the BTF. Since sulfur might be found in different states, and in order to avoid possible errors in the mass balance, the presence of thiosulfates and sulfites were evaluated in the liquid phase. The presence of these anions in the liquid purge and/or recirculation line was below the detection limit throughout the present study. The amount of hydrogen sulfide that was not converted into sulfate was assumed to be elemental sulfur. Out of it, an undetermined fraction accumulated in the packed bed of the BTF.  In the present case, the wash out procedure was performed at acidic pH (1.8) by stopping the biogas feed while keeping the aeration and the recirculation active. The air flow rate during the wash out was 13.05 The total wash out of elemental sulfur was 40.3% by day 21 of the biological wash out step, which is lower than 57% previously reported by As shown above, the BTF had a serious oxygen transfer limitation with the conventional oxygen supply system. Thus, the objective of the modification was to solve the mass transfer problems with the implementation of a jet-venturi device for supplying the necessary oxygen for the complete hydrogen sulfide oxidation to sulfate. However, implementation of a jet-venturi device in the water recirculation line of the BTF implied to also install an additional pump due to the large water flow rate needed to produce the Venturi effect in the jet-venturi unit. The following modifications were made in the BTF to optimize the oxygen transfer from the air to the water phase. First, an additional centrifugal water pump (Inbeat, MPN 50-32-160) equipped with an inverter (Marem Aplicacions i Serveis SL, Nord SK500E) was added to supply the driving force for air suction with the jet-venturi. Also, a new flow meter (Georg Fischer, Type 335) and a jet-venturi of 2  Interestingly, the air flow rate supplied with the jet-venturi was reduced by a factor of 5. However, the RE and EC were maintained. Despite such lowest air flow, the DO concentration increased due the best mass transfer efficiency when the jet-venturi was used. The oxygen transferred/oxygen supplied with the jet-venturi was 26.7% compared with the 1.4% during the operation using the blower. Such improved efficiency was in agreement with the observations made by Such improved oxygen transfer was translated in a better conversion of H An industrial-scale BTF was capable to remove with almost 100% RE the hydrogen sulfide in concentrations ranging from 1000 to 3000 The wash out strategy of elemental sulfur, with water and air addition and without the biogas feed, is an effective method to partially remove the elemental sulfur. This wash out procedure can be done during maintenance shutdowns scheduled for the CHP maintenance. The implementation of a jet-venturi device for oxygen supply at the biological process is an important improvement through a better gas–liquid oxygen mass transfer. Further monitoring of the new BTF configuration is needed to assess the long-term operation improvement. Authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the