The effect of cryo-rolling on the evolution of microstructure and texture during annealing was investigated in equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy. For this purpose the alloy was cold- and cryo-rolled to 90% reduction in thickness followed by annealing at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1200 °C. The two alloys showed the development of predominantly brass type deformation texture consistent with profuse nano-twin formation reported in this alloy. The cryo-rolled material showed significantly finer grain size after different annealing treatments as compared to the cold-rolled alloy. This could be attributed to finer microstructure in the cryo-rolled material providing greater number of available sites for nucleation. The recrystallization texture of cold- and cryo-rolled materials showed the presence of similar texture components indicating that cryo-rolling had limited effect on the formation of annealing texture. The volume fractions of different texture components did not reveal significant dependence on the annealing temperature. The evolution of texture could be explained on the basis of absence of strong preferential nucleation and growth during annealing.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are newly developed multicomponent alloys based on the novel alloy design concept of mixing five or more constituent elements in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportion A major area of research in widening the potential applications of HEAs is to understand the thermo-mechanical processing (TMP) behavior of HEAs Cryo-rolling (i.e. rolling at the liquid N In the present work, we are investigating the effect of cryo-rolling on microstructure and texture formation during annealing for cryo-rolled FCC CoCrFeMnNi HEA which has not been attempted earlier. For comparison purpose the alloy has been cold-rolled and cryo-rolled at room temperature and at the liquid N The equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi alloy used in the present research work was prepared by vacuum arc melting. The as-cast alloy was subjected to a homogenization treatment at 1100 °C for 6 h (hrs) to enhance the chemical homogeneity. The as-cast and homogenized alloy showed a rather coarse microstructure. In order to generate a wrought microstructure suitable for the present research, samples with dimensions 25 mm (length) × 8 mm (width) × 5 mm (thickness) were extracted from the homogenized material and cold-rolled to the thickness of ∼2.5 mm (∼50% reduction) using a laboratory scale rolling equipment having a roll diameter of 140 mm (SPX Precision instrument, Fenn Division, USA). These cold-rolled samples were annealed at 800 °C for 1 h in a salt-bath furnace. The fully annealed samples were used as the starting material for subsequent cold- or cryo-rolling processing up to ∼90% reduction in thickness corresponding to a final thickness of ∼250 μm. The deformation was carried out in steps of 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% reduction in thickness (with respect to the starting thickness). Further deformation up to 90% reduction in thickness was carried out using small incremental deformation in each pass. About 10 to 11 passes were required to achieve the total 90% reduction in thickness. In the cryo-rolling route, the samples were immersed in liquid N Small rectangular samples were subsequently extracted from the 90% cryo- and cold-rolled sheets and isochronally annealed for 1 hour (h) at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1200 °C. The bulk texture measurements of the deformed samples were carried out through X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using a PANalytical (Almelo, The Netherlands) MRD system. The Cu-Kα radiation (1.54 Å) was used for the measurements. The tube voltage, tube current and scan rate were fixed at 45 kV, 40 mA and 5°/s, respectively. Due to the limited thickness of the 90% deformed sheets, the bulk texture measurement were carried out on the rolling plane section (bounded by the rolling direction (RD)-transverse direction (TD)) of the sheets. The samples for X-ray texture measurement were prepared by careful polishing with colloidal silica. The orientation distribution function (ODF) was calculated using the series expansion method The microstructure and texture of the deformed and annealed materials were characterized using an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system (Oxford Instruments, UK) attached to a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Model: SUPRA 40, Make: Carl-Zeiss, Germany) equipped with field emission gun electron source (FEG). The samples for EBSD measurement were prepared using careful mechanical polishing followed by electropolishing using a mixture of methanol and perchloric acids in a ratio of 1:9 (by volume). The EBSD scans were acquired using the AztecHKL software (Oxford Instruments, UK). For deformed samples a step size (i.e. the equidistant interval for acquiring the Kikuchi patterns) of 0.04–0.05 μm was used. For annealed samples the step size varied between 0.20 μm and 4.0 μm. The acquired EBSD dataset were exported to the TSL-OIM™ software (version 6.2) (EDAX Inc., USA) in the text file format for analysis purpose. The EBSD scans acquired from the annealed samples were cleaned up using the grain dilation procedure in-built in the TSL-OIM™ software. The tolerance angle of 5°, minimum 5 scan steps and multiple rows for grains were enforced during the data clean up procedure. In order to determine microstructural and textural parameters with high degree of statistical accuracy, several EBSD scans were obtained from each deformed and annealed sample and merged together. The pole figures (PFs) and orientation distribution functions (ODFs) were calculated from these merged dataset using the harmonic series expansion method (series rank = 22). Orthotropic sample symmetry was assumed for calculating the PFs and ODFs. The volume fraction of individual texture components was determined using a cut-off angle of 15°. The microstructure of the starting recrystallized material ( The microstructure of the 90% cold-rolled sample ( The texture of the starting material appears to be rather weak as may be quite evident from the (111) PF (   The development of texture after annealing could be understood by analyzing the ODFs ( The presence of the discontinuous α-fiber is continued to be observed in the φ The α-fiber in the cryo-rolled material annealed at 700 °C ( The ODF sections of the cryo-rolled materials annealed at 1000 °C (  The bulk textures of the two materials processed by the two different routes show very similar strong brass type. The development of strong brass type texture after heavy deformation is characteristic of low SFE materials The observed texture transition from pure metal type texture (typical of high to medium SFE FCC materials) to brass type texture with decreasing SFE has been extensively investigated in different alloy systems The microstructures of the cold and cryo-rolled materials show certain differences after 90% deformation. The evidently more fragmented and finer microstructure in the cryo-rolled material appears to be consistent with the retention of higher dislocation density and the formation of more nano-twins during cryo-rolling. It is also noted that even finer fragmented structure forms along intersected deformation and shear bands. Further, finer microstructure in the cryo-rolled material may originate from enhanced nano-twin formation which can greatly accelerate grain fragmentation or microstructural refinement The softening of heavily deformed low SFE materials is characterized by discontinuous recrystallization process progressing through the typical nucleation and growth stages However, the difference in grain size is small after low temperature annealing (e.g. at 700 °C) and quite remarkable after annealing at higher temperatures (e.g. at 1200 °C). At low temperatures, due to the sluggish diffusion in the HEA, the grain growth is rather limited. This results in only minor difference in the recrystallized grain size in absolute terms but the enhanced nucleation in the cryo-rolled material is easily understood when the relative difference is considered. At higher annealing temperatures where appreciable grain growth takes place, the effect of greater number of available nucleation sites in the cryo-rolled material is manifested by the much lower grain size in this material as compared to the cold-rolled material. The recrystallization texture of low SFE materials has been intensely investigated using 70:30 brass as a model system In sharp contrast to the behavior observed in case of low SFE brass, the recrystallization texture of both cryo- and cold-rolled materials do not show dominant BR or D components. These components are present along with the retained deformation texture components, such as, S and other α-fiber components. Thus, the absence of strong BR or D components in the recrystallization texture of the HEA indicates no strong preferential nucleation or preferential growth. The behavior pointed out above may be explained on the basis of the characteristic nucleation and growth process in the present HEA. The absence of strong preferential nucleation in the HEA is explained on the basis of more energetically homogenous deformed matrix It might be noted that preferential growth of grains requires rapid migration of selected boundaries In summary, more fragmented and finer microstructure is formed in the heavily cryo-rolled HEA. This possibly relates to the greater propensity for the formation of nano-twins in the cryo-rolled HEA but needs to be investigated further. Grain size of the cryo-rolled and annealed HEA is smaller than the cold-rolled and annealed HEA when annealed at 700 °C, 1000 °C and 1200 °C. This is due to the greater number of available nucleation sites in the cryo-rolled HEA. In the aspect of texture, the cryo and cold-rolled materials show the development of very similar deformation and grain growth textures. The volume fractions of different texture components show only minor changes with annealing temperature for both cold-rolled and cryo-rolled HEAs. This is attributable to the sluggish diffusion which retards rapid boundary movement and thus preferential growth of texture components during annealing. However, the noticeable difference in the deformation texture is that the texture of cryo-rolled HEA shows higher fraction of random components than that of the cold-rolled HEA, which may be due to more fragmentation and increased intersections between nano-twins. The authors acknowledge the financial support of