ZK60 magnesium alloy was compound treated by combining rolling and ultrasonic surface rolling processing (USRP). The result showed that the gradient nanostructure (the grain size change with a gradient variation from nanometer scale to micrometer scale, from the top surface to bulk) prepared by USRP in the magnesium alloy improved the strength of the alloy while maintaining enough plasticity because the sharp decline in the plasticity was delayed by the highly uniform elongation (UEL) of the gradient structure. Meanwhile, after compound modification, the tensile results showed that the yield strength (YS) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of the ZK60 alloy were improved from 130 MPa and 243 MPa to 283 MPa and 359 MPa, respectively, and the strength plasticity product was increased from 4106.7 to 5313.2. The improvement of strength was determined by the combined effects of fine grain strengthening, dislocation strengthening and precipitation strengthening. Combine the analysis of the above results, it could be concluded that the compound modification process achieved an unexpected effect in the ZK60 magnesium alloy, which will inspire other magnesium alloy researchers.Light weight alloy materials are being increasingly used in industrial production, and magnesium alloys are favored by industries, such as automobile manufacturing and aircraft production because of their small quality and high specific strength [ In 1999, Lu [ The preparative methods of preparing gradient nanostructures includes SMAT [ A variety of evidence leads to the conclusion that the rolling process or USRP process has advantage, but the process of machining magnesium alloys combining rolling with the USRP process has rarely been reported. Thus, this paper presents rolling combined with the USRP process to machine ZK60 magnesium alloy. On this basis, the magnesium alloy achieved enough strength and plasticity by the rolling process, and surface modification was further investigated in rolled ZK60 magnesium alloy to prepare a gradient nanostructure. Based on this background, in this paper, we analyzed the strength and ductility variation as well as their influencing factors after compound modification of the ZK60 magnesium alloy. Also, the mechanism of impact of the gradient nanostructure on the tensile properties of alloys was discussed. The as-received material is a ZK60 magnesium alloy (Mg-5.64 wt%Zn-0.48 wt%Zr) bar with a diameter of 25 mm and length of 160 mm. Before rolling, solution treatment was conducted at 400 °C for 24 h. After a solid solution was obtained, the grain size and hardness of the sample were 120 μm and 69HV, respectively, and the precipitates were dissolved in the matrix. The ZK60 magnesium alloy bar comprising a solid solution was rolled on a three-phase asynchronous rolling mill. After 9 passes in rolling process, the specimens were rolled to 8 mm from 25 mm in diameter with the intermediate temperature of rolling lowered from 320 °C to 250 °C. When the final pass rolling was completed the annealing treatment was carried out at 250 °C for 30 min. The rod rolled samples with a diameter of 4 mm and gauged length of 20 mm were employed for the USRP experiment and tension tests. The tensile experiments were conducted by using an MTS servo-hydraulic testing machine at room temperature at a strain rate of 6.6 × 10 The optical microstructures of the specimens were observed by using an ICX41M-type inverted optical microscope (OM) after machining. The grain size was calculated by the average linear intercept method. An X-Pert Powder-type X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation was used to determine the phase constitution and grain sizes variation. To ensure accurate analysis, the specimens were polished to remove the oxide layer of the surface before the XRD test. After stretching, the fractures were wrapped with filter papers to protect the fractures from oxidation. The fracture surface observations were conducted by the SUPRA40-type field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) instrument, whose fracture types and mechanism were analyzed. The samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) investigations were all sliced from the part of tension specimens vertical to the loading direction by a spark-cutting machine, with an original thickness of 500 μm. TEM observation was carried out by using a FEI Tecnai G2F20 type field emission transmission electron microscope. The formation process of the nanocrystalline was analyzed by TEM images at different positions from the top surface. Also, the size distribution statistical analysis of precipitation was conducted by the precipitation TEM images. The hardness was tested by an HVS-100 full automatic microhardness tester fitted with a Vickers indenter, with a load of 100 g and a holding time of 10s. The optical microstructure of the rolled ZK60 magnesium alloy is shown in     The tensile engineering stress-strain curves shown in Some typical treatment methods for ZK60 magnesium alloys as the UTS reached over 330 MPa are listed in  The bright field images of the material at the top surface ( The TEM bright field images at a depth of 50–150 μm from the top surface are shown in The bright field images of 150–300 μm from the top surface are shown in The gradient nanostructure realized mutual coordination of structures with different feature sizes and exhibited a mechanism of action corresponding to all feature sizes, which resulted in the improvement of in the whole performance of the materials [ The tensile process schematic diagrams of gradient structured and homogeneous samples are illustrated in Under the tension of the gradient structure, a faster necking instability occurred in the surface layers, but lateral instability was constrained and quickly stopped due to the interaction between different layers, that is, a strain gradient was induced between the unstable surface layers and the stable central core ( The tensile results indicated that the YS reached 283 MPa, which is twice more the value of the original sample (130 MPa), and the UTS increased from 243 MPa to 359 MPa, which was an increase of 47.7% with an EL of 14.8%. The reasons are as follows. The strengthening increase in the ZK60 magnesium alloy was determined by the combined effects of three strengthening mechanisms (fine grain strengthening, dislocation strengthening and precipitation strengthening), whereas the general equation is: The strength obtained by fine grain strengthening is 135.79 MPa. The YSs obtained by fine grain strengthening at the different distances from the top surface are in shown in The precipitation strengthening can be expressed by the following equation [ The value of σ The percentages of the three strengthening mechanisms, fine grain strengthening, dislocation strengthening and precipitation strengthening, among the total strength were 48.02%, 40.85% and 11.02%, respectively, as we can see in According to the Considère criterion: The normalized work-hardening rate- true stress curve shown in In accordance with these analyses, the strength of the ZK60 magnesium alloy increased dramatically with the sharp decline in the plasticity being delayed due to the gradient structure obtained by USPR, which led to an excellent combination of strength and plasticity. Several conclusions can be made as follows: After compound modification with rolling and USRP for the ZK60 magnesium alloy, the YS reached 283 MPa, twice more than that of the original sample (YS: 130 MPa), and the UTS was 359 MPa, an increasing of 47.7% compared with the original sample (UTS: 243 MPa). After the compound modification, calculated by the value of the strength plastic product of the ZK60 magnesium alloy was 5313.2, and the results showed that compared with other processes, the compound modification process had obvious advantages with the excellent match of strength and plasticity. The increase of the strength in the ZK60 magnesium alloy was determined by the combined effects of three strengthening mechanisms, and the percentages of σ The strength of the compound treated ZK60 magnesium improved greatly with the EL only decreased to 14.8%, which was due to the gradient structure prepared by the USRP possessed excellent UEL and the sharp decline in the plasticity was delayed.  We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. The research documented in this work was financially supported by the