The pyrite heap biooxidation model discussed in the first paper of this two-part series was expanded to model the effects of heat generation, conduction, and convection within the heap and at its boundaries. The new sub-routine utilized parameters whose values are known to the user; the other sub-routines utilized the same parameters as in the first paper. The inclusion of the heat balance sub-routine significantly changes the pyrite oxidation profile, which is uniform in the vertical and lateral planes in an isothermal system, such as a column, but highly segregated in the vertical plane of a non-isothermal system, such as a heap. There are numerous phenomena at play in a non-isothermal system: at the top, faster cell growth and self-inhibition of the fines oxidation; at the bottom, evaporative cooling and oxygen depletion. A model sensitivity study revealed that, for a given sulfide head grade and particle size, the magnitude and duration of these phenomena can best be controlled by inoculating the heap with mesophiles, moderate thermophiles, and extreme thermophiles, increasing the aeration rate, and keeping the heap height as short as possible to achieve the fastest and most uniform oxidation throughout the heap.Despite using sophisticated detection instruments in geological exploration, gold mining companies nowadays very rarely encounter rich oxidized gold deposits that will replenish their reserves for years to come. Rather these deposits tend to be of small size, and thus of greater appeal to junior mining companies, or if holding significant reserves or resources, will contain difficult-to-treat ores that may be single or double refractory, requiring pre- and post-treatment of the sulfidic and carbonaceous minerals. High-grade precious metal ores containing sulfide minerals are amongst the easiest refractory ores to treat by ambient or pressure leaching to oxidize the sulfide lattice. Low-grade ores do not justify the large capital and operating expense of such process equipment. The only economical means of oxidizing low-grade ores is by heap bioleaching, a technology unsophisticated in appearance, and having a large footprint in comparison to agitated tanks and autoclaves. The process consists of stacking ore onto a lined pad and irrigating the heap with a leaching solution containing iron, acid, and microorganisms for at least one year. The principal chemical reactions are the oxidation of pyrite to ferrous, sulfur, and sulfate, the oxidation of elemental sulfur to sulfate, the oxidation of ferrous to ferric, and the precipitation of jarosite. The most active period of research and development into heap biooxidation of refractory sulfide ores occurred in the mid 1990s, just before the low gold cycle of the early 2000s. Demonstration heaps ranged in tonnage from 1200 tonnes in Bulgaria for treatment of double refractory ores, to 4300 tonnes in South Dakota for sulfidic ores, and finally to 25,900 tonnes in Nevada for singly and double refractory ores ( Successful commercial practice of heap biooxidation hinges on achieving the fastest sulfide oxidation rates, ensuring uniform oxidation throughout the heap volume, avoiding hot spots within the heap, precluding the formation of elemental sulfur (or completely oxidizing the elemental sulfur formed) to minimize cyanide consumption in the subsequent cyanide gold leach, controlling iron precipitation, and ensuring that the heap remains permeable to solution and air as it must undergo three cycles (sulfide biooxidation, neutralization, and cyanide leaching for gold). To meet these criteria, metallurgists have adopted one of two approaches: empirical or fundamental. The empirical approach suggests that a mathematical multi-variable empirical equation can be developed using data from several dozen column tests. The user supplies the values of the heap height, irrigation rate, ore grade, aeration rate, and any other parameters and instantly the model can generate the recovery These authors, together with Dr. Jochen Petersen, developed a fundamental model of heap leaching for chalcocite, covellite, pyrite, and sphalerite minerals, called HeapSim, over the period from 2001 to 2003. The model represents the important chemical, biological, and physical steps which might occur, in series or in parallel, from the microscale of the individual sulfide mineral grains to the macroscale of the entire heap and its surroundings. Our previous publication ( The specification of the reaction chemistry and stoichiometry, the formulation of the reactive and transport phenomena, and the definition of the chemical and biological rate equations that are all part of the HeapSim model were presented in detail in our previous publication ( The second-order, non-linear partial differential equation of Eq. This model is particularly useful to perform “what-if” simulations to test the sensitivity of the model outputs to changes in various model parameters. For this purpose, one set of parameters (the “base case parameters”) was defined, against which the results of other simulations were compared. The conditions of the base case were: a heap height of 6 m, a pyrite grade of 2.5 wt.%, a moderately reactive pyrite (P This section presents model simulations in which one or more design and operating parameters were changed from the base case conditions. The first section examines the influence of parameters that can be controlled before or during the time of stacking. The second section examines the effects of parameters that can be controlled during leaching. While the first two sections focus on the extent of sulfide oxidation, the third section relates to its gold liberation. This section discusses the influence of four parameters (heap height, pyrite grade, particle size, microbial pre-inoculation) that can be set before the heap is stacked. The conditions of the base case simulation are presented in The heap height has a moderate effect on the sulfide oxidation when the heap is not pre-inoculated ( The internal temperature profiles of a 3-m and a 12-m heaps are shown in The cooler temperatures of the shorter heap also control the degree of humidification, thus maintaining higher oxygen partial pressures. All parts of a shorter heap are oxidized at about the same rate, while in a taller heap, the reaction zone is pushed towards the bottom where there is more oxygen and the microorganisms are not inhibited by the “hot spot” temperatures. In a taller heap, this phenomenon is manifested in a larger difference between the average and minimum sulfide oxidation, as noted from comparing the top and bottom plots of The influence of the pyrite head grade on the sulfide oxidation rate is shown in  Ore comprised mostly of fines (P Pre-inoculation refers to the addition of microorganisms during agglomeration or stacking, whereas inoculation refers to the addition of the same microorganisms into the feed solution applied during leaching. Inoculation with mesophiles, moderate thermophiles, and extreme thermophiles was common to the four simulations performed to evaluate the effects of pre-inoculation. What differed between the simulations were the microorganisms introduced during pre-inoculation. Comparing the oxidation profile of the pre-inoculated and non-pre-inoculated heaps in Pre-inoculating with mesophiles reduces the leach time by 30 days to reach 10% oxidation ( In another publication, one of the authors ( In summary, small particles, full pre-inoculation, and short heaps would all increase the sulfide oxidation rate. The impact will be most significant in the order in which the parameters are listed. This section discusses the influence of four parameters (irrigation rate, aeration rate, inoculation, dripper emitter spacing) that can be controlled while leaching is underway. The conditions of the base case simulation are presented in The irrigation rate moderately affects the sulfide oxidation rate ( The effect of drip emitter spacing is shown in  Increasing the aeration rate to 4 Nm Simulations were performed by varying the sulfur yield from 0 to 1.2 mol/mol sulfide ( The substantial effects of inoculating with different microorganisms are shown in The same ore that was used in the column experiments described in a previous publication ( The above residues were cyanide-leached once 95% of their sulfide content was oxidized. But it may not be necessary to oxidize as much as 95% of the sulfide to achieve the same gold recovery. A correlation between gold recovery and sulfide oxidation was thus established experimentally using a certain material instead of the individual size fractions described in the previous paragraph. This certain material consisted of all individual size fractions mixed together and ground to less than 74 μm (200 mesh). Several charges of the ground ore were leached with nitric acid for pre-determined times. The residues were rinsed and cyanide-leached in bottle rolls. According to To estimate the time required for any particles anywhere in a heap to achieve 57% sulfide oxidation, the following approach was employed to set up the simulation: In the HeapSim model, define three FeS Set the initial conditions and design parameters based on Newmont's bio-milling process: height Perform a heap leach simulation, generating triplets of time, depth, and oxidation for each mineral. Calculate the gold recovery associated with each triplet of each mineral using the relationship of  The top of the heap is where the minimum sulfide oxidation values are found. It is holding back the rest of the heap because of the overly high temperatures that preclude even the extreme thermophilic microorganisms from oxidizing ferrous to sustain pyrite oxidation. The oxidation of fines everywhere in the heap from 0 to 30% oxidation is responsible for this rapid rise in temperature. In a curious way, the fines themselves self-inhibit their own oxidation at the top of the heap. While the top of the heap remains inhibited, fines, medium-size particles, and coarse particles at the bottom of the heap undergo oxidation. As the fines are oxidized and less heat is generated, temperatures at the top of the heap drop into the 45–60 °C range, allowing the leaching front to advance from the bottom to the top.  This paper has presented a fundamental model of pyrite heap biooxidation that takes into account particle kinetics, microbial kinetics, gas–liquid mixing, solution flow, solute transport, gas transport, and heat generation and transport. The influence of heat generation and transport on the sulfide oxidation performance was the principal focus of this paper. A sensitivity study was performed to determine which parameters have the greatest impact on the heap performance. Of those parameters controllable during stacking, the particle size (preferably small), pre-inoculation (preferably with all types of microorganisms) and heap height (preferably short) have, in decreasing order, the most significant effects. Of those parameters controllable during leaching, inoculation of the feed solution with all microorganisms and aeration rate have more impact on the leach performance than the irrigation grid layout or the irrigation rate. The injection of microorganisms produced in stand-alone stirred-tanks for the pre-inoculation or inoculation of the heap is very rarely practiced in the industry, if at all, because of the tremendous size of the heaps. Instead, pre-inoculation and inoculation occur naturally and continuously in any heap operation with the accelerated development of the indigenous microbial population within the heap, soon also growing in solution ponds. The above recommendations are general; there does not exist a unique set of stacking and leaching conditions that is universally applicable to any heap operation. The model developed allows the user to find these optimum conditions for an ore with known sulfide grade and particle size. An isothermal system undergoes leaching uniformly in its vertical and lateral planes. A non-isothermal system is characterized by hot and cool zones in the vertical plane. The hot zones are created at the top of the heap due to the rapid oxidation of fines, but the rapid oxidation is self-inhibiting. The cool zones are found at the bottom of the heap because of the evaporative cooling effect from the air blown. In general, the first phase of leaching is controlled by the rate of oxygen gas–liquid mass transfer, and the remainder of the leach cycle is controlled by the kinetics of coarse particles. Increasing the sulfide head grade or crushing the particles prolongs the phase controlled by oxygen mass transfer.  constant-pressure heat capacity (J/kg/°C) effective heat capacity ratio, moist air to dry air (–) solution flow rate ratio, actual to applied (–) mass flux (kg/m thermal conductivity (W/m/°C) evaporation rate at heap surface (kg/m Fick's law geometric factor (–) heap surface heat flux (W/m volumetric heat generation rate (W/m time (h) temperature (°C or K) heap height (m) liquid mass fraction (kg H dimensionless heap depth (–) dimensionless diffusion pathway length (–) density (kg/m absolute humidity (kg H latent heat of vaporization of water (J/kg) relative humidity (–) dry air or incoming air flowing liquid heap water vapor extreme thermophiles mesophiles moderate thermophiles This work was sponsored by the former Placer Dome Technical Services Ltd. and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada through CRD Grant 233710.