Residence time distribution (RTD) measurements performed in a small laboratory flotation column using an electrolyte tracer, showed that, without air injection, cellulose fibres induced a sizeable decrease in tracer average residence time, owing to the formation of stagnant zones. Bubble size, fibre flocculation level and gas hold-up were recorded during flotation experiments with different fibre and surfactant concentrations: a slight decrease in bubble size, fibre flocculation level and increased gas hold-up were measured after surfactant addition. The increase of cellulose fibres concentration promoted bubble coalescence, pulp flocculation and gas hold-up. Experimental data interpretation with the drift flux model demonstrated that fibre flocculation depressed gas hold-up by raising the bubble rise velocity. Moreover, correlations between fibre flocculation and their transport during the flotation process showed that pulp flocculation also promoted bubble entrapment in fibre flocs and their subsequent entrainment by air bubbles into the froth.In modern flotation deinking lines, ink removal exceeds 80–90% but a modest ink separation selectivity Mineral fillers and ink particles, with their size ranging between 5 and 20 Cellulose fibres have ca. 40 It has been demonstrated that fibre removal during the flotation deinking process occurs via bubble entrapment in the fibre network and the subsequent entrainment of bubble/fibre aggregates from the pulp slurry to the froth phase Flotation column is the dominant flotation technology in the minerals industry In this work, a small flotation column was therefore used to investigate the impact of a non-ionic surfactant and cellulose fibres on bubble size, fibre flocculation, gas hold-up and fibre removal during the flotation of a model pulp slurry and to highlight the contribution of pulp flocculation on bubble dynamics and fibre yield. Bleached hardwood fibres (eucalyptus) were dispersed in tap water at 100 Continuous flotation experiments were performed using a 19.8 The fibre concentration was measured by filtration of pulp and froth samples on a Büchner funnel (Whatman grade 2 paper filter). The impact of air injection and fibre concentration on mixing was evaluated by measuring the response of the flotation column to a conductivity pulse in the feed stream ( Before data plotting and interpolation with model equations, the conductivity baseline was shifted to zero by substracting the pulp slurry conductivity measured before tracer injection, i.e. 354 The air bubble size in the collecting zone was evaluated using an intrusive bubble sampling technique based on bubble conveying in a viewing chamber filled with a non coalescing liquid The gas hold-up in the flotation cell was measured using a commercial gas hold-up sensor (ACS 8-P, PMC, Danbury CT, USA) In order to evaluate the effect of fibre and surfactant concentration on pulp flocculation, a simple setup shown in This equipment was also used to visualize air bubbles capture in fibre flocs and the onset of flocs convective motion towards the slurry surface. Air bubbles were dispersed in the pulp stream at the inlet of the viewing chamber via a Venturi aerator and, after stopping both the pulp and gas flow, images were taken during bubble disengagement from the liquid phase and the progressive pulp flocculation. The standard reactor model for flotation columns is the Small-Large-Small-Plug (SLSP) In the absence of air injection, Eq. The fitted values for the individual residence times of the three reactors are given in Without air injection, introduction of fibre suspension instead of water in the flotation column induced a general decrease in the total residence time in the flotation column from 600 to 375 Injecting air bubbles in the column fed with a 4 In addition to conventional CSTR and PFR models, the axial dispersion model can be effectively used to describe mixing in flotation columns Air bubble size distributions illustrated in  Variations in the bubble average Sauter diameter due to an increase in fibre and surfactant concentration ( In order to highlight the effect of inter fibre and bubble–fibre interactions on bubble motion, the rising velocity of air bubbles,  For a constant fibre concentration, surfactant addition increased the drag coefficient ( For all tested fibre and surfactant concentrations, the water hold-up in the froth (  In agreement with previous studies In order to search direct correlations between fibre transport and fibre/surfactant concentration, the fibre entrainment coefficient in the aerated pulp slurry was calculated using the equation  This work demonstrated that cellulose fibres and their flocculation level strongly affect pulp mixing, bubble dynamics and fibre transport from the aerated pulp slurry to the froth phase in flotation deinking systems. The interpretation of residence time distribution data with the SLSP and SLP models showed that in absence of bubble injection, the formation of fibre flocs generated stagnant zones and a drop of 37% in the average residence time. Gas injection allowed fluidizing the fibre suspension and pulp mixing was modelled with a conventional four reactors (SLSP) model. However, RTD data showed a decrease of the average residence time with respect to the air/water system which was interpreted as reflecting the suppression of internal liquid recirculation due to the flow dampening by the fibre suspension. Fibre concentration and their flocculation level appeared as the main factors affecting gas hold-up and the bubble drag coefficient. Gas hold-up and bubble drag coefficient increased when lowering pulp flocculation. Bubble/fibre collision in a deflocculated fibre network was therefore identified as the main mechanism governing bubble rise motion in a fibre suspension. Fibre flocculation had also a major effect on fibre entrainment and the fibre rejection rate during flotation. The tight correlation between fibre flocculation and the fibre entrainment coefficient supported the fibre transport mechanism model based on bubble capture in fibre flocs and their convective motion towards the froth phase. Present results show that the control of the fibre flocculation level during the flotation deinking process can improve gas hold-up and subsequently ink removal and fibre yield with a sizeable increase of the ink/fibre separation selectivity. Authors wish to thank Prof. Philippe Sechet for useful discussions on flow modelling and Dr. Denis Curtil for his skill in assembling the RTD and bubble size measurement systems. The analytical solution for the Large-Small-Plug model in the time domain can be derived from the process transfer functions in the Laplace domain of each single reactor composing the model The overall transfer function of the three reactors (SLP) model is