Two methods to produce a particulate form of extracellular matrix (ECM) from porcine urinary bladder were investigated. One method to produce the powder involved snap freezing a lyophilized form of the material and then pulverizing it in a grinding mill. The second method was similar except that the ECM was saturated in a solution of NaCl prior to snap freezing to precipitate salt crystals within the matrix before grinding. Several methods were utilized to analyze the particle size distribution and ultrastructure including sonic sifting, laser diffraction, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The salt precipitation method yielded a more uniform distribution of particles with a smaller mean diameter (158 vs. 191μm). SEM showed that the particles produced by grinding without salt precipitation were irregularly shaped, sheet-like particles. ECM particles produced by the salt precipitation method were round and porous in appearance with many particles in the range of 1μm which tended to agglomerate with the larger particles and with each other. We conclude that the production of a comminuted form of ECM is possible and that the uniformity of particle size and shape are dependent upon the manufacturing methodology.Naturally occurring extracellular matrix (ECM) has been shown to promote constructive remodelling as opposed to scar tissue formation in a variety of body systems, including but not limited to the lower urinary tract, esophagus, myocardium, arteries and veins, tendons and ligaments The ECM was isolated from the porcine urinary bladder. The bladders were harvested immediately following euthanasia of market weight pigs (approximately 120 Two methods were used to produce a particulate form of UBM. The first method involved lyophilizing the disinfected material and then chopping it into small sheets for immersion in liquid nitrogen. The snap frozen material was then reduced to small pieces with a Waring blender so that the particles were small enough to be placed in a rotary knife mill. A #60 screen was used to restrict the collected powder size to less than 250 The second method consisted of first soaking the disinfected material in a 30% (w/v) NaCl solution for 5 Sonic sifting and laser diffraction were used to analyze the particle size distribution that resulted from the two powdering methods. Sonic sifting involved separating the powder by size through a series of graduated screens stacked in a vertical configuration. The powder passed through the screens as a result of sonic pulses along the longitudinal axis of the stack and mechanical agitation in the plane of the screens. The screen sizes used were 212, 125, 90, 63, and 38 The laser diffraction method consisted of passing the dry particles through the path of a HeNe laser beam to determine the powder size The ultrastructure of the particles was analyzed using SEM. A thin layer of powder was mounted on adhesive metallic tape. The powder was sputter coated with 3.5 The results of particle size analysis using the sonic sifting technique on powder produced by the first method are presented in The ultrastructure for particles produced by the first method was evaluated with SEM. The particles formed by the first method were irregularly shaped and could be defined generally as sheet-like or fiber-like ( Since sonic sifting did not give an accurate description of the particle size distribution, only laser diffraction was used to analyze the size of the UBM powder produced by the salt precipitation method. The mean particle size was found to be smaller for powder produced by the salt precipitation method than the particle size produced by the first method ( The current study investigated two techniques for producing UBM powder. Sonic sifting, laser diffraction, and SEM were found to be suitable to evaluate the particle size distribution and ultrastructure for the material in this study The irregular shape and size of the particles is likely due to the fibrous nature of this largely collagenous material. The grinding process is more likely to shear the material between adjacent collagen fibers than it is to actually cut a fiber along its length. Individual fibers are visible both alone and associated with other particles ( SEM also showed differences in the powder surface when the two methods of comminution are compared. The different surface appearances observed on particles produced by the first method are consistent with the sidedness of the original sheet form of the material with the basement membrane (smooth) on one side and the tunica propria (fibrous) on the other. The basement membrane may contribute to the formation of the sheet-like particles, with the dense matrix holding the fibrous tunica propria together. The particles produced by the salt precipitation method appeared to be agglomerations of smaller particles, which may have limited the ability of the laser diffraction to accurately measure the particle size. The larger particles produced by salt precipitation were more porous and were often associated with or attached to very small particles ( Naturally occurring ECM has been shown to support the constructive remodelling of damaged or missing tissues in adult mammals. More specifically, scar tissue tends to be minimal while site specific tissue remodelling occurs The present study shows that the particle size distribution and morphology is highly dependent on the method of production. ECM particles produced solely by grinding were irregularly shaped, sheet-like, and retained the ultrastructure observed on the sheet form of the material. With the addition of salt precipitation, the particles were smaller and more uniform in size and appeared to be more porous. Additional work is needed to investigate the response of mammalian tissues to ECM powder, as well as to further refine the production techniques for clinical use. We would like to acknowledge funding from the NIH (EB000261) and the original work of Dr. Tim McPherson.