This study, using matched employer–employee data, analyses gender differences in rent sharing. Results indicate significantly smaller remuneration from firm profits for women, a difference that increases along the wage distribution. Gender differences in rent sharing explain less than 2% of mean gender wage differentials as differences are found in remuneration from firm profit and not in the mean profit levels of employing firms.This study, using a large matched employer–employee data set, analyses gender differences in rent sharing and estimates if these differences provide a partial explanation to the gender wage gap. Contrary to standard competitive models, a positive relationship between firm or industry profits and wages has been empirically documented in numerous studies (see The remainder of the paper is as follows. Simple models of bargaining, over wages and employment, theoretically illustrate a link between profits and wages (see, e.g., Some degree of rent sharing may be bargained at the individual level. The data stems from the 1991 Level of Living Survey (LNU), a 1/1000 random sample of the Swedish working-age population (18–65). All individuals in the 1991 LNU sample were matched to their employing organizations by means of unique organization numbers. These establishments form the basis of the Swedish Establishment Survey (APU), a survey collecting administrative data for There are two potential complications in testing for the existence of rent sharing. One concerns the potential simultaneity bias between wages and profits. A positive correlation between wages and profit is consistent with efficiency wage arguments of non-competitive models with barriers to entry. As the aim of this study is to estimate the impact of profits on wages and not vice versa, lagged 4-year averages for firm profit are used in estimation. In addition, the accounting relationship between wages and profits implies that high wages may lead to low profits. Use of lagged profits solves these complications, as firm profits are then pre-determined in wage estimation. Cross-section estimates of the association between lagged average profits and wages are calculated for 1991 and 1995, based on a full interaction specification of the following basic model: The results for 1991 (see In order to test the power in numbers argument proposed by Controlling for industry affiliation does not alter results of significant gender differences in rent sharing. Model 4 also controls for gender composition implying that gender differences in rent sharing exist within industries given a potential sorting of men and women into firms with varying profitability. Gender differences in rent sharing may then be a consequence of a sorting within firms into positions with different possibilities of rent extraction. Controls for firm capital intensity yields a coefficient for lagged average profits that is (weakly) significant and smaller, partially due to a positive correlation between lagged average profits and capital intensity. Gender differences remain implying that sorting into firms with varying capital intensity does not fully explain differences in rent sharing. Estimation on the 1995 data yields similar results, gender differences in rent sharing are of approximately the same magnitude as indicated in the 1991 data and significant to controls for human capital, gender composition and firm capital intensity but not to industry affiliation. Wage gap estimates indicate that rent sharing explains very little of the unadjusted log wage differential of 0.1546 for 1991 (0.1556 for 1995). Wage decompositions on estimation for firm profit only, indicate that differences in mean profits of employing firms explain less than 1% of the gender wage gap in 1991 and less than 2% in 1995. This result is not unexpected as mean gender differences in the average profit level of employing firms are small. The difference is in the coefficients, i.e., in remuneration from firm profits. Quantile regressions estimated for each year indicate that gender differences in rent sharing vary across the wage distribution. Results for 1991 indicate a 1 percentage point difference in rent sharing at the 0.25 percentile (insignificant difference in 1995) compared to 5 percentage- point difference at the 0.75 percentile (3 percentage point difference in 1995), controlling for human capital differences and industry affiliation. One untested hypothesis is that men and women are sorted into positions within firms that differ in terms of their possibility for rent extraction. Wage estimations, based on data for white-collar workers, indicate that those in leadership positions have larger rent extraction possibilities in general. This study finds significant differences in rent sharing between men and women in cross-section wage estimation for 1991 and 1995, robust to controls for firm capital intensity, industry affiliation (1991), establishment gender composition and individual unemployment history. Gender differences may be due to a sorting within firms into positions with varying possibilities of rent extraction. Estimation on a small sample of white-collar workers (1995) indicates that a select sample of female chief executives had significantly larger rent sharing than their male counterparts but these women were also found within firms with significantly smaller mean profits. I am grateful to Mahmood Arai, Karsten Albaek, Fredrik Heyman, Henry Ohlsson, Roger Vilhelmsson and Johnny Zetterberg for helpful comments and advice on this and earlier drafts as well as to seminar participants at the Trade Union Institute for Economic Research (FIEF). I also wish to thank Per Weidenman, MM Partner, for providing the firm data. Table A1: Sample means, 1991 Definition of variables:          