Two freshwater sediments (organic-poor and organic-rich) that contained their distinct natural microbial communities were incubated in experimental microcosms with either NH4
                     + or NO2
                     − in the overlying water. Microsensor measurements revealed the thin oxic surface layer as a site of initially high rates of nitrification, i.e. O2, NH4
                     +, and NO2
                     − consumption, and NO3
                     − production. Unexpectedly, during the subsequent 4-week incubation NH4
                     + consumption decreased in both sediment types and NO2
                     − consumption decreased in the organic-rich sediment. In the organic-rich sediment O2 consumption and NO3
                     − production paralleled these decreases, i.e. the reduced NH4
                     + and NO2
                     − consumption rates were most probably due to reduced activity of nitrifiers. These microsensor data imply factors other than frequently suggested competition between nitrifiers and heterotrophs for NH4
                     +, NO2
                     − or O2 as causes for the loss of nitrification activity. We hypothesize that experimental manipulations (e.g. removal of macrofauna, redistribution of particulate organic matter, permanent nutrient enrichment) rendered the performance of the microbial community unstable. It is thus recommendable to restrict experiments in such commonly used model systems to the period of highest stability.Microbial degradation of organic matter in freshwater sediments releases primarily dissolved organic carbon (DOC), CO The competition for substrates such as NH Many studies on competition between sedimentary nitrifiers and heterotrophs have been carried out using sieved and homogenized sediments Two distinct study sites were chosen that both showed high inorganic N concentrations in the water column but differed greatly in sediment properties. The first site was a lowland stream, Rittrumer Mühlenbach, located near Wildeshausen in northern Germany. Sandy, organic-poor sediment from this stream was collected in April 2000 at a water temperature of 12°C. NH Twenty-four hours after the onset of the NO Depth distribution of organic matter was determined for each sediment type in three randomly selected sediment beakers at the end of the experiments. For this purpose, sediment cores were taken using acrylic cylinders of 2.5 cm in diameter. These cores were sectioned into 2-mm-thick slices down to a depth of 10 mm. The slices were dried to the constant weight at 60°C and finally combusted for 3 h at 550°C. The weight loss upon combustion was taken as an estimate of the organic content of the sediment. Between-sediment comparison of initial areal conversion rates was carried out using Student’s O The concentration profiles allowed layerwise calculation of solute conversion rates: O Generally, O The two sediments used for this experiment differed greatly in their organic matter content. At the end of the laboratory incubation the top layer of the organic-poor sediment had an organic content of 2.7±0.3%, while that of the organic-rich sediment was 15.4±4.0% (mean±S.D., We used microsensors to determine N conversions in two types of microbially stratified model sediments, each with its own particular characteristics. The two sediments differed greatly with respect to the organic content and, moreover, they were sampled in different seasons. We therefore expected to encounter two distinct microbial communities, which under identical conditions may develop differently because of their distinct initial taxonomic composition and metabolic performance. Stable sedimentary NH Starting from the steady state of N conversions reached by the end of the preincubation, we continuously enriched the sediments with NH In the course of the 4-week incubation the conversions of microbial N changed in an unexpected way in the two sediment types. Instead of a further enrichment for nitrification, the N conversion rates decreased significantly in the organic-rich sediment even though neither NH Factors related to the processing of the sediments might deliver alternative explanations for our results. (i) Sediment sieving removed macrofauna, which may have controlled the abundance of lower trophic levels, such as meio- and microfauna Microsensor measurements in model freshwater sediments demonstrated that the unexpected decrease of nitrification rates was not due to limitation by NH Dr. Jost Borcherding and Detlef Henning are acknowledged for their support during sediment collection in the field. Anja Eggers, Gaby Eickert, and Ines Schröder kindly provided us with O