The aim of this study was to determine the incidence and factors associated with subtrochanteric fracture after free vascularised fibular grafting for osteonecrosis of the femoral head, and to analyse clinical and radiological outcomes of open reduction and internal fixation. From April 1991 to May 2004, eight such fractures were managed by Rowe plate fixation. Factors examined included age, gender, side of operation, cause and preoperative and postoperative stage of osteonecrosis, and preoperative and postoperative functional assessment. The osteonecrosis was caused by alcohol consumption in six, steroid use in one and was idiopathic in one case. The overall incidence of fracture was 4.1% (13.9% in bilateral operations) and all occurred in men of mean age 36.3 years, were induced by low-energy injury and were attributed to defects created in the lateral femoral cortex for graft placement. Seven of the eight fractures (87.5%) developed within 12 weeks and all fractures healed at a mean of 16.6 weeks after internal fixation. No major complications occurred and no significant differences were found in clinical or radiological results between the fracture and non-fracture groups. Our findings indicate that strict education and mandatory protection from full weight bearing are required for 12 weeks after free vascularised fibular grafting for osteonecrosis of the femoral head.Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) presents major diagnostic and therapeutic problems. Although the natural history of ONFH has not been described fully, many studies However, subtrochanteric fracture is a potential complication of free VFG for ONFH, and thus the present study was undertaken to document its incidence and the clinical and radiological outcomes of open reduction and internal fixation, and to identify factors associated with these fractures. An ongoing prospective database containing information on all persons who had undergone free VFG at our hospital for ONFH was accessed to identify cases of postoperative subtrochanteric fracture occurring between April 1991 and May 2004. A total of 194 free VFGs (158 patients) were reviewed and eight of these had a subtrochanteric fracture. These fractures were classified according to the AO system, all were managed operatively using a bent plate (Rowe plate, At operation, we harvested a segment of the ipsilateral fibula (approximately 14 All medical records and radiographs of patients with postoperative subtrochanteric fracture were reviewed and compared with those of a similar non-fracture group ( Among 194 consecutive free VFGs (158 patients), eight subtrochanteric fractures occurred, an incidence of 4.1% ( All fractures developed after low-energy injury, i.e. type A according to the AO classification, all were secondary to a fall or abnormal pivoting on the affected leg and all involved the defect formed in the lateral femoral cortex for graft placement; the holes placed for both fracture and non-fracture groups were all of diameter 17 The aetiology of osteonecrosis included alcohol consumption in six cases (75%), corticosteroids in one (12.5%) and was idiopathic in one (12.5%). Alcohol consumption was more prevalent in the fracture group than in the non-fracture group (75% vs. 22%). Seven (87.5%) of the eight subtrochanteric fractures occurred during the first 12 postoperative weeks during touch weight bearing, and one occurred at 9 months after free VFG. Pre- and post-VFG Harris Hip Scores (HHS) were available for all 158 patients. Among those who sustained a fracture, the mean preoperative HHS was 66 (62–72), and the mean postoperative score at the most recent follow-up was 90 (78–97). In no case was there any reduction in HHS, and no significant differences were observed between the fracture and non-fracture groups in terms of clinical results ( Pedicle injury after fracture occurred in only one case. This person experienced a vascular pedicle injury after subtrochanteric fracture and required re-anastomosis. All eight patients were admitted to our hospital within 24 All eight subtrochanteric fractures originated from the defect created in the lateral femoral cortex for graft placement. This procedure requires drilling a 17-mm hole in the lateral cortex to remove necrotic bone, to place autogenous cancellous bone and to insert the fibular graft. This opening is considerably larger than that of 6–10 Eight subtrochanteric fractures occurred after 194 free VFG procedures performed to treat ONFH, an overall incidence of 4.1%. According to Aluisio, Femoral bones in Asians (as in our series) are usually smaller than those of Caucasians. Thus, because the diameters of the holes drilled in the studies were identical, the percentage defect created in Asian bone was larger. Furthermore, at our institution, the openings were placed in the lateral cortex 2.5 The aetiology of osteonecrosis included alcohol consumption in six (75%) of the fracture group. It is well known that alcoholics have a reduced sense of balance, and that chronic excessive alcohol consumption eventually results in an osteopenic skeleton and increases the risk of osteoporosis. Thus alcoholics are at greater risk of fracture. Moreover, although alcoholics tend to claim that they have not drunk excessively after surgery, they tend to find this self-discipline difficult. The immediate cause of fracture in all our eight cases was either a fall or abnormal pivoting on the affected leg. Furthermore, all but one of the fractures occurred within 12 weeks of VFG. When we compared the fracture and non-fracture groups, no differences in operative technique or graft positioning were identified. In terms of preventing fractures, it was evident that patients who underwent a non-weight-bearing regimen postoperatively had a significantly lower fracture rate than those on a touch weight-bearing regimen; in fact, seven of the eight fractures occurred during touch-down weight bearing. Aluisio Many internal fixation devices have been recommended for the treatment of subtrochanteric fractures because of the high incidence of complications. The Rowe plate is a wide curved plate designed to fit on the lateral surface of the greater trochanter and proximal shaft of the femur. Its proximal end has four round holes for cancellous screws (6.5 In the fracture group, the mean HHS was 66 points at the time of VFG and 90 points at last follow-up; in all cases the HHS was higher at last follow-up than before free VFG, and this improvement was similar to that observed in the non-fracture group ( We offer the following explanation as to why subtrochanteric fractures did not have adverse effects on clinical and radiological results. First, we used Rowe plate internal fixation. This plate allows anatomic reduction and internal fixation without interfering with graft position or causing graft penetration. Second, we used the second perforating branch of the deep femoral vessel as the recipient vascular pedicle, whereas Aluisio used the lateral femoral circumflex vessel. Although subtrochanteric fracture is one of the most serious complications of free VFG, it can be successfully managed by open reduction and internal fixation using a Rowe plate. Furthermore, the occurrence of subtrochanteric fracture was not found to have adverse effects on final clinical or radiological results. The majority of fractures developed within 12 weeks of VFG after bilateral staged procedures, and we suggest that strict education and protective weight bearing are advisable during this 12-week period. None.