The goethite process has gained renewed attention due to the generation of environmentally acceptable sludge in hydrometallurgical processing of nickel. Goethite precipitation at low pH (2.1 to 2.5) contributes to minimizing the loss of nickel, but results in iron precipitates with poor filterability. In this paper, crystallization induced by natural limonite seeds was used to improve the filterability of iron precipitates. The X-ray Diffraction, Scanning Electron Microscopy and Laser Particle Size Analysis show that limonite seeds could induce the growth of goethite crystals and reduce the generation of amorphous iron phases at low pH. The limonite particles of size range −74+37μm were the most suitable for inducing goethite crystallization. A smaller specific surface area of goethite particles by limonite seeding and hot acid washing contributed to a decrease in the adsorption on to the precipitates.Iron removal from leach liquors is a common but complicated process. For almost 50 However, there are two practical problems associated with the goethite process, such as the poor filterability of precipitates and the loss of nickel and cobalt. Recent studies have shown that carefully regulation of certain parameters, such as controlling pH at a lower level, could minimize the loss of nickel ( Two parallel mechanisms of Fe(II) oxidation (homogeneous and heterogeneous) have been reported in the literature ( In hydrothermal crystallization, seeds induced crystallization was widely adopted to produce pharmaceutical and nano-materials ( Nickel-containing mother liquor for iron removal was obtained from the 4th Nickel Smelter of Jinchuan Group Ltd. in Gansu province, China. The nickel smelter adopted the pressure oxidative leaching process. The natural limonite specimen used for seeds preparation was supplied by Robe River Iron Associates (Western Australia, Australia). The mother liquor was analyzed using ICP-AES. Sodium hydroxide (6 The experiments for iron removal from the mother liquor using the goethite process were carried out using a 50 The pH measurements were recorded on-line using a pH meter with temperature compensation (Starter3100, Ohaus, NJ, USA). The ICP-AES and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy were used for elemental assays needed for mass balance. The XRD analysis was carried out to characterize the crystalline phase of iron precipitates. The particle size of the iron precipitates was measured using a laser particle size analyzer (LPSA, Mastersizer 3000, Malvern, England). The sample was sonicated 10 As shown in The entire element component and XRD pattern of the limonite specimen are shown in The effect of the dosage of limonite seeds on goethite precipitation is presented in Hydrogen peroxide was slowly injected into the nickel sulfate leaching solution, and ferrous ions were oxidized to goethite (   The crystal size distribution (CSD) has a direct influence to the particle size distribution of final product. When the crystal seeds distribute an appropriate and narrow size range, the product will have satisfactory size or morphology ( The loss of nickel(II) during the iron removal process by precipitation is an issue. In the iron removal process by precipitation, the nickel(II) retained by the solids is included into the mineral lattices, adsorbed onto the mineral surfaces, or precipitated out of the solution onto the solid surface ( It was expected that lost nickel could be further reduced by washing iron precipitates but the results were not satisfactory with acid washing liquor at room temperature. The hot washing liquor (50–60 The goethite process at a lower pH minimizes the loss of nickel during the precipitation of iron from clarified nickel(II) leach liquors, but generates precipitates of poor filterability. To solve the filtration problem, limonite seeds were applied to induce crystallization and improve the goethite precipitation. The current study showed that the particle size of goethite precipitates was significantly increased by the addition of limonite seeds, especially in the size range of − This study was supported by the