In the context of increasingly required evaluation of existing critical concrete infrastructures, prediction of the long-term behaviour can sometimes be very sensitive to the proper consideration of physical phenomena that occur during the first weeks during construction. For the specific example of mass concrete structures, it is important to consider the heat of hydration process and the possible development of thermally induced stresses and cracking at an early age. Consideration of the early age to the long-term time spectrum to recreate the history of stress/crack development is a challenging task in the field of numerical simulation of concrete structures and involves a consideration of multiple non-linear and physical phenomena. This work constitutes a continuation of previous works involving multi-physical simulation of concrete structures using the explicit finite element solver algorithm, which is known for its efficiency in solving highly nonlinear problems compared to the conventional implicit solver. A simple and innovative framework was developed in previous studies and involves the decomposition of strain into mechanical, thermal, creep, shrinkage and a coupling chemo-physical strain. This work focuses on the development of a simple and feasible computational framework for considering the creep in the specific field of mass concrete structures. Verification and validation examples are considered at the material and element levels. Application at the structural level on a new numerical benchmark demonstrates the feasibility of the approach and the efficiency of the developed computational framework.Multi-physical simulation of concrete structures involves consideration of multiple physical phenomena that interact during the life span of the structure from construction to operation. In the context of increasingly required evaluation of existing critical infrastructure, prediction of future behaviour can sometimes be very sensitive to the proper consideration of physical phenomena that occur during the first weeks after concrete pouring, including the hydration process, the temperature history, stiffness and strength development, creep and shrinkage. For the specific case of mass concrete structures, such as dams and more generally hydraulic structures, these early age phenomena may induce thermal stresses due to external restraints with the rock foundation and due to internal restraints and temperature gradients At a larger scale and during the operation of the facility, AAR strains with an order of magnitude larger than the thermal strains may arise  According to the authors’ knowledge, numerical simulations involving concrete structures rarely considered all four scales and generally concentrated on either one or two scales. For restrained structures, it is important to mention that, depending on the concrete mix, temperature-induced stresses may form in the first 5–50 h, so it is very important to consider the very early age time scale in the context of mass concrete structures When using the conventional implicit FE solver, convergence issues may arise in the industrial context of simulation of large and mass concrete structures. Three main reasons lie behind this fact. The first is the large number of degrees of freedom required. When using the smeared cracked approach, a finer mesh is necessary to capture numerical damage close to the real cracking pattern and to capture shear failure mechanisms very common for these structures. Therefore, more computational efforts are generally required to form and invert the tangent stiffness matrix in the Newton-Raphson iterative procedure. Iterative solvers may be used in the case of large models (e.g., based on AMG technology) but still add iterations to the already iterative implicit algorithm and make computational time more unpredictable. Additionally, non-convergence issues occur due to concrete softening in models with no or light reinforcement. The propagation of cracks in the case of a large slightly reinforced member is believed to be of a local dynamic nature due to the transient local instability of the system. As shown in The approach uses the decomposition of the total strain into mechanical, thermal, creep, shrinkage and AAR strains, and an innovative scaling technique is used to address the difference in time scales between the implicit and explicit approaches. Creep and thermal strains were neglected in these past works due the presence of AAR strains but can have an important impact on the early age for the specific case of mass concrete structures. Considering at the same time, the very early age to the long-term behaviour of concrete structures is numerically a challenging issue due to the difference in time scales. In the early/very early age, strength and stress development follow very steep gradient due to hydration and aging phenomena. Discretization into small increments in the range of hours or days is therefore required to capture the path-dependent behaviour of concrete. The use of very small increment sizes due to numerical stability issues is an inherent feature of the explicit algorithm. For the example shown in The scope of this work is to develop, for the first time, a computational approach for the consideration of creep using the QSE-FEM. Rather than presenting a new creep model, the idea is to accommodate existing known models in the computational multi-physical QSE-FEM framework. The developed phenomenological approach is simple, practical and most importantly feasible within the industrial context of the assessment of existing structures. In this specific context, very limited information is available about the input parameters of the material (typically the compressive strength of concrete), and the implementation of experimental characterization tests is difficult and expensive (e.g., for the characterization of creep). Within this perspective of feasibility, important simplifying hypotheses have been considered, such as weak/sequential coupling of physics, linear visco-elasticity and the superposition principle. Such simplifications may affect the accuracy of the simulation results, but the impact would be negligible if the prediction of the global displacement field/cracking pattern and the residual capacity of the structure are the main interests. The context of mass concrete structures is considered, so mainly basic creep is targeted, but the authors believe that the developed approach can be extended to any other type of concrete structure. After a quick review of existing creep models and the development of the theoretical background, verification and validation examples are presented at the material and element levels. Finally, an application example is presented at the structural level on a typical mass concrete structure involving highly non-linear behaviour. The example demonstrates the feasibility of the computational framework and the ability to simultaneously consider the very early age and long-term behaviours of mass concrete structures. Following an explicit formulation, the nonlinear problem is solved using dynamic equilibrium equations. Conventional nodal forces are converted into inertia forces by assigning lumped masses to nodal DOFs. The dynamic equilibrium equations are written in terms of inertia forces, where Compared to the conventional implicit approach, no iteration is performed. The transient solution algorithm advances explicitly in time using a very small time increment The term Hence, The original nonlinear static problem is solved in a quasi-static manner. This can be accomplished by applying the loads “slowly enough” with respect to the fundamental period of vibration As shown in The multi-physical framework is based on the hypothesis of decomposition of the total strain into mechanical, thermal, creep, shrinkage and AAR strains, according to the following equation in the incremental form: This equation shows the coupling between the four fields considered in this framework: the stress field Creep is a physical phenomenon resulting in a partially reversible delayed deformation. Indeed, when a material is subjected to an external load, it deforms instantly (elastic deformation) and then undergoes a gradual deformation with time ( In addition, under small stresses (up to 40% of the compressive strength in magnitude), this phenomenon is linear, and the principle of superposition is then applicable. After unloading, the material partly recovers its state. First, an instantaneous recovery is observed, corresponding to the elastic recovery, followed by a delayed partial recovery corresponding to creep ( Several mathematical models for creep have been suggested in the literature and can be divided between semi-empirical models and viscous models. The double power law The compliance function may further be decomposed as follows: In code-type formulations, the compressive strength of concrete and the cement type are generally the main input parameters. The relative humidity and the volume-to-surface ratio are generally no longer required when only basic creep is considered. More parameters are required for the power-type laws, and data fitting with experimental data is generally required. Viscosity models are based on a layout of springs and dashpots, whether with linear or non-linear constitutive behaviours (visco-elastic and visco-plastic models). The compliance function is therefore obtained by integrating the differential equations. For the Kelvin-Voigt model, the creep strain is written as: For the Dirichlet Series model or generalized Kelvin chain model, the creep strain is written as: Viscosity models, also known as rheological models (rate-type creep laws), are widely used in the general context of finite element formulation In this work, linear viscoelastic creep models with ageing properties and accounting for temperature effects on maturity are considered. Additionally, because experimental testing for creep characterization is generally difficult to achieve within an industrial context, an ad hoc systematic method is suggested. In this practical method, viscous creep parameters are identified based on semi-empirical creep laws provided by the CEB-FIP code. Even if such equations are intended primarily for simple beam/hand calculation and for compressive stresses, they offer the advantage, for the specific case of basic creep, to depend on easily measurable input parameters. The results in As shown in Returning to the incremental equations describing the multi-physical problem (Eq. For a creep formulation to be “scalable”, it should be possible to find scaled parameters As an example, the development for the CEB-FIP 90 basic creep formulation is considered in the following. The compliance function can be written as follows: Scaling is possible for the two visco-elastic models described in the previous section due to the forms of the differential equations in Eqs. For the rest of the article, the discussions will be based on the CEB-FIP-90, Kelvin-Voigt and generalized Kelvin-Voigt visco-elastic creep models. The developments can be easily extended to other creep models. The extension of the uniaxial creep formulation, shown earlier, to the 3D general stress/strain state is done by considering the Poisson effects in the other orthogonal directions by using the equivalent stress In this section, stress/strain tensors are represented in a vector form using bold characters and in the so-called Voigt notation as follows: In the context of multi-physical FE, an incremental formulation using the principle of superposition is used. This principle is known to be valid only for small stress magnitudes Considering the very small increments followed in the explicit integration scheme, it is possible to assume a constant variation of stress From a numerical point of view, additional internal state variables are required for the consideration of creep. In the general 3D case, 6 variables are required for each component The incremental following algorithm is then used: Knowing the stress tensor Compute the creep strain increment using Eq. Compute the other strain increments: thermal ( Deduce the mechanical strain increment Using this mechanical strain increment and the mechanical constitutive law, compute the stress increment As shown in Ageing is expressed in the compliance Eq. Temperature is known to have an effect on the maturity of concrete and therefore affects the kinetics of the creep. This effect can be modelled by considering an equivalent curing time Due to the dynamic nature of the explicit solver, special consideration needs to be drawn to the case of constant loads that have to be applied instantly or quasi-instantly ( As will be shown later, consideration of damping is important for this particular case, and especially for creep at a very early age, where the state variables for recording the loading time can be sensitive to the oscillations. Unless otherwise specified, a Rayleigh-type mass proportional damping is used in all the following QSE-FEM analyses, using the following formula for computing the In all the analyses, a critical damping The identification of creep parameters for viscoelastic models can be performed based on creep tests for a given concrete mix. This task can be difficult in the context of an existing infrastructure, especially for the characterization of ageing. In this work, a systematic ad hoc method is suggested for identifying these parameters based on a given predictive semi-empirical formulation of creep. The example of the CEB-FIP 90 model will be taken (the same model for basic creep is used in CEB-FIP 2010). The usefulness of the CEB-FIP 90 model for creep in early age concrete was shown in previous studies (e.g., For the Kelvin-Voight model, the two parameters For the generalized Kelvin model, seven components are chosen with seven imposed values of the characteristic times: Examples of this identification are shown in In this section, a reduced integration cubic element (300 × 300 × 300 mm) with one integration point is used in the QSE-FEM method, which is equivalent to computation at the material point level. The procedure described in the previous section is used to identify the 14 generalized Kelvin parameters from the CEB-FIP 90 equations by using only the compressive strength as an input parameter and the type of cement. The CEB-FIP 90 results are based on the analytical superposition method. Hanson creep tests for Ross dam are considered the first verification example  The Ross 1958 series of tests The validations are shown in The third V&V test focuses on creep modelling under the general 3D stress condition (see Again, the results generally show an acceptable correlation between the numerical predictions and the experimental results, knowing that the compressive strength of the concrete is the only input parameter to the numerical analyses. The experiments of Emborg’s 1989 thesis The FE model used for the QSE-FEM analyses is shown in With: These adjustment coefficients are represented in By adjusting the CEB-FIP 90, the modified version (CEB-MOD) gives good correlation with the test, as shown in An application example of a dam and its foundation is considered in this work and can be considered a new numerical benchmark for assessing the non-linear structural behaviour of a mass concrete structure affected by thermal effects. The geometry of the structure and all the required data are provided in  The QSE-FEM model has a total number of 160,000 degrees of freedom, and the computational time for the analysis was approximately 12 h using 16 cores (parallel processing) of a 28-core Intel Xeon E5-2690v3@2.6 Ghz desktop computer. This result demonstrates the feasibility of the computational framework for the case of larger models (such as the one shown in  A computational framework for considering creep in the context of multi-physical explicit simulations involving concrete structures has been developed in this study. It considers both ageing and temperature effects on creep. This work is a follow-up of previous works in which the quasi-static explicit finite element method (QS-FEM), known for its efficiency in solving large and highly non-linear problems, was used as a final multi-physical analysis within a general methodology based on three different finite element analyses: thermal implicit, hygral implicit and a final QSE-FEM analysis The following conclusions were drawn when developing and applying the computational framework: The developed framework is simple to implement and can be extended to other creep models and other types of concrete structures. It can also be used to extend the applicability of existing purely mechanical constitutive laws. With the systematic identification parameters of the generalized Kelvin chain model according to the CEB-FIP 90 model code, the only required input parameters are the concrete compressive strength at 28 days and the cement type. Validation results showed that the results of this practical approach are generally satisfactory, except for the case of the very early age where the CEB-FIP creep model seems to under-estimate creep and therefore under-estimate the stress relaxation. For the specific context of multi-physical simulation of mass concrete structures, where the main concern is prediction of the cracking and the residual capacity of the structure, this approach is therefore conservative. It is believed that existing semi-empirical creep functions are not adequate for predicting the compliance function for the very early age period (both instantaneous and creep components) due to the limited number of experiments that focused on this timeframe. The authors believe that the compliance function for the very early age is very dependent on the concrete mix. For a better assessment of the thermal stresses, it is very important to experimentally characterize the compliance function at a very early age since thermally induced stresses can develop in the first hours after casting The application benchmark example demonstrates the feasibility of the developed approach for multi-physical simulation on large models of concrete structures covering the stress history from the very early age to the long-term age. The use of a very small stable time increment that could be viewed as a limitation of the explicit solver is actually an advantage for the targeted context since it allows a proper time discretization for the important physical phenomena occurring during the first hours to days. Due to the well-known path-dependency of concrete material, especially non-reinforced or lightly reinforced concrete, it is important to have a small and convenient time increment even for a long-term time scale. In this study, the very small and constant time increment, mainly dictated by the size of the smallest element in the mesh, appears to be too refined for the assessment of the long-term behaviour. It is possible to overcome this limitation by using different time-scaling techniques between the four identified time scales, and this will be the objective of future studies.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: