The fundamental error associated to the sampling of heterogeneous particles is unavoidable and can only be minimized by an adequate selection of the sample mass and/or size reduction of the sample before division. An equation is derived to estimate the relative standard deviation of the fundamental error due to the sampling of low grade ores. The results of the application of the proposed equation are similar to the results of the Gy's formula for high and medium grade ores but are different for low grade ores. The main difference between the Gy's formula and the proposed equation for low grade gold ores is related to the liberation factor.Sampling of particulate materials is an important step in the evaluation and optimisation of mineral processing plant operation ( The fundamental error is an unavoidable error that is produced when a small portion of a population of heterogeneous particles is taken to represent the whole population. The concept of fundamental error can be illustrated using the sampling of a population consisting of 100 balls with 90 white balls and 10 black balls. A 10 ball sample may contain 0, 1, … 10 black balls leading to different estimates of the black ball concentration in the population. The fundamental error is related to the probability that a sample may not contain 1 black ball leading to a wrong estimate of the black ball concentration. A batch of broken ore can be viewed as a population of balls that may or may not carry a valuable species. Although some authors ( The paper is divided into 4 sections. The first section describes the concept of fundamental error of sampling heterogeneous materials. The second section presents a derivation of an equation that can be used to estimate the standard deviation of the fundamental error of sampling. The third section recalls the Gy's formula and the application of the derived equation and Gy's formula to different ore characteristics is presented in the last section. In this paper the population to be sampled is defined as a finite batch of crushed ore that is completely submitted to the sampling process. The sampling is supposed to be carried out with adequate equipment and procedures eliminating the risk of systematic errors. Errors related to grouping, long term fluctuation and increment extraction ( The division of a crushed ore batch into several samples is illustrated in The derivation of the equation for the variance of the fundamental error of sampling assumes that the population to be sampled is a batch of ore crushed down to an adequate size for the preparation of batches for metallurgical testing. Usually the preparation particle size is less than 2 All the particles in the population are spherical with a diameter The valuable species grains have a constant equivalent diameter of There is only one valuable mineral grain per particle. This last assumption is acceptable for coarse grained valuable species but could be restrictive for finer ones (see below for more comments and details in The mass of the population to be sampled is noted The number of mineral grains or locked particles in the population is given by: The division of a population consisting of particles carrying a valuable species and particles of gangue can be described as a binomial process. The average number of gangue and locked particles directed to the sample is given by: The concentration of the valuable species in a sample (subscript S) is given by: The alternative method used here is based on the analysis of the propagation of errors on the numbers of mixed and gangue particles through Eq. The derivation of the Gy's formula used for the estimation of the standard deviation of the fundamental error of sampling is presented by The Gy's formula and Eq. The ore population to be sampled consists of 100 The results of the application of the Gy's formula and of Eq. The sensitivity of Eq. The model of one valuable grain per particle is however a simplification of the actual nature of an ore. Depending upon the distribution of the valuable grains in the ore it is possible that two and may be more valuable species grains could be locked inside the same particle. The mathematical derivation of a general equation for the sampling of such material is complicated but work is progressing to develop a numerical simulation procedure to predict the standard deviation the fundamental error of sampling. However the presence of cluster of several fine valuable species grains in a particle may produce a nugget effect. Such behavior could be modeled by allowing a size distribution of the valuable mineral species with large grains corresponding to clusters of several fine grains in a single particle. This approach would simplify the derivation of a general formula. At this stage two formulas are available to estimate the standard deviation of the fundamental error associated to sampling. The two formulas give similar results in the cases of similar sizes for the valuable mineral grains and gangue particles but diverge when the valuable grain size is less than the particle size and the concentration of the valuable species becomes less than 0.5% v/v. Repetitive sampling is used here to obtain an estimate of the standard deviation of the fundamental error of sampling associated to the sampling of low grade ores and to help in identifying the method that should be used for planning the sampling of low grade ores. The gold assays of 23 ore batches prepared from a 150 The application of the Gy's formula to the ore characteristics with a top gold grain size of 0.02 A preliminary estimate of the standard deviation of the preparation and analysis errors can be obtained from the replicated assays of The fundamental error associated to sampling of the pulverized 150 The covariance induced by the mass conservation that links the two sub samples extracted from a pulverized 150 The use of Eq. An equation is proposed to estimate the relative variance of the fundamental error due to sampling of heterogeneous materials. The proposed model is based on a number of simplifying assumptions, as a spherical shape for the valuable mineral grains and the presence of a single grain of it in mixed particles. The equation is applicable to low grade ores providing that an estimate of the valuable mineral top grain size is available and is sufficiently small with respect to the ore particle size. A model validation is made using repetitive sampling tests of a gold ore. Although it is difficult to separate fundamental errors from sample preparation and analysis errors, the predicted fundamental error standard deviation is comparable to the value calculated from the experimental results. The results also show that the fundamental error, and this is corroborated with unpublished tests and results obtained by other authors, is lower than predicted by Gy's original or amended formulae. Furthermore, the example shows that the sample preparation and chemical analysis error may contribute more significantly to the variance of the gold assays than anticipated. Obviously, the actual gold ore textures are much less simple than assumed, since the native gold and other gold-bearing mineral shape, size distribution, and non-purely random implementation in the multi-mineral gangue are quite complex. However, in summary, it is suggested that the specified sample mass for limiting the fundamental sampling error in low-grade ores might be frequently over-estimated, and that careful repetitive sampling tests should be conducted for each specific ore for evaluating the respective magnitudes of the fundamental error, nugget effect, and preparation and analysis contributions to the total error. The authors would like to acknowledge