In this paper the significance of the biofilm biomass present in horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetland in removal of nitrogen was demonstrated. The model was developed and optimised using data obtained in a horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetland planted with Phragmites mauritianus and filled with 6–25mm diameter gravel pack. The effects of biofilm biomass activities were studied by removing the effects of plant and gravel bed biofilm in an already calibrated model and re-run the same.
                  Research results indicate that total nitrogen removal was largely influenced by growth of biofilm on plants than on aggregates. When plant biofilm and suspended biomasses were considered total nitrogen removal of 38.1% was observed compared with 25.1% when aggregate-biofilm and suspended biomasses were considered because plants have more surface areas, which are active sites for the effective biofilm activities than aggregates. However, in a natural wetland where the soil grain size is smaller, the effect of biofilm on plants may be smaller than biofilm on soil particles.
                  There was no significant difference in organic-nitrogen effluent concentrations when biofilm biomass was considered or rejected. The averages in organic-nitrogen effluent concentrations were 0.39, 0.41 and 0.53gN/m2 for suspended alone, aggregate-biofilm and suspended; and suspended and plant-biofilm, respectively. This indicates that the removal of organic-nitrogen in wastewater is not significantly influenced by biofilm activities. Sedimentation and mineralization processes are the major factors influencing the concentration of organic-nitrogen in the effluent.
                  On the other hand, biofilm activities had significant influence on ammonia–nitrogen and nitrate–nitrogen transformation. The developed model output indicates that the effluent ammonia concentration was 2gN/m2, but in absence of biofilm the effluent ammonia concentration increases to 3.5gN/m2. Statistical analysis indicates that the mean average nitrogen–nitrogen in the effluent was 0.71gN/m2 when aggregate-biofilm was considered, but increased to 0.83gN/m2 when it was not considered.Various literature studies have reported on the transformation and removal of nitrogen in the subsurface flow constructed wetlands ( To meet the objectives of this research, four field scale horizontal subsurface flow units of constructed wetlands were built at the University of Dar es Salaam. ( A conceptual model that encompasses the suspended and biofilm biomass activities governing the nitrogen transformations and removal was developed. The model also incorporated the activities of both suspended and biofilm biomass on nitrogen transformation and removal in a horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetland. It has considered all major state variables such as organic-nitrogen, ammonia nitrogen and nitrate ammonia. The conceptual model has also taken into account all major nitrogen transformation mechanisms such as mineralization, nitrification, denitrification, plant uptake, sedimentation and decaying processes and uptake of ammonia and nitrates by microorganisms. All these transformation processes are carried out by both suspended and biofilm biomass. Therefore, mathematical equations developed in this study incorporated the suspended and attached biomass activities. A conceptual model, which incorporates both suspended and attached biomass activities, was run and the ammonia, organic and nitrate nitrogen effluent loads together with transformation mechanism values were recorded. Details of the developed model and model output are available elsewhere ( To determine the effect of activities of attached biomass on gravel bed and plant roots (biofilm) on nitrogen transformation, the biofilm component was removed from the optimised model. The model was then re-run in order to predict the effluent load of ammonia, nitrates and organic-nitrogen. Transformation processes that facilitate nitrate–nitrogen removal in wetland systems are denitrification and uptake by plants and microorganisms. Several studies have suggested that autotrophic bacteria uptake of ammonia is preferred over nitrates (  The effects of aggregate-biofilm biomass were studied by setting to zero the activities of suspended biomass and biofilm growth on roots of plants. The model output showed that 0.635 Uptake of nitrogen by plant was 0.298    The aggregate-biofilm biomass was set inactive to enable the modelling of the effects of suspended and plant-biofilm biomass activities on nitrogen removal. Mass balance of nitrogen shows that 0.833 Based on nitrogen removal efficiencies, the leading pathway removal in this case was denitrification process (19.3%) followed by plant uptake (harvesting) (10.9%) and sedimentation (gravel accumulation) (7.9%). Total permanent nitrogen removal was 38.1% of total influent nitrogen, which was higher than 25.1% when suspended biomass and biofilm growth on gravel bed were considered. This is suggesting that roots of plants provide a larger surface area for formation of biofilm than gravel bed because of their sizes. It is also important to note that the rate of uptake of nitrogen by plants was about half of the rate of denitrification. It can be concluded that plant physical attachment sites were more important that their biological nitrogen uptake role.  This study has demonstrated the significance of the biofilm biomass present in horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetland in addition to that of suspended biomass in removing the nitrogen from wastewater. With regard to the model results, the following conclusions are made: The nitrogen removal when plant-biofilm and suspended biomasses were considered was 38.1% of the total influent nitrogen. However, when aggregate-biofilm and suspended biomasses were considered nitrogen removal was 25.1%. This indicates that plants have more surface areas, which are active sites for the effective biofilm activities than aggregates. However, the situation in natural wetlands might be different because they contain soil particles of much smaller grain size than aggregate diameter of 8–25 The role of plants was more physical than biological because attachment of microorganisms on roots of plants contributed nearly twice the rate of nitrogen removal than uptake of nitrogen by plants. There was no significant difference in organic-nitrogen effluents concentrations when biofilm biomass was considered or rejected. This indicates that the removal of organic-nitrogen in wastewater is not significantly influenced by biofilm activities. Sedimentation and mineralization processes are the major factors influencing the concentration of organic-nitrogen in the effluent.