Symmetric rolling (SR) and asymmetric rolling (ASR) processes were carried out on 6 mm thick AZ31 magnesium alloy sheets that were produced by twin roll casting (TRC) technique. Before rolling processes, sheets were heat treated in order to obtain a homogenized microstructure. In this study, for the ASR process the rolling speed ratio between upper roller and lower was selected as 1.25. Both SR and ASR processes were utilized with 40% reduction per passes using 2 pass schedule for a total reduction ratio of 0.67. Symmetric and asymmetric rolled sheets were characterized using optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques. Texture measurements were performed by using X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique and mechanical properties were investigated by tensile tests and also hardness measurements.Magnesium alloys have potential as structural materials due to their excellent properties such as low densities, high specific strength, high specific stiffness, good castability and machinability, low heat content per unit of volume, high damping capacity and good electromagnetic (EMI) shielding. They are therefore very attractive in applications in electronic, transportation (automotive, railway, aerospace and space) and defense industries where the mass reduction is an important issue In the last 10–20 years, a lot of companies, institutes and universities produced magnesium alloy sheets as laboratory scale using TRC technology In the present work, effect of ASR process on microstructure and texture of an industrial scale AZ31 magnesium alloy sheet produced by twin roll casting technique was investigated. The result of asymmetric rolling process on microstructure and texture was compared with the results of symmetric rolling process. The TRC magnesium alloy sheets used in this study were produced on an industrial scale and 1500 mm wide magnesium alloy AZ31 sheets of 6 mm thickness have been successfully cast The twin roll casting (TRC) system used had a gas-fired chamber furnace with a maximum melting capacity of approximately 3200 kg magnesium. Water-cooled steel twin-rolls of 1600 mm wide and 1125 mm diameter with 15° tilt angle were used. The system has a pinch roll unit, a cross-cut shear and a coiler. 1500 mm wide magnesium alloy AZ31 sheets of 6 mm thickness have been successfully cast Before rolling processes, sheets were heat treated. Homogenization conditions were set as follows: sheets were heated to 425 °C for 6 h and then cooled to room temperature in air. After homogenization, sheets have been symmetrically and asymmetrically rolled using a laboratory scale rolling mill. Schematic views of symmetric and asymmetric rolling processes were given in The microstructure examination of the as-cast, homogenized and as-rolled sheets was performed using optical microscopy (OM). Rolled sheets were also compared by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For optical microscopy, the samples were cold mounted in epoxy and polished starting with SiC paper, followed by 3 and 1 μ diamond slurries and colloidal silica. The specimens were etched in an acetic picral acid solution (4.2 g picric acid, 10 ml acetic acid, 70 ml ethanol, 10 ml water) for 5 s and they were washed with and rinsed in ethanol. Specimens were investigated with a Nikon L150 light microscope in plan view and cross sectional views. According to ASTM E112-96 standard, the Heyn Lineal Intercept procedure was applied for measuring the size of the grains Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations were carried out using a JEOL JSM-6335-F FEG. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies, specimens were cut, 3 mm diameter discs were punched and ground to a thickness less than 60 μm. Punched specimens were dimple ground with Gatan 656 Dimple Grinder. Specimens were ion polished first at 3 kV and after perforation at 1 kV with Gatan 691 Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS). The foils were examined with a JEOL JEM 2100 HRTEM with a LaB Texture measurements were performed by PANalytical X'Pert Pro operated at 45 kV and 40 mA after specimens were polished to third quarters of sheet thickness. Texture pole figures were determined by normalization with X'Pert Texture Version 1.1a software. To investigate the mechanical properties of the materials, a Zwick Z250 universal testing device was used. For homogenized condition samples were machined with tensile axis parallel to the rolling direction (RD) with a gage section of 50 mm length and 12.5 mm width. After ASR and SR processes the specimens with 20 mm gage, 50 mm length and 4 mm width were cut along planes coinciding with the rolling direction ( In this study, Recently, many studies about ASR process have been carried out. Watanabe et al. Chang et al. In the present study, after homogenization, the eutectic phases dissolve, equiaxed grain structure was formed and the grain size was refined to 19 μm. For symmetrically rolled sample, the average grain size was achieved as 10 μm and for asymmetrically rolled sample it was observed as 0.7 μm. SEM and TEM pictures of asymmetrically and symmetrically rolled sheets were given in (0002) and (1010) pole figures of the commercially available AZ31 1 mm and 2 mm sheets, asymmetrically and symmetrically rolled AZ31 magnesium alloys sheets were given in It is known that generally, the symmetrically rolled sample tends to show peak inclined to the rolling direction but the asymmetrically rolled sample tends to show peak slightly inclined to the transverse direction because large shear strain is introduced during asymmetric process, comparing to symmetric process The reduction of (0002) texture intensity and grain size after ASR is also expected to lower yield stress and higher elongation values  Also, the tensile test results and hardness measurements of the homogenized sheets after rolling processes were given in TRC–AZ31 alloys were heat treated to 425 °C for 6 h and then cooled to room temperature in air. After homogenization, sheets have been symmetrically and asymmetrically rolled at a warm temperature of 300 °C. Before rolling processes, the sheets were firstly heat treated for 30 min at 350 °C. For the ASR process the rolling speed ratio between upper and lower rollers was selected as 1.25. Microstructures, textures and mechanical properties of the rolled AZ31 sheets were examined. The results are summarized as follows: After microstructural investigation, the mean grain size of the homogenized TRC–AZ31 alloy sheet was calculated as 19 μm, while, for symmetrically rolled sample, the average grain size was observed as 10 μm and for asymmetrically rolled sample it was achieved as 0.7 μm. When the pole figures were examined, as expected, it was found that the basal texture intensity of both asymmetrically and symmetrically rolled sheets were reduced compared to conventional rolling. According to texture studies, the maximum pole intensity values were 17.424, 16.231 and 10.052 for commercially available AZ31 1 mm sheet, commercially available AZ31 2 mm sheet and SR processed sheet respectively. However, minimum value of 9.490 could be achieved for the ASR processed TRC-AZ31 alloy sheet. The reduction of (0002) texture intensity and grain size after ASR is also expected to lower yield stress and higher elongation values. However, in this study it was determined that the mechanical test results of asymmetrically and symmetrically rolled sheets were almost the same. Despite the grain size improvement, lack of change in mechanical properties can be explained that the sheets used for rolling process produced by twin roll strip casting technology as well. Moreover, it should be noted that the samples used in this study were industrial scale sheets and the center line segregation and surface segregation may affect the mechanical properties. The reason also can be related with the long range inhomogeneous microstructure of the twin roll casted AZ31 magnesium alloy sheet that was used for the rolling processes.