An attempt has been made to present the progress in the applications of high-pressure fluid jets over a period of almost three decades. Based on all published literature and experience through the years, it is shown that advances in techniques, materials, design and automation have made the fluid jet not only a viable tool, but also an overwhelmingly advantageous tool for a wide variety of industrial applications. The technology will have an outstanding role to play in the 21st century when new materials that are hard to machine by conventional means will be used commonly by industries, and when the highest ecological requirements are imposed.Nature has taught that even the hardest rocks can be eroded by a stream of water and moved away from the area. Because this effect could be seen, it could also be adapted to man’s use. In the late 1960s Franz found that very high-pressure jets could be used to cut through wood products with little damage to the material on the outside of the cut surface and at relatively high cutting speed Yet there were limitations to the range of materials that this tool could cut. Whilst some work has been carried out, aimed at exploiting cavitation as a way of cutting these materials, the breakthrough came in adapting a technology used initially for cleaning surfaces by inducing sand into the water stream. The scientist from Flow Research adopted this technique to high-pressure cutting. Although the passage of the abrasive when driven by a high-pressure jet is sufficient to rapidly erode the collimating nozzle used to provide the abrasive stream The development of the market from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s had perhaps been dominated by the use of these very high-pressure, low flow-rate operations. In the mid-1980s, British Hydrodynamics Research Association made a new technological breakthrough. They had produced a means by which an abrasive could be injected into the flow line between the high-pressure pump and the initial acceleration nozzle. This development opened new technological possibilities, where the cutting of hard and brittle materials could be accomplished under pressures of below 70 High-pressure water jet technology was developed in many new applications in the last decade. The technical and theoretical basis for this technology is strong and the prospects for the new century are exceptional. The number of businesses based on this technology is mushrooming. The International Society of Water Jet Association was established, and the Journal of Water Jet Technology is available now. It is possible for people interested in this technology to attend international conferences every year organized in different countries. The number of publications available now are above 2000 titles. Market research has shown an 18.9% average annual growth for fluid jet products in the United States ($164 million in 1986 and $390 million in 1991, excluding contractual cleaning, which is growing at a rapid rate At the end of the 1960s the author of this paper, during his Ph.D. work at the Production Engineering Institute at Wroclaw Technical University, came up with the idea of dressing grinding wheels using high-pressure water jets. This idea was maturing during subsequent years in different approaches and in 1972 the prototype of a high-pressure water jet cutter for 4000 The application of fluid jet technology is broadly divided into: Manufacturing (including water jet-assisted machining), Civil Engineering and Construction, Mining, Nuclear and Hazardous and Off-shore/Sub-sea. Many industrial applications of high-pressure jetting were developed and applied commercially in the last decade. From the material machining point of view, a small diameter water jet generated by high pressure has very unique properties. A fast moving jet develops no sparks or dust, does not generate heat and thermostresses, exerts very little force on the cutting material, and thus does not deform the material during cutting. No dulling is observed. It is possible to start and end a cut in any place, at any moment, and generate very sharp profiles with the finished cut. A high-energy water jet with extremely high energy flux at the contact surface can cut honeycomb materials, cellular structures, and multi-layer materials without crushing the edges. Shape cutting with NC, CNC, optical trace or manual trace is easy to perform. A small back force is especially beneficial for cutting with six axis robot assistance. Cutting under hazardous conditions is also applicable without any risks. All high-pressure water jet properties are understandable, because of the extremely high velocity, which can achieve 3M number for higher pressures. Any non-metallic materials colliding with such a jet behave as in piercing by a fast moving solid object. For metal cutting, a high-pressure water jet is effective only for thin metal foils. To establish effective cutting through a thick metal slab, abrasive particles need to be entrained in the water jet. Each particle is accelerated to a velocity that makes them able to perform a micro-chipping effect. A slurry jet with a velocity of 1000 There are many examples in civil engineering and mining engineering where mechanical tools are assisted by high-pressure water or a liquid jet to protect the tool against excessive heating and premature damage. This concept was a subject of intensive study by many researchers in the area of metal machining ( A close examination of the area of contact, as the chip moves up the tool face, shows that this surface is not smooth and that the chip will mainly contact the hill-tops but never touch the valleys. The system of capillary channels created between the chip and the tool acts as a sponge which draws in the cutting fluid With the very severe conditions found at the tool contact point, there is little chance for improvement of the cutting action through the use of conventional lubricating methods. The primary function of the fluid is changed on pressurization from that of lubrication of the interface to that of prevention of the growth of metal contact along the tool face. It has been reported that a high-velocity lubricant jet directed at the flank face is a very effective coolant and acts so as to reduce the friction force on the tool Current knowledge of the improved efficiency achievable and the change in the mechanism of metal machining, resulting from the application of the lubricant in the form of a high velocity jet, is based upon a few experiments conducted over a limited pressure range Sharma et al. Spencer Shoenig et al. The work performed by Kovacevic et al. The method of supplying high-pressure lubricant into the tool/chip interface demonstrated by Yankoff The new concept Based on industrial practice, the application of a slurry jet makes it possible to machine the most advanced materials, where conventional methods are not applicable In modern production engineering there are many ways to shape parts: by a solid tool, a laser beam, ultrasonically, by electrical discharge, by chemical machining, and many more different ways. Although the above techniques are complimentary to each other, and have advantages for particular applications, the high-pressure slurry jet uniquely offers the following features: (i) it can be applied for turning, milling, wafering, piercing, and drilling difficult-to-machine materials; (ii) it is able to machine both very soft and very hard materials; (iii) it is able to machine multi-material composites selectively; (iv) it can cut stacks of different materials; (v) it can cut sharp profiles omni-directional; (vi) the material removal rates are high; (vii) there is no direct hard contact with workpiece; (viii) no heavy clamping is required; (ix) it is ideal for automation, robotics, and remote control; (x) a single machine tool can be designed to perform multiple machining operations on a single workpiece in one clamping operation; (xi) the cutting systems are flexible for instantaneous change of the cutting parameters that are suitable for particular operations; (xii) abrasive jets are faster in removing material than many composite material machining techniques. Surfaces generated by abrasive jets have the following characteristics: (i) no thermal effects or heat-affected zones; (ii) no clipping or cracking of brittle materials; (iii) no metallurgical or physical changes are observed; (iv) slight work hardening is possible; (v) minor burr formation is possible; (vi) cuts may be tapered; (vii) embedding may occur (viii) there are some problems in controlling the surface finish. There is one disadvantage: dimensional accuracy It has been demonstrated practically Further expansion of the fundamental knowledge of the mechanisms involved in machining by an abrasive water jet and their influence on the finished surface, depth of penetration, and nozzle wear, must take place. From a new generation of the abrasive jet cutting system development point of view, it is essential to continuously monitor cutting performance and utilize this information for system self-adaptation. The block diagram in A number of models have been proposed for predicting the cutting performance of both plain and abrasive water jets. Most of these required a number of test data points to establish performance curves that allow cutting under reasonably efficient operating conditions. More work must be done to better understand the ultra-high-speed machining mechanisms and abrasive particle behavior during collision, especially to improve the surface finish of the kerf, and to reduce striation formation. Theoretical models must be examined critically against experimental data and improved accordingly, or completely new models created for better results. This is not an easy task in spite of the long list of process parameters presented in Nozzles for plain water and direct injection systems must have an improved discharge coefficient, and the ability to concentrate energy into the smallest jet cross-section and the longest possible distance from the nozzle. Today achievements are satisfactory, but further development in the manufacturing of a smaller diameter nozzle channel with specified shape and high surface finish will be welcomed. Nozzles for direct injection jets can be designed to minimize or even eliminate abrasive wear. It is possible to concentrate on the abrasive near the axis of the jet to cut a kerf narrower than the nozzle diameter. Theoretical work must be backed by testing. It is expected that the “intelligent nozzle” which would have the ability of focusing abrasive particles by changing wall flow conditions in the nozzle channel will be developed. In the last few years the focusing nozzle lifetime has been extended significantly by applying composite carbides. No doubt development of the materials for focusing nozzles will continue, as there is now a large number of these machines in operation. There is improvement in the cutting performance as the operating pressure and abrasive flow rate is steadily improved (Brand et al., see The potential advantages of using interrupted jets makes them attractive for many applications. The water-hammer effect generated during segmented jet collision with an obstacle is well demonstrated in the laboratory and well understood, but there is not yet a common production practice being applied. The main reason for this is that the water slug shape, which is very critical for the water-hammer effect, is difficult to control. In the coming years, progress in this matter is expected. In high-pressure water jet technology, cavitation is utilized because of the intensification of cutting and cleaning effectiveness. Cavitation is always present in all jet cutting and cleaning operations as long as the ambient pressure is not too high. Severe cavitation will occur if the cavitating number is below a certain critical value: the exact value depends mainly on the nozzle design. A good understanding of the loads produced by impinging cavitating jets or liquid droplets on the surface is very important and is still the subject of study. More research on optimization of the nozzle design would be welcome. To control all of the processes, dedicated software systems will have to be developed that will obtain information from data banks about the materials to be cut, the required speed of operation, the surface finish desired, the jet parameters, etc. This bank requires more knowledge of cutting parameters and all possible variations, especially for newly developed materials. It should be based on more advanced cutting models for plain and abrasive water jets. Water jet technology is a clean technology as far as water recirculation is concerned. It does not produce dust but is a subject of concern dealing with noise pollution. Further research must be done on a noise-suppression system. Over the years the reliability of the equipment used has improved steadily, and now a high-pressure system can compete effectively with conventional technologies. It is expected that research and development of a direct abrasive pumping system will be successfully undertaken, leading to a marketable cutting system that is significantly simplified and highly competitive. An improvement of all pumping equipments, with respect to reliability, steady flow rate, and minimized pressure pulsation, should take place. Nozzle life needs to be further prolonged to ensure steady and repeatable flow conditions as long as possible. The accuracy and surface finish of cuts, which mainly depend on the quality of the manipulators and jet, are expected to be improved in the coming years. Milling or drilling by hydro-abrasive jets require depth-of-cut control, which in turn needs more information about the jet behavior to be stored in the machine data bank. It will also depend on how the abrasive particle stream in the slurry jet is organized and controlled. Nozzle quality and reliability is especially vital to this. Metal machining supported by high-pressure liquid cooling will attract more attention when the friction coefficient in the tool/chip interface is reduced from 0.8 (conventional machining) to the level of 0.1 for modern machining. At the same time, equipment for friction reduction based on high-pressure flow must be relatively cheap to be accepted widely.