Ball mill grinding circuit is a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system characterized with couplings and nonlinearities. Stable control of grinding circuit is usually interrupted by great disturbances, such as ore hardness and feed particle size, etc. Conventional model predictive control usually cannot capture the nonlinearities caused by the disturbances in real practice. Multiple models based adaptive dynamic matrix control (ADMC) is proposed for the control of ball mill grinding circuit. The novelty of the strategy lies in that intelligent expert system is developed to identify the current ore hardness and then select a proper model for ADMC. Compared with the various nonlinear DMC strategies, the approach can synthesize and analyze as many variables and status as possible to adequately and reliably identify the process conditions, and it does not introduce additional computational complexity, which makes it readily available to the industrial practitioner. Simulation results and industrial applications demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of this control strategy.Ball mill grinding circuits are the most important mineral processing units in concentrator plants, and the product particle size of grinding circuits greatly affects mineral’s recovery and the final tailing discharge. Ball mill grinding circuit is essentially a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) system characterized with couplings, nonlinearities and large time delays. Stable control of grinding circuit is usually interrupted by great disturbances, such as the changes in ore hardness and feed particle size, etc. which brings great difficulties to process control. Many research papers have been published on the development of control strategies for grinding circuits. These control methods involve decentralized PID control and model predictive control (MPC) ( Dynamic matrix control (DMC) ( Strategy based on multiple linear models is an effective way to represent nonlinear process. The multiple model method is first and now widely adopted in adaptive control and has obtained great success in real process applications ( Although multiple model method is a useful way to deal with nonlinear process, development of a suitable model switching algorithm for multiple models based adaptive DMC (ADMC) is not an easy task. The objective of model switching algorithm is to select the correct model from a set of candidate control models, which captures sufficient static and dynamic process aspects at the local operating point. In most of the multiple models based adaptive control, switching algorithms are based on the errors of the controlled variables ( Much knowledge, in plant practice, might be available in many forms, such as operator experience, reports, and recorded data. Knowledge-based control that can capture human experience and other forms of “soft” knowledge and use them in a reasoning framework would be quite desirable for many control process applications. One of the most reliable control types for multivariable and complex process is expert system. It is a very practical technique in the field of artificial intelligence, and has been widely used in process control ( The novelty of this work lies in that intelligent expert system is developed to identify the current ore hardness and then select a proper model for ADMC, which can employ as many variables and status as possible to adequately and reliably identify the process conditions in case of misinterpretations. Compared with the various nonlinear DMC strategies, such as neural networks based DMC, ADMC is straightforward and convenient for on-line use without increasing the computational complexity of the control algorithm. In this paper, an adaptive dynamic matrix control (ADMC) strategy based on expert system for ball mill grinding circuit is developed. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: A model of ball mill grinding circuit with three-inputs and three-outputs is constructed in Section The ball mill grinding circuit studied here operates in a closed-loop as shown in When ball mill works, the coarse ore is fed into the mill together with water. The tumbling action of the balls within the revolving mill crushes the feed to finer sizes. The slurry containing the fine product is discharged from the mill to a spiral classifier for classification. The slurry is separated into two streams: an overflow stream containing the finer particles as product and circulating load containing the larger particles. The latter is recycled back to the ball mill for regrinding. Product particle size is the final and most important controlled variable in a grinding circuit. Mine ore has to be ground to a size called the liberation size that the imbedded mineral particles are exposed for effective recovery in the following flotation process. It should be pointed out that grinding to a size much smaller than the liberation size may also bring some disadvantages. Besides the higher power consumed in grinding, too fine particles or slimes are difficult to be recovered, which will also produce larger volume of tailing discharge in the subsequent concentration and filtration process. Great disturbances exist in grinding circuit operation, such as changes in ore hardness and feed ore particle size, etc. Variations in ore hardness and feed size may cause the mass flow rate of the classifier overflow and particle size distribution to experience continuous fluctuations. Increased fresh ore hardness, for example, can easily lead to a steady increase in circulating load which consequently causes mill overload or a mill circuit overload. In order to counteract the effects of these disturbances, a basic circuit usually has a minimum of two manipulated variables, namely fresh ore feed rate and dilution water flow rate ( The main technical parameters of the grinding circuit are shown in In order to get a better control performance, three controlled variables are selected, i.e. product particle size, mill solids concentration and circulating load. Three manipulated variables are available: the fresh feed rate, mill feed water flow rate and sump dilution water flow rate. Many experiments have been conducted in the process to show the relation between manipulated variables and controlled variables. The grinding circuit model can be written as The elements Besides multivariable control loop interactions, the process represents a challenging control problem due to its modest nonlinear dynamic behavior caused by the great disturbances. In the plant studied, the ore is first crushed and screened before it is fed to ball mills and then the fluctuations of feed ore particle size are limited to a smaller range. The change in ore hardness has become the main uncontrollable disturbance and should be well detected for a long-time stable control. As mentioned above, multivariable models can be used to approximate the nonlinearities of a process, and the accuracy of the nonlinear approximation can be increased by combining more models ( As shown in Single model based DMC scheme is based on the step response model, consisting of reference trajectory, rolling optimization, feedback correction and predictive model. At any sampling instant, given a reasonably accurate predictive model and the desired future closed-loop behavior (or a reference trajectory), plan the set of future control moves in such a way that the predictive output is as close to the reference trajectory as possible. DMC is based on real-time optimization of a cost function ( The fact that DMC adopts only one single step response model generated at one particular operating point demonstrates that this linear model will become less representative of the current process conditions as process operating regions change due to disturbances or operating point variations, which will result in a degraded closed-loop response. Therefore, a multiple models based adaptive DMC is presented here to improve the closed-loop performance. The general schematic diagram of ADMC for ball mill grinding circuit is shown in Up to present, on-line ore hardness instrument for process control is not yet available in the market. Ore hardness can only be sampled manually and sent to laboratories for analysis. Since there is absent of on-line measurable information of disturbances, adaptive model switching algorithm has to be designed according to the changes in the process variables to track the operating point variation of the nonlinear grinding circuit. Because of the complexities and risks that mentioned before, an expert system has been developed that mimic the condition recognition of an experienced operator to identify the current ore hardness and then get a required model for ADMC. This expert system makes use of a set of operational rules, which are collected by the process engineers and veteran operators over a long period of time. It is composed of a knowledge base, a database, an inference engine, a control and communication interface and a user interface. The expert system structure for model switching strategy is shown in As shown in The main empirical knowledge culled from engineers and operators to identify ore hardness are illustrated as follows:  If product particle size is coarse and circulating load is high, this is the typical condition reflecting higher ore hardness.  On the contrary, if product particle size is fine and circulating is low, ore with low hardness is in processing.  Product solids concentration can be used together with product particle size to identify ore hardness. If solids concentration is low while particle size is coarse, increased ore hardness can be determined. On the contrary, there exists decreased ore hardness.  Mill acoustic emission should be measured to identify the internal working condition of a ball mill (  If ore hardness turns lower, the ore can be easily ground to fine particles and the discharge will speed up, and the acoustic intensity will increase.  If fresh ore feed rate is continuously lower than normal while circulating load is higher than normal, ore with high ore hardness is usually in processing.  Power draw is a function of load, and can be exploited to estimate mill charge levels ( Based on these rules, the knowledge base is established by production rules whose basic pattern is “IF conditions THEN results”, where the condition is a characteristic state of the process or a logic combination of characteristic states and the result is a conclusion. Process variables are fuzzified into 3–5 values as shown in The main rules of the expert system are shown in If the ore hardness is inside the current operating point, the model switching mechanism keeps inactive. If, however, the operating point drifts outside the original one, a switching action is active to make the ADMC to adapt to the new condition. Based on the characteristic states or their logical combinations, the inference engine gets the proper rules from the knowledge base by forward chaining; thereafter it determines the present condition and selects the proper model for ADMC. The main features of the expert system include: Each rule has a different priority; if two rules or more are activated simultaneously the rule with the highest priority is executed. A hysteresis is set in case of frequent switching between the neighboring points. Switching algorithm is executed every 15 The variables setpoints, low alarms and high alarms can be changed by the operators. This allows them to retune the controller if there are considerable changes in ore production. The following tuning and weighting factors are used while applying the DMC scheme to control the grinding circuit: Prediction horizon Based on the new control strategy, the close loop response of three controlled variables, namely product particle size, mill solids concentration and circulating load after a step change in ore hardness is simulated as shown in At 200 The new strategy based on ADMC was put into service in an iron ore concentrator plant in early October 2006. The main technical parameters of the grinding circuit have been shown in DMC scheme based on a three-input three-output model had been used for nearly two years before the implementation of ADMC strategy. Particle size, mill solids concentration and circulating load were chosen as controlled variables, while fresh ore feed rate, mill feed water flow rate and dilution water flow rate were selected as manipulated variables. The qualified rate of product particle size was kept about 95% under DMC mainly due to the changes in mineral ore hardness and feed particle size, etc. though the performance of DMC had been much improved compared with that of PID or manual control in earlier time. In order to investigate the benefits from using the updated control strategy,  It can be concluded that the new control strategy has achieved a better stable control of grinding circuit while rejecting process disturbances. Compared with DMC scheme implemented before, the control system has fulfilled the intended purpose. It should be pointed that if more sub-models are employed and a better approximation of the nonlinearities will be acquired, and there will be a hope of more increased control performance in the grinding circuit. A multiple model based adaptive dynamic matrix control (ADMC) has been developed and the application and benefits of this strategy is demonstrated in a grinding circuit. Three-input three-output model with three different levels of ore hardness have been constructed for ADMC. The novelty of the strategy lies in that intelligent expert system is developed to identify the current ore hardness and then select a proper model for ADMC. Compared with the various nonlinear DMC strategies to date, the approach can employ as many variables and status as possible to adequetely and reliably identify the process conditions, and it does not introduce additional computational complexity, which makes it readily available to the industrial practitioner. Compared with the former DMC, the running results of ADMC scheme have demonstrated improved performance while rejecting process disturbances in grinding control. The run results show that the proposed ADMC scheme based on expert system is an effective and practical method to control ball mill grinding circuits. The authors would like to thank the teammates who have contributed to the experimental work and system commissioning in industry. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by Project 8508002049, Southeast University.