This paper describes a methodology for modelling the nonlinear, inelastic load–displacement behaviour of two-way spanning unreinforced masonry walls subjected to out-of-plane loading. The model utilises a simplified macroblock approach that starts with the assumption of a collapse mechanism based on the wall’s boundary conditions. It then treats the wall as having zero tensile strength and assumes that the resistance comes entirety from two gravity-based resistance components: elastic rigid block rocking, and inelastic friction, with the total load resistance of the wall taken as the sum of these individual components. Analytical expressions for calculating the load and displacement capacities of the elastic rocking component of response are derived from the principles of statics using an integration approach well suited for the treatment of two-way mechanisms. Expressions for the associated frictional capacity component are obtained using the virtual work method. Comparison of the theoretical load–displacement response with experimentally measured data is favourable as demonstrated using data obtained via quasistatic cyclic tests on two-way spanning walls; the model is shown to provide an acceptable lower bound estimate of actual behaviour. The developed approach could be used to construct pushover curves for a range of different collapse mechanisms and therefore has the potential to be assimilated into a simplified displacement-based seismic design/assessment technique for two-way spanning walls against out-of-plane collapse.Despite the common perception that unreinforced masonry (URM) structures are brittle, the collapse of URM walls subjected to out-of-plane earthquake loading is governed by geometric stability rather than tensile strength, and the associated load–displacement ( This behaviour is already well established for one-way vertically spanning URM walls (either free standing or simply-supported at top and bottom) whose Conventional force-based (FB) seismic design, where the objective is to ensure that the wall’s load capacity exceeds the imposed load demand, continues to be the most commonly used method for designing URM walls against out-of-plane failure. From the designer’s point of view, this approach is most likely to lead to a favourable outcome (in terms of being able to demonstrate a wall’s seismic adequacy) if the ultimate load capacity inclusive of bond strength contribution is known. However, in practical assessment of existing URM buildings it is often difficult to reliably quantify the bond strength without extensive destructive testing. And whilst collapse load capacities can be computed using simplified limit analysis techniques that ignore bond strength and instead rely on geometric properties for input (e.g. Recent trends in seismic design of ductile structural systems have seen a move away from force-based (FB) techniques and toward displacement-based (DB) methods Considerable progress has already been made toward development of DB methodology for vertically spanning URM walls subjected to rocking. The associated Extension of DB methodology to two-way spanning walls has lagged behind, largely due to the lack of a suitable and experimentally validated model to describe the load–displacement behaviour. Promising progress has however been made on this topic recently by Lagomarsino Before the analytical The proposed model starts with the user postulating a collapse mechanism based on the wall’s geometry and boundary conditions. The boundary conditions necessary to generate these mechanisms include translational support at the bottom edge and at least one vertical edge. The top edge can be either free (type K1 mechanisms) or restrained (type K2 mechanisms). For conciseness, It should be mentioned that a wall with a particular set of boundary conditions can potentially undergo additional types of collapse mechanisms to those considered here In the equations featured in this paper, the following notation will be used: The effective height and effective length of the mechanism are taken as Referring to In the context of practical DB seismic assessment it is important to note that ignoring the presence of a top edge support and assuming that a wall undergoes mechanism K1 instead of K2 may not necessarily be conservative, because whilst K2 will generally have a higher load capacity, K1 will have a higher displacement capacity (instability displacement). The reason for this is that mechanism K1 exhibits a greater degree of rotation about the vertical axis and so its subpanels become less destabilised by gravity. This argument is supported by experimentally observed behaviour For comparison purposes, this paper will also consider one-way vertically spanning versions of these mechanisms in which both vertical edges are unsupported; these will be referred to as V1 where only the bottom edge is laterally restrained, and V2 where both the top and bottom edges are restrained, as illustrated in Allowance is made for the presence of a precompression load at the top of the wall due to for example a floor system or another part of the building’s mass. If we define In mechanisms where the top edge of the wall is free (K1 and V1) it is important to consider whether the mass imposing the precompression is restrained from horizontal movement (e.g. stiff slab tied to in-plane walls), or unrestrained (e.g. flexible diaphragm floor). This effect is demonstrated in To activate or deactivate these effects in the presented formulation, we introduce the binomial variable The vertical line of action of the precompression load affects the moment imposed on the wall, which in turn influences the wall’s load and displacement capacities. In the developed formulation the precompression eccentricity is specified using the nondimensional parameter Because the upward-deflecting point switches sides with alternating For a given collapse mechanism, the theoretical For convenience, this paper treats load in the nondimensional form The proposed theoretical approach makes the following general assumptions: The tensile strength of the wall is ignored and the wall is assumed to be already cracked. The wall’s displacement profile is assumed to follow an idealised collapse mechanism comprising a series of rigid, flat subpanels bordered by rotating hinge lines ( The user must make a reasonable approximation of the diagonal crack slope ( The lateral load acting on the wall is assumed to be spatially distributed proportionally to the wall’s mass; i.e., uniform acceleration Each of the contributing resistance sources ( Contributions from internal confinement and arching are ignored. This assumption is conservative as it neglects the additional load resistance provided by these effects at small displacements. Whilst arching can also provide a destabilising influence at large displacements, this occurs beyond the rigid body instability displacement. Rocking response provides the primary component in the overall To formulate the load–displacement for the rocking component, the two-way mechanism is discretised into a series of vertically spanning strips which are held together by out-of-plane compatibility ( The process makes the following assumptions (additional to those in Section The vertical strips transmit zero vertical shear force and zero net horizontal shear force across their lateral boundaries ( The vertical strips can however transmit moment about the longitudinal axis ( Additionally, the initial derivation of the From the first two assumptions it follows that the entirety of the lateral load is resisted by reactions along the top and bottom edges where supports are provided, shown as For the purpose of demonstrating the process used to formulate the rigid rocking Since the mechanism has top edge support, from Eq. Similarly, we define the effective weight as Referring to Also noting Eq. As shown in The external and internal loads acting on the blocks are shown in Implementing these equilibrium conditions and substituting in Eqs. In the above system of equations, rows 1 to 3 are horizontal force equilibrium equations, and rows 4 to 6 are moment equilibrium equations, for the top, middle and bottom blocks respectively. We can reduce this system of equations and substitute in Eqs. This expression represents the sum of the derivatives of longitudinal moments Finally, we substitute coefficients The above formula follows the linear-descending form associated with rigid body rocking (dashed line in The process demonstrated here on mechanism K2x can similarly be applied to any of the other two-way mechanisms shown in Superscripts ‘+’ or ‘−’ are used simply to denote that the positive and negative direction capacities can be asymmetric due to precompression eccentricity effects. A notable feature of these idealised rigid rocking relationships is that the resulting expressions for the load capacity ( Relationships for vertically spanning mechanisms V1 (freestanding wall) and V2 (simply-supported at top and bottom with crack at mid-height) are also given in The Due to finite material stiffness, response within the small displacement range prior to lift-off must be linear elastic, and thus the discontinuity across In existing literature, alternate piecewise-linear Predicting the stiffness of the initial loading branch of a post-cracked wall is a challenging task, influenced by a variety of factors including the effective material stiffness and state of degradation at the cracked joints. For the purposes of comparing the model to experiment, the ‘yield’ displacement in the bilinear model ( A reduced ‘effective’ wall thickness approach can be used to account for the finite bearing zone width across cracks. By adopting a rectangular stress block approach at the point of crushing, the thickness reduction factor (ratio of effective thickness to gross thickness) becomes Unlike vertically spanning walls whose As discussed in the previous section, the load capacity of the rocking component ( Throughout these equations, In the above expression, Other input parameters in The parameter The approach described makes the following assumptions (in addition to those listed in Section Moment capacities of vertical cracks are based on torsional friction along interlocking courses of bricks, with the instantaneous centre of rotation located at the centre of the bed joint. All bed joints along the height of the vertical crack are assumed to fully contribute to the total crack moment. In mortared stretcher bond URM walls however, cracks tend to generally develop a mixture of stepped failure (interlocking cracks) and line failure (cracks passing through brick units), and only the stepped portions contribute toward residual capacity. A theoretical approach for estimating the relative likelihood of each type of failure is reported in Frictional slip along vertical cracks is assumed to be purely torsional (a requirement for general assumption No. 2 in Section Eqs. The derived frictional capacities are based on the assumption that the vertical stress at the level of the crack is equivalent to the undisturbed stress (precompression plus weight of panel above). However, it is conceivable that in mortared walls, the continued cyclic rotation of interlocking cracks can degrade the bed joint interfaces, which can relieve the axial stress acting across them. Additional experimental testing is required to investigate the importance of this effect. To account for the above assumptions and approximations in practical design or assessment, it may be prudent to reduce the nominal In the overall As discussed in Section The load capacity contribution from precompression sliding is given as Using Eq. To verify the accuracy of the proposed model, the predicted For each wall and its associated mechanism, capacities Summaries of the analyses are presented in Key aspects of the undertaken analyses are as follows: For each solid wall (i.e. without openings), the length and height spans of the mechanisms ( Since the equations in This data set comprised eight full-scale, mortared brick masonry walls as reported in A notable aspect of the experimental The proposed model provides a conservative lower-bound representation of each wall’s The model appears to underpredict the inelastic (frictional) capacity of the walls, as can be seen by comparing the experimental hysteresis loops to the predicted forward and reverse path branches (shaded areas enclosed by dashed lines in In walls with openings, the difference in predictions using the two alternative approaches (solid wall analysis versus longer side analysis) is relatively minor in walls S3, S4, S5 and S6, but more pronounced in walls S7 and S8. The sensitivity of the predicted load capacities relates to the value of the effective length ( By visual comparison, the initial loading branches obtained using the empirical This set of data comprised three half-scale, dry-stack brick walls as reported in A summary of the analyses is presented in Interestingly, the idealised rigid block load capacity This paper has described a nonlinear inelastic load–displacement model for representing the behaviour of two-way spanning walls subjected to out-of-plane loading. The model ignores any initial bond strength and assumes that response consists of several independently acting resistance sources whose load contributions can be superimposed at any value of the wall’s displacement. These include the rocking component, modelled as bilinear-softening; and frictional components due to horizontal bending and precompression load sliding, both modelled as elastoplastic. A generalised method for predicting the load and displacement capacities of the rocking component of response has been described. The approach treats the wall as a series of vertically spanning strips held together by kinematic compatibility dictated by the shape of the collapse mechanism. The method has been applied to the type K family of mechanisms (refer to Comparison of the proposed model with experimental Potential applications of the developed model include incorporation into a nonlinear time-history analysis for the stepwise computation of response under dynamic loading; or implementation as part of a displacement-based seismic design/assessment framework, for example using the capacity spectrum method in combination with the substitute structure concept. A conceptual demonstration of the latter is provided in This research was conducted with the financial support of the