Ge(IV) can be found in industrial leachates of coal gasification fly ashes (CGFA) or zinc resources. In this research, the selective separation of germanium from simulated water leach liquors of CGFA containing Zn(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), and Co(II) was carried out using flat sheet (FSSLM) and hollow fiber supported ionic liquid membrane (HFSLM) systems containing Aliquat 336 as an ionic liquid carrier. As a result, Aliquat 336 was found to be an effective carrier for the selective transport of Ge(IV) from these types of solutions. In addition, the selective transport of germanium was performed from a simulated acidic zinc leach liquor using an FSSLM system. According to the results obtained, sulfuric acid in zinc leach liquors has not an insignificant effect on the transport of germanium in comparison to a water medium consisting of CGFA leach liquors. The germanium transport from both types of solutions was selective and its efficiency reached >98%. Finally, the facilitated transport of germanium was conducted in an HFSLM under the same condition obtained using the FSSLM system. It was observed that this system could transport the maximum amounts of germanium species in the first 30 min, showing its faster transport than that of the FSSLM system.Germanium compounds are widely used in many industries such as optics, telecommunication, alloys, and solar panels ( Various types of hydrometallurgical processes listed in The selection of an appropriate extractant as a carrier is vital to develop a proper germanium separation SLM process. There are many extractants summarized in Furthermore, the reaction of germanium tartrate complexes with the carrier molecules at the feed phase-membrane diffusion layer (see At the interfacial membrane-strip solution (see To the best of our knowledge, IL Aliquat 336 has been first used as a carrier of the supported liquid membrane in the current study for the selective transport of germanium from simulated solutions with the similar composition to zinc resources/fly ashes leach liquors. The effects of concentrations of Aliquat 336, tartaric acid, and HCl in strip solutions on the transport of species were examined in details. The processes proposed in this research can be considered as novel alternatives for the recovery of germanium from various industrial leach liquors. This study deals with two types of simulated leachates (one of the zinc residues and another of CGFA). In this regard, synthetic solutions containing 1000 mg/L of Zn, and 100 mg/L of Ge, Cd, Co, and Ni obtained by dissolving ZnSO Flat sheet supported liquid membrane experiments were carried out in two cells (volumes of 220 mL) with an effective membrane area of 11 cm The usual parameter to monitor an SLM system is the permeability coefficient P (cm/s). It can be calculated using the slope of the plot of Another type of SLM systems is called the hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM) as illustrated in In order to detect the proper support type for the efficient transport of germanium, two support types were studied: polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). The obtained results are given in According to The effect of the carrier concentration on the transport of germanium from a solution containing heavy metals was investigated. In order to separate germanium from heavy metals existing in the solution, the separation factor was used for the calculation as in Eq. As mentioned in the Introduction section, the presence of a complexant in a solution containing germanium is important to convert Ge(IV) to anionic species. Catechol as an organic reagent and carboxylates such as citric and tartaric acids are some reagents which can be used in this conversion. According to previous liquid-liquid extraction experiments (  According to the liquid-liquid extraction studies ( In this section, the effect of various parameters on the germanium permeation is investigated. All experiments in previous sections were carried out in water medium which was The lack of reactions between heavy metals and tartrate anions to form species (in working pHs of the present study) results from the low values of stability constant logarithm (log The speciation diagrams by Medusa ( According to In addition, with respect to One of the reasons for the decrease of the germanium transport in the presence of sulfuric acid results from the competition between germanium-sulfate and germanium-tartrate anions in reacting with Aliquat 336 ( In order to compare the efficiency of the HFSLM module with the FSSLM system, an experiment was conducted in the best conditions found in FSSLM experiments. As mentioned in Since no transport of other metals was observed, corresponding results are not presented here. It can be concluded that the HFSLM system of this study is an effective technique for the treatment of solutions such as leachates obtained from CGFA leach liquors or industrial wastewaters containing germanium. As seen in One of the challenges when using SLM systems is stability ( One of the reasons for the good stability of the present SLM system resulted from the properties of Aliquat 336. As mentioned in the Introduction section, small vapor pressure, tunability of characteristics, and its affinity towards other metals are some properties of Aliquat 336 that make it much more stable. Furthermore, the high viscosity of Aliquat 336 results in increasing the persistence of the carrier in the PTFE support pores. Consequently, the reusability of this liquid membrane for the germanium permeation was found to be possible. Similar results have been obtained for PVDF membranes. FSSLM processes using Aliquat 336 as a carrier were developed to transport germanium from simulated leach liquors of CGFA and zinc residues. Based on the experiments conducted on simulated CGFA leachates, the suitable condition was found to be using Aliquat 336 concentration of 5% v/v, mole ratio of tartaric to Ge equal to 2 and an HCl concentration of 1 mol/L in the strip solution, in which more than 98% of germanium was selectively transported in the presence of other heavy metals. Under these aforementioned conditions, an FSSLM system was conducted on a simulated acidic zinc leachate neutralized by NaOH. The results obtained revealed that germanium tartrates can be selectively transported in sulfuric acid medium. Finally, an HFSLM system was developed to transport germanium from a water medium as a feed phase to a diluted HCl as a strip solution. Since the volume ratio of the feed to the strip solution was set at 4, the concentration of germanium in this solution was enriched up to 400 mg/L. After 240 min, the germanium was completely transported to the strip phase. The results showed that the transport rate within the HFSLM system was much faster than that within the FSSLM system and can be comparable to that of any other liquid-liquid system. This research was partially supported by the MINECO (