A CaO-supported ZnWO4 nanocomposite (ZnWO4/CaO) was successfully synthesized using a novel hydrothermal method and was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), tunnelling electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron diffraction X-ray (EDX), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and UV–visible (UV–vis) spectral analysis. The ZnWO4/CaO composites exhibited rod-like morphologies with variable lengths from 45nm to 147nm and diameters from 26nm to 36nm. The catalytic efficiency of the synthesized ZnWO4/CaO composites was displayed for the photodegradation of oxytetracycline (OTC) antibiotic from the aqueous phase. The synergistic degradation of OTC was investigated in the presence of H2O2 and ZnWO4/CaO. The rate of photodegradation followed pseudo-first-order kinetics. The antibiotic removal was strongly influenced by the catalyst loading, H2O2 concentration, pH and OTC concentration. Using a solar/H2O2/ZnWO4/CaO catalytic system, 85% COD removal was attained for OTC degradation in 210min. The oxidative degradation occurred through hydroxyl radicals. The prepared nanocomposites possessed high recyclability and were easily separated from the aqueous solution by a simple sedimentation process.Antibiotics represent a class of chemicals that are used worldwide in pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) and are toxic to the ecosystem Photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants by semiconductor photocatalysts has emerged as a potential technology for water purification. The advanced oxidation process is a promising technology due to its low cost, simplicity and high efficiency as well as its ability to generate no secondary pollution Binary metal oxides such as TiO The adsorption of pollutant onto the catalyst surface is required for the efficient photodegradation process in the aqueous phase The current studies have emphasized the applicability of ZnWO All of the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade. Oxytetracycline antibiotic, sodium tungstate dihydrate (Na The hen eggshells were washed with distilled water to remove any adhered impurities. The washed hen eggshells were boiled and heated at 800 The ZnWO Photocatalytic, photolytic and dark experiments were executed in a double-walled Pyrex vessel (7.5-cm high The kinetics of OTC degradation was explained by pseudo-first-order kinetics. The rate constant (  The TEM images of the ZnWO     Photocatalytic degradation of OTC was explored using different catalytic systems under solar light and in the dark. Under solar light, 85% of OTC was removed using the H To investigate the role of adsorption in photodegradation, OTC removal using solar/H  The effect of catalyst loading was investigated by varying the catalyst dose from 10  However, beyond the optimal concentration of H Generally, photocatalytic degradation processes occur through hydroxyl radical-mediated oxidation of organic molecules (oxidation potential – 2.8 The OTC degradation was confirmed by measuring the COD value at different time intervals. It was found that 8% of OTC was degraded in 60 During the photocatalytic process, the illumination of ZnWO Recycling efficiency is one of most crucial factors for an efficient photocatalytic process. The recycling efficiency of the ZnWO In this study, the photocatalytic activity of the H