The contamination of groundwater with arsenic is a serious health issue in many parts of the world. Although iron has been shown to be effective at removal of arsenic from water, there has been no research to assess the feasibility of using natural iron oxide minerals for water treatment. The successful treatment of water to remove arsenic requires an understanding of arsenic chemistry and the physical–chemical interactions between arsenic and iron oxide minerals. A study was conducted to evaluate hematite, magnetite, goethite and iron rich laterite soil as arsenic adsorbents. Electroacoustic measurements were conducted to assess the nature of arsenic adsorption. Results showed that arsenic adsorption occurred over the entire pH range tested (pH 4–11). The isoelectric point shifted due to arsenic adsorption and this is a strong evidence of specific ion adsorption. This was supported by leaching tests that indicated strong attachment of arsenic to the surface of iron oxide minerals. Adsorption tests showed that iron rich laterite was most effective for arsenic removal, followed by goethite, magnetite and hematite. This was attributed to the higher specific surface area of the respective minerals. The study also demonstrates a simple water treatment method involving the use of low cost natural ironoxide minerals for arsenic removal to meet drinking water standards. Treatment of 100 mL of water containing 20 ppm arsenic with 5 g of laterite reduced the arsenic level down to 10 ppb within a period of 10 min.Arsenic has long been recognized as a toxin and carcinogen. Chronic exposure to arsenic may occur through natural sources such as weathering reactions, volcanic emissions as well as human activities like mining. Of the various risks, exposure to arsenic through contaminated drinking water is probably the greatest threat to human health. Mostly, arsenic is found in high concentrations in groundwater. Some of the well-known high-arsenic groundwater areas are in Argentina, Chile, Mexico, China, Hungary, West Bengal (India), Bangladesh and Vietnam. Contamination of groundwater by arsenic in Bangladesh resulted in the largest massive poisoning in history, with millions of people exposed ( Arsenic is commonly found in water in the form of inorganic species. Arsenic (V) or arsenic (III) occurs as arsenate ( Despite the knowledge that ferric iron can be used to co-precipitate arsenic from water as ferric-arsenate, there have been few studies to assess the use of naturally-occurring iron oxide minerals for arsenic removal from water ( Iron oxide minerals are abundant in nature and are relatively inexpensive, which should make water the use of these minerals an attractive alternative for household water treatment. This study investigates the suitability of various natural iron oxide minerals for the removal of arsenic from water. Arsenic-iron oxide interactions were studied through electroacoustic measurements (surface charge) as well as adsorption and leaching tests. Also, the suitability of using a lateritic soil with a high iron mineral content for arsenic removal is demonstrated. The objective was to develop a simple, affordable and readily available method for household use in rural areas to remove arsenic from drinking water. The iron mineral samples used in this study are shown in Adsorption tests were performed to assess the suitability of the different iron oxide minerals for arsenic removal. All the samples were tested at the same pH, temperature, arsenic concentration and time based on proven parameters from literature ( EA tests were conducted to investigate the effect of arsenic adsorption on the surface charge of the iron oxides. For the EA tests, a Zeta Probe (Colloidal Dynamics, Warwick, RI) instrument was used. The probe was cleaned, calibrated for pH and the mixer was set at 150 rpm. The raw ESA signal in mPa∗m/V vs. pH was recorded. Background corrections were made for the contribution of the electrolyte to the ESA signal for each test. Electroacoustic methods use the Electrokinetic Sonic Amplitude (ESA) effect to determine the zeta potential of fine particles ( Leaching tests were performed on samples of each iron oxide mineral sample (hematite, magnetite, goethite and laterite) which were prepared by adsorbing arsenic onto each sample. The objective was to assess the adsorption mechanisms, to distinguish between weakly and strongly adsorbed arsenic, and to evaluate the chemical stability of the adsorption product. A sequential extraction procedure specifically designed for arsenic using MgCl Tests were performed to assess a simple household method of arsenic removal from water at natural pH. The tests consisted of hand mixing 100 mL of water containing 20 ppm of arsenic with 5 g of laterite soil at pH 7 over different periods of time – from 15 s to 1 h. After mixing, the samples were filtered through two coffee filter papers; the filtrate was acidified and sent for arsenic analysis by enhanced ICP-MS.  The results of the EA tests for magnetite in the presence and absence of arsenic (V) are shown in The results of the EA tests with hematite in the absence and presence of arsenic (V) at different concentrations (20 ppm and 50 ppm) are shown in  The results of the volumetric titration of hematite with arsenic (V) solution, at pH 4.2 and pH 9.2, are shown in The results for the EA tests with goethite in the presence and absence of arsenic (V) are shown in The results of the EA tests with laterite in the presence and absence of arsenic (V) are shown in Results from EA tests showed that the IEP was between pH 6.5 and pH 8.5 for all iron oxide minerals studied. The charge of oxide surfaces is established by adsorption or desorption of protons bound to the surface hydroxyl groups. These reactions are ( These equilibrium reactions are pH dependent. An increase of [H EA tests showed that a shift of the IEP and a decrease of the surface charge occurred due to arsenic adsorption. A shift of the IEP is a very good indication that arsenic shows a high adsorption affinity towards iron oxide-type surfaces, and that inner sphere complexes form between the adsorbing arsenic species and the surface sites. Since ESA is a measure of the particle surface charge, a decrease of the surface charge after arsenic addition revealed that negative arsenate ions were adsorbed onto the particle surface. Adsorption of arsenate ( The formation of an inner sphere surface complex (specific adsorption) during arsenic adsorption onto iron oxide minerals was indicated by the decrease of the pH of the IEP. This fact shows that the anion was bound directly to the particle surface, so the net surface charge decreased or became more negative. In addition, the decrease of the surface charge after arsenic adsorption implied that adsorption occurred over the whole pH range, even when the iron oxide mineral surface charge was negative (i.e. pH gt; IEP). This observation also suggests that the arsenate anion was bound as an inner sphere complex (specific adsorption) onto iron oxide surfaces, and adsorption could occur at pH levels above the IEP ( Goethite and laterite showed reversibility of EA curves, indicating adsorption as the predominant mechanism for arsenic bound to the surface of iron oxide mineral. EA curves of magnetite and hematite showed hysteresis. Hematite showed a positive hysteresis, with surface charge increasing with pH, while magnetite showed a negative hysteresis with the surface charge decreasing with pH. This result suggests that the surface reaction between arsenate and magnetite/hematite immediately changed the surface composition of these oxides.  For surface precipitation to occur, the iron oxide must partly dissolve to contribute iron to the surface precipitate. Iron oxide minerals have low solubility in water, but their solubility increases at acidic pH values, especially at the lowest pH used in the study, pH 3. The iron dissolved at such a low pH may be sufficient to form the surface precipitate as in the case of phosphate precipitated on goethite, as reported by The change of surface charge over time, as shown by the EA hysteresis, indicates a change on the surfaces of hematite and magnetite. The surface reactions between arsenate-magnetite and arsenate-hematite may change from adsorption to surface precipitation, leading to the formation of a ternary complex (multilayer coverage). In this part of the study, the samples were leached with MgCl In accordance with the sequential extraction procedure described previously, sub-sample A were sent for dissolved arsenic analysis after adsorption tests, and the results are shown in In the adsorption tests, hematite gave 25% of arsenic in equilibrium in solution, while with magnetite only 4% arsenic was left ( The leaching tests were performed to determine the amount of arsenic that was weakly adsorbed and strongly bound to the iron oxides. Results from leaching tests showed some variations in the percentage of arsenic that could not be removed by leaching; fixed arsenic ranged from 78.2% to 86.2%. However, there seems to be no significant difference between adsorption onto the hematite and magnetite, which may be due to both precipitation plus specific ion adsorption, versus the goethite, which is believed to be due to only specific ion adsorption. Arsenic that was not leached during this test was either strongly adsorbed or co-precipitated with the iron oxide ( The fact that hematite and magnetite showed the highest value of arsenic fixed per surface area is in agreement with the assumption that precipitation plus specific adsorption occurred on their surfaces. Precipitation and specific adsorption imply tightly bound products, thus, arsenic adsorbed on these iron minerals was in the form of stable surface products. It is suggested that goethite and laterite bound with arsenic only through specific adsorption yielding a lower quantity of strongly bound arsenic.  The following points are derived from the study: All of the natural iron oxide minerals (magnetite, hematite and goethite) as well as an iron rich lateritic soil were effective in adsorbing arsenic from solution. Arsenic adsorption occurred over the entire pH range (4–11), although higher adsorption capacity was observed at pH values below the IEP’s of the iron oxide minerals. Shifts in the IEP for all iron oxide minerals following arsenate adsorption on their surfaces demonstrated strong specific adsorption and innersphere complex formation between the adsorbing arsenic species and the mineral surfaces. Arsenic adsorption onto iron oxide minerals was found to be largely irreversible although a small contribution of weak (reversible) physical adsorption was also seen. For magnetite and hematite, electroacoustic results indicated that an arsenic-iron precipitate may form on the particle surfaces. Laterite - an abundant iron-bearing adsorbent - proved to be a promising and cost-effective material for the removal of arsenic from water. The other naturally-occurring iron oxides are also attractive due to their physico-chemical properties that allowed arsenic adsorption over a wide pH range. The simple method developed for the removal of arsenic successfully reduced the arsenic levels to below drinking water limits and proved to be an effective and rapid household method.