Background: Early detection of bone metastases in prostatic carcinoma is very useful in treatment and prognosis of the disease. The aim of this work was to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of a group of bone markers in order to discriminate between prostate carcinoma patients without (M0) and with (M1) bone metastases. Methods: Sixty-seven non-treated patients with: benign prostate hyperplasia (n=21), prostatic carcinoma in several stages without bone metastases (T
                        X
                     M0) (n=31) and with bone metastases (T
                        X
                     M1) (n=15) were studied. The following markers were studied: (A) bone formation: (1) serum bone alkaline phosphatase, IRMA (Tandem Ostase, Beckman); (2) serum procollagen I amino-terminal propeptide (PINP), RIA (Orion Diagnostica); (B) bone resorption: (1) urinary collagen I amino-terminal telopeptide (NTX), ELISA (Ostex); (2) collagen I carboxy terminal telopeptide (CTX): (2A) urinary α-CTX, RIA (Osteometer), (2B) serum β-CTX, Elecsys (Roche); (3) collagen I cross-linked carboxy terminal telopeptide (ICTP), RIA (Orion Diagnostica). Results: Levels of all bone markers were significantly higher in group M1 than in group M0. A complete separation of groups M0 and M1 was achieved with PINP and β-CTX (100% sensitivity and specificity). Conclusions: These results support the use of PINP or β-CTX as a tool to confirm the presence or absence of bone metastases in the first staging of prostatic carcinoma patients.Metastases of prostate carcinoma cells to bone occurs in over 75% of patients Bone scintigraphy remains the most widely used method for diagnosis and surveillance of bone metastases. This technique presents sensitivity but lacks specificity At this moment, PSA is the most widely used biochemical marker, not only for the diagnosis and follow-up of prostate cancer, but also for evidence of bone metastases Bone is a dynamic tissue characterised by two opposite activities: resorption and formation, carried out, respectively, by osteoclasts and osteoblasts. In the adult bone, these processes are tightly coupled, but there are some pathological conditions in which uncoupling is present. The biochemical markers of bone remodeling, compounds synthetised by the active osteoclast or osteoblast or liberated from bone during the resorption phase and present in serum and urine, give us an index of osteoblast or osteoclast activity and are currently used to evaluate these activities in pathologies in which bone remodeling is altered When metastatic bone cancer cells penetrate within bone marrow, they interfere with normal bone cells through local release of cytokines and growth factors, which increase bone turnover rate leading to osteolysis or osteoclerosis. Cells from osteolytic or sclerotic bone metastases secrete factors that stimulate osteoclasts or osteoblasts, respectively Although bone metastases in prostatic cancer are mainly of osteoblastic type (osteosclerotic), both osteoblastic and osteoclastic activities are affected The field of biochemical bone remodeling markers has experienced a great advance in recent years. The aim of this work was to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of several new bone markers in order to discriminate between patients with and without bone metastases in a group of untreated prostatic carcinoma patients. The biochemical markers of bone formation, serum isoenzyme of bone alkaline phosphatase (bAP) and serum procollagen I amino-terminal propeptide (PINP), and the biochemical markers of bone resorption, urinary amino terminal telopeptide of collagen I (NTX), urinary α isomer of C-terminal telopeptide (α-CTX), serum β isomer of C-terminal telopeptide (β-CTX) and serum cross-linked C-terminal telopeptide (ICTP) were studied. Sixty-seven male patients, with ages ranged from 50 to 82 years (70±8, mean±SD) were studied. Twenty-one presented a benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and 46 clinically confirmed prostatic cancer. Bone marker levels in patients with prostate cancer and BPH were compared to those of 60 healthy age-matched men (67±9 years, mean±SD). All the patients were newly diagnosed and had not been previously treated for their prostatic disease. On the other hand, patients did not have a history of any pathology known to influence bone metabolism and none were taking drugs known to affect bone metabolism. Healthy control men had no history of medical disease nor were taking drugs known to affect bone metabolism. None of the patients or controls presented renal insufficiency. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our hospitals. Both BPH and prostatic carcinoma patients were confirmed pathologically by prostate biopsy. For clinical staging, patients were classified in accordance to the TNM staging system Serum samples were drawn in the morning after an overnight fast. Two hours fasting morning urine samples (after the first voiding was discarded) were also collected. Samples were aliquoted and frozen in glass tubes at −60 °C until use. Serum bAP was quantified with an IRMA (Tandem R-Ostase™, Hybritech Europe Liège, Belgium) using two monoclonal antibodies specific for bAP over liver AP Serum PINP was measured by RIA (Orion Diagnostica, Finland) Urinary NTX determination was performed by ELISA (Osteomark™, OSTEX) Urinary α-CTX was assessed by RIA (α-Crosslaps, Osteometer Biotech, Denmark). This method is an RIA using a monoclonal antibody raised to an eight amino acid sequence of the C-telopeptides of α Values of all urinary markers were expressed as urinary creatinine ratios. Urinary creatinine was measured using Jaffé reaction by precipitation with picric acid. Serum β-CTX was measured on the Elecsys 2010 automated analyser (Roche Diagnostics) by electrochemiluminescence. This assay is specific for cross-linked β-isomerized type I collagen C-telopeptide fragments recognising the Glu-Lys-Ala-His-Asp-β-Gly-Gly-Arg peptide Serum ICTP was quantified by RIA (Orion Diagnostica) Differences between the groups were tested using the Mann–Whitney Test as a nonparametric test. References rangs were taken as the intervals included between the lower and the highest values obtained among normal healthy subjects. Values are shown as the median and range. Spearman's coefficients of linear correlation (      All the biochemical markers studied correlated significantly with each other Bone AP is localized in the plasma membrane of osteoblasts and released into the circulation during the bone mineralization process. From many years ago, serum levels of bAP have been used as a biochemical marker of bone formation. Total AP in serum exists in various isoenzyme forms, liver and hepatic isoenzymes being quantitatively the most important. Serum bAP determination has been improved with the development of monoclonal antibodies specific for bone isoenzyme and with low cross-reactivity with hepatic isoenzyme. PINP is another biochemical marker of bone formation, being a collagen formation indicator. Serum levels of propeptides of collagen I are an index of collagen formation because these compounds are released from the collagen precursor molecule, procollagen I, after it is released from the osteoblast. At present, assays directed to the C-terminal (PICP) or to the N-terminal propeptides (PINP) are available, with PINP determination being more sensitive in the study of bone turnover in postmenopausal osteoporosis There is a series of new bone resorption markers available with a better specificity and sensitivity than the classical hydroxyproline. Urinary NTX has shown a very good sensitivity and specificity in the study of bone disorders The carboxy terminal telopeptide of the α ICTP is another biochemical marker of bone resorption. ICTP, a product of collagen degradation, is a structure formed by two carboxy terminal telopeptides of type I collagen cross-linked with a third peptide from the helical domain of another type I collagen molecule Authors of two recently published works Urinary excretion of calcium and hydroxyproline were the conventional markers of bone resorption in cancer patients but both lack sensitivity and specificity In our study, NTX shows a sensitivity of 100% in the detection of bone metastases associated to prostatic carcinoma but a specificity of 76%. In a recent work, Tamada et al. The use of urinary α-CTX presents similar results to those of NTX with respect to sensitivity (100%) and a lower specificity (64% vs. 76%). In a previous work, Garnero et al. In the present work, serum β-CTX provided the best sensitivity and specificity with respect to the detection of bone metastases among all the biochemical markers of bone resorption studied with a sensitivity and specificity of 100%. We only found one previous work about the use of serum CTX in the study of bone metastases associated to prostatic carcinoma After the development of the assay to measure ICTP, it was observed that this marker was not sufficiently sensitive to reflect either the increase in resorption produced after the menopause or the decrease in this activity observed after the osteoporosis treatment with hormonal replacement therapy or biphosphonates. However, ICTP is useful to detect situations in which a local destruction of bone tissue is produced (e.g. multiple meloma, bone metastases or rheumatoid arthritis) ICTP has been widely used in the study of bone metastases associated to cancer but there are discrepancies about its usefulness In conclusion, we found a significant increase in biochemical markers of bone remodeling, both bone formation and resorption, in patients with prostatic carcinoma and bone metastases with respect to those who did not present bone metastases. Sensitivity of all the studied markers: serum bAP, PINP, β-CTX and ICTP and urinary NTX and α-CTX, in untreated patients, was 100% (except for bAP, that was 92%). Specificity values presented more variation, from 100% for PINP and β-CTX to 64% for α-CTX. At this point, it is important to indicate the limitations of this study, including the cross-sectional design and the number of patients investigated. However, these results support the use of serum PINP or serum β-CTX as a tool to confirm the presence or absence of bone metastases in the first staging of prostatic carcinoma patients. Further studies are necessary with these two markers in order to establish their sensitivity and specificity in the detection and follow-up of bone metastases extension after treatment. Moreover, the study of the possibility that the increase of these bone markers would be prior to the detection of a positive bone scan should be of great interest. This work has been supported by the Grant No. FIS 98/0967 from the Spanish Institute of Health.