This paper presents results of five creep tests conducted in uniaxial compression at room temperature. The test specimens were from the welded Topopah Spring tuff formation at Yucca Mountain, Nevada. The specimens exhibited brittle failure. Multiple stress levels were applied in steps to each specimen. Each stress level was maintained for 3 days or longer. The transient creep for all the stress levels can be well described by power functions. The transient creep is caused by an elastic aftereffect. The tuff does not show real steady-state creep. The so-called steady-state creep rate decreases with time. In general it is very low, typically in the range of 10−7
                     h−1. For the first 50h, the so-called steady-state creep rate may be described as a power function of stress. The specimen failed shortly after it entered into the accelerating creep phase.Yucca Mountain has been selected as a candidate site for a high level nuclear waste repository in the United States The specimens were prepared from rock cores received from the sample management facility (SMF), Yucca Mountain Site Characterization Project. The nominal diameters of the cores were 61 and 45 Moisture contents for the specimens were measured soon after testing. The average value was 0.58%. The porosity of the welded Topopah Spring tuff is in the range of 10–13% The tests were conducted in a 2670 Test temperature was monitored using thermocouples. Significant temperature variation was observed in some tests. The variation came from three sources: (1) alternation of days and nights, (2) heat generated in the MTS test system, (3) unexpected adjustment of room air conditioning. Of the three above, the first and the second accompanied all the tests. The range of variation for the two sources usually was about 3–5 The temperature-induced strain was caused by two concurrent effects in the strain gage installation. First, the electrical resistivity of the grid conductor is temperature dependent, and, as a result, the gage resistance varies with temperature. The second contribution to thermal output is due to the differential thermal expansion between the grid conductor and the specimen. In this study the first is minor. For the second, using self-temperature-compensated strain gages could eliminate the thermal output if the thermal expansion coefficient in the strain gages would match the one in the specimen. However, it is difficult to select a type of strain gage to match perfectly the tuff specimens in thermal expansion coefficients. One obvious fact is that the thermal expansion coefficient from specimen to specimen would not be unique because of the complexity of the microstructure of the tuff. To remedy the temperature effect, a multivariate regression approach is adopted in this study to remove the thermal output from the strain measurement. The detailed procedure is described in the All specimens exhibited brittle failure. The major fractures were nearly parallel to the axes of the specimens by predominantly longitudinal splitting ( Creep is typically reported in terms of three distinct phases: transient creep, steady-state creep and accelerating creep. For rocks with a large variability in properties (e.g. strength) such as the Topopah Spring tuff, the ultimate strength of various specimens is highly variable. It is difficult to complete a creep test with a single stress level within months, because it is difficult to select a stress level that will assuredly give creep without instantaneously leading to failure. In this study multiple stress levels were applied in steps to each specimen. Each stress level was maintained for no less than 3 days. The stress increment from one level to the next was 7–10 As soon as the axial stress is increased, the axial strain increased with a high initial rate. This strain rate decreased as a power function of time. After 7–20 Power and exponential functions have been checked by curve fitting to the transient creep data. The power function in Eq. All the Pseudo- Eq. The strain rate in transient creep can be calculated using Eq. Picking the axial stress and axial strain at the end of transient creep for each stress level, and plotting these pairs of values in a stress–strain coordinate system for each test, Costin and Holcomb The temperature-induced strain was not seriously influential in transient creeps because the transient creep rates were relatively high. Comparatively strain rates in steady-state creep, or steady-state creep rates, were so small that they were extremely easily influenced by temperature-induced strain. The In the first 50 All the tests experienced one or two stress levels in which the steady-state creeps were maintained for 100–200 The slopes of the first two strain–time broken lines in Accelerating creep occurred at the final stress level for each test and led to failure of the specimen. If a specimen failed right after a loading increase, this stage could not be observed. Only one of the five tests exhibited accelerating creep ( We can speculate that the strain at failure induced by creep corresponds to the strain the samples would reach if a “conventional” complete stress–strain test were performed, i.e. that the strain at failure (approximately?) equals the strain that would be reached at the same (post peak) stress. This would parallel the proposition by Haimson and Kim Wawersik We can only speculate, because we do not have a good definition of the post-peak stress–strain curve of the tested tuff. What we do know beyond any doubt is that the tested tuff is extremely brittle, highly likely of Class II type. (Even when tested in uniaxial compression under controlled strain rates, at extremely slow strain rates (down to 10 The main results can be summarized as: Transient creep rate for the welded Topopah Spring tuff can be well described by a power function of time. Transient creep is marked by the stabilized stress/strain ratio that defines the secant elastic modulus. Transient creep is caused by the elastic aftereffect. For the welded Topopah Spring tuff, the so-called steady-state creep rate is very low. Below the elastic limit, it typically varies in the range of 10 Within the first 50 Accelerating creep progressed quickly. It marks the onset of the specimen failure. This paper was prepared by University of Nevada Reno pursuant to a Cooperative Agreement fully funded by the United States Department of Energy, and neither University and Community College System of Nevada nor any of its contractors or subcontractors nor the United States Department of Energy, nor any person acting on behalf of either Makes any warranty or representation, express or implied, with respect to the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of the information contained in this report, or that the use of any information, apparatus, method, or process disclosed in this report may not infringe privately owned rights or Assumes any liabilities with respect to the use of, or for damages resulting from the use of, any information, apparatus, method or process disclosed in this report. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Department of Energy. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Department of Energy. We would like to thank Mr. Rick Blitz for assistance with testing, and Mr. Jamie Gonzalez, DOE Technical Task Representative for overall help with this investigation, and in particular the organization of sample acquisition. The temperature-induced strain is given in In Eq. Let the steady-state creep rate be The strain measured in steady-state creep tests is the sum of temperature-induced strain and stress-induced strain By regressing