Talar fractures can be severe injuries with complications leading to functional disability. Open reduction–internal fixation remains the treatment of choice for displaced talar fractures. Arthroscopic evaluation of the fracture and articular surfaces can play an important role in the treatment of these fractures. Arthroscopic reduction–internal fixation (ARIF) is increasingly used for certain intra-articular fracture types through the body. The minimally invasive nature of ARIF and high accuracy are enviable attributes of an evolving technique. This technical note describes arthroscopic evaluation of 2 intra-articular talar head fractures, using posterior portals, with ARIF performed in 1 case and excision of the fracture fragments in the other case.Talar fractures represents 3% to 6% of fractures about the foot and ankle. Arthroscopy has successfully been used for diagnostic evaluation and treatment of osteochondral lesions, ankle arthrodesis, anterior and posterior impingement, tendinopathy, and retrocalcaneal pathology. Two cases amenable to ARIF are presented: a 37 year-old man with a 9-mm lateral talar body fracture involving the articular surface (Sneppen type II) with displacement and multiple loose bodies ( Arthroscopic-assisted reduction allows direct vision of the therapeutic process, anatomic reduction of the articular surfaces, and preservation of the osseous blood supply by minimizing trauma to the soft-tissue envelope. We believe that ARIF has significant potential benefits for the evaluation and treatment of selected talar fractures in the future. Operative treatment is performed with the patient under general anesthesia and placed in the prone position. A thigh tourniquet is inflated. Image intensification is required when ARIF is performed. Posteromedial and posterolateral ankle arthroscopy portals, adjacent to the calcaneal tendon, are used. The posteromedial portal is established by infusion of 10 mL of normal saline solution through a 22-gauge needle distending the ankle joint, before a small incision and passing of the arthroscopic cannula take place. Establishment of the posterolateral portal takes place under direct vision with the placement confirmed with a 22-gauge needle. Accessory portals may be established, as required. A 2.7-mm-diameter camera with a 30° oblique viewing angle (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) allows for vision of the fracture and articular surface. The operative technique for each case is described in detail separately. At the conclusion of each case, a below-the-knee plaster of Paris back slab was placed while the patient was still anesthetized. Two weeks postoperatively, review of the arthroscopic portal wounds was performed and a fiberglass below-the-knee immobilizing cast (Nemoa; Smith & Nephew) was applied. Six weeks postoperatively, the patient was provided with a removable Nextep immobilizing fracture boot (DJO Global, Vista, CA) and instructed to progress to full weight bearing within the boot. Passive and active ankle range-of-motion exercises were also commenced. Physiotherapy-assisted rehabilitation (strength and ankle proprioceptive control) occurred in the sixth to 10th postoperative weeks. A 37-year-old man sustained a fall of 0.5 m from a ladder. Radiographic evaluation showed a 9-mm lateral talar body fracture involving the articular surface (Sneppen type II) with displacement and multiple loose bodies. The posteromedial portal provided direct vision of the fracture and articular surface ( A Kirschner wire, provisionally stabilizing the fracture, was inserted under arthroscopic vision, and its position was confirmed with image intensification. Calcaneal bone graft was percutaneously harvested from the lateral aspect of the calcaneal body and inserted into the subchondral fracture impaction void. A 3.5-mm headless compression cannulated screw (Smith & Nephew) was placed over the provisionally placed Kirschner wire to achieve compression and stabilization of the fracture ( Six months after surgery, range of motion had returned to being equal to the uninjured ankle and the patient had returned to all of his preinjury daily social and occupational activities. Radiologic examination at this time showed that the fracture had healed but a loose body persisted in the lateral gutter ( A 22-year-old man sustained a fall of 2 m from a rooftop. His presentation to a tertiary-level hospital was delayed. Radiographic evaluation showed a right-sided comminuted, fragmented fracture of the posterolateral talar body with small intra-articular loose bodies and a concomitant intra-articular anterior tibial fracture. The posterolateral portal provided direct vision of the fracture and articular surface ( After removal of the talar body fracture fragments, internal fixation of the tibial fracture was performed by an anterolateral ankle approach. Six months after surgery, range of motion was 10° of dorsiflexion to 20° of plantar flexion. Radiologic examination showed union at the tibial fracture site. Six months after, the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society score was 87. Use of ankle arthroscopy is increasing; a 210% increase has been seen over the past decade within Australia. The extent of soft-tissue and bony dissection is one possible factor that we suggest may also contribute to post-traumatic ankle arthritis. Medial and lateral malleolar or tibiofibular osteotomies are often used to allow for adequate exposure without compromising the soft-tissue attachments to the talus. Regardless, with the use of osteotomies, soft-tissue trauma is inevitable during open reduction of articular talar fractures, and this may contribute to skin necrosis, infection, malunion, post-traumatic arthritis, and avascular necrosis (AVN). The rates of AVN are dependent on the type of fracture, degree of displacement, and type of surgical approach. Although there were no complications, we would be concerned by the prolonged operative time in the case of ARIF as a potential source of complications. We believe that our ARIF operative time was artificially extended by the fact that it was a novel procedure in our hands; thus extra time was taken to document and photograph the intraoperative findings. We believe that any future ARIF would have a shorter operative time. Another recognized potential negative effect of ARIF or attempted ARIF is that if conversion to an open procedure is required, fluid extravasation may impair exposure. This was not evident with the open approach to the distal tibia in our second case. Potential ARIF is limited by the comminution and chronicity of the fracture, which may result in excision or conversion to an open procedure ( Further studies comparing open reduction–internal fixation and ARIF of talar fractures would be worthwhile, but the relative infrequency of these injuries means that we are likely to rely on further case reports and technique development to guide operative techniques. We recommend that other authors contribute their experiences on this rare clinical scenario so that the collective experiences can increase the value of advice that readers can obtain from the literature. We advocate that ankle arthroscopy is a reliable technique for the fixation of selected talar body fractures in the hands of experienced ankle arthroscopists. We suggest that it has the advantages of allowing anatomic reduction and stable fixation, direct vision of the therapeutic process, preservation of the soft-tissue envelope, and assessment of concomitant intra-articular lesions. 