The Load Sharing Classification (LSC) allocates one to three points to each of three different radiological characteristics of traumatic thoracolumbar fractures: the vertebral body involved in the fracture, the displacement of the fracture parts and the kyphotic deformity. Added up, a minimal score of three and a maximal score of nine can be obtained. When the LSC score is three to six, a short segment pedicle screw fixation suffices. When the LSC score is seven to nine, a high rate of failure in patients with a short segment pedicle screw fixation exists. In these cases an anterior stabilising procedure of the spine is advised.
                  The LSC has been examined by Dai and Jin, who claim an almost perfect inter- and intraobserver agreement, according to the Landis and Koch criteria. Dai and Jin only present results for the separate three items of the LSC and for the total LSC scores. Observer agreement for the two LSC score categories (three to six and seven to nine) have not been studied.
                  The aim of this study is to study the inter- and intraobserver agreement of the LSC for the total score, the three separate items and also for the two LSC score categories. Three observers determine twice the LSC scores of forty traumatic thoracolumbar fractures. The average standard Cohen's kappa values for the separate LSC items range between 0.06 and 0.48. For the total LSC score the average standard Cohen's kappa and weighted kappa values are 0.22 and 0.67 respectively. For the two LSC score categories, there is unanimous agreement in 55% of the cases and a majority agreement in 40%. In the remaining 5% of the fractures there is a split decision. Standard Cohen's kappa value for the two LSC score categories is 0.53. The standard Cohen's kappa values can be rated as fair to moderate. From these data it can be concluded that the inter- and intraobserver reliability of the Load Sharing Classification of Spinal fractures can be rated as fair.Since the introduction of transpedicular screws by Roy-Camille, short-segment posterior stabilization has become common practice in the operative treatment of traumatic vertebral fracture surgery. To support decisions about the best surgical approach for unstable thoracolumbar fractures McCormack et al. introduced the Load Sharing Classification (LSC) of spine fractures. In the retrospective study of McCormack et al. it was stated that the LSC can be used preoperatively to: (1) describe any spinal injury for retrospective studies, (2) predict pedicle screw failures in short segment posterior stabilizations, and (3) select spinal fractures for anterior reconstruction in fractures with LSC scores of seven and higher. For any classification to be useful, consistency between different observers is essential. The reliability of the LSC has been examined by Dai and Jin who report an almost perfect inter- and intraobserver agreement, according to the Landis and Koch criteria. The purpose of the present study is to determine intra- and interobserver agreement for the total LSC score, for the scores of each of the three radiological fracture characteristics, as well as for the two score categories, and to compare the findings, with the values reported in literature. The LSC of spine fractures uses three radiological characteristics of the fracture and allocates one to three points to each of these items ( Comminution/involvement (item A): according to McCormack et al., the comminution is assessed using the 2D sagittal CT-scan reconstruction images. Apposition/displacement (item B): the apposition is assessed on the axial slices of the CT-scan. One point is attributed when the displacement of the fracture fragments is 0 to 1 Deformity correction (item C): the amount of correction of kyphotic deformity is calculated from the lateral plain preoperative radiographs: the kyphotic angle of the fractured element is measured from the inferior endplate of the vertebra above and the superior endplate of the vertebra below the fractured segment. The physiologic kyphosis of the cranial and caudal neighbouring spine elements are measured likewise and their mean value is subtracted from the kyphotic angle of the fractured element ( For determination of the inter- and intraobserver agreement on the LSC preoperative radiographs of a consecutive series of 40 operatively stabilized fractures of the thoracolumbar spine (levels T11-L3) are reviewed ( The preoperative radiological materials are inspected on distinguishing marks. All marks are removed before any observer started classifying. Three observers, two trauma surgeons and one radiologist score the LSC of the selected fractures independently, on two separate occasions. All observers are experienced in the radiological interpretation of thoracolumbar fractures and have a copy of the original literature at their disposal. Data are analysed using Agree software. For the inter- and intraobserver agreement on the three separate LSC items Cohen's kappa coefficients are calculated for three pairs of observers. Values of standard Cohen's kappa coefficient can vary between −1 (complete disagreement between observers) and +1 (perfect interobserver agreement). The same statistic analysis, including 95% confidence intervals, is employed for inter- and intraobserver agreement on total LSC scores. As both the LSC scores per item and total LSC scores vary on an ordinal scale, inter- and intraobserver agreement can also be calculated by a weighted kappa test which implies that small differences lead to a larger kappa than large differences. Finally, agreement between all observers concerning the LSC score categories (scores three to six and seven to nine) as described by McCormack et al., is analysed. The standard Cohen's kappa and weighted kappa scores per item for three pairs of observers are presented in The standard Cohen's kappa values for the interobserver agreement of comminution/involvement (item A) range from 0.23 to 0.73 with an average value of 0.48; weighted kappa values for the interobserver agreement of item A: 0.47–0.85, average value 0.58. The standard Cohen's kappa values for the interobserver agreement of apposition/displacement (item B) range from 0.15 to 0.52 with an average value of 0.37; weighted kappa values for the interobserver agreement of item B: 0.14–0.73, average value 0.46. Finally the standard Cohen's kappa values for the interobserver agreement of the deformity correction (item C) vary between 0.06 and 0.28 with an average value of 0.20; weighted kappa values for the interobserver agreement of item C: 0.13–0.50, average value 0.31. The results for intraobserver agreement on the LSC are presented in The standard Cohen's kappa and weighted kappa scores for the interobserver agreement on the total LSC score for three pairs of observers are presented in In 22 fractures (55%) there is full agreement between all three observers. In 10 fractures (25%) there is partial agreement with one of the observers having a different score concerning the LSC score categories. In six fractures (15%) a disagreement is seen in two out of six observations. In two fractures (5%) a disagreement is seen in three out of six observations. The standard Cohen's kappa coefficients for interobserver validation of the total score of the Load Sharing Classification are compared to other validation studies of fracture classification systems in An important aim of a fracture classification system is to assist in choosing the most appropriate treatment. Given sufficient reliability, such systems also enable surgeons to compare treatment outcomes of specific groups of patients. Employing classification systems before their reliability is determined can lead to conflicting and non-consistent clinical conclusions. Since LSC scores may vary from three to nine points (three separate items: one to three points per item) not only inter- and intraobserver (dis)agreement per se is important, the magnitude of inter- and intraobserver variance should be considered too. Consequently, in addition to the standard Cohen's Kappa values, the weighted Kappa values need to be calculated as well. Larger inter- and intraobserver differences will show a decrease in weighted Kappa values as compared to standard Cohen's kappa values whereas smaller differences will show an increase. Statistical analysis employing standard and weighted Cohen's Kappa tests is partially dependent on the frequency distribution of the specific options within a classification system. In this specific study there is an overrepresentation of LSC scores five to eight with a general average of the total LSC scores of 6.3. This can be explained by the fact that the inclusion criteria are formulated with the purpose to approximate the clinical dilemma of the surgical approach in spine fractures as closely as possible (posterior or anterior stabilisation). Moreover, McCormack et al. also based the LSC on a study of the posterior implant in operatively treated patients, with an average LSC score of 6.9. It makes sense to test the reliability of the LSC in a similar population. If conservatively treated fractures would have been included the average scores would likely have been lower. The result now is a studied population with an average LSC score of 6.3, right between the lower LSC scores of three to six (in which case a posterior stabilisation is sufficient) and the higher LSC scores of seven to nine (in which case an anterior reconstruction is advised). Considering the inter- and intraobserver agreement on the three separate items of the LSC there is notable difference between (weighted) Kappa values of item A (comminution/involvement) and the other two items. This higher degree of consensus for item A may be due to the fact that all observers also made use of the axial slices of the CT-scan besides the 2D sagittal and coronal reconstructions to assess the amount of comminution. The use of the axial slices of the fractured vertebra together with the 2D sagittal reconstructions gives a more detailed insight to what extend the vertebral body is involved, especially in case of spine fractures with a burst-split morphology (AO type A3.2). Although on every CT-scan a scale is present on all the axial slices to estimate the proportions of the scan, the assessment of item B (apposition/displacement) seems less reproducible. This scale can be used in the visual assessment of the distance of the displacement. The other aspect of apposition, the percentage of the cross sectional area of the vertebral body, may well be influenced by interpretation of different (consecutive) axial slices. It was not clear for the observers in this study whether this assessment of apposition should be based on one “worse scenario” slice or more axial CT-scan slices together, possibly showing involvement of a larger part of the cross-sectional area. Calculation of the deformity correction in item C appears to be more complex than anticipated beforehand. Assessment of deformity correction is based on measurements of the anatomical alignment of both the proximal and distal adjacent spinal motion segments. The measurement of kyphosis on conventional X-rays is influenced by the architecture of the vertebra. The accuracy of repeated angle measurements of a normal spinal segment (one vertebra and its adjacent intervertebral discs) is around 7.9° thus an erroneous calculation of an angle between two spinal motion segments may be expected. We found in this study a moderate interobserver agreement for the two LSC score categories, LSC scores three to six and LSC scores seven to nine. It is worthwhile to note that in 55% of the included cases the observers agree about the LSC score categories. This implies that, when using the LSC, in nine out of twenty patients with unstable spine fractures with an anterior compression component, doubts will still remain about the anterior stability of the spinal column. According to the Landis and Koch criteria ( Standard Cohen's Kappa for the average interobserver agreement on the total LSC scores of 40 operatively treated thoracolumbar fractures is 0.22 and would be rated as fair according to the Landis and Koch criteria. In contrast the weighted Kappa value for the average interobserver agreement reaches a much higher level at 0.67, pointing out that differences in total LSC scores between the paired observers were small. In a study on the interobserver reliability of the AO comprehensive classification of thoracolumbar fractures 22 expert observers had to classify 14 spine fractures and the average standard Cohen's Kappa reached 0.33 for AO type. Up till now, only one study on the reliability of the LSC of thoracolumbar fractures has been published. From these data it can be concluded that the inter- and intraobserver reliability of the Load Sharing Classification of Spinal fractures can be rated as fair. The level of interobserver agreement is well within the range of other frequently used fracture classification systems. In accordance with McCormack et al. we state that the combination of comminution as quantified by radiomorphologic criteria, ligamentous disruptions and discal injuries will ultimately control the development of deformity.