To explore the effect of particle size distributions of supports on thermal performances of phase change materials (PCMs), shape-stabilized composites were prepared by using stearic acid (SA) to hybridize size-different kaolinite (Kaol). The samples were characterized using SEM, XRD, FTIR, BET and DSC techniques. The results indicated that superior thermal capacity was ascribed to higher loading capacity and crystallinity of SA, which was closely related to the layout state of Kaol within the composites. Enhanced thermal conductivity could be achieved with the increasing crystallinity, the descending interfacial thermal resistance and efficient heat conductive network. The establishment of heat transfer network depended largely on the mutual proportion between small-sized and large-sized particles in supports. The tiny particles were inferred to act as junctions to bridge the separately dispersed plates, which was contributed to the continuous heat conducting pathways. The results suggested that particle size distributions of Kaol could exert a great influence on thermal performances of composites. Furthermore, Kaol could obviously uplift the thermal stability of composites, and the thermal cycling test has validated its excellent thermal reliability. We believe that this study will play an enlightening role in the design and fabrication of highly-efficient shape-stabilized PCMs for solar energy storage.With the issue of urgent energy crisis, solar energy as an inexhaustible natural energy has received great concerns in industry and academia recently ( During the past few years, extensive efforts have been made to overcome the aforementioned challenges ( Many kinds of physicochemical characteristics of Kaol could make a huge influence on thermal properties of Kaol-based ss-PCMs, especially the particle size ( Five kinds of Kaol (Kaol-1, Kaol-2, Kaol-3, Kaol-4 and Kaol-5) with different particle size were purchased from China Kaolin Clay Co. Ltd. (Suzhou, China). The major chemical composition was presented in Table S1. Prior to utilization, it was pretreated at 105 °C for 24 h in drying oven to remove the physically absorbed water. Stearic acid (SA, C The SA/Kaol composites were prepared by using vacuum-assisted impregnation method. Firstly, 8 g Kaol and 12 g SA were uniformly blended and placed into a conical flask, whose internal pressure was adjusted to −0.1 MPa by a vacuum pump. It was maintained at room temperature for 10 min, and subsequently, the reaction vessel was put into a 90 °C thermostatic water bath for 30 min. Afterwards, the vacuum pump was turned off and the flask was aspirated to ambient atmosphere pressure again, when the entry air could further enforce the infiltration of molten SA into Kaol. To remove the superfluous SA, the colloid state of samples was then thermally filtered at 90 °C for 48 h, finally obtained the composites and abbreviated as SA/Kaol-1, SA/Kaol-2, SA/Kaol-3, SA/Kaol-4 and SA/Kaol-5, respectively. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples were obtained on a Bruker-AXS D8 Advance diffractometer (Germany) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm) under a scanning rate (2 The thermal property analysis was conducted using a NETZSCH DSC214 Polyma differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, Germany) followed the procedure reported by The particle size distribution graphs of the five Kaol are illustrated in The morphologies and microstructure of neat SA, Kaol and SA/Kaol composites are illustrated in Fig. S2 and The XRD measurement is carried out to investigate the crystallization properties of SA, Kaol and SA/Kaol composites. As shown in Thermal properties of neat SA and composite ss-PCMs are studied by DSC analysis in Fig. S3 and However, the rising latent heats shouldn't be assigned to the increment To further study the in-depth mechanism of the presented discrepancy on thermal performances, the texture properties such as surface area and pore properties of Kaol are determined by nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms ( However, as proposed in literature ( Thermal conductivity of ss-PCMs is becoming increasingly important and decides the heat transport rates of solar energy storage systems ( More specifically, the key point to affect thermal conductivity is considered as the number of effective heat conduction channels within the composite ( Nevertheless, it is well known that even a three-dimensional conductive network has been already established, heat conducting properties of ss-PCMs could be still affected by the filler-matrix ( Generally, the interfacial thermal resistance is the primary bottleneck for nanoscale heat transfer because it could largely deteriorate the heat charging/discharging rates ( Interestingly, the thermal conductivity slumps abnormally at SA/Kaol-5 with the continuously declining small-sized particles. The reason might be related to the effect of particle size distributions on the layout state of fillers. When there are Kaol particles with different sizes in the filler, the interspaces between large platelets is likely to be padded by those tiny particles, which could act as junctions to bridge the isolatedly dispersed platelets ( Thermal stability of SA, Kaol and Kaol-based composites is evaluated by the TG analysis in Size-different kaolinite (Kaol) was employed to encapsulate stearic acid (SA) to synthesize the SA/Kaol composite for investigating the effect of particle size distributions on thermal performances. The interactions between Kaol and SA were physical and the crystal structure of SA was not destroyed during preparation process. The as-prepared SA/Kaol has the stable structure for LHTES applications. Despite the almost equal mean-volume diameter, the Kaol-1, Kaol-2, Kaol-3, Kaol-4 and Kaol-5 displayed completely different particle size distributions. The melting and freezing temperatures of pure SA were 68.5 °C and 67.3 °C, respectively, which vary little compared with that of composites. The latent heat capacities of composites increased from SA/Kaol-1 to SA/Kaol-5 due to higher loading capacity and crystallinity of SA, suggesting that the uniformity of Kaol particle size was conductive to the superior thermal properties. Additionally, the thermal conductivity firstly climbed from 0.598 W·m We declare that we have no conflict of interest. This work was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at