The use of renewable energy sources instead of fossil fuels is one of the most important means of limiting greenhouse gas emissions in the near future. In Finland, wood energy is considered to be a very important potential energy source in this sense. There might, however, still be some elements of uncertainty when evaluating biofuel production chains. By combining data from a stack of composting biodegradable materials and forest residue storage research there was an indication that rather great amounts of greenhouse gases maybe released during storage of wood chip, especially if there is rapid decomposition. Unfortunately, there have not been many evaluations of greenhouse gas emissions of biomass handling and storage heaps. The greenhouse gas emissions are probably methane, when the temperature in the fuel stack is above the ambient temperature, and nitrous oxide, when the temperature is falling and the decaying process is slowing down. Nowadays it is still rather unusual to store logging residue as chips, because the production is small, but in Finland storage of bark and other by-products from the forest industry is a normal process. The evaluations made indicate that greenhouse gas emissions from storage can, in some cases, be much greater than emissions from the rest of the biofuel production and transportation chain.Renewable energy sources have been identified to play an important role in future energy solutions. In Finland, wood energy is considered to be a very important potential energy source in this sense. In the 1990s about 20% of the energy used already came from biomass. Greenhouse gas balances of bioenergy systems have been compared with fossil energy systems in some previous works One of the most difficult tasks in biomass harvesting is how to manage the storage of the material The forwarding and comminution of fresh logging residue guarantee the maximum yield of dry matter, but, on the other hand, the moisture content is high, about 50–60 Considerable fuel chip storage research has been performed in Sweden since the 1980s Combining research results from storage of wood residues with some new information coming from the waste-handling sector, a concern rises of there being a lack of knowledge concerning greenhouse gas emissions from the biofuel storage operations. The objects of the concern are self-heating biofuel piles containing such nitrogen and moisture contents that allow rapid degradation circumstances similar to those found in biowaste The objective of this study is to briefly evaluate greenhouse gas emission potentials from storage of wood residues. As the production and storage of bioenergy probably will flourish in the near future, the emission mechanisms from storage might need further research in order to learn how to avoid emissions. Currently it is not common to store logging residue as chips. In Finland, the production amounts are still small, but storage of bark and other similar by-products is a normal process for sawn mills and in the paper industry sector. In Finland, the present biofuel amounts that might be of concern for causing greenhouse gas emissions are, if stored as chips, about 6 The following chapter presents some published knowledge from biofuel storage and biowaste composting that might be used for evaluating greenhouse gas emission risks in storage of wood residue. The main physical parameters of interest are the age of the stored material, rapidity of material losses, C/N The temperature in a pile of chipped (fresh or naturally dried) forest residue usually rises very rapidly after an initial period of approximately one week The moisture content of chips has a large influence on dry matter losses. In tests carried out in Sweden, the initial moisture content was found to be proportional to the losses—initial moisture content of 42%, 51% and 58% caused monthly dry matter losses of 1.1, 2.2 and 2.6 The material losses due to storage are highest in the beginning of the storage period, right after the temperature has rapidly risen. The losses have been estimated to be 3.6 There seems to be a considerable difference in temperature behaviour depending on the moisture level. If the initial moisture content is under 40 The size of the chip seems to be of importance for the temperature behaviour. Thörnqvist Also coating, ventilating, and compressing the heaps seem to influence the temperature behaviour and the material losses As material losses can be significant and affect the energy content of the produced fuel directly, they must be perceived and accounted for in the emission evaluations. In some cases, the material losses can be compensated for by lower moisture content due to the drying process that occurs because of the heat produced in the decomposition process. However, since the stacks are usually kept outside with little or no cover, rain and snow are likely to keep the moisture content constant or even increase it. Source-separated biowaste has a typical nitrogen (N) content of about 2 The nitrogen content of forest residue varies widely (0.05–1.1 A high moisture content is favourable for the decomposition process. Practically, compost heaps have a moisture content of about 60 As a summary, the moisture and nitrogen contents in wood-originated biofuel are normally such that rapid decomposition is known to occur. An exception to this, due to the low content of nitrogen, is sawdust from stem wood. Emission of climate-relevant gases such as N Organic material is decomposed mainly to CO The behaviour described above is only valid for ideal, homogenous compost. Practically, humidity, temperature levels, aeration, etc. vary in different parts of the heap, which can eg. make it possible that nitrous oxide can be formed although the mean temperature of the heap is over 40 Compost gas may contain N In laboratory tests, total emissions of N Beck-Friis et al. Total emissions of CH The calculations of emitted CH The working steps used for this theoretical evaluation are shown in Calculations are made for one type of forest residue with two different moisture contents, 40 and 60 According to the different behaviour of the storage heaps (see Section 2.2), the dryer heap is expected to mainly emit methane for 2 months and then N The emission coefficients needed for the calculations in this article are taken from Beck-Friis et al. Using a mean methane emission of 60 Using a mean of nitrous emissions of 1.2 After a 6-month storage, the naturally dried forest residue (moisture 40 Comparing the emitted amounts of C and N as CH Based on these rough evaluations, the following conclusions can be drawn:  (ii) It is to recommend that comminuted forest residue is used without delay, if possible within 1 week. (iii) Storage heaps should not be mixed or moved during the storage period, as this would probably make the decomposition process more intensive, which causes increasing emissions rates. During the period of fast decomposition, there are remarkable risks of emissions and energy losses, which can easily be detected through temperature measurements. Biofuel storage could be monitored with heat detectors, and the decisions of dismounting a storage could be made depending on the follow-up data. Due to emissions, it seems to be more important to first use a warm fuel stack than a stack that has already cooled down. As methane emissions are only produced during anaerobic conditions, it might be a risk factor to compress piles, because then the airflow through the pile will probably decrease. This might also increase the potential risk of spontaneous ignition From composting, it is well known that biological activity is stimulated if the surface area of the material is increased. The choice of comminution technique could therefore be of importance when trying to avoid emissions. Other methods used to stabilise biodegradable materials could be worth investigating. The reliability of these calculations is not easy to evaluate as there are many, still not too well-known, factors affecting the decomposition process and subsequently the emissions. Nevertheless, the results are probably more valid for rather long-term storage (here 6 months) than for shorter periods, because the emission factors can temporarily vary widely, from being about half of the mean value (used for the evaluation) to double. Also, the dry matter losses are known to vary significantly during shorter periods but can be better predicted for long-term storage. Furthermore, 66–100% of the emitted greenhouse gases from a 6-month storage was calculated to originate from C emitted as CH In a recent study Assuming a price of biofuel of 10 euro I wish to thank Professor Ilkka Savolainen for commenting on this article and encouraging me to publish it. I would also like to express my gratitude to the anonymous reviewer for his comments.