Collector and frother are commonly used to induce the floatability of valuable minerals in flotation plants. These reagents can be added in a conditioner prior to flotation or stage distributed along the flotation banks. A review of the literature and some experimental results obtained from laboratory and full-scale trials indicate that the way flotation reagents are distributed down a flotation bank can positively influence the flotation response of coarse particles. This paper summarizes these observations, which show that the distribution of reagents is a potential tuning variable for the optimization of the flotation process.Flotation is in many cases the only way to concentrate sulphide minerals. Flotation is a concentration process that uses particle surface composition to induce the selectivity by mean of chemical reagents. The size of the mineral particles also plays an important role in the sequence of events that lead to the flotation of a particle. The influence of particle size on flotation have been studied for several decades and is still not fully understood While fine and optimum size particles need a small quantity of collector to float This paper shows that the way reagents are distributed down a flotation bank can produce a similar effect to that of split conditioning without the required classification and conditioning equipment. The flotation response as a function of particle size has been investigated for several decades. The first detailed analyses are due to If the interaction between frother and particle size has not been investigated in details Since fine particles exhibit a larger specific surface (cm An adequate distribution of reagents along the flotation bank could provide a similar effect than split conditioning. The stage distribution of collector and to some extend of frother is a standard practice among operators. This practice, although recognized as advantageous if not necessary The following idea can therefore be considered: This strategy is investigated in this paper. An adequate distribution of reagents down a flotation bank could lead to a reduction of collector consumption The idea of adding less collector at the beginning of the flotation process, and increasing the addition as flotation progresses has been tested at the laboratory and plant scales. The strategy has been evaluated with Cu, Cu–Ni and Cu–Pb–Zn ore samples Laboratory flotation tests were conducted to investigate the different reagent distribution strategies using ore samples provided by Brunswick Mining For a test, a 1-kg ore sample is ground with water for 10 min in a laboratory rod mill to yield a product with a Each flotation test is conducted four times. The concentrate and tailing samples are filtered, dried and weighted independently. Then the samples from duplicate tests are combined to produce a composite of concentrate and tailings samples. This procedure provides an average test and consequently improves the test reproducibility  The recovery of lead as a function of particle size observed for tests K, L, M and N is shown in The CuPb rougher flotation bank (see Several tests with different distributions were conducted on the CuPb rougher and most of the results confirm that equivalent metallurgical performances at lower collector dosages can be achieved using less collector at the top of the bank with increasing additions as flotation progresses For each reagent distribution test, samples from different streams (see The collected samples are weighted, filtered, dried, weighted dry and assayed for lead and other metals. The slurry percentage of solids are calculated from the wet and dry sample weights. The samples were also sieved, cyclosized and the material within each size interval assayed for Pb and some other metals. These data allow the estimation of the lead recovery as a function of particle size. Some flow rates were measured on the rougher and scavenger concentrates by collecting the froth for a given time into a bucket. The solids flowrate is calculated from the slurry weight and the estimated percentage of solids. The data are finally reconciled using a mass conservation model according to the BILMAT algorithm   Results of the full scale trials confirm that it is possible to achieve equivalent, if not higher, recovery of the valuable metals by distributing more equally the collector as flotation advances. Results also show that at constant recovery one could expect a reduction in the consumption of collector using the proposed strategy of reagent distribution. Results also show an improvement in the recovery of fine particles with low addition of collector at the feed of the flotation bank. This result was not expected, although it could be observed from the results of Stage distribution of reagents down a flotation bank is practised in many operating plants to give a boost to the flotation after the first cells. A typical reagent distribution uses more than 75% of the collector at the top of the flotation bank with the remaining distributed down the bank. Results of exploratory laboratory and full scale trials show that by using 50% or less collector at the top of the bank, with larger additions in the downstream cells provides higher recovery of coarse particles at equivalent or lesser reagent consumption. This lower addition at the top of the bank is sufficient to allow the flotation of fine particles. The remaining collector can then adsorb on the coarser particles that require more surface coverage to be recovered by flotation. In addition, to show an improvement in the recovery of coarse particles, the tests with low addition of collector at the top of the flotation bank yield higher recovery of fine particles. Observations made during the laboratory tests also show the importance of using an adequate ratio of collector to frother in the various stages of flotation. Such investigation, that would require to adjust the frother and collector dosages, as well as their distributions, will however be very demanding in terms of experimentation. The use of simulation could provide useful hints for planning the experiments. The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Noranda Brunswick Mining division for allowing to use their laboratory facilities and providing assays of the produced samples. Special thanks are formulated to Robert Grant, the metallurgical laboratory and the plant operators of Brunswick mining for their assistance and support during the full-scale trials. The authors are also grateful to the Quebec Fonds pour la formation de Chercheurs et l'Aide à la Recherche (FCAR) and Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for providing the financial support for the project.