This study investigated whether polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can be used as an additive for the treatment of electric arc furnace (EAF) dust. The PVC powder was mixed with the dust in order to test the synchronous treatment of two resources: waste PVC and EAF dust. The mixture was made into pellets and subjected to heat at various temperatures. The effects of the heat treatment and heating rate were investigated. The PVC emitted hydrogen chloride gas by pyrolysis and generated chlorides of zinc, lead, and cadmium in the pellets. These chlorides can be recovered by volatilization or leaching after the heat treatment. The residual pellet of this process contained over 45% iron, and it is expected that the residual pellet can be injected into the electric arc furnace.Generation of the electric arc furnace (EAF) dust in steel-making companies has increased, and many research studies on its treatment have been published. Although most of the researches focused on the recovery of metals, prior consideration about using the dust may be re-injection into the furnace as the principal ingredient of the dust is iron. Therefore, the subject of those researches, like this study, can be regarded as pretreatment for re-injection. EAF dust refining methods can be classified as wet and dry, and their main target metals are zinc, lead, and cadmium. A typical dry refining method involves mixing the dust with an additive and subjecting it to heat. The noticeable point is that lead and cadmium are recovered as chlorides. For example, the WAELZ kiln method mixes the dust with a reductant and roasts the mixture in about 1200 This research began from the idea that target metals of the dust can be recovered as chlorides by volatilization. We choose waste polyvinyl chloride (PVC) as the source of chlorine and tested whether PVC can be used as the additive. PVC is composed of about 57% chlorine and about 43% hydrocarbon. It begins emitting hydrogen chloride gas by pyrolysis under 300 Therefore, this research was carried out for the simultaneous treatment of two kinds of resources: EAF dust and waste PVC. The entire process of this research aimed to recover the zinc, lead, and cadmium from the dust and was adjusted so that the residual dust can be injected into the EAF. Instead of using waste PVC, pure PVC powder was used in this research. The characteristic of the dust and PVC was investigated. The dust and PVC were mixed and made as pellets at various mixing ratios. The pellets were heat-treated at various temperatures, and the effects of the heat treatment and the heating rate were investigated. The EAF dust was collected from a baghouse of a steel-making company in Korea. Pure PVC powder (LS100S, LG Chem Co.) was used in experiments and was mixed with the dust in various ratios. Prior to making pellets, the dust and PVC powder were blended by a rod mill for over 2  The solid samples were dissolved by an acid mixture for analysis. The chemical composition of the prepared solutions was analyzed by ICP (VISTA-Pro, Varian) except chlorine and carbon. The content of chlorine was measured by potentiometric method, which is the titration method using a silver electrode and silver nitrate titrant ( The configuration of the samples and the distribution of several elements in the sample were observed by SEM (JSM6300, JEOL) and EDX mapping technique. X-ray diffraction technique (D/max-2200, RIGAKU) was used for the analysis of crystalline phases of samples. XRD patterns were compared with the list in the Joint Committee on powder diffraction standards (JCPDS) data files.  The X-ray diffraction technique was applied in the analysis of the crystalline phases of the dust. Intensities and positions of XRD patterns in   For confirmation of the pyrolysis of the PVC sample, thermo-gravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG–DTA) of PVC sample were performed. The tests were conducted in the atmosphere of air and argon, respectively. Both TGA curves commonly showed sudden weight loss of about 62% between 250 After the emission of hydrogen chloride, the residue began to decompose at about 400 Consequently, the PVC began to emit hydrogen chloride gas under 300 The effect of the heat treatment on the volatilization of metals is shown in Volatilization of zinc, lead, and cadmium increased in proportion to the temperature, and particularly from 600 However, 17% of iron was volatilized at 300 Vapor pressures of PbCl  Cross-sections of those pellets were observed by SEM. There were needle-shaped materials around the residual PVC. This pellet was heated at 800   Consequently, the roasting of the PVC 30% pellets at 1000  However, the reactions from (5) to (9) have lower Gibbs free energy than reaction (2). Reactions (5) and (6) are about the generation of the zinc chloride, and those of (7) and (8) are about the generation of cadmium chloride and lead chloride, respectively. Therefore, although the chlorides of zinc, lead, and cadmium can be generated earlier than FeCl Ferrous chloride can be generated as in reaction (4), and it can be also used as a chlorine provider. A Japanese patent had tried to treat the EAF dust by using ferrous chloride ( The possibility of the reaction (10) was tested by the experiment in The ZnFe As can be seen, the chlorine exchange began at about 600 The chlorine exchange between iron and zinc occurred as an equivalent mole ratio. In case of 700 The effect of the heating rate on the volatilization of iron was tested in The volatilization of iron decreased in proportion to the decrease of the heating rate. About 3.9% of iron volatilized at the heating rate of 10 Therefore, from the above results, the following observation can be made. Rapid heating rate makes excessive concentration of the hydrogen chloride gas and induces to generated ferric chloride. However, the heating rate slower than 4 Finally, the effect of the mixed PVC ratio was investigated. The PVC powder was mixed with the dust as the ratio from 10% to 45%. The pellets were heated at 800 The technique used in this research left much chloride residue in the roasted pellet. The chlorides of transition metals can be volatilized by heat treatment, but the chlorides of alkali metals and alkaline metals cannot. Therefore, for the re-injection of the residual pellet, the pellet was washed after heat treatment. When the washing step is included in the process, we do not need to increase the temperature until 1000 The heated pellets were pulverized under 150  The recovery of chlorine decreased in proportion to the mixed PVC ratio, and that of the PVC 45% pellet was about 92%. The recovery of zinc and lead increased in proportion to the mixed PVC ratio and converged at 40% and 30%, respectively. The recovery of cadmium was irrelevant to the PVC ratio and exceeded 92% at the 10% PVC mixing ratio.  The principal ingredients in the final residue were iron and carbon. The concentration of those increased in proportion to the mixed PVC ratio. The weight of residue decreased in proportion to the mixed PVC ratio, but that of the PVC 45% pellet increased, which occurred because the ferrous chloride in the heat-treated pellet precipitated into ferric hydroxide during washing, implying that mixing 45% of PVC is excessive. Consequently, the optimum condition identified in this research is the following: 40% of the PVC mixing ratio, heat treatment at 800 This research can be used for synchronous treatment of both resources: EAF dust and plastic waste loaded with PVC. However, this process may create dioxin and it is not investigated yet. Prior to practical application, it should be considered. The PVC powder was mixed with the dust in various mixing ratios, and the mixture was made into pellets. The pellets were subjected to heat treatment at various temperatures, and the effects of the heat treatment temperature and the heating rate were investigated. Potassium chloride restrained the zinc chloride from volatilizing until 900 Rapid heating rate generated ferric chloride in the pellets, but the heating rate lower than 4