This paper extends the range of diameters (0.009–0.127 m) for which information on the maldistribution of the phases at a T-junction is available. Data are presented for a smaller T-junction whose diameter is 0.005 m in all branches. The flow rates studied result in annular flow approaching the junction. Gas superficial velocities of 46–60 m/s and liquid superficial velocities of 15–20 m/s were studied. When the present data are compared to those from larger diameter junctions for similar superficial inlet velocities, it is seen that decreasing the pipe diameter increases the fraction of liquid taken off. It is suggested that this trend is due to the lower entrained fraction and more uniform film around of the pipe circumference for the smaller pipes. The measured split data were compared with the predictions of published models.When a two-phase flow is introduced into a T-junction, there is almost inevitably a maldistribution of the phases between the outlets. This can constitute a major problem when it occurs in chemical processes and oil and gas production, as the maldistribution can have a significant effect on the behaviour of equipment downstream of the junction. An example of this can be taken from natural gas distribution networks, where during winter months some of the heavier hydrocarbons can condense out of the gas flow. Even though small quantities of liquid itself will not cause a problem, observations during operation showed that the condensate could arrive in appreciable amounts at any one of the delivery stations. This is caused by liquid emerging preferentially from an outlet in one of the junctions used to split the flow between delivery stations. However, this maldistribution of phases can be utilised as a useful tool in the processing industry, mainly as a phase separator. On offshore oil/gas production platforms, a phase separator is required to provide gas-free oil for pumping, and oil-free gas for transmission compressors. Current separators are large vessels, which are expensive to build and to place on the platform. Moreover, such vessels contain a large inventory of flammable material that should be minimised. The possibility of using the maldistribution that occurs at a T-junction for phase separation, although only partial separation, is an approach which is motivating research in this area. The majority of junctions, which have been employed in studies of two-phase flow split, are of the side arm type. In these, there is a main pipe containing an inlet and one outlet, usually termed the run. Coming off the main pipe there is the pipe which forms the second outlet, the side arm. The aim of this study was to investigate, experimentally, the split that occurs at a 0.005 m horizontal T-junction, and to compare the results with data from junctions of other diameters, and with theoretical models from published work. A 0.005 m junction is employed, so that the effect of a small diameter can be investigated to see if it follows previous trends. Small diameters are of interest because of the possibility of scaling down the size of plants, especially those manufacturing hazardous materials. Though there has been a substantial amount of work published in the area of flow split at T-junction, there has been none at such a small diameter. Here, the most relevant published data and models are reviewed, so as to place the present work in context. The experiments performed by    Experiments were conducted on a two-phase, T-junction loop shown schematically in The T-Junction used in this study was manufactured from acrylic resin, so to allow experimental observations. The main and side arm diameters are 0.005 m. The outside of the T-shaped block has a rectangular cross section to minimize refraction problems during the observation of the flow. The undeviated two-phase stream travels along 0.95 m of horizontal pipe beyond the T-junction and then flows vertically down to a cyclone. The side arm consisted of 1.34 m of straight horizontal steel pipe followed by a vertically downward steel pipe to a second separator. The flow rates of air and water emerging through the side arm and run of the T-junction was altered by opening and closing gate valves in the outlet legs of the T, just upstream of the cyclones (7, 8). The cyclones separated the phases and their flow rates were measured. The airflow rate was measured using one of a series of rotameters (9), while the water flow rate was determined by collecting the volume of liquid discharged at the bottom of each cyclone over a measured time (10). An assessment was carried out on the uncertainty on each of the measured parameters. They were all within Measurements of the flow-split data were taken for a number of inlet flowrates. Two gas superficial velocities were investigated, 15 and 20 m/s. Three liquid superficial velocities were employed, 0.11, 0.16 and 0.19 m/s, for each gas inlet condition. The pressure at the T-junction was always maintained at 148 kPa. The flow pattern was observed to be annular for all six inlet conditions. This was in agreement with the observations of The inlet flow rates employed were limited by the experimental equipment and flow patterns. For higher inlet liquid flows, the flow pattern changed from annular flow to slug flow. The presence of slugs produced large variations in the outlet airflow rate and it became impossible to obtain readings from the outlet air rotameters. For each test, the flow rates emerging from both the side arm and run of the horizontal T-junction were recorded, and the fraction of the air and water flow taken off through the side arm was calculated. The data are tabulated in The effect of the inlet gas flow rate is shown in The effect of varying the liquid superficial velocity is also shown in The results of this work can be used to examine the effect of the pipe diameter. Data for flow rates similar to those used here are available for pipe diameters of 0.009 m ( The experimental data have been compared against the predictions of the models of The effect of asymmetry of the film flow rate caused by gravity on the present results has also been considered. The horizontal annular flow models of Examination of the data presented in  For annular flow dividing at a 0.005 m diameter T-junction, increasing liquid flow rate decreases the fraction of liquid removed for a given gas take off. There is very little effect of inlet gas flow rate on the take off. Decreasing the pipe diameter increases the fraction of liquid removed through the side arm for a given fraction of gas taken off. It is suggested that this is due to an increase in the fraction of liquid travelling as a film on the pipe walls, making more liquid available for take-off. The models of For the geometry and flow rates considered in the present experiments, the junction is not very suitable for phase separation