Mineralization in the Earth's crust can be regarded as a singular process resulting in large amounts of mass accumulation and element enrichment over short time or space scales. The elemental concentrations modeled by fractals and multifractals show self-similarity and scale-invariant properties. We take the view that fluid-pressure variations in response to earthquakes or fault rupture are primarily responsible for changes in solubility and trigger transient physical and chemical variations in ore-forming fluids that enhance the mineralization process. Based on this general concept, we investigated mineral precipitation processes driven by rapid fluid pressure reductions by coupling mineralization to a cellular automaton model to reveal the nonlinear mechanism of the orogenic gold mineralization process using simulation. In the model, fluid pressure can increase to the rock failure condition, which was set as lithostatic pressure at a depth of 10 km (270 MPa), due to either porosity reduction or dehydration reactions. Rapid drops in pressure resulting from fault rupture or local hydrofracture may induce repeated gold precipitation. The geochemical patterns generated by the model evolve from depletion to enrichment patterns, and from spatially random to spatially clustered structures quantified by multifractal models and geostatistics. Results show how metal elements self-organize to form high metal concentration patterns displaying self-similarity and scale-invariance. These transitions are attributed to the growth and coalescence of sub-networks with different fluid pressures up to the percolation threshold, resulting in a wide range of fluid pressure reductions and gold precipitation in the form of clusters. The results suggest that cyclic evolution of fluid pressure and its effects on gold precipitation systems can effectively mimic the repeated mineralization superposition process, and generate complex geochemical patterns characterized by a multifractal model. The nonlinear behavior exhibits scale-invariance and self-organized critical threshold, where mineral phase separations result from fluid pressure reductions associated with fault failure.The interactions of fluid flow, seismicity, and mineral precipitation can control the mechanical strength and permeability of faults in the earth's crust, and are indispensable components in the development of hydrothermal systems and the formation of ore deposits ( This well-known fault-valve process is widely linked to the formation of mesothermal gold mineralization because the rapid fluid pressure reductions due to fault ruptures can result in anomalous enrichment of elements in small ore bodies within a relatively short period of time ( The concept of fractals introduced by However, these models focused on the dynamic interaction between earthquakes and dehydration reactions, and did not address mineral precipitation processes associated with rapid fluid pressure reductions. Gold solubility in hydrothermal solutions is dominantly controlled by temperature, pressure, pH, and redox (e.g., In this study, we integrated the mineral precipitation process into the fluid flow cellular automaton to investigate the basic nonlinear behaviors of the orogenic gold mineralization process during rapid fluid reductions due to fault failure at a depth of 10 km (270 MPa). We coupled gold precipitation processes to the model of Cellular automata can generate very complex forms according to a simple set of local rules governing interactions among nearest neighbors, and thus are attractive for the study of critical phenomena and phase transitions ( Once the fault rupture occurs, the abrupt drop in fluid pressure toward hydrostatic values triggers mineral precipitation in the fracture network, which can seal fractures to rebuild the fluid pressure and ensure that the cycle repeats. The relationship between the solubility of elements and fluid pressure is different for different temperature ranges. Some studies suggest that the solubility of metal ion species (e.g. Ag, Au, Cu and Sn) decreases log-linearly with decreasing water vapor pressure ( In this study, we used three different relationships between metal ions and fluid pressure. Specifically, we investigate linear, exponential and power-law functions (Eq. Taking the linear relationship as an example, the volume of mineral precipitation due to rapid fluid pressure reductions can be estimated by: Here We assume that the total concentration of deposited metal elements (e.g., Au or Ag) in the The partition function Here The singularity exponent An asymmetry index Semivariograms are a key component in geostatistics, and are typically used to quantify the degree of spatial variability. The semivariogram function can be expressed as: We started the simulation of fluid pressure increases and mineral precipitation process within a test grid of Similar to the evolution of high fluid pressure, the spatial distribution of metal elements evolves from a spatially random structure to spatially clustered structures. Nine temporal sequence snapshots ( A transitional phenomenon also occurs with multifractal geochemical patterns. Simulations end when the average fluid pressure of the system reaches the failure condition. Producing maps of singularities can provide new information, complementing results based on the original concentration distribution ( We investigated the cycle of fluid pressure increase – hydrofracture – fluid pressure decrease – rapid sealing from precipitation using a cellular automaton model to simulate the singular mineralization process. With the continued increase of fluid pressure within the undrained system, the evolution of the connectivity structure shows the onset of a correlation length at the percolation threshold, after which the correlation length increases until the system as a whole reaches a critical state. The relationship between cluster size and the number of events shows a power-law with an exponential tail at the percolation threshold that plays an important role for fracture connectivity and fluid flow in the formation of mineral deposits ( The interaction of physical, chemical and biological processes can contribute to mineral deposition through phase transition or separation during the hydrothermal mineralization processes. We considered fluid pressure fluctuations and cyclicity as a dominant process in mineralization, and this cyclicity was responsible for the superposition of repeated mineralization events that ultimately produce complex geochemical patterns that can be effectively modeled using a multifractal framework. Although this idealized model is simple, it is not simplistic, and provides important insights into the singular mineralization process. Future model developments will include other important processes not yet considered, including tectonic stress increases from plate motion, to investigate how different ratios of differential stress to fluid pressure can influence the fault failure patterns which may further determine the ore deposit types ( The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. Thanks are due to two reviewers' comments and suggestions, which helped us improve this study. This research was jointed supported by the