The effect of heating rate on the formation of microstructure and texture was investigated in a heavily cold-rolled and annealed equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy. For this purpose, the alloy was 90% cold-rolled and annealed for 2 min (mins) and 60 min at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1000 °C using two different heating rates, namely high heating rate (HHR) of 10 °C/s and low heating rate (LHR) of 0.013 °C/s. The cold-rolled material developed a very fine deformation microstructure and strong brass type texture. The LHR treated materials consistently showed higher average grain size and wider grain size distributions as compared to those in their HHR treated counterparts. This could be attributed to the early activation of nucleation sites during LHR treatments. However, the annealing textures of the HHR and LHR treated materials were very similar, confirmed by the qualitative and quantitative texture analyses of the individual components and overall texture strength. The texture development could be adequately explained on the basis of absence of strong preferential orientation selection and preferential growth, which resulted from the more homogeneously deformed matrix and sluggish diffusion, respectively. The present results indicated that heating rate could significantly affect the average grain size and grain size distribution during annealing, but the annealing texture remained largely unaffected.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are multicomponent alloys developed based on the novel alloy design concept of mixing a large number of elements in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportions In order to further enhance or tailor the properties of these alloys for specific applications, understanding of the thermo-mechanical processing (TMP) behavior remains critical An important processing parameter which can have significant impact on the evolution of microstructure and texture during annealing is the heating rate In the present work, we systematically investigate the effect of heating rate on the evolution of microstructure and texture in heavily cold-rolled and annealed FCC equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi HEA for the first time. It is proposed that unearthing the effect of heating rate would be helpful in understanding and control of microstructure and texture in other multicomponent systems. Rectangular slabs (40 mm (length) × 20 mm (width) × 10 mm (thickness)) of equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi HEA were prepared through vacuum arc-melting route using starting materials having purities greater than 99.9%. The as-cast slabs were subjected to an optimized homogenization treatment at 1100 °C for 6 h (h). Rectangular samples (thickness ∼5 mm) were extracted from the homogenized slab and cold-rolled to 50% reduction in thickness (∼2.5 mm) using a laboratory scale rolling equipment with roll diameter 140 mm (SPX Precision instrument, Fenn Division, USA). These cold-rolled sheets were annealed at 800 °C for 1 h in a salt-bath furnace. These annealed sheets were used as the starting materials for further TMP treatments. The fully annealed samples were subjected to multi-pass cold-rolling up to ∼90% reduction in thickness (final thickness ∼250 μm). The cold-rolling was carried out in steps of 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% reduction in thickness (with respect to the starting thickness ∼2.5 mm). However, further deformation to 90% reduction in thickness was achieved using small incremental deformation in each pass. In total, 10 – 11 passes were required to achieve the desired 90% reduction. Small rectangular samples were obtained from the 90% cold-rolled sheets and annealed at 700 °C, 800 °C and 1000 °C using two vastly different heating rates, namely 10 °C/s(s) (high heating rate or HHR) and 10 °C/min (∼0.13 °C/s) (low heating rate or LHR). An infrared gold image furnace (Make: ULVAC, Japan; Model: QHC-E410) was used for this purpose. The samples were annealed using the two different heating rates and isothermally held at different annealing temperatures for 2 min (mins) and 60 min. Following the annealing treatments, the samples were quenched at the rate of 60 °C/s using high pressure argon. The microstructure and texture of the samples were characterized using an electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system (Oxford Instruments, UK) attached to a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Model: SUPRA 40, Make: Carl-Zeiss, Germany) equipped with field emission gun electron source (FEG) operating at 20 kV. The samples for EBSD measurements were prepared using mechanical polishing followed by electropolishing using a mixture of methanol and perchloric acids (9:1 by volume). The EBSD scans were acquired using the AztecHKL software (Oxford Instruments, UK). For deformed samples, scan step size of 0.04 μm was used. For annealed samples the step size varied between 0.10 μm and 2.0 μm. The acquired EBSD dataset were exported to the TSL-OIM™ software (EDAX Inc., USA) for further analysis. In order to obtain reliable statistics, several EBSD scans (3–4 scans) were obtained from each deformed and annealed sample. The average grain size (the grain were defined with a tolerance angle of 15° and size of at least 5 scan points in a single grain) of different annealed samples was determined using the circle equivalent diameter method. The annealing twins were excluded from the grain size calculation. The orientation distribution functions (ODFs) were calculated from the merged dataset using the harmonic series expansion method (series rank = 22). Orthotropic sample symmetry was assumed for calculating the pole figures (PFs) and orientation distribution functions (ODFs). The volume fractions of individual texture components were determined using a cut-off angle of 15°.   The microstructures of the 90% cold-rolled material after isothermal annealing for 60 min at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1000 °C using HHR and LHR is shown in The development of texture in the 90% cold-rolled material after isothermal annealing treatments for 2 min at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1000 °C using HHR and LHR is shown in In order to further illustrate the effect of heating rates on the evolution of texture, the volume fractions of important texture components, namely BR (  The heating rate can affect the kinetics of recrystallization by controlling the extent of recovery that can happen before the onset of recrystallization. In case of lower heating rates, pronounced recovery may happen before recrystallization which can decrease the driving force for recrystallization The development of fine scale microstructure in the present alloy after heavy deformation has been widely reported for high and low SFE single phase materials It might be noted that complete recrystallization is achieved at lower annealing temperature of 700 °C, but appreciable grain growth does not occur due to the sluggish diffusion in the present HEA system It is important to note that nucleation or growth behaviors can significantly affect the formation of recrystallization texture, as conceived in the classical oriented nucleation and growth theories In the light of the above discussion, it is quite interesting to analyze the effect of early activation of the potential nucleation sites on the formation of recrystallization texture in the present HEA. From the ODF sections ( It has been clarified by the present authors that in contrast to model low SFE alloys, such as Ni-60 wt%Co, the texture formation in the present HEA is not affected by preferential nucleation or growth From the discussion above, it may be apparent that, while early nucleation initiates at the most favorable nucleation sites during the LHR treatments, there is no preferential orientation selection. In other words, the most favorable nucleation sites do not necessarily have preferential orientations. Therefore, the orientations of the early recrystallized grains are random sampling of the overall orientations present, which has been already reported  LHR treatments result in larger annealed grain size and wider grain size distribution as compared to those in the HHR treated materials. This is attributed to the early activation of potential nucleation sites during the LHR treatments. The difference in the annealed grain size in the LHR and HHR treated materials annealed at low temperature (700 °C) and for short duration (2 min) is not significant. This may be explained by the sluggish diffusion behavior of the HEA which restricts grain growth. Higher annealing temperature and longer annealing time lead to appreciable difference in the annealed grain size. The texture of HHR and LHR treated materials appear very similar, qualitatively and quantitatively. Absence of preferential orientation selection and preferential growth during recrystallization lead to very similar texture in the two cases. Heating rate significantly affects the annealed grain size and grain size distribution. However, the recrystallization texture remains largely unaffected. The authors (G.D. Sathiaraj and P.P. Bhattacharjee) gratefully acknowledge the financial support of