Hemiarthroplasty is a time-tested and valuable tool in a surgeon's armamentarium for the treatment of complex fractures of the proximal humerus. Hemiarthroplasty has been shown to reliably relieve pain; functional outcomes are less predictable. Hemiarthroplasty is demanding, and meticulous attention to detail is required for a successful outcome. Reconstruction of proximal humeral anatomy via the restoration of humeral height, version, and alignment is the foundation of the operation. However, tuberosity repair is arguably the most important part of the procedure. Tuberosity malposition and malunion is the most common and significant cause of poor functional outcomes. This article reviews the technique of hemiarthroplasty for fractures of the proximal humerus.The appropriate treatment for 3- and 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus is controversial ( The use of hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of fractures of the proximal humerus was initially described by Neer in 1953. In his original series on proximal humerus fractures, Neer stated that 3-part fractures were best treated with ORIF, whereas 4-part fractures were best treated with hemiarthroplasty. Hemiarthroplasty is a demanding procedure, and often complications are linked to surgical technique. Normal anatomic landmarks may be obscured or obliterated by the fracture, making restoration of the patient's native anatomy challenging. Nevertheless, vigilance and meticulous attention to detail can reliably reconstruct the proximal humerus, minimize complications, and ultimately improve results for patients. The patient is placed in a modified beach-chair position with the back of the operating table elevated to approximately 45°. A towel is placed under the medial border of the scapula, and a table with cutaway section about the shoulder is used to allow global access to the shoulder. The entire arm is prepped and draped beginning at the base of the neck and under the axilla, thus permitting the arm to be moved freely throughout surgery. A long deltopectoral incision is used. The incision begins inferior to the clavicle, just lateral to the coracoid, and extends laterally toward the deltoid insertion on the humeral shaft. The cephalic vein is identified in the deltopectoral interval, and the vein is retracted laterally as the interval is opened. To facilitate exposure, the proximal one-third of the pectoralis insertion is taken down and tagged with suture for later reattachment. A broad retractor is placed under the lateral border of the strap muscles; the surgeon should avoid overretraction that could result in neurovascular injury. Another broad retractor is placed under the deltoid, and this muscle is retracted laterally. The long head of the biceps brachii (LHB) is identified. With the LHB as the guide to the glenoid and the center of the shoulder, the hemorrhagic bursa is excised and the clavicopectoral fascia is incised. Typically, this dissection will reveal the fracture hematoma and fracture fragments. At this point in the procedure, the fracture fragments must be identified and mobilized, and the LHB serves as a landmark to the individual parts. Typically, the lesser tuberosity lies medial to the LHB, the greater tuberosity lateral, with the head—in varying degrees of comminution—lying between the tuberosities. With the individual fragments identified, each tuberosity is tagged with a number 2 nonabsorbable suture. The suture is placed in cuff tendon, proximal to the tuberosity insertion, thereby avoiding further iatrogenic comminution to the fragment. Each tuberosity is mobilized sufficiently medially, laterally, superiorly, and inferiorly. With the tuberosities tagged and mobilized, attention is turned to the removal of the humeral head ( Two important conditions must be recognized and addressed appropriately. First, if treatment has been delayed beyond 7 to 10 days after the initial injury, particular care must be taken in mobilizing the tuberosities and removing the humeral head. Scarring and adhesions make these tasks considerably more difficult. Second, if the head is dislocated anteriorly below the coracoid and medial to the strap muscles, caution must be exercised given the proximity of neurovascular structures and potential for neurovascular injury. At this point in the procedure, attention is focused on preparing the humerus for the implant. This must be undertaken gently because the bone in patients who sustain these injuries is typically osteoporotic. To expose the humerus, the arm is extended and externally rotated and then the elbow is lifted in a distal-to-proximal direction. Medial and lateral Darrach retractors are placed posterior to the shaft for full exposure. Next, the medullary canal is opened and prepared with sequential reamers. It is vitally important to determine the proper orientation, position, and size of the prosthesis. This involves 3 aspects: height, retroversion, and head size. The prosthesis is the foundation on which the reconstruction is based, and the restoration of a patient's anatomy with the implant is vital to the success of the operation. A malpositioned implant leads to malpositioned tuberosities. Version is initially assessed with the use of an intramedullary alignment system equipped with an outrigger that references the forearm ( The next step is to establish the height of the prosthesis. The trial stem is placed within the canal with the use of a sponge around the humeral stem. It is important to not seat the collar of the prosthesis so deeply that it is placed against the remaining proximal shaft ( Finally, a trial humeral head is selected and placed ( Next, a reassessment of the position of the tuberosities, as well as the alignment, height, and version of the prosthesis and tuberosities, is performed. The tuberosities should be below the head such that there is no subacromial impingement, and the tuberosities are well-apposed to the shaft. Then, the height is assessed. The tension on LHB, if the tendon is intact, can be used as a guide to the appropriate tension for the entire myofascial sleeve. If the tendon is slack in its anatomic position, the prosthesis is implanted too deeply. If the tendon is tight, the prosthesis is prominent. To evaluate version, assess the stability of the implant at 40-50° of internal and external rotation. If the prosthesis subluxes or dislocates posteriorly, there likely is too much retroversion, and this should be decreased. If the prosthesis is unstable anteriorly, this suggests that the retroversion should be increased. Finally, anteroposterior translation and push-pull assessments are performed to assess the translational stability of the implant. Our goal is 50% translation in both the anterior-to-posterior and superior-to-inferior directions. If there is any concern regarding alignment of the implant, intraoperative fluoroscopy can be used to confirm appropriate position. When it is thought that the implant is in the ideal position, the distance from the lateral shaft to the lateral aspect of the collar is measured, which will allow reproduction of appropriate height when the actual component is implanted. The proximal humerus is prepared with drill holes to allow for tuberosity fixation ( Attention is now turned to implantation of the final prosthesis. In most cases, the use of cement is mandatory in the setting of this fracture for 2 reasons. First, there is usually insufficient bone stock to allow adequate press-fit fixation. Second, the use of cement restores the rotational stability of the implant that was lost via fracture of the tuberosities. The stem is sized close to that of the reamed canal, such that a minimal amount of cement will be required. An appropriately sized cement restrictor is placed within the canal and the canal irrigated to remove excess blood and debris. Cement is injected, and the component, with the use of the previous measurements, anatomic landmarks, and instrumentation, is placed to assess appropriate height and retroversion. Excess cement is removed from the proximal canal to prevent tuberosity-to-shaft contact and impeded healing. The actual head is then placed and the prosthesis reduced. Tuberosity repair is arguably the most important part of the procedure ( We routinely use a medium suction drain placed in the deep interval for the first 12-24 hours to prevent initial hematoma formation. The drain should exit laterally in the proximal deltoid, avoiding injury to the axillary nerve. The insertion of the pectoralis major should be repaired with number 2 nonabsorbable suture. Several number 2 nonabsorbable sutures are placed in the deltopectoral interval, marking the interval in the event of future revision surgery. The deep subcutaneous tissue is closed with a 3-0 absorbable sutures and the skin in a subcuticular fashion with a 4-0 absorbable suture. Steristrips are used to promote a cosmetic closure ( In our rehabilitation protocol, a passive motion program begins on the first postoperative day. Range-of-motion limitations are determined on the basis of the intraoperative assessment of stability following tuberosity repair, taking into account the quality of bone, the status of the rotator cuff and deltoid, and the strength of tuberosity fixation to the shaft. On the morning after surgery, we usually raise the arm in the scapular plane to approximately 80-90° in the scapular plane to establish patient confidence. A therapist then begins gravity-assisted pendulum exercises to allow the patient to warm up. After this, assisted forward elevation and supine external rotation with a stick are performed ( In his initial series, Neer reported that hemiarthroplasty for complex fractures of the proximal humerus produced outcomes that were “satisfactory, but imperfect, and many months were required for maximum recovery.” Many controversies remain regarding the surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures. Locking plate technology is expanding the indications for ORIF; and there remains a debate as to which specific fracture patterns are amenable to ORIF, and which are best treated with hemiarthroplasty. Initial work is being performed to address this question