Because of periodic disturbance during coal seam excavation and support, the surrounding rock is subjected to cyclic unloading-reloading. To study the effect of pressure-relief on coal fields during gas drainage and mining, the permeability, acoustic emission (AE) and energy dissipation properties of coal under tiered cyclic unloading were experimentally investigated. Permeability enhancement rate (PER), AE signal change rate and a damage variable were defined to describe this process. Hysteresis, memory and Felicity effects are revealed. These results show that, the step-wise increase of strains and permeability display a hysteresis effect under tiered cyclic unloading. The axial residual strain increases exponentially, while the radial residual strain increases as a quadratic function, and the PER increases. The AE signals show Kaiser effect when the unloading capacity is small. Conversely, the Felicity effect is displayed when the unloading capacity is large. The cumulative AE signal and the axial strain exhibit good synchronisation and memory characteristics. The dissipated energy increases as a quadratic function, and the developed damage variable also increases, the critical damage variable of coal failure is estimated to be D
                     c ≈ 0.8.With increasing intensity and depth of mining, the influence of mining disturbance has become more and more significant in affecting the stress state of fields, and construction activities such as extraction of protective seams and roadway excavation prone to cause the surrounding rock to unload or fail ( Extensive work have been performed on analysing and the mechanical characteristics of coal and rock mass under different unloading paths, unloading rates ( At the same time, the permeability, energy and AE characteristics of rocks under unloading confining pressure have been widely studied (e.g., All the above experiments were carried out at a certain rate to unload the confining pressure until the specimen is destroyed. However, the mining disturbance is quite complex, and in the meanwhile, a large amount of mine gas gushes out during coal seam excavation ( The mechanical and seepage experiments of gas-bearing coal were carried out in this study under cyclic unloading-loading of the confining pressure. The residual strain, permeability, AE and energy dissipation properties of gas-bearing coal and their intrinsic relationship under cyclic unloading confining pressure were analysed and provide some guidance on the damage during unloading and on the prevention of coal and gas outburst during the process of gas-bearing coal and rock mining. The coal samples used in this experiment were sourced from the coalfield in Gong County, Yibin City, Sichuan Province in the southwest of China ( In this experiment, thermal-fluid-solid coupling triaxial servo seepage test device for the coal containing gas and the AE signal monitoring system were used to carry out the cyclic unloading-loading of the confining pressure. The basic parameters of this experiment instrument can be referred to in the reports of The coal samples were loaded into the triaxial chamber according to the seepage experiment method, and the detailed operation procedures are presented in the paper by Cyclic unloading-loading of confining pressure tests were carried out on four coal samples, namely coal#1-4, under the same conditions. The influence of cyclic unloading on the mechanical properties of the coal was analysed based on three aspects (seepage, AE signals and energy dissipation). This experiment only investigated the unloading confining pressure process, and adsorption equilibrium and axial stress loading stage were not the focus of this study. Therefore, this research considers the deformation at the starting point of unloading confining pressure as 0, which can elucidate the corresponding relationship between deformation, permeability and AE signal (see The gas permeation through the sample was assumed to be an isothermal process. According to Darcy's law, the permeability of coal was calculated as (  The stress-strain curve associated with the cyclic unloading-loading of confining pressure, shown in The 4th and 5th unloading cycles of coal#2 were separately extracted, and are depicted in To quantitatively characterise the irrecoverable deformation of coal caused by the unloading-loading of confining pressure and by the constant high axial stress, the residual strain was defined in terms of two components: axial and radial residual strains. The formulas for calculating the cumulative residual strain As shown in The PER under confining pressure unloading was defined to quantitatively characterise the influence of confining pressure unloading on permeability. The formulas for calculating the cumulative permeability enhancement rate (CPER) The relationship between PER and confining pressure unloading is shown in The authors have studied the distribution characteristics of AE signals in coal under graded loading and unloading axial stresses, and found that there is a regional distribution characteristic of the AE signals ( The AE ring count and AE energy distribution of coal#4 under tiered unloading confining pressure are presented in Parts of AE signals and deformation display memory effects under tiered cyclic loading ( The cumulative AE ring count, cumulative AE energy and axial strain of coal#4 are in good synchronisation with the confining pressure under tiered cyclic unloading. All of them increase in a step-wise manner, and the gradient continuously increases. Through comparison and analysis of the cumulative AE signals with the help of the locally enlarged axial strain and confining pressure curves of To understand the change in the AE signal under unit confining pressure unloading, the AE ring count change rate (  With the development of deep-mining engineering, the unloading effect of coal and rock mass in the construction process has become more and more vital. Coal mine disasters caused by the unloading effect occur frequently, and energy is the factor driving rock deformation, failure and instability ( In the coal loading process, the mechanical energy ( During the seepage test on coal containing gas, the effect of gas pressure on the axial stress and confining pressure should be considered in the energy of coal ( According to Terzaghi effective stress principle, the axial and radial effective stresses have been deduced by In the process of unloading and loading of the confining pressure, the energy of coal is mainly axial absorption strain energy, circumferential expansion consumption strain energy, elastic strain energy and dissipation energy. Stress and work analysis of coal has been carried out, as shown in Similarly, the radial dissipated energy can be expressed as The cumulative dissipative energy was calculated by using Eqs. Compared with By substituting Eq. From Eq. Because of periodic disturbance of coal seam excavation and support, the surrounding rock is subjected to cyclic unloading-reloading, and the mechanical characteristics of coal and rock are quite different during unloading and loading status. In order to study the effect of pressure-relief on coal during gas drainage and mining, a seepage experiment under constant axial stress and cyclic unloading-loading of confining pressure was carried out in this research. The permeability, AE and energy dissipation properties of coal and their intrinsic relationship were analysed in detail. PER, AE signal change rate and a damage variable were defined to describe this process. Hysteresis, memory, Kaiser and Felicity effects are revealed. The following are observed upon cyclic unloading-loading of confining pressure: The axial and radial strains and the corresponding permeability increase step-wise, and the permeability and strain display obvious hysteresis effects. The axial residual strain increases exponentially, while the radial residual strain increases as a quadratic function, and the PER on a whole increases. The AE signals show that the dominating Kaiser effect when unloading capacity is small, while switching to Felicity effect when unloading capacity is large. The accumulated AE signal and the axial strain show good synchronisation. The axial strain exhibits the characteristics of deformation memory, and the corresponding AE signal also reveals memory characteristics. A new method of determining the effective stress work for gas-bearing coal is proposed. The cumulative dissipated energy increases as a quadratic function with the increase in the unloading increment of confining pressure. The variation in the permeability, deformation, AE signal and energy dissipation of coal are essentially generated due to the evolution of coal damage. A new damage variable based on energy dissipation is proposed, which increases, and the critical value of the damage variable for coal failure There are no conflicts of interest to declare. This study was financially supported by the