The grain selection process during single crystal casting of a Ni-base superalloy DD403 in spiral grain selector is simulated by a macro-scale ProCAST coupled a meso-scale Cellular Automaton Finite Element (CAFE) model. And the simulation results are validated by experimental observations. It is found that the grain orientations can be optimized in starter block and the length of starter block could be reduced to about 26.0mm. A single crystal can be rapidly selected after the solidification front climbing 400° along the spiral passage. It is proposed that the coupling effect of the heat flow direction, the preferred growth direction and the geometrical restriction of spiral wall makes contribution to the crystal selection in spiral passage. An investigation into the grain orientation selection in grain selectors with different geometries reveals that crystal orientation can be optimized by increasing the length of starter block or decreasing its width. However, no obvious relationship is found between the crystal orientation and the parameters of spiral passage.Ni-base single-crystal (SX) superalloys are extensively used as blades in aero-engines and industry gas turbines for its excellent high temperature strength and creep resistance In general, the single crystal structure is produced through competitive grain growth by directional solidification technology To improve the production efficiency and yield rate of SX blades, numerous efforts on the grain selection during SX casting have been made over the last few decades by simulations and experiments Recently, Dai et al. Furthermore, to enhance the understanding of grain selection and to provide the capability to design and optimize a spiral grain selector for newly developed alloys and components, it is of interest to investigate the mechanism of grain selection in the spiral passage for the attempt to improve the efficiency and reliability of the grain selector. Dai et al. Based on such facts, this article is devoted to investigate the relationship between the crystal orientations and the geometries of the grain selector. In addition, the influence of heat flow will be taken into account when analyzing the mechanism of grain selection in the spiral passage. The SX casting process is simulated by a coupled ProCAST&CAFE model. The geometries of the starter block and the spirals grain selector designed in this study are shown in The material used in this study was the first generation SX Ni-base superalloy DD403. The chemical composition of DD403 is listed in After SX casting, Electron Back-Scattering Diffraction (EBSD) technology was applied to acquire orientation image maps and determine the grain texture distributions in the starter block and spiral passage. For the EBSD analysis, a ZEISS SUPRA 55 SEM equipped with HKL system and Channel 5 analysis software was used. The directional solidification process was modeled by a macroscopic 3-D finite element analysis software namely ProCAST (a trademark of ESI Group, Paris). During directional solidification, the 3-D casting mesh contacted with the 2-D furnace mesh through thermal radiation (shown in The directional solidification process mainly refers to three kinds of heat transfer patterns: the thermal conduction in materials and between different materials that contact each other, the radiation within the insulator as shown in Based on the law of Stefen–Boltzman, the thermal radiation quantity The calculated thermal profiles by the macro-scale ProCAST were then used as input in the meso-scale CAFE model to predict the grain structure with special consideration of the crystallographic anisotropy of grains and the growth kinetics of dendrite tips. In the present study, the heterogeneous nucleation that occurred randomly at the surface of chill plate was modeled by a continuous nucleation distribution called Gaussian distribution of nucleation sites The The preferred orientation of Ni-base superalloys with a face-centered cubic crystal structure is 〈1  Figs. As for the grain number selection, it is found that the grain number decreases and the grain size increases with the increase of the distance from chill plate. The quantitative relationship between the grain density and the distance from the chill plate is shown in When the distance is higher than 26.0 The grain selection behavior in the spiral grain selector and the efficiency of the selectors with respect to different spiral designs will be discussed in the following. As an example, By tracking the grain selection in Except for geometrical blocking, it is speculated that the heat flow also makes contribution to the grain selection in the spiral passage. For the intention of clear observation, the length of starter block is decreased to 1.0   The microstructures of the longitudinal section I, section II and section III (see The findings of Fu et al. In addition, the experiment results of Lu et al. The mechanism of grain selection in the spiral grain selector has been discussed above and the following is an investigation into the efficiency of the selectors with respect to different spiral designs. The relationship between the SX crystallographic orientation and the geometries of starter block is investigated with a 3-D model of grain selector. For Ni-base superalloys, the fast growing dendritic orientation is 〈0 With decreasing the width of starter block, the specific surface area of the ceramic mould is increased and the cooling rate during solidification is improved. Greater cooling rate will increase the growth rate of the dendrites at the solid–liquid interface. As reported by Ardakani et al. However, the ratio of the length In order to investigate the grain orientation selection in the spiral passage, grain structures at different cross sections of the spiral grain selector were examined by simulation and experiment method. To confirm this, the deviation angles between 〈0 This can be attributed to the following reasons. The grains with different deviations randomly distribute at the entrance of the spiral as shown in Grain selection in spiral grain selectors is simulated by a coupled ProCAST&CAFE model and validated experimentally with different spiral geometries. The predicted results are During the grain selection process in starter block, the preferred 〈0 During the grain selection process in spiral, the grain near the inside-underside of spiral passage is selected as the final crystal and a single crystal can be rapidly selected after the solidification front climbing 400° along the spiral passage. The boundary between the selected grain and its adjacent grains is parallel to the average direction of heat flow. It is proposed that the coupling effect of the heat flow direction, the preferred growth direction and the geometrical restriction of the spiral wall makes contribution to the crystal selection in the spiral passage. The SX orientation can be optimized by increasing the length of starter block or decreasing its width. While the SX orientation approaches a constant value when the ratio of the length to the width is greater than 2. The results also reveal that there is no obvious relationship between the crystal orientation and the parameters of spiral passage. The authors are grateful to the financial support of the