The leaching of Mo, Cu and Fe from MoO3 calcines (59–61% Mo) containing 1–2% Cu, 1–2% Fe and other impurities produced from roasting molybdenite (MoS2) concentrate was examined using water and a series of chloride lixiviants, including NH4Cl (0.6M), HCl (0.115–1.40M) and a mixture of HCl (0.70M)+NH4Cl (0.1–0.93M) at a solid/leachant (w/v) ratio of 1:1 and within the temperature range 25–70°C. Stabcal modelling showed that there are many compounds formed from Cu, Fe and Mo co-exist in the solution. Optimisation studies show that HCl solutions of concentrations≥0.35M are capable of dissolving >80% of Cu within 1h. The addition of NH4Cl (0.30–0.93M) to 0.7 MHCl reduces the dissolution of Mo to <0.5%, due to the formation of a precipitate containing mainly NH3(MoO3)3, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction. A mixture of 0.7M HCl and 0.6M NH4Cl at ambient temperatures removes Cu to <0.5% within 2h, as required for the production of Fe–Mo alloys at Kwangyang Ferro Alloys Co. (Korea). Although not required, Fe was removed to <0.6% whereas most other metal impurities were removed to <0.1%. Pilot plant trials over 7 campaigns, each treating 2.0–2.2tonnes of MoO3 calcine containing 2.1% Cu using 1.44M NH4Cl and 0.97M HCl at an ambient temperature yielded final products containing 0.22% Cu as required. Mass balance calculations (closure to 96–99%) of the pilot plant trials confirm that the Mo loss during leaching is around 0.5%.Molybdenum trioxide (MoO The direct roasting of molybdenite concentrates to produce MoO   The removal of impurities from calcines or partially roasted materials containing MoO A similar approach based on the precipitation of magnesium complex salts (phosphate and arsenate) was patented by These patents and earlier papers however did not deal with the high loss of Mo during acid leaching. The role of ammonium ions in precipitating ammonium molybdate compounds at a pH The HCl–NH The solubility of pure MoO There is a possibility of re-precipitation of molybdate salts from Mo(VI), Fe(III) and Cu(II) ions formed during leaching (  The difference in the regions of stability for solid mixtures of (MoO According to All chemical reagents used in the laboratory tests were of analytical grade. The MoO Particle size analysis of the untreated MoO  The initial dissolution of calcine in water therefore could be represented by the following equation, showing the generation of hydrogen ions: The dissolution of Mo from impure MoO   The loss of Mo to HCl leach liquor could be minimised by adding NH  The effect of increasing temperature on the two processes involved, namely (i) dissolution of Mo, Fe and Cu and (ii) precipitation of ammonium molybdate is depicted in The first series of experiments were conducted with MoO The efficiency of the HCl–NH The pilot plant trials conducted subsequently confirmed the effectiveness of the Cu removal process on a larger scale, according to the flowsheet presented in The overall mass balance and the results of the trials are summarised in The mass balance of all solids recovered (as product and solids precipitated/remained in the wash liquors) is within 93.4% of the 14,160 The resulting wash liquors containing Fe and Cu could be further treated in a solvent extraction circuit. The process describing this treatment was reported in earlier papers ( Mixtures of HCl and NH