Ca–Cu chemical looping (CaL–CLC) based on calcium looping is a novel and promising process for CO2 capture. The concept utilizes the heat released from the exothermic reduction of CuO to support the endothermic regeneration of CaO-based sorbents. Therefore, it is important for the two major reactions to have matching kinetics. This work assesses kinetics of the two reactions in a calciner under the conditions of interest for CaL–CLC. The reaction rates of the decomposition of CaCO3 and reduction of CuO-based material with CH4 were measured in a TGA by varying the temperature and gas atmosphere, and two gas–solid reaction models were utilized for the determination of the kinetic parameters. On the basis of these results, a dynamic model was developed to investigate the simultaneous reduction of CuO and decomposition of CaCO3 in an adiabatic fixed-bed reactor operating at 1atm. The simulation results showed that the reduction of CuO completed extremely fast under all test conditions, and it could lead to hot spots in the calciner. It was found that addition of steam into the reducing gas could enhance the reaction rate of CaCO3 decomposition and help it match the fast rate of CuO reduction, then reduce the formation of hot spots. Also, steam could be used to control the movement of reaction front. Although CO2 could be used to control the reaction front as well, the higher CO2 partial pressure in CH4 was found to slow down the decomposition of CaCO3 leading to incomplete reaction.CH CO equilibrium concentration of CO concentration of gas ‘i’, mol/m initial concentration of gas ‘i’, mol/m concentration of gas ‘i’ in feeding gas, mol/m heat capacity of gas in the reactor, J/(kg heat capacity of solid in the reactor, J/(kg particle diameter, m reaction rate constant of CaCO reaction rate constant of CuO reduction, m reaction order, dimensionless heat of CuO reduction, J/mol heat of CaCO total pressure, Pa CO rate of CuO reduction, mol/(m rate of the decomposition of CaCO formation/consumption rate of gas ‘i’, mol/(m ideal gas constant, J/(mol time, s temperature, K initial solid temperature in the reactor, K temperature of the feeding gas, K superficial velocity, m/s conversion of CuO reduction, dimensionless conversion of CaCO axial coordinate in the reactor, m bed voidage, dimensionless molar density of CuO, mol/m molar density of CaCO density of gas in the reactor, kg/m density of solid in the reactor, kg/m dynamic viscosity of gas, kg/(m Anthropogenic emission of carbon dioxide from the combustion of fossil fuels is the main contributor to global warming and climate changes. Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) has been proposed to reduce CO Calcium looping utilizes the reversible reaction of calcium oxide and carbon dioxide for CO Some preliminary work has been done on the conceptual design of Ca–Cu chemical looping process and the development of Ca/Cu-based sorbents that could be potentially applied Since the CuO reduction reaction is to supply energy for the endothermic decomposition of CaCO The kinetics of CaCO In principle, the rate-limiting process during CaCO The reaction of CuO with a reducing gas can be treated as a non-catalytic gas–solid reaction, thus different models for gas–solid reaction could be used to obtain its kinetic parameters. The shrinking core model (SCM) was usually used to represent the reduction kinetics of supported-CuO In addition, García-Labiano et al. For a better design of Ca–Cu chemical looping process, research on kinetic matching of the key reactions as well as heat transfer characteristics during calcination is required. For this purpose, a CaCO Pure calcium carbonate (⩾99%, Alfa Aesar) was sieved to be within particle size ⩽0.1 Determination of reaction kinetics was carried out in a Cahn thermogravimetric analyzer apparatus (TGA, model 121). For a typical test, 5 Several analytical techniques were applied to characterize the materials. The BET surface area was determined with N There are several resistances, such as external and internal heat and mass transfer, which could affect the gas–solid reaction rate. Thus, a number of measures were taken to minimize these effects and to ensure that the reactions took place under chemical-controlled conditions. The diffusion effect of gas in the pore network was minimized by sieving particles of the samples to be smaller than 0.1 Decomposition of CaCO To determine the kinetic parameters of CaCO By plotting curves of Though previous experimental data are sufficient to determine the kinetic parameters of CaCO Attempts were also made to fit our experimental data on reduction of CuO with CH To study the kinetics of CuO reduction with CH Kinetic parameters for the reduction of CuO with CH To demonstrate the accuracy of the model, the predicted results using the kinetic parameters determined as aforementioned were also shown in A pseudo-homogeneous model In the dynamic model, rate expressions of CuO reduction with CH In addition to the reaction models, mass and energy balances, and the pressure drop were employed in the simulation of the multi-component system. The mass balance in the fixed-bed was governed using the pseudo-homogeneous model as follows, The pressure loss in the fixed-bed reactor was calculated using the Ergun equation as follows The mathematical model was solved using the finite difference method in MATLAB, and the initial and boundary conditions are shown as Eqs. Features of the fixed-bed reactor and the operating parameters used are summarized in After developing the rate models of CuO reduction with CH Though CO The change of solid conversions and temperature in the calciner outlet of CaL–CLC is presented in Decomposition of CaCO This research was supported by the