In this work, the flotation of slime–fine fractions of Mt. Keith pentlandite ore was studied in de-ionised water, and bore water with high ionic strength. Compared with de-ionised water, bore water increased pentlandite flotation significantly while decreasing serpentine flotation. Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) was tested as a dispersant to improve pentlandite flotation in both de-ionised and bore water. The degree of substitute (DS) of CMC, an indication of the charge density, was found to be an important parameter. In de-ionised water, the higher the DS of CMC, the better the pentlandite flotation, while in bore water, the lower the DS of CMC, the better the pentlandite flotation.The flotation of nickel sulphides in saline water at Mt. Keith has historically been difficult due to a low nickel grade and large amounts of serpentine minerals. A unique process, the split flotation, has been implemented at Mt. Keith to optimise pentlandite flotation. The grinding discharge is pumped to a two-stage cyclone classification. The underflows from the first and second stages of cyclones pass to rougher–scavenger flotation of coarse (−160 Some studies have been conducted to disperse serpentine coating from pentlandite surfaces in the flotation of Mt. Keith and other nickel ores from Western Australia by using CMC. In this study, CMC with different DS was tested in the flotation of slime–fine fractions of Mt. Keith ore in de-ionised and bore water. The DS of CMC is the average of the hydroxyl groups that have taken part in the substitution reaction (the number of original H atoms of cellulose hydroxyl groups that are replaced by carboxymethyl substituent) on each glucose unit ( The pentlandite ore sample with 0.6% Ni, 41.5% MgO, 0.5% S and 4.7% Fe was obtained from Mt. Keith and crushed to a size of 2.36 Sodium ethyl xanthate and H407 (polypropylene glycol ether blend), industrial grade, were used as collector and frother, respectively. They are used at Mt. Keith. CMCs with the DS of 0.4, 0.6 and 0.9 were obtained from Akzo Nobel. One kilogram crushed sample was ground in a laboratory stainless steel rod mill at 40% solids to obtain 80% particles passing 125 Flotation was carried out in a 2.5    In de-ionised water, the flotation of the slime–fine fraction of Mt. Keith ore was poor with low Ni recovery and high MgO gangue entrainment. CMC is an anionic dispersant providing steric stabilisation. It increased pentlandite flotation in both de-ionised and bore water. In de-ionised water, a higher DS with the higher charge density corresponded to the higher pentlandite flotation. This may be due to the higher adsorption of CMC on the positively charged serpentine particles and more reduction of the charge of serpentine particles. In contrast, a lower DS with the lower charge density corresponded to the better pentlandite flotation in bore water. The authors gratefully acknowledge the approval of publication of this paper by BHP Billiton.