Resin D201, D314 and 717 were compared for their efficiency to extract vanadium from hydrochloric acid leaching solution of red mud. The adsorption parameters were investigated in details by using the three resins. The separation characteristics and mechanism of vanadium were analyzed with infrared spectroscopy and adsorption kinetics. More than 99% of vanadium was selectively adsorbed by using resin D201 at pH value of 2.0, flow speed of 6m3/h·m3 resin, resin D314 at pH value of 3.0, flow speed of 4.8m3/h·m3 resin, and resin 717 at pH value of 5.0, flow speed of 7.92m3/h·m3 resin, respectively. The maximum loading of vanadium by using resin D201 was more than resin 717 and D314. The vibration peak of functional group on the resins increased after adsorption of vanadium from the leaching solution. The adsorption process of vanadium was according with the pseudo-second adsorption kinetic model.Vanadium is an important strategic resource, which is widely applied in aerospace, special material, catalyst, etc. Titano-magnetite, stone coal and solid wastes containing vanadium are the main vanadium resources ( Therefore, the hydrochloric acid leaching process was chosen in this work due to the major advantages of limited leaching of major element Ti, Fe, Al and Si, low acid consumption, high pH value of leaching solution and less generation of waste water ( In this work, the ion exchange process was carried out by using resin D201, D314 and 717 to find an optimum condition to separate vanadium from hydrochloric acid leaching solution of red mud. The separation behavior of vanadium under different conditions was reported respectively by using the three resins. Finally, the infrared spectroscopic analysis of resins and loaded resins were investigated to verify the separation of vanadium. The loading extent and adsorption kinetics were analyzed to elaborate the separation characteristics of vanadium from the hydrochloric acid leaching solution. The red mud used for all experiments was provided by an alumina plant of Henan, China. The red mud was analyzed by using a Plasma1000 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (Plasma 2000, China) (ICP-AES), and the result shows that it contained 0.02% Sc The resin D201 and 717 are belongs to strong base and styrene monomer with -N(CH The distilled water was used in the experiments. Prior to hydrochloric acid leaching process, the red mud was dried at 80 Before ion exchange experiments, the acid leaching solution was adjusted to prospective pH value by using HCl and NaOH solutions. The resin has been pretreated according to our previous study ( According to previous investigation, the kind and concentration of acid were the main factors on the leaching extent and separation effect of rare metals from red mud (  Therefore, the hydrochloric acid of 10% was chosen as leaching in the process, and the titanium was separated from vanadium and scandium with hydrochloric acid leaching from red mud. However, it is necessary to separate vanadium, scandium and other impurity ions from the acid leaching solution by using ion exchange or solvent extraction. Solvent extraction was an effective method for separation and recovery of scandium with P507 and ion exchange was an effective process to separate vanadium from the hydrochloric acid leaching solution ( The impacts of pH value on vanadium separation with different resins were studied. The results are shown in  The impacts of flow speed on vanadium separation with different resins were investigated under the conditions of pH value of 2.0 with resin D201, pH value of 3.0 with resin D314 and pH value of 5.0 with resin 717. The results are shown in  The breakthrough curves of vanadium and impurity ions with different resins were investigated under the conditions of pH value of 2.0 with resin D201, pH value of 3.0 with resin D314 and pH value of 5.0 with resin 717. The throughput (BV) on the x-axis and the breakthrough (%) on the y-axis were operated. The results are shown in  Therefore, the appropriate BV of 150 was chosen for effective separation of vanadium and impurity ions from the leaching solution. In order to analyze the maximum adsorption capacity and loading extent of vanadium by using the three resins, the BV increased continuously on the basis of the breakthrough experiment of vanadium. The maximum adsorption capacity of vanadium was 60 The resins were analyzed by using a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (Avatar-370, America) to find out the functional group of resins, and the results are shown in D201 is a macro-reticular type ion exchange resin with functional group of The adsorption kinetics was applied in analyzing the relationship between the adsorption rate and adsorption time to investigate the adsorption capacity and adsorption rate of resin ( Assuming the adsorption of vanadium by using resin is according with the pseudo-second adsorbent kinetic model, the expression of adsorption process is shown by Eq. (4). The experimental data was fitted to the two adsorption kinetic models and the results are shown in Recovery and separation of vanadium from hydrochloric acid leaching solution of red mud by using resin D201, D314 and 717 were carried out. More than 99% of vanadium was adsorbed by using the three resins under the optimal parameters, respectively. Resin D201 was fit for adsorption of vanadium in the strong acidic medium, while resin 717 was suitable for adsorption of vanadium in the weak acidic medium. The adsorption rate of vanadium by using resin 717 was faster than resin D201 and D314. However, the maximum loading of vanadium by using resin D201 was more than resin 717 and D314. The vibration peak of the functional group on the resins increased after adsorption of the vanadium from the leaching solution. The adsorption process of vanadium was in accord with the pseudo-second adsorption kinetic model. The authors are thankful for financial support from the