In this study, the separation of calcite and apatite was achieved by the depressant sodium pyrophosphate (SPP). Microflotation results showed that when using 20 mg/l sodium oleate (NaOL) as the collector, apatite could be significantly depressed by 120 mg/l SPP, and calcite remained floatable at pH 6.5–9.3. Relatively more Ca2+ was selectively dissolved from the surface of apatite by pyrophosphate, and the dissolution of calcium on the surface of calcite was inhibited. For calcite, the dissolution of Ca2+ decreased first but then increased with increasing SPP dose, and the adsorption amount of SPP illustrated an opposite tendency. With respect to apatite, the dissolution of Ca2+ was similar to that of calcite, but pyrophosphate failed to adsorb onto apatite. The solution chemistry of pyrophosphate at different pH values and in the presence of Ca2+ was discussed. The XPS results revealed that both SPP and NaOL could be adsorbed on the surface of calcite, while NaOL was rarely adsorbed on the surface of apatite. Moreover, the Ca/P ratio of apatite decreased after adding SPP. Zeta potential measurements showed that NaOL could still be adsorbed on the negatively charged calcite surface by chemical adsorption with surface calcium. Regarding apatite, the adsorption of NaOL was hindered by the decrease of active calcium sites and negative surface charge. The differences in polyphosphate concentration and pH should be responsible for the divergent existing theories of the interaction of polyphosphate and calcium minerals.Phosphorus resources are essential for agriculture, and more than 90% of phosphorus resources have been consumed as fertilizers for food growth Polyphosphates (such as polyphosphates, metaphosphates, and pyrophosphate) can form stable soluble complexes with metal ions The ability of polyphosphates to complex metal ions is well understood, but their depression mechanisms are diverse. Jiwei Lu et al. In addition, polyphosphate depressants are usually simplified as orthophosphate in some studies In this study, the flotation behavior of calcite and apatite with SPP as a depressant and NaOL as a collector was studied through pure mineral flotation. Additionally, the solution chemistry of pyrophosphate was also discussed. The mechanism of SPP on calcite and apatite was studied based on ion concentration measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis, and zeta potential determination. We found that the dissolution of calcium ions could be inhibited or promoted at different concentrations of SPP. A model for the separation of apatite and calcite using SPP as a depressant was proposed. The resistivity of deionized water used in the experiment was over 17 MΩ × cm. AR-grade sodium pyrophosphate (SPP, Na Calcite and apatite were crushed and ground using a porcelain ball mill and then sieved in deionized water to obtain a particle size range of 38–75 μm for the flotation and adsorption experiments. The preparation of mineral samples was free from metal ion contamination. The 38 μm samples were ground to 2 μm for XRD and zeta potential measurements. Single mineral flotation was performed on an XFG flotation machine at a 1700 r/min stirring speed. The order of adding reagents was as follows: first, 2 g mineral and 30 ml water were added to the flotation cell; after stirring for 1 min, SPP was then added and stirred for 2 min. For the next step, HCl or NaOH was added and stirred for 2 min, and the stable pH was recorded. Finally, NaOL was added and conditioned for 2 min. The foam was scraped and collected for 5 min. The flotation recovery was calculated by dividing the weight of the foam produced by the total weight (2.0 g). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi Thermo Fisher, USA) combined with a monochromatic Al Kα source was used for XPS measurements. The energy scan step for narrow measurement was 0.05 eV. Binding energy was corrected for charging effects by referencing C 1s at 284.8 eV. The samples were prepared with the flotation process and rinsed three times with a NaOH solution at pH 8.8. Finally, they were dried at 40 °C in the oven. The concentration of calcium ions and phosphorus in the pulp was determined by the residual concentration method. First, 2.0 g 38–75 μm minerals was added to the flotation cell with 30 ml water. Then, after stirring at 1700 r/min for 1 min, a certain amount of sodium pyrophosphate was added, stirring at 1700 r/min for another 8 min. The suspensions were allowed to settle for 1 min; then, the supernatant liquid was filtered with a 0.22 μm membrane. Finally, the concentration of calcium and phosphorus in the supernatant was determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, Spectro Blue). Every sample was tested three times. The pH of calcite was not adjusted during the whole stirring process, and the pH of apatite was adjusted so that the two minerals had the same pH. A zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Zetasizer Nano) was used to analyze the zeta potential of the minerals with different amounts of added agents. A 40 mg sample was added to a 100 ml beaker with 50 ml of a 0.01 mol/l NaCl supporting electrolyte. The pH was adjusted with HCl or NaOH from 7 to 12. The condition time was the same as that of the flotation test. The pulp was precipitated for 2 min to remove large particles. Three measurements were repeated under each condition.   Further studies were conducted using XPS, which could provide elemental information 10 nm below the surface of the samples. The elemental composition, chemical state, surface element concentration and other information of the sample surface could also be obtained  In the experiments, the Ca/P atomic ratio of pure apatite was 1.58, which was lower than the theoretical value of 1.67. The difference between the theoretical and experimental values may be due to the impure apatite and the inherent error of atomic sensitivity factors. In addition, under the action of adventitious carbon, the inelastic scattering of calcium and phosphorus attenuates to different degrees. Regardless, the relative variation between the ratios was credible. The Ca/P atomic ratio decreased from 1.58 for pure apatite to 1.46 for the apatite treated with SPP. This decrease could be attributed to the increase of P or the decrease of Ca on the surface of apatite. In combination with the study discussed below in which the SPP was not adsorbed on the surface, it can be inferred that the decrease of Ca/P atomic ratio was induced by the decrease of Ca. This indicates that pyrophosphate dissolved Ca on the surface of apatite, while phosphate remained on the surface of apatite, thus reducing the Ca/P atomic ratio.  When particles move in an aqueous solution relative to the liquid phase under external force, the potential on the slipping plane is the zeta potential. Zeta potential plays an important role in characterizing the surface properties of particles.   Polyphosphates are formed by repeated tetrahedral [PO The formation constants of pyrophosphate species are shown in   As shown in In addition, the amount of Ca Eventually, according to the analysis above, we have drawn a possible model illustration, including the flotation separation results of artificially mixed ore, as shown in Within the range of pH 6.5–9.3, the separation of apatite from gangue mineral calcite can be achieved by flotation in the case of SPP as a depressant (120 mg/l) and NaOL as a collector (20 mg/l). The different components of pyrophosphate and its complexing ability had significant influence on separation. The dissolution of calcium by SPP occurred in two stages. The dissolution of Ca Under the conditions of optimal separation, the dissolution of Ca  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this research by