High carbon ferrochrome slag is a byproduct of High Carbon Ferrochrome (HCFeCr) production in submerged arc furnaces. The slag is conventionally tapped from the furnaces and granulated before being dumped as waste. The major uses of the slag have been in road and civil engineering construction and in production of refractories. HCFeCr slags however, contain appreciable amounts of residual ferrochrome alloy which can be liberated and recovered profitably using cheap and environmentally friendly gravity concentration methods. In this work the milling behavior of a high-carbon ferrochrome slag is investigated. Milling experiments for a typical HCFeCr slag were conducted using a 0.303 by 0.282m laboratory ball mill to establish liberation as a function of particle size and to determine the associated key breakage parameters like the breakage function (Bij) and selection function (Si). The breakage parameters were obtained using the monosize fraction method by milling the following size fractions −13.2+9.5mm, −9.5+5.6mm, −5.6+4mm, −4+2.8mm, −2.8+1.18mm and −1.18+0.15mm. The effects of powder filling and mill speed were also tested experimentally. An increase in the milling speed from 75% Ncrit to 85% Ncrit caused an increase in the selection functions of different fractions however a further increase to 90% Ncrit resulted in a drastic reduction in the rate of milling across all size fractions. Increasing the powder filling from 40% to 60% caused a marked increase in the selection functions for the particles in the size fraction −5.6+4mm and smaller and a decrease in the selection functions for the particles in the size fraction −9.5+5.6mm and larger. A further increase in the powder filling to 80% caused a marked fall in the selection functions for all size fractions to values lower than those obtained at 40% powder filling. The results from the size by assay test-work showed that the sizes of particles that contain the highest amount of the ferrochrome alloy and the least amount of silica are in the range −1.18+0.6mm. The milling process has to maximize the generation of particles in this specific size range in order to achieve the best alloy recoveries in the downstream concentration unit.High-Carbon Ferrochrome (HCFeCr) alloy is produced from chromite ore, mainly in submerged electric arc furnaces where the chromite ore is smelted in the presence of fluxes and carbon. The products from the smelting process are ferrochrome alloy and slag. HCFeCr alloy is mainly used as an alloying material in steel making to improve the hardness, toughness, wear and corrosion resistance in steels. HCFeCr slags, which mainly contain SiO These slags have found limited use as aggregate in road and civil engineering construction and in the production of refractories. However the content of the HCFeCr alloy in the majority of the ferrochrome slags is high enough that the alloy can be recovered profitably especially when cheap and environmentally friendly gravity based concentration methods are used to process the slags ( Viable recovery of HCFeCr alloy from slag could mean that producers can shut down furnaces during the times of high cost of production and low demand and rely on the low cost slag-to-metal-plants to sustain the businesses from the dumps. On the other hand, when the demand of HCFeCr is high; the slag-to-metal-plants become a low-cost means to boost production ( In order to recover the alloy from the slag, the alloy has to be liberated from the associated waste phases by crushing and/or milling. Liberation should be done in such a way that it generates particles of the size amenable to the chosen gravity concentrating technique. A spiral concentrator, which is the concentrator proposed to beneficiate the slag tested in this current work, is known to separate at its greatest efficiency when its feed has particles with size range of 75 The main objective of milling is to liberate and release the valuable minerals from the associated gangue minerals by size reduction. The liberation process should ideally release the valuable mineral at its coarsest possible particle size ( Milling processes have been studied extensively and are widely reported in literature ( Assuming that S A more general empirical model for calculating the selection function S A number of researchers have however shown that the selection function is depended on the following milling conditions; powder filling (U), fractional ball filling (J), fraction of critical speed (%ϕ where C The multipliers in Eq. Critical speed is the mill speed at which the balls just begin to centrifuge. It is given by the following equation. C Ball filling (J) is the volume of the mill which is filled by the balls at rest. The following equation shows how ball filling can be calculated (  Powder filling (U) is explained as the fraction of spaces between the balls taken up by the powder. The relationship between mill filling (f C The combined relationship between the ball mill diameter, powder and ball loading on the parameter a in Eq. The other important milling parameter is called the primary breakage distribution function, B The cumulative form of this breakage distribution function is represented as follows;   The least-squares fitting is also used to fit the above model to the experimental data in order to estimate the parameters (∅ Eq. The selection and breakage functions are used in the above rate – mass balance equation to find the mass fraction remaining in each size fraction after a period of time. The mass fraction remaining in the size fraction that is obtained from rate – mass balance equation can be compared with the experimental results from milling a size distribution. The above population balance model will be adopted to simulate the milling process of the HCFeCr slag. The main parameters of the model i.e. the material specific selection function (S A 1 XRF and XRD analysis were used for quantitative chemical and mineralogical studies as described in the following sections. In the procedure for XRF analysis the samples were prepared by first drying them at 100 In the procedure for XRD analysis, the samples were scanned after addition of 20% Si for quantitative determination amorphous content and micronizing in a McCrone micronizing mill. The material was prepared for XRD analysis using a back loading preparation method. It was analyzed with a PANalytical Empyrean Diffractometer with PIXcel detector and fixed slits with Ni filtered and Cu-Kα radiation. The phases were identified using X Pert High score plus software. The relative phase amounts (weights %) were estimated using the Rietveld method. The original slag sample was crushed to 100% passing 13.5 Batch wet milling experiments were carried out using a laboratory scale mill shown in The milling experiments done on the HCFeCr slag were divided into three broad categories. (i) Determination of the selection functions (ii) determination of breakage functions and (iii) determination of PSD at different milling conditions. An HCFeCr slag sample was milled for 5 A dry sub sample from each size fraction size was mounted on a carbon pad/stub and a conductive coat was applied to it before being analyzed using the SEM-EDS technique to obtain the elemental composition. A Carl Zeiss Sigma Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) was used where imaging is performed with a Secondary Detector (SE) or a Back Scatter (BS) detector. Elemental analysis, which was an important measurement, was done on this microscope by Electron Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS) with a Silicon Drift Detector (SDD). Each particle size fraction discussed in The Austin model shown in Eq. Batch wet milling tests were performed on each of the size fractions discussed in  The first order plots for milling of the high carbon ferrochrome slag material in the tested size fractions show an almost linear correlation of the mass fraction remaining in the specific size fraction with milling time with no deviation suggesting that milling of this material can be described perfectly by the first order law. The gradients of each of the plots were calculated to get the values of S The data in An increase in the milling speed from 75% N The selection functions were also measured at a fixed mill speed of 85% N Increasing powder in the mill from 40% to 60% probably increases the filling of the collision space between the balls and results in higher chance of contact between the particles and the grinding media which improves the nipping collisions resulting in higher breakage rates. However, over-filling a mill i.e. increasing the powder filling to 80% will result in an effect called powder cushioning, which decreases the rate of breakage. A decrease in the selection function for larger particles i.e. > These estimated Austin model parameters are given in  The cumulative breakage functions that were determined using Eq. The values for B The average values were used because B The population balance equation given in Eq.  The results from the SEM-EDS elemental analysis are shown in The results suggest that the size range − In this investigation a high carbon ferrochrome slag sample was milled with a view of understanding the characteristics of the material and also achieving good liberation of the alloy locked up in the slag matrix for purposes of downstream recovery of the alloy using a gravity concentration unit. Key milling parameters for this HCFeCr slag material i.e. the selection and breakage function were experimentally determined by milling the slag under different predetermined conditions. The results showed that the particles in the − The Austin models for both the selection and breakage function were applied to the experimental data and regression analysis used to evaluate the parameters α, Λ, a and μ for the selection function and ∅ SEM-EDS chemical analysis performed on the slag sample in discreet size fractions showed that the size range − Future work will focus on determining optimum milling conditions to maximize the generation the particle sizes that showed the best liberation in order to enhance the recovery of the alloy using a spiral concentrator. The authors would like to thank the School of Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa for the laboratory and analytical facilities including the technical assistance rendered. The supplier of the HCFeCr slag sample is also hereby acknowledged.