To examine the mortality and implant survivorship of proximal femoral replacement (PFR), revision total hip arthroplasty (REV) and open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) in the treatment of acute periprosthetic fractures of the proximal femur, we retrospectively reviewed 97 consecutive acute periprosthetic proximal femoral fractures from 2000 to 2010. Three groups were defined: PFR (n=21), REV (n=19), and ORIF (n=57). Outcome measures were all-cause mortality, implant failure, and reoperation. Competing Risks survival analysis of overall mortality during the mean 35-month follow-up showed no statistical difference between the three groups (P
                     =0.65; 12 and 60month mortality for PFR: 37%, 45%; REV: 16%, 46%; ORIF: 14%, 100%). Implant survival was worse for the PFR group (P
                     =0.03, 12 and 60-month implant failure rate for PFR: 5%, 39%; REV: 7%, 7%; ORIF 2%, 2%). We conclude that PFR as compared with REV or ORIF may have worse medium-term implant survival, primarily due to instability and dislocation.Periprosthetic fracture around proximal femoral implants is a difficult complication of hip arthroplasty. A rising incidence of this complication has been observed and is likely a result of increasing volume of primary and revision procedures, longer average patient lifespan, and increasing number of arthroplasty procedures in older patients Treatment paradigms for periprosthetic fracture around proximal femoral implants should be individualized based on patient functional demand, comorbidities, and patient expectations. However, the principles of obtaining a stable implant and achieving early mobilization are paramount in developing treatment strategy and improving outcomes The purpose of this study was to examine the outcomes of PFR compared to the other most common treatment strategies for periprosthetic fractures of the proximal femur. Specifically, we sought to examine the implant survivorship, mortality, and complication profiles of PFR as compared with conventional revision surgery and ORIF in the treatment of this difficult problem. Based on our experience and existing reports After obtaining approval from our institutional review board, we performed a retrospective analysis of 97 consecutive periprosthetic hip fractures treated at our center from 2000 to 2010. Inclusion criteria for the study included Vancouver grade A, B, or C periprosthetic fracture of the proximal femur around a primary or revision total or hemiarthroplasty femoral implant Three treatment groups were identified depending on the index operation: Proximal femoral arthroplasty (PFR, n The PFR, REV, and ORIF groups were compared using analysis of variance for quantitative data, two-tailed chi-squared with Fisher exact test for categorical data, and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis incorporating log-rank statistic to compare survival curves (SPSS, IBM, Inc, Armonk, NY). Given the high incidences of two interacting outcome measures, death and implant failure, we also used competing risks survival analysis with the Gray test to compare cumulative incidence curves Indications for performing PFR included all fractures with a loose implant and poor surrounding proximal femoral bone stock (Vancouver B3, Although this study involved three attending surgeons with different operative protocols, there are some generalizations which can be made. All surgeons contributing to this study use a direct lateral or anterolateral approach to the femur. At our institution specialized laboratory or aspiration studies to investigate occult infection are not routinely performed preoperatively in periprosthetic fracture patients unless the patient shows signs of sepsis on presentation or there is some other sign which lowers the threshold of suspicion such as late spontaneous dislocation. We do however routinely send gram stain and intraoperative frozen section studies prior to implantation in any case where there is a question of infection or purulence discovered intraoperatively. For PFR reconstructions specifically, two different techniques were used for abductor reconstruction: trochanteric slide with maintenance of continuity of the abductor–vastus lateralis complex on a wafer of the greater trochanter, or abductor reconstruction utilizing Dacron (Medi-Tech, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) vascular grafts. Postoperative abduction bracing is infrequently used, being reserved only for a select portion of patients who undergo non-constrained total hip arthroplasty or where the abductors are reconstructed due to discontinuity with the vastus lateralis complex. Duration of bracing, when used, is typically 4–6 For the entire series of 97 patients, mean patient age at fracture was 72. There was no significant difference between the three groups with regard to age, gender, BMI, or medical comorbidities with the exception of chronic pulmonary disease, which was more prevalent in the PFR group ( Follow-up data were recorded differently depending on the outcome variable. For the implant failure endpoint, clinical documentation from in-person office examinations was required. We did not use a minimum follow-up period and the overall mean follow-up was 16.3 Overall raw implant survival in the entire series was 97% (95% CI 91%–99%) at 12 The PFR group was comprised of 38% bipolar, 33% constrained, and 29% non-constrained PFR prostheses. The group had 5 total implant failures defined by need for revision or resection of femoral or acetabular implants. The etiology of the implant failure in this group was instability in 3 patients, and infection in 2. One of the 5 patients had concomitant infection and dislocation. For the three that dislocated, 2 did so despite constrained polyethylene liners and one dislocated with a standard non-constrained configuration. The average time to failure in these 5 patients was 37 For the entire series, mean time to death (n The overall raw complication rate for the entire series with regard to summary non-death complications was 34% (95% CI 25%–44%). Based on Chi squared analysis, there were no detected statistical differences in summary non-death complications between the PFR, REV, and ORIF groups ( In treating difficult periprosthetic fractures around proximal femoral implants, we found that PFR as compared with REV or ORIF has no significant difference in short and medium-term patient mortality but does have worse medium-term implant survival related to late instability and infection. Incidence of summary non-death complications was statistically similar between the three groups, but complications which lead to implant revision such as dislocation and infection may be higher in the PFR group. Using Competing Risks (CR) analysis in this study did not change the overall findings but did alter the survival estimates at any given time point. CR survival analysis is a statistical tool which is important to consider when performing research involving survivorship which may have two or more co-dependent outcome variables The chief limitations of this study are the retrospective nature of the analysis, small sample size, and the possibility of selection bias amongst groups which are heterogeneous and have different indications for treatment. We have attempted to control group heterogeneity by measuring many patient-related variables which are presented in Our implant survivorship with revision as the endpoint was worse than prior published reports. A recent series described 48 non-oncologic PFR procedures with a minimum and mean follow up times of 24 Patient mortality has been described infrequently for non-oncologic patients with periprosthetic fractures who undergo PFR. In one of the largest series of PFR performed for non-onologic periprosthetic fracture, the authors reported 6% mortality at 24 Overall complication rates were high in our series, which is consistent with prior reports In summary, for PFR used to treat acute periprosthetic fractures of the proximal femur, we did not detect a mortality or operative-time benefit and did observe increased implant failure in the medium-term. Periprosthetic fracture of the proximal femur is a difficult problem with high associated mortality, and should be managed according to host characteristics, implant stability, and bone quality for the best outcomes. In certain situations, PFR may be the only reasonable reconstructive modality, as available bone stock may be so deficient as to preclude other reconstructive techniques. This was often the case in our study. Nevertheless, because it is technically straightforward to perform and allows early mobilization, PFR also remains one option for dealing with difficult proximal femoral fractures where implants are found to be loose and bone quality is preserved. Based on our findings, enthusiasm for expanded use of PFR in this setting should be tempered. When we do use PFR implants, we currently recommend use of constrained liners or bipolar heads where applicable, as instability constituted the majority of our implant-related complications. Although we do not commonly use bracing in the postoperative period, it remains another option when attempting to address this problem. Careful attention must also be paid to abductor reconstruction, with meticulous maintenance of the abductor–vastus lateralis sleeve or use of synthetic reconstruction as described in our methods. Finally, since the results of this retrospective study are meant to generate hypotheses for further testing only, additional prospective, long-term studies are required to fully evaluate the survivorship and role of PFR in treating periprosthetic fractures of the proximal femur. Conflict of Interest Statements We would like to acknowledge Dan Winger, MS, Li Wang, and Clare Bunker, MPH, PhD, for their contributions to the statistical work. The project described was supported by the National Institutes of Health through Grant Numbers UL1 RR024153 and UL1TR000005.