An alternative experimental technique for the investigation of the reduction of dense synthetic NiO in H2–N2 and H2–H2O gas mixtures at high temperature has been developed. This technique enables the nickel product pore structures to be accurately characterized and the intrinsic reaction rates to be measured. A number of distinctly different nickel product microstructures, originating at the Ni–NiO interface were observed. The formation of these microstructures was found to be a function of temperature, gas composition and reaction time.Several nickel ore processing operations produce intermediate products, such as, mixed nickel and cobalt hydroxide, basic nickel carbonate, and nickel oxide ( Many experimental studies have been carried out in order to investigate the gaseous reduction of nickel oxide with hydrogen ( A range of particle sizes (5–5000 It is well established (  Recognising this issue some researchers have designed experiments that eliminate the uncertainties associated with mixed control reactions. At low temperature, two different techniques have been used to measure the intrinsic rates of reduction of NiO by hydrogen: Direct observation and measurement of the radial growth of the nickel metal nuclei on the surface of dense nickel oxide ( Measurement of the reduction rates of very thin NiO samples (54 In both of these studies the barriers to gas diffusion to the reaction interface are small and the apparent chemical reaction rate constants measured by these methods are in good agreement and are relatively higher than those obtained from other measurements. However, at high temperature and high H The detailed investigation of the product microstructure is certainly important if an accurate predictive model of the nickel oxide reduction mechanisms is to be developed. It was recognised in early studies of gas–solid reaction systems that the microstructure of the metal product can be used to extract information regarding the dominant reaction mechanisms ( The present paper describes improved experimental techniques that can be used to create controlled reaction conditions, characterize the metal product pore structures and measure the intrinsic reaction rates of reduction of synthetic dense nickel oxide in H The starting material used in this experiment is dense nickel metal sheet (0.5 The nickel oxide sheets produced using this technique contain no pre-existing pores, i.e. have been shown by pycnometer measurements to be close to 100% theoretical density. Unlike sintered NiO samples, the use of dense NiO enables any change in macrostructure or microstructure on reaction to be readily detected by metallographic examination. The weight change due to the oxidation was found to be consistent with the amount of the oxygen required to form stoichiometric NiO, i.e. approximately 0.2 The arrangement of the overall reduction apparatus is shown schematically in The flow-rates of gases are controlled accurately using differential pressure type flow-meters. The H The nickel oxide reduction technique used in the present investigation is based on procedures previously used in studying the gaseous reduction of iron oxides ( This reduction apparatus allows the nickel oxide sample to be directly introduced into the furnace at the required reduction conditions through an airlock at the top of the apparatus. From this entrance the sample falls under gravity down the reaction tube and resides on an alumina base supported by an alumina rod attached by an o-ring seal at the top of the reaction tube. By lowering the alumina rod the sample can be easily dropped from the hot zone of the furnace and discharged at any time from the reaction tube directly into liquid nitrogen. The use of liquid nitrogen provides not only thermal quenching but contact between the hot sample and the liquid nitrogen produces N The important features of this reduction technique are: Elimination of the gas phase mass transfer limitation by the utilization of very small samples and high linear gas flow velocities around the sample. Introduction of the small sample directly into the desired reaction conditions, thus the sample reaches the reaction temperature in a fraction of a second. Preservation of the morphology developed in the sample during the reduction by rapidly quenching the partially reduced sample directly into liquid nitrogen. Sample preparation techniques for subsequent analysis of the partially or fully reduced samples are divided into two categories. The first preparation technique has been developed to enable observation of the product pore structure; a suitable preparation technique of the reduction product that will not destroy the structure. This can be achieved by fracturing the partially reduced samples in half by cutting perpendicular to the sample surface using a scalpel. Next, these fractured samples are coated with platinum using Eiko IB-5 Sputter Coater (Eiko Co. Ltd., Hitachinaka, Japan) before analyzed using scanning electron microscope (SEM) techniques. The second preparation technique is used for the internal kinetic measurement. The kinetic measurements are conducted by measuring the progress of the Ni–NiO interface on a cross-section perpendicular to the sample surface; a smooth and flat cross-sectioned sample at a 90° angle to the sample surface is required. For this purpose, partially reduced samples are prepared by conventional metallographic preparation techniques, i.e. mounting the samples in acrylic resin and polishing using SiC paper and diamond paste from 6 to 0.25 Two types of scanning electron microscopes, JEOL 6400F (JEOL is a trademark of JEO Ltd., Tokyo) and Philips XL-30 (Philips is currently part of FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA), are used in the present work. The JEOL 6400F, a cold field emission electron microscope, can produce high resolution and high magnification topographical images of the sample required to reveal the morphology of the fractured partially reduced samples. On the other hand, the back-scattered electron detector of Philips XL-30 can produce better compositional contrast, therefore this machine mode of operation is used for distinguishing the original nickel oxide and the nickel metal product that is useful for the measurement of the reduction kinetics. Using the sample fracturing technique described above, the nickel product morphology can be examined accurately. An example of the high level of detail revealed in the nickel pore product morphology obtained using this fracturing technique is shown in In contrast, if the partially reduced sample is prepared by a conventional metallographic technique involving mounting, grinding and polishing, the pore volume and pore size appear to be approximately half of that present in the actual nickel product ( Using the improved sample preparation technique, major differences were observed between the structures obtained under different reduction conditions. It can be seen ( In summary, during the reduction of nickel oxide the interface of Ni–NiO can develop into several different structures, namely A number of studies ( Analysis shows that the pore structure formed on the surface of the metal product is not representative of the entire product structure. This is important because both the surface and the internal pore structures change with time, therefore appropriate techniques that can accurately characterize both of these changes are needed. Preliminary studies have been carried out to examine the changes of the pre-reduced Ni product structures at various temperatures. A series of samples having the same initial Ni product structure was prepared by reducing dense NiO in 13%H SEM micrographs of the product surface shown in This result shows that the change in Ni metal product structure during heating should be monitored both on the surface and in the internal section of the solid, and that this can be carried out by using the fracturing technique reported in the present work. The ability of the modified reduction apparatus to perform and stop the reduction immediately has enabled the progress of the reduction to be monitored in very short time intervals (i.e. 5  As a comparison, the intrinsic reaction rate obtained from the present measurements for the reduction at 400 The use of polycrystalline synthetic NiO in the present work creates a possibility of reduction occurring not only on the outer surface of the sample but also on the surface of micro-cracks formed during preparation of the dense NiO (  The measurement shows that the fastest advancement occurs at the early period of the reduction. During this short reduction time of 5 At particular reduction conditions, significant changes in the Ni product microstructure can occur as the reaction time progresses. For example, the interfacial pore structure produced from the reduction at 700 This change in microstructure was found to be accompanied by the change in the overall kinetics as can be seen in An experimental technique for the investigation of the gaseous reduction of dense NiO under H The reduction reactions to be undertaken at controlled conditions, in particular temperature and gas composition. The samples to be rapidly introduced into the reaction condition, quenched directly from the reaction conditions to room temperature, and the evolution of the product structure to be followed. The absolute value of the intrinsic reaction rate constant to be determined from the microstructural changes at fixed reduction conditions. Observations of the product structures prepared by a fracturing technique have enabled several different types of nickel product structures to be identified, namely The authors would like to thank BHP Billiton, QNI Yabulu Refinery for their financial support and valuable information during this work, and AusAid for providing a scholarship for T. Hidayat.