We reviewed 230 cases of wrist arthroscopy using a volar approach and evaluated its advantage in various wrist disorders. In general, a dorsal approach has been preferred in wrist arthroscopy. The volar approach has been avoided because of the presence of significant structures, such as radial and ulnar arteries, their venae comitantes, median and ulnar nerves, and flexor tendons. However, we can access the wrist joint securely using the volar approach through the tendon sheath of the flexor carpi radialis. Through this approach, we can adequately visualize the dorsal rim fragment of the intra-articular fracture of the distal radius, dorsal synovial proliferation of the rheumatoid wrist, and volar segment tear of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral interosseous ligaments. We had no complications with wrist arthroscopy using the volar approach in 230 patients. The volar approach for wrist arthroscopy is a valuable procedure to evaluate and treat various wrist disorders.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 19, No 4 (April), 2003: pp 440–445Wrist arthroscopy has currently developed as a major diagnostic and therapeutic procedure. The standard arthroscopic portals have been developed on the dorsal side of the wrist. We have, however, experienced some limitations in visualizing and treating common pathologic lesions, such as dorsal rim fragment in intra-articular fracture of the distal radius, synovial proliferation at the dorsal aspect of intra-articular space in the rheumatoid wrist, and volar segment tears of the scapholunate or lunotriquetral interosseous ligament. Although Jantea et al. We reviewed the charts of 230 patients who underwent wrist arthroscopy from 1992 through 2001 in our hospital. Diagnosis of these patients consisted of 142 cases of distal radial fracture, 29 cases of ulnar impaction syndrome, 25 cases of triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFC) tear, 21 cases of rheumatoid arthritis of the wrist, 6 cases of scapholunate or lunotriquetral interosseous ligament injury, and 7 other cases with various diagnoses. The clinical profile, arthroscopic findings, and treatment rendered were recorded on individual charts and were available for review by authors. Our principle to apply the volar portal aimed to evaluate and treat (1) dorsal rim fragments of intra-articular fracture of the distal radius, (2) synovial proliferation at the dorsal aspect of intra-articular space of the rheumatoid wrist, and (3) volar segment tears of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral interosseous ligaments. The patient is positioned supine on the operating table under general or regional anesthesia with the arm draped free on a hand table. A tourniquet is regularly wrapped around the upper arm and inflated. Three portals including the conventional dorsal 3-4 portal (between the extensor pollicis longus tendon and the extensor digitorum communis tendons), 4-5 portal (between the extensor digitorum communis tendons and the extensor digiti minimi tendon), and volar portal are marked. The volar portal is marked on the skin just radial to the flexor carpi radialis tendon at the level of the proximal wrist flexion crease (Fig 1). Traction is applied using sterile finger traps to keep the elbow suspended and flexed at 90° with 10 to 15 lb of traction. A compressive elastic bandage is wrapped around the forearm to prevent extravasation of fluid into the muscle compartments during arthroscopy while keeping the trocar and cannula inserted through the volar portal. The radiocarpal joint is distended with saline using a 23-gauge needle through the 3-4 portal. The 3-4 and 4-5 portals are established subsequently and gravity inflow is placed on the sheath of the arthroscope and augmented with a pressure bag. Extensive lavage is confirmed through the 6U outflow portal (ulnar side of the extensor carpi ulnaris tendon). The arthroscope (Sapphire View; Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI), a 2.7-mm instrument with a 30° angled field of vision, is introduced through the 3-4 portal to perform a systematic diagnostic and therapeutic arthroscopy. A probe is inserted in the 4-5 portal to examine and feel the integrity of the ligaments, synovia, TFC, chondral surface of each bone, and fracture fragments. Next, the arthroscope is inserted through the volar portal and a probe is introduced through the 4-5 portal to examine the dorsal aspects of the radiocarpal and ulnocarpal joint, the volar aspects of scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, and each interosseous ligament. Midcarpal arthroscopy is often performed with the radial midcarpal portal established 1 cm distal to the 3-4 portal and the ulnar midcarpal portal 1 cm distal to the 4-5 portal subsequently. Regarding the intra-articular fracture of the distal radius, the senior author (K.D.) has already reported the advantage of a volar portal. We often see the synovial proliferation at the dorsal fold of the radiocarpal joint in the rheumatoid wrist. The volar approach facilitates better visualization of this section compared with any dorsal approach. After evaluating the synovial proliferation of whole joint space through dorsal (Fig 3A) and volar portals, the arthroscope is reinserted through the volar portal and the shaver is introduced through dorsal portal to resect the synovium at the dorsal fold of the wrist joint ( The volar approach also enables detection of volar segment tears of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral interosseous ligament directly. In the arthroscopic view from the dorsal portal, one sees only the tear of proximal and dorsal segments of the scapholunate interosseous ligament and can only detect volar segment injury indirectly by tracing with a probe (Fig 4A). In our 230 cases of the volar approach for wrist arthroscopy, we never encountered any complications such as injury to tendon, nerve, vessels, or ligaments. We have also never seen the progression of rotary subluxation of the scaphoid after arthroscopy. Minimum separation and dislocation within 1 mm of step-off are advocated to minimize the incidence of osteoarthritis after intra-articular fracture of distal radius. There have been a few reports about the volar approach, which has been considered to be somewhat dangerous because the radial and ulnar arteries and their venae comitantes run at the volar side and the median nerve and flexor tendons run between these structures. Hence, the palmar side of the wrist is anatomically too complicated to make a portal. However, Tham et al. A partial tear of the scapholunate interosseous ligament, called dorsal wrist syndrome Various complications related to establishment of portals have been reported. Recently, we have used a plastic tube to maintain the portal and prevent these complications. Before inserting the cannula to the joint, we cover the cannula using a 2.9-mm diameter plastic tube (Fig 5A). In conclusion, the volar approach for wrist arthroscopy is a safe and successful technique when dealing with various kinds of wrist disorders. We recommend that all wrist arthroscopists become familiar with the volar approach.