Although cardiac surgeons encounter calcific degenerative aortic valve disease on a frequent basis, little is known about the molecular causes of this disease. The study by Dr Jian and colleagues presents convincing evidence that transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) may be an important piece in the puzzle of the etiology of this disease. Clues as to the causes of calcific aortic valve degeneration are revealed by pathologic analysis of diseased cusps removed at the time of valve replacement. In normal circumstances, aortic valve leaflets are composed of three principal layers: the ventricularis at the inflow surface, the spongiosa in the center, and the fibrosa at the outflow surface. The extracellular matrix components of these layers have been well characterized: the ventricularis contains radially aligned collagen and is rich in elastin; the spongiosa is primarily composed of glycosaminoglycans with some collagen; and the fibrosa contains densely packed collagen fibers aligned in parallel with the free edge of the valve cusp Why do apoptotic cells and cellular debris become calcified instead of resorbed? The conversion of vascular smooth muscle cells into an osteoblastic phenotype appears central to this process. Extracellular proteins common to bone have been isolated from degenerating aortic valves including, osteocalcin, osteopontin, bone morphogenetic proteins, matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9, tenascin-C, and matrix Gla protein Dr Jian and colleagues have identified high levels of TGF-β1 in calcified valve nodules and demonstrate the TGF-β1 stimulates aortic valve interstitial cell in culture to aggregate, induce cellular apoptosis, and calcify. These experiments suggest that this bone/smooth muscle cell factor may play a role in the cascade of cellular death and transformation. It opens the doors to testing agents which block TGF-β production, release, and function for ability to prevent valve calcification. The molecular dissection of this surgical disease has begun.