Alkaline leaching is a promising treatment to extract arsenic from enargite. This study investigates the feasibility of leaching enargite concentrate in the presence of pyrite in alkaline solution with sodium hydroxide only. Single factor and orthogonal experiments were performed to determine the effect of sodium hydroxide concentration, temperature, leaching time and liquid-to-solid ratio on enargite dissolution and to optimize leaching conditions. The results indicate that sodium hydroxide concentration has the greatest effect on arsenic dissolution from enargite, while the liquid-to-solid ratio has the smallest effect. Finally, over 99% of arsenic was removed using optimal conditions. Characterization of the leach residue by XRD and SEM-EDS analyses showed that enargite was converted into non‑arsenic copper sulfides such as anilite (Cu7S4), geerite (Cu8S5) and djurleite (Cu31S16). This research is applicable to solving problems related to arsenic pollution.It is difficult to separate enargite (Cu To recover copper from copper ores or concentrates containing quantities of enargite, selective separation of enargite from non‑arsenic copper sulfides by flotation is necessary to produce a low-arsenic copper concentrate and a high-arsenic copper concentrate. The low-arsenic concentrate can be sent to the smelting process without financial penalties for excessive arsenic content ( The leaching behavior of enargite in NaHS media and Na Since enargite, which commonly associates with copper sulfides, causes both environmental contamination from toxic arsenic and negative impact on the human body in copper smelting, a more economical and environmentally friendly pre-processing method for arsenic removal and copper recovery is evidently needed. In this work, the leaching of enargite flotation concentrate containing large amounts of pyrite in alkaline solution with sodium hydroxide only was studied. There is no need for the addition of other sulfide species such as sodium sulfide or sodium hydrosulfide due to the fact that pyrite may be a source of S The enargite concentrate used in this work was prepared from arsenic bearing copper ores by crushing, grinding and flotation. The particle size of samples was 95% passing 75 μm. The elements of interest in solid samples and leach solutions were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP, IRIS Intrepid II XSP). The crystalline phases were detected using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, TTR-III) in 2 θ scale using CuKα radiation (k = 1.5406 Å, 50 kV and 100 mA) at the scanning rate of 10 degrees/min, varied from 10 to 70 degrees. Leach residues were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (JSM-6360LV, JEOL) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (NEPTUNE TEXS HP, EDAX). The leaching experiments were conducted in a small autoclave fitted with a matching 100 mL Teflon reactor. Initially, 40 mL of prepared solution containing the desired amount of NaOH was added into the reactor and heated in a magnetically stirred tank fitted with a heating system. Once at the set temperature, 10 g of enargite concentrate was introduced into the reactor, except for the liquid-to-solid ratio tests. The pulp was stirred continuously at 700 rpm and allowed to leach for the desired time at a constant temperature. At the end of the experiment, the pulp was filtered and dried overnight at 60 °C for chemical and phase analysis. In some experiments, the elements Cu, Fe, As and S in the solids and leach solutions were assayed to perform mass balance analyses, which was helpful to evaluate the reactions that occured during leaching. An orthogonal array of L  During the investigation on the effect of temperature on enargite dissolution, the temperature was varied in the range of 423 to 463 K while keeping leaching time, NaOH concentration and liquid-to-solid ratio fixed at 120 min, 150 g/L and 4 mL/g, respectively. In the experiments on the effect of initial sodium hydroxide concentration on the extraction of arsenic, the leaching conditions were maintained as described above, except that sodium hydroxide concentration was varied from 50 to 250 g/L. It is evident from However, leaching time and liquid-to-solid ratio have less influence on the percentage of arsenic dissolution compared with the two factors above. According to Orthogonal experiments were performed to optimize the conditions under which the highest arsenic dissolution was obtained, and to determine the effect subsequence of the above four factors. Each experiment was repeated two times to avoid experimental contingency. The results of of L The mineralogical characterizations of the leach residue were investigated using XRD and SEM-EDS analyses. The residue was obtained under the optimal conditions of 463 K reaction temperature, 180 min leach time, 200 g/L NaOH, and a liquid-to-solid ratio of 5 mL/g. The X-ray diffraction pattern of leach residue is given in Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analyses were also used to detect the mineralogical changes of leach samples. The leaching of enargite concentrate containing pyrite in NaOH solutions successfully eliminated arsenic, as enargite was converted into arsenic-free copper sulfide, which can be directly sent to smelt. The results of single factor and orthogonal experiments indicate that the percentage of arsenic dissolution depends on sodium hydroxide concentration, temperature, leaching time, and liquid-to-solid ratio. Futhermore, sodium hydroxide concentration has the greatest effect on leaching, while the liquid-to-solid ratio has the least effect. At the selected optimal conditions, over 99% of arsenic in the enargite flotation concentrate was removed. The analysis of leach residue demonstrates the transformation of enargite into Cu This research was supported by