Drying is a unit operation associated with the removal of small amounts of liquid, generally water, from raw or processed materials. Drying is an ancient technology employed for the conservation of foods and biological samples coming from diverse sources such as plant and animal tissues, body fluids, cell cultures, and microbial fermentation broths. In this case, water is removed to halt or slow down the growth of spoilage microorganisms, as well as the occurrence of chemical reactions. Alternatively, it has been used for downstream processing operations, reduction of product mass and volume as the final processing step before packaging, or for the elaboration of powder products. Technological advances in food industry evolve continuously to offer better-quality products, reduce commercial costs, and develop new food products to satisfy the increasing demand of consumers. This article reviews not only the traditional drying and dehydration processes (i.e., air drying, freeze drying, spray drying, fluidized-bed drying, drum drying, and vacuum drying), but also new advances in osmotic dehydration, infrared radiation, supercritical drying, or electroheating (ohmic, microwave, or radio frequency heating, including advantages and drawbacks that still need to be overcome in order to select the appropriate technology for an industrial-scale production).Drying technology where the solid to be dried is exposed to a continuous flowing hot stream of air where moisture evaporates. Drying technology usually employed for drying heavy pastes, slurries, or puree materials, among others. Unit operation associated with the removal of small amounts of liquid. Bed of solid particles with a stream of gas blowing upward through the particles at a rate high enough to set them in motion. Drying technology where substances are exposed to very cold air to remove the water by sublimation. Rapid drying technology with hot gas to produce powder materials. Drying technology operated under vacuum to use low temperatures. Drying is a unit operation associated with the removal of small amounts of liquid from raw or processed materials. This liquid is generally water, although it can be applied to organic liquids or solvents. Contrarily, evaporation is related with the removal of large amounts of water as vapor at its boiling point. The terms dried and dehydrated are not synonymous although they are used indistinctly in many occasions. Hence, the US Department of Agriculture lists dehydrated foods as those with no more than 2.5% water (dry basis), while dried foods apply to any food product with more than 2.5% water (dry basis) Drying is an ancient technology employed for the conservation of foods and biological samples coming from diverse sources such as plant and animal tissues, body fluids, cell cultures, and microbial fermentation broths. In this case, water is removed to halt or slow down the growth of spoilage microorganisms, as well as the occurrence of chemical reactions. Alternatively, it has been used for downstream processing operations, reduction of product mass and volume as the final processing step before packaging, or for the elaboration of powder products. The evolution of drying and dehydration processes from the simple use of solar energy to the modern technologies can be divided into four groups or generations First generation: Dryers involving hot air flowing over an extensive area of the product to remove water from the surface; this technology is mainly employed for drying solid materials such as grains, fruits, and vegetables. Second generation: Dryers are more dedicated to the dehydration of slurries and purees, that is, spray and drum dryers intended for dehydrate powders and flakes. Third generation: Includes freeze and osmotic dehydration. The former was developed to overcome structural damages and minimize losses of flavor and aroma compounds, whereas the latter is mainly intended for processing fruits and vegetables by immersion in a hypertonic solution. Fourth generation: Involves high vacuum, fluidization, and the use of microwaves, radio frequency, and refractance window. These technologies represent the latest advance in this area of food processing, showing specific application, based on the final quality attributes of the intended products, and the characteristics of the raw materials being processed. Drying can be discontinuous (batch), when it proceeds for a certain period of time inside dryers, or continuous, when dryer equipments are continuously supplied with wet materials, and dried material is continuously recovered. Food drying and dehydration processes include the selection of a dryer, taking into account the production capacity, initial moisture content of the material, particle size distribution, drying characteristics of the product, maximum allowable product temperature, explosion characteristics (i.e., spray or fluid bed dryings), moisture isotherms, and physical data of the material, as well as the knowledge of the physicochemical concepts associated with food dehydration, including water activity, glass transition temperature, dehydration mechanisms and theories, and chemical and physical changes The aim of this article is to describe the traditional drying and dehydration methods, including particular applications, as well as to review the advances in current technologies. Drying and dehydration are used in many food applications, including: Product recovery. The biotechnological industry includes a variety of downstream processing operations to isolate, recover, concentrate, and purify a product from complex mixtures, such as hydrolyzates from lignocellulosic materials. The overall recovery, quality, and cost of production are influenced by selection, integration, and optimization of downstream operations. Among them, dehydration, especially freeze drying, is commonly used to preserve biological materials. Reduction of product mass and volume as the final processing step before packaging to improve the efficiency of the product transportation and storage. Elaboration of powder materials such as powders and dyestuffs. These products have been produced using different processes including spray drying, freeze drying, and vacuum dehydration. Food preservation. Drying has been traditionally used for the removal of moisture from food products as a preservation method. Microorganisms that cause food spoilage and decay cannot grow and multiply in the absence of water. Also, many enzymes that cause chemical changes in food and other biological materials cannot function without water. Consequently, reducing the water content of a food product not only eliminates the opportunity for microbial deterioration but also reduces the rates of other deteriorative reactions. Water content must be reduced below about 10 wt.% to inactivate microorganisms, and below 5 wt.% to preserve flavor and nutrition The most common drying processes are air drying, freeze drying, spray drying, fluidized-bed drying, drum drying, and vacuum drying. The costs of these drying methods are listed in Air drying foods as a method of preservation is an ancient technology as it is remarkably cheap (see Air dryers employed in the food industry include commercial alternatives of cabinet- and bed-type dryers (i.e., kiln, tray, truck tray, rotary flow conveyor, and tunnel) containing at least a feeder, a heater, and a collector. This type of dryer involves hot air flowing over an extensive area of the product to remove water from the surface, being mostly suitable for solid materials such as grains, sliced fruits and vegetables, or chunked products An alternative drying process that combines the speed of air drying with preservation of the fresh characteristics of foods is freeze drying (or lyophilization). According to The drying of food products via freeze drying has two main characteristics Generally, freeze drying food products offers the highest quality, being an attractive method for extending the shelf life of food. A prominent factor is the structural rigidity afforded by the frozen substance when sublimation occurs, which prevents collapse of the remaining porous structure after drying, and, consequently, when water is added later, the rehydrated product retains much of its original structural form Nowadays, freeze drying is often used for long-term storage of biological samples, foodstuffs, and pharmaceuticals, and for conservation of certain kinds of substances, which may not be heated even to moderate temperatures. Nevertheless, freeze drying has some disadvantages, as it is an expensive form of dehydration for foods because of the slow drying rate and the use of vacuum These damages have been attributed primarily to changes in the physical state of membrane lipids or to changes in the structure of sensitive proteins, as the activity of proteins tends to be substantially lowered during the process and storage, unless the product is kept under low temperatures (below −20 Three important design variables for consideration in freeze drying include Vacuum drying operates under vacuum, and consequently, moisture can be removed at controlled low temperatures. This process has been described to be the most promissory method to preserve commercial starter cultures, which are usually preserved in frozen or freeze-dried form, because of the relatively high levels of survival and maintenance of activity, but frozen cultures must be kept at temperatures below –20 However, although vacuum drying could be a more cost-efficient alternative to the freeze drying of viable yeast biomass, products are not as easily rehydrated as freeze-dried samples, and often have lower viabilities than frozen cultures, probably due to damage of the cell membrane The principles of vacuum drying are similar to those of freeze drying, with the main exceptions of elevated in-dryer temperatures and vacuum levels, so that the material is kept in a nonfrozen state during the whole process; this means that the removal of water during vacuum drying is more rapid than during ice sublimation and that the microorganisms will go through a gradually increasing desiccation stress while still being capable of metabolic activity Vacuum drying may have an advantage over other drying processes owing to its lower ability to cause oxidation, and also for resulting in products with high storage potential and are easily rehydratable Similarly, liquid drying is a sophisticated alternative method of vacuum drying for the long-term preservation of microorganisms sensitive to the freezing or freeze drying of the normal lyophilization process. Its intrinsic feature is the vacuum drying of samples from the liquid state in specialized equipments, thus preventing cultures from freezing. The basic vacuum dryer consists of a chamber containing heated shelves. Trays, with the wet materials, are placed on the shelves, and water is removed by a vacuum pump and condensed at a condenser The optimal conditions for vacuum drying must be optimized as a function of the exposure surface, pressure of the vacuum system, weight or volume of the sample, etc., in order to allow the best bacterial recovery after dehydration–rehydration, to avoid cellular damage, because, during the process, a thermal stress can occur simultaneously to the hydric stress, which could induce irreversible damage. Consequently, the exposure of microorganisms to high temperatures should be as minimal as possible, and the conditions employed, in terms of times and temperatures, should be carefully considered. For instance, the relatively long drying time compared to spray or fluidized bed drying (ranging from 20 to over 100 Spray drying is a method of producing dry powder materials from a liquid or slurry by rapidly drying with a hot gas, generally air, that is, 150–200 Spray drying is particularly interesting in the case of drying thermally sensitive materials. The cost, per kilogram of water removed, of spray drying is considerable lower than the cost of freeze drying (see Spray drying is employed in the food industry to obtain milk powder and milk dairy and nondairy derivatives including whey powder, dry cream, dry milk-based beverages, infant formulas, casein, and other milk-protein products. Flavorings, cereal, coffee, or spices are also produced. In pharmaceutical applications, it is employed to obtain antibiotics, additives, or medical ingredients, and in the industrial sector to obtain catalyst supports, paint pigments, or ceramic materials. The most important advantages of spray drying are the drying process is performed at low temperatures; the drying process is very short (less than 30 the product is of excellent quality with no adverse effects. Depending on the material and application, different spray dryers can be used in processes carried out operating in co-current, countercurrent flow, or a mixture of both process under an angle in the same equipment. The industrial techniques include spray drying with centrifugal or pressure atomization, and two-stage or three-stage spray drying. The kind of equipment used affects the final product properties. For instance, due to the small quantity of water (10–14%) to be dried in the second drying stage, the powder gets a cluster-like structure. The void spaces among particles are easily filled up with water during reconstitution (great contact area), resulting in quick solubilization of the product Various drying chambers have been designed using atomizers that disperse the material into a controlled drop-size spray. The atomizers employed in these spray dryers are rotary, single-fluid pressure swirls, or ultrasonic nozzles. The most common devices are centrifugal (rotary) atomizers and pressure (nozzle) atomizers, although nowadays, both atomizing devices are accommodated in the same equipment in order to achieve wide versatility in powder production The final crystallinity in powder materials depends on the application, and consequently, different process industries require different extents of crystallinity. Spray drying is a potential process to obtain crystalline powders in a single step, rather than multistage conventional crystallization processes where crystallization is normally followed by a further drying step Additionally, it must be taken into account that, during the spray-drying process, several phase transformations may occur within the material. Depending on the process intensity and material physical properties, the dispersed liquid turns into an amorphous solid with some fraction of crystalline solid (governed by drying kinetics and liquid-phase crystallization) due to the evaporation of the solvent, and the predominantly amorphous phase may also transform into a crystalline one (governed by Williams–Landel–Ferry kinetics), where the rate of solid-phase crystallization is related to the temperature difference between the particle temperature and the glass-transition temperature during spray drying The spray-drying technology can also be employed to obtain dry probiotics, which are employed for the elaboration of functional food preparations, such as dairy products and confections. Although frozen concentrates of starter cultures are widely used in the production of fermented foods, there is a market for dried starter cultures. Spray drying is one of the promising processes for the production of dry probiotics, as under optimized conditions, high processing rates, low operating costs, and high degree of survivability have been achieved. The availability of spray-dried powders harboring high numbers of viable probiotic microorganisms is desirable for commercial applications, enabling convenient storage and transport of these cultures and their subsequent application in functional food development. Thus, some studies have been carried out on the spray drying of yogurt cultures, cheese cultures, and bacteriocin-producing lactic acid bacteria to demonstrate the capability of spray-dried cultures in replacing the usual liquid or frozen-bulk starter or freeze-dried cultures. However, the commercial production of spray-dried starters has not been widely successful because cells of many bacterial strains can be killed or inactivated by the atomization process, depending on the temperature–time combinations Consequently, concerns about the use of spray drying in this application have been raised because of low survival rates during drying and low stability during storage. This survival rate depends upon a number of factors, including the drying conditions, the inoculum and medium used, preadaptation of the culture to acquire resistance to processing conditions, the use of protective agents, and the selection of the species and strain of culture as some lactic acid bacteria can be spray-dried without a drastic loss of viability and activity, or at least show survival rates during spray drying, which are comparable to those on freeze drying In summary, research in spray-drying technologies is being carried out to obtain high-quality products with low production costs and good storing stability. The outstanding achievements in modern spray-drying techniques are the development of multistage vacuum evaporation with thermal and mechanical vapor recompression resulting in better economy, and the introduction of membrane methods, which allowed numerous combinations of dairy-based powders with different compositions A fluidized bed is a bed of solid particles with a stream of gas blowing upward through the particles at a rate high enough to set them in motion During fluidized-bed drying, particles are freely suspended in the hot-air stream and dehydrated simultaneously by rapid exchange of heat and mass with air, in batch or continuous systems, operating in open cycle involving water evaporation, or closed cycle, which involves mainly organic solvent evaporation. The fixed and manufacturing costs of fluidized-bed drying are the cheapest after air-drying (see Although fluidized-bed drying can take longer than spray drying, heat inactivation can be minimized and more easily controlled by using relatively low air temperatures. The drying time needed to prepare a product at a desired moisture level oscillates from 1 Fluid-bed drying is ideal for a wide range of foods, both heat sensitive and nonheat sensitive. However, the use of fluidized-bed dryers is limited because of the irregular particle sizes and the sticky nature of the granulated materials, which can lead to an inhomogeneous bed, agglomerated particles, and a decreased drying rate Conversely, the main drawback of fluidized-bed drying is that only granulatable materials can be dried, and, therefore, cells must be entrapped or encapsulated in support materials that should fit to the foods to be fermented, such as skim milk, potato starch, calcium alginate, or casein Drum drying, developed in the early 1900s, is currently used in both the food and chemical industries to dry heavy pastes, slurries, puree materials, and thick liquids, and in the manufacture of dehydrated powders and flakes. Drum-dried products include cooked or pregelatinized starch, baby food, milk product, mashed potatoes, caseinates, fruit and vegetable pulp, dry soup mixtures, maltodextrins, yeast creams, precooked breakfast cereal, spent yeast, polyacrylamides, sodium benzoate, propionates, or acetates. Generally, drum dryers are used to obtain porous and easy to rehydrate dried product, ready to be used in beverages, bakery goods, cereal, dairy foods and chemical applications The advantages of drum drying include The products have good porosity and, hence, good rehydration due to boiling evaporation. Drum dryers can dry very viscous foods, such as pastes and gelatinized or cooked starch, which cannot be easily dried with other methods. Drum dryers normally have high energy efficiency. Drum drying can be clean and hygienic. Drum dryers are easy to operate and maintain. The dryers are flexible and suitable for multiple but small quantity production. Furthermore, the main advantages of drum drying include high drying rates and economic usage of heat Some products may not form a good film on the drum surface and are not suitable for drum drying. Some products, especially those with high sugar content, may not be easily scraped off from the drum. There is relatively low throughput compared to spray drying. Because of the precision machining that is required, there is a high cost of changing the drum surface. There is a possible scorching of the product to impart cooked flavor and off-color due to direct contact with the high-temperature drum surface. It is not possible to process salty or other corrosive materials due to potential pitting of the drum surface. On occasion, the bad quality achieved in the output products can be related to perturbations in the drying processes, such as fluctuations in the initial moisture and thickness of product or accumulation of noncondensable gases in the drum with local bad heat transfer. Consequently, the choice of the drum dryer is important. The most common types are the single-drum cylinder, the double-drum dryer, and the twin-drum dryer. A single-drum dryer consists of hollow metal cylinders mounted on a horizontal axis and mechanically rotated with variable speed control. The drum is heated by steam, hot water, or other heating medium condensing on its inside surface, the drying effect being obtained by the transfer of heat from the inside of the drum through its metallic wall to a film of material spread over its external surface A double-drum dryer consists of two cylinders (drums) of equal diameter rotating very close together in opposite directions. The material to be dried is fed into the wedge-shaped space between the drums using a distribution pipe. Heat is transferred from the hot drum surfaces to the wet material. The rotation of the cylinders causes the material in the pool to pass through the narrow space between them, dividing the material into two films, which after drying are removed in the form of thin sheets by scraper blades spanning the whole width of the drums. The most significant factors in the efficiency of a double-drum dryer are the steam pressure, drum rotation speed, level of pool between the drums, gap between drums, and conditions of the feed material, including concentration, physical characteristics, and temperature at which the material reaches the drum surface Finally, a twin-drum dryer also has two drums, but they rotate away from each other at the top. Single- and double-drum dryers are largely used for drying fruits and vegetables, while twin-drum dryers are particularly adapted for drying materials, such as solutions of inorganic salts (which are crystal bearing or crystal forming), and for drying materials yielding dusty products. Research in the novel heating methods of foods, for applications such as cooking, pasteurization, sterilization, defrosting, thawing, and drying, often focuses on areas such as the assessment of processing time, the evaluation of heating uniformity, the appraisal of the impact on quality attributes of the final product as well as the prediction of the energy efficiency of these heating processes Osmotic dehydration (OD) has been used as a viable process for the partial removal of water from cellular materials, including fruits and vegetables. In this case, an advantage is that a change of phase is avoided, and, consequently, the possible physical, chemical, and biological changes (typical when drying at high temperature) are reduced. OD is based on placing foods in a hypertonic solution (i.e., sugar, salt, sorbitol, or glycerol), where the complex cell-wall structure of the food acts as a semipermeable membrane, which is not completely selective. The hypertonic solution has a higher osmotic pressure, and, consequently, the water activity is reduced, creating a driving force, which results in two countercurrent mass-transfer flows: diffusion of water from food to solution, and diffusion of solute from solution to food. Water removal can be aided with the help of vacuum. OD systems consist mainly of a storage tank where the osmotic solution is prepared, followed by a pump to control the flow rate at the processing tank. The product is placed in the processing tank where the osmotic solution is pumped in at a constant rate The efficiency of OD behavior has been studied using osmotic agents, such as sucrose, glucose, fructose, corn syrup, and sodium chloride, or other drying processes assisting OD. For example, it has been reported that OD, ultrasound, and ultrasound-assisted OD show different responses when applying these drying pretreatments to different fruits, as the ultrasonic waves can cause a rapid series of alternate compressions and expansions, causing cavitation, which may be helpful to remove strongly attached moisture. Besides, the forces involved create microscopic channels that may ease the removal of moisture. Research has also been focused on the influence of OD, prior to conventional drying, on the moisture transport characteristics, and, more recently, interest has been raised in the investigation of the physical characteristics of fruits after osmotic pretreatment and drying. Infrared drying (ID) has received considerable attention lately for drying foodstuffs such as grains, flour, vegetables, pasta, meat, and fish, due to advantages such as higher energy efficiency, shorter drying time, versatility, simplicity of equipment, fast response of heating and drying, easy installation to any drying chamber, and low capital cost A supercritical (SC) fluid is defined as a substance for which both pressure and temperature are above the critical point. At this thermodynamic condition, the supercritical fluid cannot be condensed even with extreme compression. The most and widely desirable fluid for the extraction of natural products for foods is carbon dioxide (CO Electroheating can be subdivided into either direct electroheating where electrical current is applied directly to the food (i.e., ohmic heating (OH)) or indirect electroheating (i.e., microwave (MW) or radio frequency (RF) heating) where the electrical energy is first converted to electromagnetic radiation, which subsequently generates heat within a product Food exposure to MWs is under investigation, particularly taken into account the doubts raised on food safety due to possible structural changes. However, the mild effect and the versatility that seemingly reduce the thermal impact on food’s functional properties, allow for an overall food quality improvement MWs heating involves drying of a solid–fluid mixture or food substrate by the interaction between an electromagnetic field and dipolar molecular species (such as water), or ionic species (such as salts). The friction produced by the dipoles rotation and by the migration of ionic species to regions of opposite charge generates heat, especially where the water content is in relative excess Potential advantages to drying by MWs can be attributed to the difference in the way that energy is delivered. Thus, as MWs can penetrate materials and deposit energy, heat can be generated throughout the volume of the material; the transfer of energy does not rely on diffusion of heat from the surfaces, and it is possible to achieve rapid and uniform heating of relatively thicker materials RF also uses electromagnetic energy to heat products instantly inside the product. Time cycle and efficiency improve exceptionally, as the process does not depend on a temperature gradient. RF electromagnetic waves cover the frequency spectrum from 30 to 300 However, in spite of its considerable speed advantage over conventional heating methods, its uptake by industry has been relatively slow. Recently, a substantial number of publications have been appearing and it is likely that this trend will continue for the foreseeable future. For example, Marra Finally, refractance window (RW) is a new technology in which water is used to transmit heat into the product being dried. The product is evenly applied to the surface of a conveyor belt (a sheet of special plastic floating on hot water) and infrared heat passes directly through the membrane and into the product. In this technology, all three methods of heat transfer, radiation, conduction, and convection occur for exceptionally effective heat transfer. However, as the material dries, the infrared window is closed, as moisture no longer contacts the plastic, and the only heat transfer taking place is by conduction. As plastic is a poor heat conductor, little heat is lost. This also causes the majority of infrared radiation to be bent back into the water, leaving only conducted heat as the drying means, thus protecting the product by preventing color and flavor degradation. Furthermore, RW drying maintains product temperatures far below the temperature of the circulating water beneath the conveyor belt, also protecting the products from oxidization. A broad variety of fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, poultry, eggs, flavorings, herbs and spices, dairy, cereals, starches and grains, as well as beverage products have been successfully dried by RW Technological advances in different fields, including novel heating of foods, are evolving continuously to offer better-quality products, reduce commercial costs, and develop new food products to satisfy the increasing demand of consumers. For that reason, in this article, not only the traditional drying and dehydration processes (i.e., air drying, freeze drying, spray drying, fluidized-bed drying, drum drying, and vacuum drying) but also new advances in OD, infrared radiation, supercritical drying, or electroheating (ohmic, MW, or RF heating) were reviewed, including advantages and drawbacks that still need to be overcome in order to select the appropriate technology for an industrial-scale production.