Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is commonly used in pavement assessment, manly for measuring pavement layer thickness. Asphalt layer thickness is the most relevant input for flexible pavements assessment. The present study evaluates the feasibility of the Common Mid-Point (CMP) method, for a coreless GPR approach, using air-coupled antennas. Three test sections, with different asphalt layer thicknesses, were evaluated using a pair of 1.8 GHz air-coupled antennas. Results highlight the satisfactory performance of the CMP method with air-coupled antennas. The estimation of the asphalt layer thickness leads to a linear coefficient of determination greater than 0.95 when compared with the measured thickness from cores. The CMP method presented lower average absolute errors for the thinner asphalt layers (about 6 cm) in comparison with the SRM method (6% vs 18%). For thicker layers (from 11 to 13 cm), the average absolute errors for both methods were similar (approximately 7%).Pavement layer thickness data are an essential input for pavement structural analyses The use of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) in transport infrastructures represents one of the most significant advances for obtaining continuous data along the road, with the advantage of being a non-destructive and operating at traffic speed GPR systems are based on the theory of electromagnetic wave propagation, but those principles can have different applications, which lead to several types of GPR systems The two most common setups of antennas used by impulse GPR systems are ground-coupled dipole antennas and air-coupled horn antennas; the former are in contact with the pavement surface or suspended just above it, up to 0.1 m (when suspended the distance to the surface must be kept constant in order to guarantee the coupling) For determining the layer thickness (h) with GPR it is necessary to know the wave propagation speed (v) and the two-way travel time (twt) of the reflected signal according to Eq. The velocity of the propagation of the wave through the asphalt layer depends on the dielectric value of the material (ε) and can be calculated by Eq. The two-way travel time is the time it takes for the wave to travel from the transmitting antenna, be reflected and turn back to the receiving antenna, and is recorded by the GPR system. The dielectric value of a material is a measure of its relative dielectric permittivity when compared to a vacuum. The variability of the mix compositions of the pavement materials, the age of the mixture and also changes within the water and air void content will influence the dielectric values The calculation of the materials’ dielectric value can be done by different approaches such as: using fixed values based on experience; laboratory determination of dielectric values; applying the surface reflection method; or calculated from “Ground-Truth” references, such as cores and test pits For the “same” material, a wide range of dielectric values are available on several publications (typically, the dielectric values for asphalt may range from 2 to 12 Coring and test pits are time consuming, labour intensive and traffic intrusive The surface reflection method Recent works already started to address some of these challenges proposing new approaches for GPR layer thickness measurements, using multiple antennas to calculate the average dielectric value of the asphalt layer, taking advantage of significant hardware improvements in GPR resolution and accuracy. The TRIMM project Those studies provided good results for the evaluation of the first layer of the pavement, but they require two or more GPR sets. Although very useful in pavement assessment, GPR systems are still an expensive technology and many companies that have this equipment do not own multiple antenna sets of the same frequency. The present study evaluates the feasibility of the Common Mid-Point (CMP) method, using only one pair of air-coupled antennas, to estimate pavement thickness, for a coreless GPR approach for road pavement assessment. Since asphalt layer thickness is most relevant for the structural assessment of flexible pavements (the most common type of pavement structures in Europe), this paper focuses primarily on the determination of this parameter. The CMP method is widely used with ground-coupled antennas GPR data acquisition was performed the same way as the classical method, with the two antennas (one transmitter and one receiver) initially adjacent to each other and then moved at equal distances from the initial midpoint. Data processing, however, was adapted to address the different reflections obtained. The velocity of the propagation of the wave in the first layer was obtained using the CMP-velocity analysis adjusting the hyperbolas manually since the semblance analysis algorithm The GPR tests were performed using a pair of 1.8 GHz air-coupled antennas, on three test sections with different flexible pavement configurations, to address different thicknesses of the asphalt layer. The measurements were recorded along the survey lines (scan by distance) and also at the control points (scan by time). Together with the CMP approach using air-coupled antennas, the dielectric value of the asphalt layer was also estimated from “Ground-Truth” references and by applying the Surface Reflection Method (SRM). A comparison between these three methodologies and the main results obtained are presented in this paper.  The proposed methodology starts from the classic CMP method and adapts the data processing to incorporate the use of the air-coupled antennas, since the electromagnetic waves trajectory differ from the usual CMP analysis with ground-coupled antennas.  The analysis of the CMP data was made using the module “Interactive The first stage was the correction of the start time of the signal, this means the time the wave has been transmitted. For the classic CMP method if a direct air wave is present the definition of the start time is performed choosing a velocity of 0.3 m/ns (the velocity of the electromagnetic wave on the air) and adapting it to the direct air wave For the CMP method with air-coupled antennas the first reflection, which also has a velocity of 0.3 m/ns, was used instead of the direct wave. The shot position was set to 0 m, the receivers were set from Xmin to Xmax and then the air/ground reflection wave was manually fitted to a velocity of 0.3 m/ns (the adjustment was made for the beginning of the reflection wave: “zero” amplitude). The crossing point at distance 0 yields the time at which the wave has been transmitted. The velocity of the propagation of the wave within the first layer was determined using the CMP-velocity analysis applied to the modified data. The algorithm semblance analysis (that generates mean velocities), provided by the ReflexW software Therefore, for the determination of the velocity of the first layer the manual velocity adaptation was used. The procedure consisted on the adjustment of the reflection varying the boundary and the velocity of the hyperbolas of the CMP-velocity analysis ( Knowing the velocity of the propagation of the wave through the asphalt layer, the dielectric value of the material can be calculated using Eq. Three experimental tests sections (Cell 2 to Cell 4) were constructed in a real scale physical model at LNEC facilities, with areas of 4.00 × 2.00 m The bituminous mixture used in the asphalt layers was AC 20 BASE 50/70 (MB). During the application of the mixture, some samples were collected before compaction for laboratory characterization. The compaction was carried out with roller compactors, but during this procedure difficulties occurred due to the size of the cells and the size of the roller compactor. Cores were extracted to verify the compaction and bulk density. The binder content was 3.5% and the average air voids content in the compacted mixture for cells 2, 3 and 4 was 8%, 11% and 10%, respectively.  For each cell, two parallel survey lines with a length of 1.00 m, spaced 0.30 m apart, were made ( A pair of air-coupled horn antennas with a central frequency of 1.8 GHz ( The GPR data was acquired along the survey lines (scan by distance) and also at the control points (scan by time). The air-coupled antennas were suspended at 0.45 m from the surface as generally applied for pavement assessment. The setup used for the acquisition is presented in After the GPR survey, 12 cores were drilled at the control points ( Three different methods for GPR calibration were considered within this study: “Ground-Truth” (Core), Surface Reflection Method (SRM) and Common Mid-Point Method (CMP) for air-coupled antennas. The configuration related to data acquisition, algorithms used in data processing and the main results for each calibration method are presented in this subsection. The comparison of the results obtained is presented in Section The “Ground-Truth” method, also referred as the coring calibration method, can be used to calculate the dielectric value of the asphalt layer at selected points where the layer thickness is known. For the application of this method at each control point, the thickness of the asphalt layers was measured from the cores. Then, the two-way travel time of the reflected signal was determined from the GPR static data collected The velocity of the propagation of the wave (v) through the asphalt layer was calculated according to Eq. The results of the velocities and the dielectric values for the asphalt layer by the Coring method are presented in For this method, the velocities obtained ranged from 0.117 m/ns to 0.137 m/ns with average values of 0.117 m/ns, 0.130 m/ns and 0.124 m/ns for Cells 2, 3 and 4, respectively. The coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated for each cell using the results from the 4 control points according to Eq. Cell 2 presented the highest dielectric values and it is the most homogeneous with a CV under 2%, while Cells 3 and 4 showed similar dielectric values and also similar CV values (between 6% and 8%). Note that Cell 3 and 4 have a higher average void content (11% and 10%, respectively) than Cell 2 (8%) and, as better compaction leads to an increase in the dielectric value, the values obtained are in agreement with the classical Clausius and Mossoti equation, were the permittivity increases with the increase of density The Surface Reflection Method (SRM) can be used when air-coupled antennas are employed and relies on the comparison of the amplitude from the pavement surface with the amplitude from a metal plate reflection, acting as a perfect reflector of the GPR signals The dielectric value for the surface layer (ε The amplitude of the reflection from the metal plate was obtained from the raw data calibration files collected before the GPR survey using the same configuration applied during the tests. The amplitude of the pavement surface reflection  From the GPR data, the two-way travel time and the amplitude of the surface were identified for each scan of the profile along the survey line. With both reflection amplitudes The results of the velocities, the dielectric values and the thicknesses for the asphalt layer obtained from the Surface Reflection Method, at the control points, are presented in  For the SRM method, the velocities obtained at the control points ranged from 0.115 m/ns to 0.137 m/ns, with average values of 0.123 m/ns, 0.134 m/ns and 0.131 m/ns for Cells 2, 3 and 4, respectively. Cell 2 presented higher dielectric values, but they have also higher variability (CV of 12%). Once again, the dielectric values from Cells 3 and 4 are similar and with analogous CV values (around 5%). In general, the dielectric values obtained from the SRM method are lower than the ones determined from the cores. The higher errors (up to 20%) occurred at control points 42, 72 and 82, but they are very variable along the test site. For Cell 2 some variation in the surface amplitude measured (A A GPR data was collected varying the distance between the transmitter and the receiver antenna. The measurements were made at the control points and the separation between the antennas was increased from 0.34 m up to 1.00 m with increments of 0.02 m ( The results of the velocities, the dielectric values and the thickness for the asphalt layer obtained from the Common Mid-Point Method, at the control points, are presented in  The velocities obtained using the CMP method, ranged from 0.109 m/ns to 0.137 m/ns with average values of 0.113 m/ns, 0.130 m/ns and 0.133 m/ns for Cells 2, 3 and 4, respectively. Cell 2 presented higher dielectric values (CV of 9%), while Cells 3 and 4 showed similar dielectric values and the ones obtained in Cell 4 were less variable (CV just below 6%). Cell 3 had the highest variability (CV of 13%) for the CMP method, when analysing all four control points, but looking at the velocity values for the first control points (51 and 61) and the last two (52 and 62) in pairs they are very similar. The dielectric values obtained from the CMP method at Cell 2 are higher than the ones determined from coring, as for the other Cells, 3 and 4, the dielectric values are, in general, underestimated by the CMP method.   The absolute thickness deviations range from 0.3 cm to 1.4 cm and from 0.1 cm to 1.7 cm for the SRM and the CMP method, respectively. The normalized relative thickness error values go up to 26% for the SRM method and half the value (13%) for the CMP method. For Cell 2 the measured thicknesses were generally higher than the ones obtained using both the SRM and CMP methods. As for Cells 3 and 4 the measured thicknesses were always lower than the calculated ones. The higher error values were obtained for survey Line 6 (Cell 3) when using the SRM method. Cell 3 had the thinnest layer of asphalt, therefore these results can be justified by the signal amplitude reduction that occurs when the thickness of the upper pavement layer is small compared to the wavelength in the layer (about 0.07 m) affecting negatively the accuracy of the measurements For the CMP method, some variations in the errors at the different control points were noticed. However, these errors were not directly correlated with the thickness of the asphalt layers as it can be seen in In addition, no correlation was noticed between the average void content of the asphalt layer, at each cell, and the thickness error estimated from both methods (see  These results show that the modified CMP method, using air-coupled antennas, has satisfactory performance in the determination of the thickness of the asphalt layer and, for thinner layers (about 6 cm), presented better results than the SRM method (average absolute errors of 6% and 18% for CMP and SRM, respectively). For thicker layers (from 11 to 13 cm), the average absolute errors for both methods were similar (approximately 7%). Finally, the results achieved within this paper are comparable to the results obtained by other authors using adaptations to the CMP method with multiple air-coupled antennas: The mean accuracy achieved in The extended common mid-point method in The multi offset array test presented in The present research focused on the feasibility to use the CMP method to estimate the asphalt layer thickness when using air-coupled antennas. An adaptation from the classic CMP method, developed based on ground-coupled antennas measurements, was performed. For this study an air-coupled system with an antenna of 1.8 GHz central frequency was used in the tests and three experimental sections with variable thickness of the asphalt layer were analysed. To evaluate the feasibility of the CMP method with air-coupled antennas the asphalt layer was also estimated from “Ground-Truth” references and by applying the SRM. These two methods are the most commonly used for GPR pavement thickness evaluation. The thickness errors for the CMP method were not directly correlated with the thickness of the asphalt layers in contrast with the SRM. Considering all the Cells the absolute thickness normalized error range from 1 to 13% (with an average of 7%) and from 3% to 26% (with an average of 10%) for the SRM and the CMP method, respectively. Nevertheless, in comparison with the SRM, the CMP method presented lower errors for the thinner asphalt layers (Cell 3) with absolute average thickness values of 6% versus 18% for the SRM. Overall, the modified CMP method, using air-coupled antennas, had a satisfactory performance in the determination of the thickness of the asphalt layer and presented a linear coefficient of determination greater than 0.95 when compared with the measured thickness from cores. The results achieved show the potential of the CMP method, using only one pair of air-coupled antennas, to provide accurate results on asphalt thickness estimation even in comparison with other studies that use multiple air-coupled antennas setups Regardless of the good results, the CMP methodology, as described within this paper, can only be applied for discrete analysis at the control points but, even with this limitation, it can be a complement to the SRM, especially for thinner asphalt layers (about 6 cm). It would be interesting to expand this study to a larger range of asphalt thicknesses and also to different compositions of asphalt layers to complement the validation of the proposed method. This will allow for the establishment of practical recommendations concerning the selection of the most appropriate methodology (CMP or SRM) for specific types of pavement. For future works it would be important to address the use of the CMP method, with only one pair of air-coupled antennas, not only on control points but also for continuous interpretation of the GPR data along the road. For that goal it would be necessary to study the combination of several surveys with variable setups of antennas separation and also to develop algorithms for automatic velocity analysis of CMP. Complementary works can also include the application of this method to simulated data to estimate the theoretical reachable accuracy of the air-coupled CMP method. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the EU COST Action TU1208 “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar’’, through the Short Term Scientific Mission “Calibration methods for air-coupled antennas”. The authors would also like to thanks Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (