Thermal energy storage (TES) is an efficient solution for improving the dispatchability of Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) plants. A system, consisting of two tanks with Solar Salt (NaNO3 60% wt. and KNO3 40% wt.) is commonly used. However, the investment cost of this technology is very high, due to the huge amount of salts required (thousands of tons). A pronounced interest is evident for improving the thermophysical properties of molten salts by adding small amounts of nanoparticles in order to reduce the mass of molten salts at CSP. At the moment, the effect of nanoparticle addition on corrosion of container materials is poorly explored. In particular, there are no works regarding the dynamic effect of nanoparticles on the corrosivity of molten salts. In this work we present first ever dynamic corrosion tests for Solar salt doped with alumina nanoparticles (1% wt.). Carbon Steel A516 and SS347, used in double-tank system, were tested. Corrosion rates were 94.8 μm yr−1 and negligible respectively (1000 h, 385 °C). Detailed examination of construction materials revealed incorporation of nanoparticles into the corrosion layer and considerably lower corrosion rate as compared to the previously reported work on the nanoparticles-free Solar salt.Concentrated Solar Power Carbon Steel Thermal Energy Storage Photovoltaic Power Block Heat Transfer Fluid Levelized Cost of Electricity Direct Normal Irradiance Solar Salt Carbon Steel A516 Stainless Steel 347 Molten Salt-Based NanoFluids NanoPrticles Alumina NanoParticles Scanning Electron Microscopy Field Emission Gun Energy Dispersive X-Ray Microscopy Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Deuterated-TriGlycine Sulfate In the last decades, the increasing emission of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere is leading to a global climate change. In this scenery, non-renewable energy obtained from fossil fuels is slowly being substituted by renewable energy from different sources (solar, wind, waves, geothermal). The European Union promoted a commitment to attain a minimum of 20% of the total energy consumed by the members to be renewable in 2020 [ The most extended TES system consists of two tanks filled in with a material composed of a mixture of salts: the cold tank (300 °C) and the hot tank (400 °C). These are the working temperatures in the TES system combined with Parabolic Trough (PT) CSP Plants [ As it was shown in the previous paragraph, the published literature about the compatibility of MSBNFs with container materials is very scarce and controversial. The influence of the addition of nanoparticles on the corrosion behaviour of these materials in contact with common steels has not been sufficiently studied. Moreover, there is a lack of knowledge about the compatibility of molten salts with common container materials under dynamic conditions. Most of the works are focused on the study of the effect of the chloride content (or the purity of the salt) on the corrosion of common container materials (different kinds of carbon and stainless steels). Corrosion rates are normally measured as the increase of the corrosion layer width with time in μm yr As it can be seen in The objective of this work is to provide first experimental results on the dynamic corrosion of MSBNs. In particular, this work aims to shed a light about the corrosion behaviour of the steels usually employed on TES containers of CSP plants (Carbon Steel A516 and Stainless Steel 347) with solar salt doped with 1% of alumina nanoparticles under dynamic conditions. Presently, CS A516 is employed for the cold tank and SS347 is employed for the hot tank of the TES systems in CSP plants. The results were assessed by corrosion measurements (weight and thickness gain/losses), surface and degradation analysis and migration of elements from the container materials to the molten fluid by means of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR). The main objective of the present work is to know the compatibility of the container materials used in TES systems of CSP Plants with molten salt doped with alumina nanoparticles under real dynamic conditions. To achieve this goal, the following objectives should be reached: A better knowledge of the dynamic corrosion performance of these container materials during long exposure times (1000 h) under real conditions existing in CSP Plants. Understanding the effect of the presence of alumina nanoparticles on the dynamic corrosion mechanism Assessment for the selection of adequate container materials for molten salt based nanofluids used as thermal energy storage materials. The study of possible degradation of molten salt based nanofluid in contact with these container materials The synthesis of solar salt doped with alumina nanoparticles was performed in the laboratory following a procedure developed by the authors detailed in section The solar salt employed in the study consists of refined grade sodium nitrate and potassium nitrate supplied by SQM [ The source of alumina nanoparticles consisted of a commercial aqueous suspension Alumisol-10A, Kawaken Fine Chemicals, Co., with a concentration of 10 %w of hydrated γ-alumina nanoparticles of 10 nm width and 50 nm length. A quantity of 2.6 kg of solar salt nanofluid was prepared by the following procedure: The dried sodium and potassium nitrate were weighed and mixed to a proportion of 60:40% wt. A quantity of 2.574 kg of the previous mixture was dissolved in deionized water to a proportion of 50% wt. Then, 260 g of Alumisol-10A were added to the solution under stirring in order to achieve the desired alumina concentration (1% wt.). The water was then removed by heating at 100 °C in Pyrex trays (250 × 320 × 65 mm) inside an oven. The dried material was scratched from the Pyrex trays and stored into a dried cabinet until the dynamic corrosion test was performed. The steels tested in this work (CS A516 and SS347) were provided by Masteel [ The samples were prepared by cutting a 3 mm thick sheet of the mentioned materials to the required dimensions (25 mm × 10 mm x 3 mm). A hole was bored at the edge of each specimen to hang the probe in the holder. The samples were polished using an abrasive paper to remove any existing oxide layer before the corrosion test and degreased with ketone and ethanol. Before starting the corrosion test, the dimensions of the samples were measured using a calliper and were weighed with a scale (Sartorius mod. ENTRIS224i-1S, precision of ±0.0001 g). An autoclave was used to make the corrosion tests. Six samples were placed in a holder specifically designed for the test, which was immersed into the autoclave. A stirrer was used in order to homogenize the test conditions and a thermocouple was also integrated in the system for a proper control of the temperature in the reactor. An image of the main autoclave body is shown on The stirrer was placed at the end of a hollow tube, employed to cool the stirrer down with water during operation. The sample holder ( Previously to conduct the corrosion test, it is required to determine the adequate fluid velocity. To ensure that the corrosion conditions were representative of the current CSP plants, the fluid velocity in areas near to pipe bends and valves were taken as a reference. These lie in the range of 0.2–0.5 m s Higher fluid velocities than 0.3 m s To begin with the corrosion test, three samples of each material were hanged on the holder outside the autoclave. The synthesized nanofluid (2.6 kg) was subsequently introduced inside the autoclave and the temperature was raised until it was completely melted (over 220 °C). Then, the lid with the stirrer and the holder (one piece) was placed on the top of the autoclave and consequently, the samples were put in contact with the molten salt. The stirrer was turned on to provide the desired fluid velocity. Since this moment, the temperature was slowly raised to 385 °C in order to set the temperature at this exact value with small oscillations (±2 °C). It is important to notice that the maximum working temperature of the autoclave was 400 °C. Once the target temperature was reached, the corrosion test started. It is worth mentioning that no fresh nanofluid was added during the 1000 h of test. After each testing period (200 h, 600 h, 1000 h), one sample of each material was removed from the autoclave. To do it, the temperature was decreased to 250 °C (liquid state), the stirrer was stopped, and the lid was lifted up. A nanofluid aliquot was also extracted from the autoclave. Then, the autoclave was closed again to continue the experiment with the remaining samples, setting up the same conditions as before (385 °C, 0.3 m s The samples collected from the autoclave after different test-times (200 h, 600 h and 1000 h) were washed in boiling water to remove the solid material on their surface. Their size and weight were measured according to the same procedure used for the initial samples. They were subsequently stored under dry conditions in a desiccator. The samples were then prepared for SEM characterization: they were immersed in a polymer resin prepared by mixing KEM 90 Harz resin and KEM 90 Harter catalyst, commercial products supplied by ATM Advanced Materialograpy [ The oxidation/corrosion layer of the samples was analysed and its thickness measured by means of a Quanta 200 FEG SEM operated in high vacuum mode at 30 kV equipped with a backscattered electron detector. EDX analyses were carried out to obtain the chemical composition maps. Considering that the thickness of the layer is not regular, 200 measurements were taken along all the perimeter of the sample cross section and average values are presented. In order to determine the changes occurred in the nanofluid, the XRD technique was used. A Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer was used, equipped with a High-Resolution Energy-Dispersive Detector from Bruker [ To identify any possible salt degradation or contamination during the corrosion test, FTIR technique was employed. For this purpose, a PerkinElmer FTIR Spectrum 400 DTGS spectrophotometer was used.  In the case of the steel CS A516, the weight grows continuously during the whole test ( In order to compare the results obtained in this corrosion test for CS A516 with those obtained by other authors, a comparative graphic is shown in Regarding the other steel SS347, the weight gain was very low (0.0276 mg cm The corrosion layer formed onto the CS A516 sample surface can be clearly observed by SEM on all the samples (200 h, 600 h and 1000 h). An example of the layer formed after 1000 h of exposure is presented on The thickness measurements carried out on the SEM analysis render the average results included on The growth of the corrosion layer on a SS A304 in contact with a molten carbonate eutectic mixture (42.7% Li Eq. The results of the experiment for CS A516 were mathematically treated using a linear regression model. The equation and Pearson coefficient are shown in  In static conditions, Ruiz- Cabañas et al. [ In this work, high purity solar salt with low chloride content was used. The corrosion rate can be compared to the values obtained by Prieto et al. [ Other corrosion experiment was performed by Bradshaw et al. [ The only experiment performed in dynamic conditions was carried out at much higher temperature (500 °C) [ No passivation was found in this experiment, as the corrosion rate keeps constant with time during 1000 h (approx. 100 μm yr The corrosion rate for CS A516 resulted to be 94.8 μm yr In order to gain some insights into the mechanism of corrosion of SS347 the elemental analysis as well as SEM imaging of the cross-section were performed –( The material SS347 is recommended for long term service in these conditions: dynamic regimen, 385 °C, refined grade solar salt, due to the extremely low corrosion rate, in the order of 0.2 mg cm The CS A516 samples were characterized by XRD analysis ( Regarding SS347 samples, the corrosion layer width is lower than 2 μm. For this reason, the only signals detected by XRD ( The nanofluid was analysed by FTIR before and after performing the corrosion test. No degradation of the nanofluid was observed ( As it was stated in the introduction of this paper, there are very few studies concerning the corrosion of container materials in contact with MSBNFs. The presence of nanoparticles in the molten salt will have an influence on the corrosion performance. In this paper, the presence of alumina nanoparticles has shown to be a protective influence. However, it is not well known how this passivation takes place. In the following paragraphs, a review of the literature regarding the different variables affecting the corrosion performance of steels in contact with molten nitrate salts is presented. Results obtained in this paper are discussed, taking into account these corrosion studies. Concerning corrosion in molten nitrate salts, the corrosion mechanism, proposed by Fernandez et al. [ This author [ This corrosion mechanism was confirmed by Federsel et al. [ Thus, increasing the NO Decomposition of nitrate salts was proven by the loss of weight due to the evolution of NO and NO Moreover, the dissolved oxygen can be directly reduced to O Nevertheless, the presence of an air atmosphere in contact with the molten nitrate salts will increase the corrosion of the container materials. The combination of solvated O The corrosiveness of chloride (Cl Chlorine can migrate through the oxide scale, breaking the pores and reacts directly with the metal surface to produce more metal chlorides. The combination of Cl In this work, refined grade solar salt with low chloride content (less than 0.1% wt.) is used. However, taking into account that the experiment was performed in contact with air, the discussion of the previous paragraphs should be taken into account. Stainless steels containing chromium show better performance against chloride and chlorine attack. This has been proven by Dorcheh et al. [ In this experiment, a protective layer of Fe-Cr-Ni prevents the material SS347 from further corrosion. The presence of water is unavoidable in large scale molten salt-based TES systems for CSP. Humidity will play a crucial role on the corrosivity of the molten salt. Fernández et al. [ The presence of water is specially significative in the case of HITEC XL, where calcium nitrate normally appears as Ca(NO The addition of nanoparticles to the molten nitrate salt has been proposed by many authors to increase its specific heat capacity and, in this way, reduce the quantity of TES material required in CSP Plants and therefore the investment cost [ Alumina coatings have been reported for corrosion protection by several authors. Gómez-Vidal et al. [ This work represents the first dynamic corrosion tests for molten salts based nanofluids. A corrosion test under dynamic conditions on common container materials used in TES systems for CSP Plants, CSA516 and SS347, was successfully performed with molten solar salt doped with alumina nanoparticles. The operating conditions of the test (385 °C, linear velocity near the samples 0.3 m s CS A516 showed a continuous growth of the corrosion layer at 94.8 μm yr Unexpectedly, the presence of alumina nanoparticles within the solar salt have a protective influence on the corrosion behaviour of CS A516. Alumina compounds were found in the corrosion layer for this material. However, the mechanism of protection is still not well known. It is possible that alumina nanoparticles improve the adherence of the oxide layer to the metal surface. Regarding SS347, this material is recommended for long term service at 386 °C under dynamic conditions according to Cabeza et al. classification ( The corrosion performance of container materials is a key factor that has to be addressed in the construction of new CSP Plants with TES systems. Many factors affect corrosion: the presence of chlorides in the molten salt (purity grade), molten salt in contact with inert or air atmosphere, dynamic or static conditions, composition of steel (chromium concentration), temperature, between others. In the last years, nanoparticle addition has been proposed for the enhancement of the thermophysical properties of the molten salt. The obtained results demonstrate the importance of corrosion aspects of molten salts based nanofluids and must be taken into account when addressing their feasibility for TES application at Concentrated Solar Power plants. For the future works longer exposure time tests under dynamic conditions are recommended in order to check if a protective passivation layer is formed at times higher than 1000 h in the presence of alumina nanoparticles. The authors show gratitude to the