Purpose: To evaluate the end results of arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of tibial plateau fractures in patients older than 55 years of age. Type of Study: Case series. Methods: Over a 5-year period, 201 consecutive patients presented with tibial plateau fracture; 131 of these patients were treated with arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of the tibial plateau. Inclusion in the retrospective analysis was limited to those patients older than 55 years at the time of injury and those who were available for follow-up at the time of the study. Thirty patients met these criteria. Results: Secondary displacement occurred in 9 patients (30%) within 12 weeks after surgery. After a median follow-up of 3 years, 24 of 30 patients (80%) had an excellent or good clinical result according to the modified Rasmussen criteria. There was no difference in clinical outcome between the patients with or without secondary displacement of the fracture. Conclusions: Given the good clinical results, arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis has been shown to be highly efficient in the treatment of tibial plateau fractures in the elderly.
                  Arthroscopy: The Journal of Arthroscopic and Related Surgery, Vol 17, No 8 (October), 2001: pp 826–831The goals of treatment for tibial plateau fractures are restoration of joint congruity, restoration of normal alignment, stabilization of the joint, and prevention of post-traumatic osteoarthrosis. Previous studies attribute important advantages to arthroscopically assisted minimal osteosynthesis. These studies claim that, in experienced hands, the arthroscopic procedure is swift and safe with little chance of complications such as wound infections or skin necrosis. In our clinic, we prefer to perform arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis in elderly patients. This retrospective study was undertaken to analyze the end results of our policy and see whether arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of proximal tibial plateau fractures in patients older than 55 years is a safe and efficient mode of treatment. Because collapse of the tibial plateau following osteosynthesis is a frequently observed complication, another concern was to assess the incidence of secondary displacement and to analyze etiologic factors contributing to the occurrence of secondary displacement. In the period from 1992 to 1996, a total of 201 consecutive patients presented with a tibial plateau fracture at the traumatology department of our hospital. Of those patients, 131 were treated with arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of the tibial plateau. Inclusion in the retrospective analyses was limited to those patients treated arthroscopically who were older than 55 years at the time of injury. Thirty of 201 patients (15%), 27 women and 3 men, with a mean age of 72 years (range, 57 to 92 years) were eligible for the study. Either an accidental fall or a traffic accident caused the injuries. One patient injured her knee while skiing. The diagnosis was made on the basis of the medical history, physical examination, and standard radiographs. One patient suffered a grade I open fracture. Computed tomography scanning with 3-dimensional reconstruction was performed in all 30 patients to determine the exact location of the impacted part of the tibial plateau, the extent of comminution, and the number of fracture fragments. Fractures were classified according to Schatzker et al. While the patients were under anesthesia, the knee was cautiously tested preoperatively to assess stability of the knee joint. It appeared that instability of the knee was present in 21 of 30 patients, suggesting either an unstable fracture or ligamentous injury. Follow-up was performed by using the modified Rasmussen clinical and radiologic criteria. In our hospital, the treatment of choice for all tibial plateau fractures is arthroscopically assisted reduction and minimal osteosynthesis. Also patients with nondisplaced fractures but with clear valgus or varus instability are operated on in order to restore stability and allow early rehabilitation. This means that a patient with a good radiologic score on preoperative radiographs (n = 4) may still be eligible for surgery. In our opinion, conservative treatment should be reserved for the very few cases in which there is a nondisplaced fracture without instability of the knee and without hemarthrosis. When the exact location of the impacted part of the tibial plateau was confirmed by arthroscopic inspection, an incision under the joint was made to give access to the underlying cortex. Fenestration of the tibial condyle allowed access to the impacted fragments. The impacted fragments were then pushed up and reduced to achieve congruity of the joint surface. Arthroscopic inspection of the tibial plateau ensured alignment of the chondral tissue. The defect in the proximal tibia was filled with a bone plug from the pelvic crest in 4 patients. In 8 patients older than 75 years, the gap was filled with palacos (methyl methacrylate), which has the advantage of enabling the elderly patient to moblize within a week after surgery. If it was estimated that a small defect was present, no bone substitution was used (n = 18). Finally, fixation with cancellous lag screws or, when there was insufficient support from the cortex, a buttress plate and screws, was accomplished according to the AO principles (Fig 1). Radiologic assessment was done preoperatively, within 5 days postoperatively, and every 4 weeks until full weight bearing was achieved. The final clinical and radiologic evaluation of the reconstructed tibial plateau took place after a median follow-up period of 3 years (range, 2 to 5 years). By using the Fisher Exact test, we examined whether or not the use of bone substitution had an effect on the incidence of secondary displacement. Furthermore, a difference in the clinical Rasmussen score of patients with and without secondary displacement of the reconstructed tibial plateau was tested using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test; The average hospital stay was 20 days (range, 7 to 58 days), and the average time to full weight bearing was 9 weeks (range, 2 to 16 weeks). Arthroscopic inspection revealed concomitant pathology of menisci (n = 12), collateral ligaments (n = 2), or cruciate ligaments (n = 2) in 14 (46%) patients. Except for 1 wound infection that was treated with conservative measures, no serious postoperative complications were recorded. In particular, compartment syndrome of the leg, a serious complication after irrigating the knee joint during arthroscopy, did not occur. Within 5 days postoperatively, standard radiographs showed 6 excellent, 13 good, 9 fair, and 2 poor radiologic results (Table 4). Secondary displacement occurred in 9 of 30 patients (30%) within an average time of 9 weeks postoperatively (range, 2 to 12 weeks). Interestingly, secondary displacement was observed in 1 of 12 (8%) patients who were treated with bone substitution. In patients in whom we applied neither bone cement nor a bone graft, secondary displacement occurred in 8 of 18 patients (44%). This difference was statistically significant ( At the time of surgery, 16 patients suffered from pre-existing mild to moderate osteoarthrosis. Two patients were classified as having severe osteoarthrosis, which means that preoperative radiographs showed marked joint space narrowing with severe subchondral sclerosis or one of the other distinctive features described in The outcome of the final clinical evaluation was 12 excellent, 12 good, 3 fair, and 3 poor results. Thus, a good or excellent clinical result was achieved in 24 of 30 patients (80%). Furthermore, the median clinical Rasmussen score of patients without secondary displacement was 9.0 (P To our knowledge, this is the first study dealing exclusively with tibial plateau fractures in patients older than 55 years of age treated arthroscopically. A good or excellent clinical result was achieved in 24 of 30 patients (80%). These results are in accordance with earlier results reported on open reconstruction of the tibial plateau in patients of the same age group (71%). Secondary displacement and breaking out of implants frequently occurs after reduction and fixation of a fracture in osteoporotic bone. The philosophy behind arthroscopic knee surgery is prevention of additional surgical trauma to the knee joint by using a minimally invasive approach. As a result, the incidence of postoperative infection decreases and prolonged immobilization is avoided. In our patients, there were no serious infections. Another advantage of arthroscopic surgery is a clear visualization of concurrent injury to menisci, chondral tissue, and ligaments. Based on this observational study and the good functional results we achieved without suffering serious complications, arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis has been shown to be highly efficient for tibial plateau fractures in the elderly. 