Interaction mechanisms of flotation reagents including pyrogallic acid (pyGA), GA and tannic acid (TA) adsorption onto fluorite (1 0 0) and calcite (1 0 4) surfaces were investigated by first-principles calculations, molecular mechanics (MM) and molecular dynamics (MD) approaches under vacuum phases to understand the spatial effects of molecules. First-principles calculations indicated that GA/pyGA could more strongly adsorb onto the fluorite surface than onto the calcite surface, but MM and MD results indicated TA tended to adsorb onto the calcite surface rather than the fluorite surface. These results were consistent with reported flotation results. Further analysis showed that the interaction difference was ascribed to the different balance of the corresponding chemical and van der Waals forces on different mineral surfaces.Gallic acid (GA, 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid) is commonly the hydrolysis product of tannic acid (TA) and tannins ( In this communication, multiscale theoretical calculations under the vacuum phase have been adopted to investigate the interaction mechanisms of GA-bearing reagents with fluorite and calcite surfaces, focusing on the spatial effects of GA-bearing reagents. Small molecules in an implicit solvation model were pre-optimized by using the quantum chemistry software package (More details can be found in the supportting materials). Fluorite (1 0 0) and calcite (1 0 4) surfaces were investigated as the common exposed surface ( First-principles calculations were performed by using the CASTEP code with the PBE (Perdew Burke Ernzerhof) functional within the generalized gradient approximation to obtain the optimized molecular and surface/interface structures ( Bulk water molecules and other possible solution species, i.e. CO Mineral surfaces were fully fixed as a perfect substrate without relaxation. The empirical atomic partial charges method of Gasteiger–Marsili was adopted to equilibrate the charges of the system ( Solution species analysis of GA at the whole range of pH (  The insets of (a) GA@calcite, (b) GA@fluorite, (c) pyGA@calcite and (d) pyGA@fluorite in Adsorption energy is an effective indicator of the adsorption strength for a given molecule on a given surface. Here, the adsorption energies of GA  In addition, based on the MM calculations, the total adsorption energy of TA on calcite possesses a more negative value (−722.0 Kcal/mol) than on the fluorite surface (−391.0 Kcal/mol), with corresponding average adsorption energies of −80.2 and −78.2 kcal/mol, respectively. After MD equilibrium, the calculated adsorption energies of TA on calcite and fluorite are −1140.9 Kcal/mol and −577.9 respectively. Both energies are lower than results at 0 ns due to the long equilibrium time, resulting in a stable structure. The average adsorption energy of TA (−76.06 Kcal/mol) on the calcite surface is also more negative than that (−72.24 Kcal/mol) on the fluorite surface. It should be mentioned that GA can bond with the surface calcium atom, leading to the direct adsorption of molecules on calcium bearing mineral surfaces. Nevertheless, GA groups in the TA molecule are constructed on the bone of the big molecule, which has largely limited the adsorption of these groups. The repulsive vdW force between the surface and the TA can affect the adsorption of the big molecule. Based on these conclusions, the reported experimental results can be qualitatively explained ( First-principles calculations have revealed that GA  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 