The hydrogen absorption behavior of V+80wt.% LaNi5 composite, LaNi5 and V has been investigated. The LaNi5–V composite was prepared by high energy ball-milling technique using high pure vanadium and LaNi5 powder. Lattice expansion of the composite has been observed in X-ray analysis which indicates the solid solution formation. Presence of free V and traces of V2O5 phase were also observed in the composite. The hydrogen absorption capacity and absorption kinetics of the composite showed improvement as compared to LaNi5. The improved kinetics of the composite has been co-related to the change in lattices parameter, Fermi energy level and catalytic property of vanadium. Integrity of the composite has found to be effective even after 20 numbers of hydriding and dehydriding cycles due to the presence of vanadium.Search of suitable alternative and eco-friendly energy carrier is an essence to overcome the depleting conventional energy sources, manage the global warming, control the nuclear disaster and meeting the continuously increasing demands of energy supply. In this regard most extensively discussed energy carrier is hydrogen LaNi Four point probe method was used in the present investigation to measure the conductivity. In this method four high conducting wires are connected to individual copper terminal blocks. The two outer leads are connected to a precision current source and the two inner leads are used to measure the voltage drop. The sample (composite, LaNi A schematic block diagram of the hydrogen charging apparatus used in the present study is described somewhere else The scanning electron micrograph of as prepared powder composite has been shown in The instantaneous thermogravimetric (% wt. gain) data of all the samples (composite LaNi The enhanced absorption kinetics could be explained on the basis of decreased Fermi energy level of composite. Electrical conductivity of composite, LaNi The present results can also be explained on the basis of the theory given in the open literature V–80 The authors record their sincere appreciation of Dr. Anamika Singh, Research Associate, Department of Biotechnology, Government of India for her technical assistance during the data analysis. The appreciation is also extended to Shri. Ravidra Hankare of Materials Science Division, BARC for his help in vacuum arc melting.