Prediction of the terminal velocity of solid spheres falling through stagnant pseudoplastic fluids is required in several applications like oil well drilling, geothermal drilling, transportation of non-Newtonian slurries and mineral processing. Prior attempts utilized various Newtonian correlations to predict the drag coefficient and from this the terminal velocity with varying degrees of success. We report here carefully derived experimental data for solid spheres falling through non-Newtonian liquids and present them together with measurements reported in the literature, for a total of 80 pairs of Re–C
                     D, and show that the data fall along the same curve. Through nonlinear regression, an equation is derived, similar to the most accurate, simple, five-constant equation proposed for Newtonian liquids, which has not yet been tested for non-Newtonian liquids. The predictions compare favorably with the measurements both for the proposed equation and for the Newtonian equation. With a combination of non-Newtonian data with Newtonian data, from this work and work from other investigators, giving a database of 148 pairs, an improved equation is derived. Analysis of the predictions shows that the Newtonian equation describes extremely well the Newtonian data and furthermore it could be used with good engineering accuracy to predict the terminal velocity of solid spheres falling through stagnant non-Newtonian liquids.Knowledge of the terminal velocity of solids falling in liquids is required in many industrial applications. Typical examples include hydraulic transport slurry systems for coal and ore transportation, thickeners, mineral processing, solid–liquid mixing, fluidization equipment, drilling for oil and gas, geothermal drilling. In many of these processes, it is the ‘hindered’ falling velocity that is of interest, hindered by the presence of walls or by other particles (Chhabra The normal procedure for estimating the free falling velocity is through the use of the drag coefficient, The characteristic area of the particle is given by, Combining Eqs. Dimensional analysis for falling spheres in Newtonian liquids shows that the drag coefficient is a function of the Reynolds number, There have been several attempts to relate the drag coefficient to the Reynolds number. The most comprehensive equation set for predicting A simpler correlation has been proposed by Heider and Levenspiel In contrast to the vast work on Newtonian fluids, there is less work for the terminal velocity of solid spheres falling through non-Newtonian fluids. Processes of interest include drilling applications, hydraulic fracturing, hydraulic conveying of non-Newtonian slurries, mineral processing, waste water processing. Major hurdle with the non-Newtonian fluids is defining the proper rheology of the fluid for the appropriate shear rate. Most of the work has covered shear thinning fluids described by the power law equation for the shear rate–shear stress relationship, although there is work covering also Bingham plastics (Valentik and Whitmore The most common approach taken by previous investigators for predicting the terminal velocity is through the use of ‘standard’ Newtonian relationships ( For power law fluids, the generalized Reynolds number is defined as Both of these stem from the definition of the apparent viscosity, To describe the non-Newtonian data, various Newtonian fluid correlations have been proposed (Machac et al. The data of Lali et al. Upon testing various correlations proposed either for Newtonian or for non-Newtonian fluids, Machac et al. Miura et al. Pinelli and Magelli From the above discussion, it is apparent that the majority of the investigators conclude that the use of Newtonian correlations for non-Newtonian fluids is justified, with an engineering accuracy, provided that the apparent viscosity is used. However, a single equation yielding accurate results is not available for non-Newtonian fluids, thus making it difficult to have consistent predictions of the drag coefficient. In Kelessidis The comparison showed also that the RMS error on In this work, we present additional experimental data for the terminal velocity of spheres falling through stagnant non-Newtonian and Newtonian liquids, which enhance our database, propose a new correlation and test the validity of Eq. Data has been collected for the falling velocities of single spheres in Newtonian and non-Newtonian liquids using glass beads of different diameters, steel balls and lead balls. The properties and diameters of the spheres are shown in The liquids used were water (WA), glycerol (GL, 86–88%, provided by Riedel-deHaen), with a listed and measured viscosity of 135 cp and aqueous solutions of Carboxy Methyl Cellulose (CMC) (scientific grade, average molecular weight ∼250,000; degree of substitution 1.2; provided by Aldrich Chemicals) in tap water of 0.7% (CM1), 0.9% (CM2) and 1.1% (CM3) w/v concentrations. The solutions were prepared in batches of about 9 l by adding the necessary amounts of CMC in tap water, stirring continuously for 2 h and letting it age for 24 h. The solution was agitated prior to each set of measurements and a small sample was taken after the experiments to determine the rheological properties. The rheograms of the test fluids were derived using a coaxial rotating viscometer (Grace M3500a) with a continuously varying rotational speed of 0.01–600 rpm, equipped with a microprocessor and connected directly to a personal computer for further data analysis and data storage. The liquid density is the water density at the experiment temperature. All measurements were done at room temperature of 21 °C. The accuracy of the viscometer was checked using a calibrated Newtonian fluid (from Brookfield). The measured viscosity of a 95 cp fluid was 92.7 cp (difference –2.3%) while that of a 493 cp fluid was 481.7 cp (difference —2.4%). The rheograms of the CMC solutions are shown in The terminal velocity data was obtained in a cylindrical column of length of 1 m and a diameter of 0.1 m filled with the appropriate liquid. The particles were carefully dropped, using tweezers, in the center of the column and just below the liquid surface. The time of travel, From the measurements, we compute an average velocity and a standard deviation for each combination sphere solution. Using the average velocities so determined and the solid–liquid properties, we estimate the parameters of interest, We note the good repeatability of the measurements judged from the values of the standard deviation of the terminal velocity which ranges from a low of around 0.5% to a high of around 3%, shown in We plot the non-Newtonian data for The predictions of This equation is also plotted in We compute the RMS error on We see that the indicators are very similar for both equations. Hence, both correlations can predict with good accuracy the drag coefficient of spheres falling through non-Newtonian liquids and predictions compare well with data of this work as well as data from other investigators. In Most of the Newtonian data fall on or very near the curve of Eq. Fitting all the available Newtonian and non-Newtonian data, a total of 148 pairs, in the form of Eq. In view of the comparison of these indicators and the good predictions from Eq. The terminal velocity of solid spheres falling through stagnant non-Newtonian shear thinning fluids can be predicted with engineering accuracy from various proposed correlations for Newtonian fluids. This can be achieved provided the apparent viscosity of the fluid is used, evaluated at a shear rate given as the ratio of the falling velocity to the sphere diameter. From the many simpler correlations (with respect to the cumbersome correlation set of Clift et al. We gathered experimental data for the terminal velocity of solid spheres (glass beads, steel and lead balls) falling through Newtonian and shear thinning non-Newtonian fluids. Our experimental data were compared to experimental data from other investigators, derived for both Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, and yielded very similar An equation in the form of Eq. Comparison of non-Newtonian data with Newtonian data on a Although this is a slight improvement, the fact that Eq. characteristic area of solid particle (L drag coefficient (–) drag coefficient predicted by Ref. drag coefficient predicted by other correlations (–) particle diameter (L) diameter of test column (L) kinetic energy per unit volume (M/LT force on solid particle (ML/T acceleration of gravity (L/T consistency index of fluid (M/LT length of measurement column (L) flow behavior index (–) number of samples (–) Reynolds number based on particle diameter, generalized Reynolds number, generalized Reynolds for Bingham plastic, time travel of sphere (T) solid terminal velocity (L/T) solid terminal velocity predicted by correlations from Ref. solid terminal velocity predicted by other correlations (L/T) density difference, ( solid density (M/L liquid density (M/L shear stress (M/LT shear rate (T liquid viscosity (M/LT) apparent liquid viscosity (M/LT) liquid plastic viscosity (M/LT) yield stress (M/LT Special thanks to Professor Y. Kawase and Professor F. Magelli for the kind provision of their experimental data in the proper form for the analysis given in this paper.