Several stable iron-containing spinel oxides with the composition CuFe2O4 or FeCr2O4 were prepared by different methods including thermal nitrate decomposition, combustion synthesis, and mechano-chemical synthesis. Materials were compared to commercially available spinels produced by conventional ceramic route with respect to their structural properties and catalytic activity. Phase compositions and microstructures of the catalysts were studied in detail. The catalysts were tested in the Friedel–Crafts alkylation of various aromatic compounds with different alkyl halides as alkylating agents. Microstructural properties (microstrains) of the synthesized binary oxides have been identified as a reason for the increased reactivity. Even at low reaction temperatures of 50–70°C catalysts maintained their high activity resulting in TOFs of up to 3000h−1 and excellent selectivity with total heterogeneous behavior in catalysis.The Friedel–Crafts alkylation is a well-known widely-used organic reaction for C For the synthesis of oxidic materials like spinels several methods are known from the literature. Among these the ceramic route as high temperature reaction between solids (>1000 This work is focused on the comparison of the activity and structural properties of oxidic materials prepared by different synthetic procedures: namely, ceramic route (CR), thermal nitrate decomposition in a muffle furnace (MF), combustion synthesis (CS1), scaled-up combustion synthesis (CS10), and mechano-chemical synthesis (MS). The Friedel–Crafts alkylation is used as a model reaction proving the formation of defects due to their action as Lewis acidic sites. Especially from combustion synthesis and mechano-chemical synthesis highly defective materials and therefore active catalysts are expected. Furthermore, it is anticipated that the spinel phases can be synthesized in a faster reaction and/or at lower reaction temperatures. Reagents, solvents, and metal precursors were purchased from commercial suppliers (Sigma–Aldrich, Merck) and were employed without further purification. Weights of metal precursors used for catalyst preparation were corrected by means of the purity of the respective metal salts. Commercially available spinels (denoted as CA) were purchased from Ferro GmbH and Sigma–Aldrich. After their synthesis catalysts were ground to free-flowing powders prior to application. Thermal nitrate decomposition was carried out with the metal nitrates in molar ratio 1:2 for achieving ḾḾ́ Glycine and metal nitrates were used as fuel and oxidant, respectively. Glycine and nitrate were set to a 1:1 molar ratio. The respective amount of metal salts for 1 The procedure was scaled up to 10 The materials were synthesized in a ball mill “Pulverisette 7 classic line” (Fritsch GmbH) by using the respective oxides FeO and Cr Thermogravimetric analyses were carried out using a Shimadzu DTG 60 with platinum crucible under flowing air atmosphere of 30 Reactions were carried out in batch mode in a round bottom flask equipped with reflux condenser connected to a washing flask for trapping the evolved HCl gas. CuFe The reusability of the catalysts was tested with FeCr Analysis of the reaction mixtures was carried out using a GC-FID (HP 6890) with The combustion synthesis is much faster than thermal nitrate decomposition. After gel formation the reaction is finished within seconds (as shown in The TGA/DTA investigations of the catalysts (cf. X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) was used for investigation of the phase composition (cf. In Fe-containing FeCr The material FeCr The Friedel–Crafts alkylation of A blank test with the most reactive system The reactions proceeded very fast and with the more active catalysts they are completed within 10 The alkylation of In the alkylating reaction with cyclohexyl chloride only FeCr The lower reactivity of cyclohexyl chloride can be checked by using benzyl chloride and cyclohexyl chloride as alkylating agents in a parallel reaction. The results are summarized in In For all substrates the alkylation with benzyl chloride can be carried out successfully. The selectivity to monoalkylated products is in the same range as observed for the reaction with Besides the pure activity of the catalysts, the heterogeneity of the reaction is a very important factor. Therefore, heterogeneity tests were carried out with the model reaction system In For investigation of important parameters on the conversion of benzyl chloride, reaction time, reaction temperature, and catalyst amount were varied using 2  In The reusability of the catalysts was tested with FeCr Several very active iron containing binary oxides for the Friedel–Crafts alkylation have been synthesized by different synthetic routes. Differences in the catalytic activity of the materials obtained from the respective synthetic procedures were found. The amount of microstrains as a measure of the defect concentration is identified as the major characteristic parameter of the catalyst. Neither the crystallite or particle size nor the BET surfaces are responsible for the observed differences in the catalytic activity. Therefore, both the CS (combustion synthesis) and MS (mechano-chemical synthesis) methods are able to produce structures with significant increased numbers of defects than other synthetic routes. Thus, those procedures yield more active catalysts for the Friedel–Crafts alkylation. The combustion synthesized materials exhibited higher activity than the commercially available oxides, wherein the CS10 catalysts obtained from the scaled-up combustion synthesis revealed higher activity than the CS1-type. With respect to the achieved TOFs two rows of activity were found depending on the reaction temperature. For CuFe For carrying out the BET measurements and NMR spectroscopy the support of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.apcata.2012.07.025. The following are Supplementary data to this article: