Octahedral magnetite microcrystals were synthesized by a simple hydrothermal route. The morphology and structure of magnetite microoctahedrons were characterized by XRD, IR, SEM, EDS, TEM and ED. The results showed that the as-synthesized sample exhibits octahedral structures and the size ranges from 4 to 10 μm. It is suggested that the driving force for the anisotropic growth of magnetite octahedrons derives from the surface tension, the inherent crystal structure of magnetite and its chemical potential in concentrated NaOH solution. It is also found that the surfactant, NaOH concentration and reaction temperatures have great influence on the morphology and structure of the final sample. Magnetic measurements at room temperature indicate that the saturation magnetization and the coercive field of octahedral Fe3O4 are about 93.3 emu/g and 86 Oe, respectively.Magnetite (Fe Microscale inorganic materials with well-defined superstructures have attracted considerable attention for their structure characteristics endowing them with a wide range of potential applications. Great effort has also been made to explore excellent synthetic approaches in the field of these so-called sub- or micrometer-sized inorganic materials. However, there have been few reports on the synthesis of microstructural magnetic materials such as microspheres, although Li et al. have prepared single-crystal microspherical ferrites by simple solvothermal method For hydrothermal reactions, all the reagents were of analytical grade and used as received. In a typical synthesis process, 35 mL aqueous solution consisting of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and NaOH was prepared by dissolving CTAB (0.5 g) and NaOH (16 g) in de-ionized water. The resulting solution was stirred for 30–60 min. Subsequently, 5 mL aqueous solution consisting of 1.0 g (NH To reveal the crystalline structure of the black powders, XRD analysis was carried out on a Regaku D/max2500 diffractometer at a voltage of 40 kV and a current of 200 mA with Cu-Kα radiation ( The XRD pattern of the as-synthesized sample is shown in The SEM image in Further observation on the facet structure of the octahedrons was conducted by TEM and ED. The morphology of Fe At the same time, it is suggested that the driving force such as the surface tension, the inherent crystal structure of magnetite and its chemical potential in concentrated NaOH solution, should favor the anisotropic growth of magnetite octahedrons. For the reaction system in the presence of CTAB, the surface tension of solution is reduced due to the existence of surfactant, which lowers the energy needed for the formation of a new phase. From the view of kinetics of crystal growth, if the crystal adsorbs the surfactant on some area of its surface, the growth rate of the crystal in some certain direction will be confined. Therefore, the addition of CTAB can modify the growth kinetics of the growing crystal, which finally leads to anisotropic growth of the crystals A measurement of the magnetic properties of the sample at room temperature is presented in Soft-magnetic magnetite microcrystalline octahedrons with a size distribution from 4 to 10 μm have been synthesized through a simple hydrothermal method. The morphology of octahedron enclosed by {111} planes implies much faster growth rate along <001> than {111} directions during the formation of magnetite phase. It is suggested that the driving force for the anisotropic growth of magnetite octahedrons derives from the surface tension, the inherent crystal structure of magnetite and its chemical potential in concentrated NaOH solution. In addition, the suitable reaction temperature is important for the growth of octahedral magnetite. The saturation magnetization and the coercive field for magnetite microcrystalline octahedrons are about 93.3 emu/g and 86 Oe at room temperature, respectively. We appreciate the financial support of the National High Technical Research and Development Program of China (No 2003AA305890).