Thoron (220Rn) has been identified as a possible health concern in specific places such as monazite processing plants and (rare-earth) mines. The short half-life of thoron (55.8 s) makes thoron calibration sources and thoron chambers less common than the corresponding radon (222Rn) ones. In this paper an inexpensive and straight forward but accurate thoron source is described that can easily be set up in typical nuclear environmental laboratories. The source of thoron is a solution of Th(NO3)4 in water. Thoron is extracted by bubbling air through the solution using an aerator. The gamma rays from the solution are measured at the same time. The thoron activity concentration in the exit stream follows from the reduction in the intensity of the gamma rays from the progeny of thoron over time.In this paper we will term One of the major difficulties in studying thoron concentrations and exhalation rates is the lack of thoron chambers and reliable standard sources compared to the many radon chambers that exist around the world. Specialised standards such as the one developed by PTB ( In this article, an inexpensive and straight forward method is described that can be used as a reliable thoron source. The method is a variant of the ideas applied in the PTB method and the radon in water standard developed by NIST ( Many commonly used radon detectors such as most alpha track devices, cannot distinguish between thoron and radon. The RAD7 monitor is one of the most widely used continuous radon monitors that can differentiate between thoron and radon. The detector contains a surface barrier detector that measures radon and thoron by detecting the energy of the alpha particles from The interest in thoron has necessitated the need for a standard thoron source or thoron chambers to calibrate detectors. Solid thoron sources have the same disadvantage as solid radon sources: the release depends on the temperature and pressure in an undetermined and irreducible way or may just be low ( By removing Thoron from the solution, the intensity ratio is affected between gamma rays emitted in the decay of  To produce a well characterised source, 10.2 ± 0.14 g of Th (NO This result implies that the sample bottle contains an activity of 331 ± 5 Bq. This value is reasonably close to the calculated value of about 354 Bq, but does not agree with that value. We do not have a reliable history of the salt and its purity. Therefore, Air was bubbled through the solution using the stainless steel aerator that is supplied as part of the radon in water accessory (RAD H Gamma-ray spectra were measured with a standard 7.5 cm × 7.5 cm NaI(Tl) detector(REXON) connected via a ScintiSPEC™ Multi Channel Analyser to a personal computer. The winTMCA ( No effort was made to reduce background radiation by shielding. The background was fairly constant and can be subtracted without the complications of a set-up with lead blocks. This was in the spirit of the suggested thoron source-simple, cost effective and fairly accurate. Note that the method described in this work does not require an efficiency calibration of the detector for the geometry used since we use the intensity ratios of gamma lines. There is also no need for any correction to take into account coincidence summing that is present in, for example, the 2614 keV line (  Spectra were collected for periods of one hour. The pumping was continued for more than two days and the count rates in the 2614 peak for later times are plotted in The calculation starts with the decay series (starting with thoron) in secular equilibrium with a given concentration at t = 0 after which the feeding from the thoron decay to The value of The thoron nuclei in the air stream leaving the bottle can be calculated as At the flow rate of 0.6 L per minute the activity concentration( As shown in We also studied the initial behaviour of the system. Given an initial activity value of 331 Bq in the bottle, this implies that there are about 331/λ ≈ 26 500 thoron atoms in the bottle. The equilibrium that is reached, where the source term is only around 50 Bq, implies only about 4000 thoron nuclei in the bottle. Therefore, the initial pumping should remove The large fraction of the thoron that is pumped out compared to the exhalation from solid sources (e.g. Wang et al. in ref 10) makes our system as depicted in We experimented with several pumping speeds and various aerators. In all cases the system worked well when a correction is made for the pump speed. A faster pumping speed did not significantly increase the percentage of thoron that was removed from the solution and led to a lower concentration in the exit stream since a similar number of thoron nuclei was removed but these nuclei would now occupy a larger volume. Measurements showed that pumping for about 12 h is enough to fix the source strength for the thoron that is left in the bottle. A simple, cost efficient thoron source based on air pumped through a solution of thorium nitrate in water has been developed. The simple and robust experimental set-up provides a thoron source with a high concentration and with good repeatability when compared to solid sources. The thoron that is removed from the solution by pumping is deduced from the activity of the thoron in the solution and the fraction of this thoron that decays in the solution by a straight forward gamma measurement of the thoron progeny. Funding from the