A novel carbon felt cathode coated with iron oxides has been prepared by Fe3+ electrodeposition. The deposited iron content was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence, the composition of iron oxides formed by X-ray diffraction and the morphology of deposits by scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Freshly prepared electrodes were used as air-diffusion cathodes in a stirred tank reactor with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode to degrade solutions of Malachite Green dye at pH3.0 by heterogeneous electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) processes. Oxidizing agents were hydroxyl radicals formed at the BDD surface from water oxidation and at the cathode surface or in the bulk from Fenton's reaction between deposited or leached Fe2+ and electrogenerated H2O2 in both treatments, along with the photo-oxidation by UVA light in heterogeneous PEF. The decolorization and mineralization of dye solutions were faster for the latter process due to the photolysis of Fe(III) complexes with initial oxalate and generated carboxylic acids. TOC decay always obeyed a pseudo-first-order kinetics. The increase in dye concentration decelerated the decolorization efficiency and mineralization rate, but enhanced the mineralization current efficiency. A test of 10 consecutive cycles of heterogeneous EF treatment of 50mgL−1 of Malachite Green at 21.7mAcm−2 showed a gradual loss of iron oxides from the cathode with decreasing dye mineralization rate. An improvement of the stability of the novel cathode is then necessary for its reuse with a better keeping of the oxidation power of heterogeneous EF and PEF treatments of organic pollutants in waters.Recently, there is a growing interest in the remediation of wastewaters contaminated with biorecalcitrant and/or toxic organics, like dyes, by advanced oxidation processes (AOPs). These methods include a large variety of environmentally friendly methods with the common feature of the in situ generation of hydroxyl radical ( The most common EAOP is anodic oxidation (AO), also known as electrochemical oxidation. In AO, an undivided cell is utilized with a high O The preferred anode for AO is the boron doped diamond (BDD) thin-film electrode, since it has much greater overvoltage for O Reaction Our laboratories are interested in the development of EAOPs like electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) based on the addition of a catalytic amount of Fe However, the formation of short-linear carboxylic acid as final products inhibits the mineralization process in homogeneous EF since they form Fe(III) complexes that are hardly destroyed by hydroxyl radicals A drawback of the homogeneous EF process is the need of the neutralization of the final treated solution, usually with formation of large amounts of iron sludge, whose disposal is expensive and difficult This paper presents the preparation of a novel carbon felt–iron oxide electrode by Fe Malachite Green (83% purity as oxalate salt, C The carbon felt–iron oxide electrodes were prepared by Fe  The solution pH was determined with a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. Prior to analysis, the samples withdrawn from treated solutions were neutralized to stop the degradation process and filtered with Whatman 0.45 The mineralization of Malachite Green solutions was followed from the abatement of their total organic carbon (TOC), measured with a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer. Aliquots of 50 The comparative oxidation power of heterogeneous EF and PEF processes was better explained from the mineralization current efficiency (MCE), estimated for each treated solution at a given electrolysis time The surface morphology of the bare carbon felt and the prepared carbon felt–iron oxide cathodes was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL-5400LV system. An accelerating voltage of 15 The electrodeposition of iron over the carbon felt material was firstly corroborated from XRF analysis. These measurements revealed the presence of about 1.525 The XRD patterns for the carbon felt–iron oxide cathode before and after its use in the heterogeneous EF treatment of 50 SEM analysis of the same fresh and used carbon felt–iron oxide electrodes was further made to study the morphological properties of the deposit. The elemental mapping profiles for Fe K To assess the H From the aforementioned findings, a The oxidative power of the heterogeneous EF and PEF methods, as well as the role of generated hydroxyl radicals and UVA light, was ascertained by studying the decolorization and mineralization of solutions with 50–150  The mineralization of the products formed during Malachite Green degradation in the above EAOPs was monitored from the normalized TOC abatement with electrolysis time and the results obtained are shown in On the other hand, the final electrolyzed solution of the 50 The exponential decay of normalized TOC for all the curves of The oxidation ability of the EAOPs was better clarified from the MCE values of the above trials calculated from Eq. Moreover, the MCE value for each treatment of The results obtained in this work evidence that the more powerful heterogeneous PEF process is able to yield an almost total mineralization with 98% TOC removal for a 50 The main operational cost of EAOPs is related to the electrical energy consumption. The energy consumption (EC) was then calculated for the more efficient PEF process as follows As can be seen in The above findings evidence the best viability of the degradation of more concentrated dye solutions by PEF. Although the mineralization takes place in smaller extent with increasing organic concentration, lower EC values are obtained due to the greater current efficiency. The stability and activity of iron oxides are key parameters for the reusability of coated carbon felt cathodes in heterogeneous EAOPs. XRF analysis of a cathode after 360 It has been shown the viability of carbon felt coated with iron oxides as air-diffusion cathode for the heterogeneous EF and PEF degradations of Malachite Green solutions at pH The authors are grateful to F.M. Rivas Esquivel for the XRD analysis, F. Espejel Ayala for the SEM–EDX technical assistance and F. López García for his collaboration in the illustration of this work. The authors acknowledge the financial support from