During shaft excavation, blast induced vibrations can cause micro-cracks in the fresh concrete lining and decrease its strength. The traditional method to reduce the vibration effect is to control the scale of blasting and apply temporary support to protect the fresh concrete. Recent research was conducted to study the effects of the blast induced vibration on the fresh concrete. Shaft sinking operations (drilling, blasting and concrete lining) were simulated in a laboratory model. Additives of triethanolamine – TEA (N(C2H4OH)3) and sodium chloride (NaCL) in varying proportions were added to the concrete lining to increase the early strength. Vibration was generated by small scale blasting. The experimental results show that the blast induced vibration has negative and positive effects on the strength of the fresh concrete depending on the curing time at blasting. Vibration can increase the strength within the first 1–2days. After that period, vibration can cause cracks in the fresh concrete and reduce the strength. Still later, it has no more effect. The time windows vary with the magnitude of vibration and the strength of the concrete at the time of blasting. It was also found that both additives increased the early strength of concrete lining and expanded the time windows. These results indicate that proper timing of blasting and use of additives can change the negative effect of the blast induced vibration into a positive effect and increase the strength of a concrete lining.Concrete is considered as one of the most important supporting materials and is broadly used in tunneling, mining and other construction industry for permanent support. The quality of concrete is vital to the safety of both workers and constructed structures. The concrete is expected to stand firm without failure until the end of its intended life. In some cases, shaft sinking for example, concrete lining takes place at very close proximity to the drilling and blasting site, and the newly cast concrete is subjected to the blast induced vibration. This often results in damage to the new concrete. The problem is more pronounced in excavating a deep shaft in a water-bearing stratum, where the blast induced vibration can damage the new concrete and cause water inflow. The Morocco Lajid shaft sinking ( In order to solve this type of problem, temporary support is often used to protect the fresh concrete. This helps to decrease the vibration of the concrete lining, but impedes the work progress and increases cost. There has been very limited research reported on the behavior of a fresh concrete lining subject to blast induced vibrations. This research is aimed at the fresh concrete behavior under the direct influence of blast induced vibration. The objectives were to increase the concrete strength by taking advantage of the positive effect of vibration and also to increase the time window. The intensity of vibration and use of additives to increase the early strength were considered. The simulation was conducted in the explosive laboratory of Shandong Science and Technology University, China. A simulation shaft ( The weight of explosive charge ( Vibration tests were conducted on concrete samples mounted on top of the lining of the simulation shaft. The samples were made of 15 All the concrete samples were cast with normal Portland cement (425#) at the same cement/water ratio (0.45) and the same ratio of cement to sand to aggregate (1:2:2.5). A total of four sets of samples were made: I with no additive, II with 0.05% TEA, III with 0.5% NaCL and 0.05% TEA, IV with 0.5% sodium lignosulfonate and sodium carbonate (NC). Some samples were not subjected to vibration test and their strength was used for comparison. Vibration tests were conducted on individual samples at various curing times. For all samples subjected to blast vibration tests, the UCS was tested at 28 days curing time. For samples with additives, vibration tests were only conducted at curing times of 8, 24 and 48 The vibration magnitude also had an effect on the 28 Concrete is a kind of mixture which includes aggregate, sand and cement. Sand and aggregate form the backbone of the concrete matrix. Cement and water react to bind the matrix together. Cement needs time to harden. Before that takes place, the cement grout can move easily from one place to another and vibration can help to increase compaction of aggregates and even the distribution of cement grout. Thus it will increase the ultimate strength of the concrete. With the increase of the curing time, as the cement gradually hardens and the basic structure is being formed, vibration may damage the cement bond and the structure, by inducing permanent fractures, thus decreasing the final strength of the concrete. This research studied the vibration effects by experiments using blast induced vibrations. It has clearly demonstrated three windows: Before the critical curing time (Window A), vibration played a positive role, increasing the ultimate strength of the fresh concrete. After the critical curing time but before the non-influence curing time (Window B), vibration played a negative role, reducing the ultimate strength. When the non-influence curing time was past (Window C), the concrete had essentially formed a solid structure, and vibration had little effect on the ultimate strength. (This may change if the vibration is excessively large). Both the critical curing time and non-influence curing time are expected to vary with the early strength of the concrete and the magnitude of vibration. The critical curing time from this study is 23 and 48 This study also showed that the two additives (TEA at 0.05% and NaCl at 0.5%) effectively increased the early strength of the fresh concrete and its ability to withstand blast induced vibration, thus increasing its ultimate strength. The additives have increased the critical curing time (i.e. expanded the positive effect time window). This feature is very useful in field construction. During shaft sinking, it requires a certain time to complete one round of excavation (drilling, blasting and mucking) and concrete erection. The expanded positive effect time window will give more time to allow the next round of blasting to be completed. It will help reduce or avoid blasting induced damage and even increase the concrete strength, thus changing the previous negative vibration effect into a positive effect. The authors would like to thank the whole staff of the explosive laboratory at Shandong Science and Technology University, China, especially Profs. Yumin Li and Congmou lin, their help made this research possible. Also, the authors deeply appreciate the time and effort put into the experimental part of this work by Prof. Qi huang.