The paper deals with and axial stress distribution (ASD) obtained from pull-out tests of strain gauged rockbolts in high strength rock media. For this purpose, an experimental research was conducted considering the only axial forces acting on fully grouted rockbolts (FGR). Strain gauges were used to observe the behavior of rockbolts and to determine the load transfer mechanism of the bolts to rock mass. In the test, five grout mixture having different properties was prepared and stress–strain mechanism of the bolt-grout interface was investigated for these conditions. ASD was demonstrated elastic load transfer behavior from the rockbolt to the outlying rock under the applied load (for each grout type) and stress concentration was rather a high level at 70 mm distance from rock surface. Axial stress curves drawing with the aid of strain readings were showed the regular distribution with increasing of grout stiffness. The test results of strain gauged rockbolts show that the shear stress distribution (SSD) is uniform and, the style of the distributions along the rockbolt was similar under various loading levels for all grout types. Shear stress was rather a small amount at the pulling end of rockbolt but it reached the peak after a short distance away from the pulling end of rockbolt and subsequent to peak value decayed rapidly with the load increase. The results were showed that strength properties of grout played an important role in SSD and ASD along the rockbolt. The increase in grout strength and rigidity made the stress distributions regular along the rockbolt.Bolting provides stability by increasing the anchorage capacity of rock mass at the confines of an underground excavation. Rockbolts can combine support effects (shotcrete, steel mesh-arches) with reinforcement effects (bolting). Their use is usually the unrivalled way of supplying stability to excavations in problematic rock formations, before final concrete lining. Rockbolts are widely used as the main support instrument to stabilize the decoupled rock blocks around tunnels, dams, mines, slopes and other engineering construction apropos of rock masses. Yet another duty of rockbolts is restraining the deformation therein the rock masses. It is important to understand how rockbolts behave in deformed rock masses to improve bolting design. This can be accomplished by studies (laboratory tests, numerical and analytical studies and field modeling) to be conducted by researchers. For a better understanding of rockbolt performance and interaction between rockbolts and rock mass, several studies have been carried out using laboratory and in-situ test results. A significant part of literature related rockbolts was focused on analytical methods and numerical analysis ( Taking account of softening, elastic and debonding rock zones,   The results of the field and laboratory tests conducted by various authors ( The performance of fully grouted rockbolts is understood quite well in a general sense, but it is not so clear how rockbolts behave in different grout media. The aim of this paper is to explain the axial and SSD behavior of FGR under axial load and different grout conditions. Unstable rock blocks and ground caused injuries-fatalities around openings continues to be a safety concern especially underground mines. For this reason, stability and design analyses should be conducted early in a mine. Strain gauged rockbolts using can contribute to solving such problems. Strain-stress values derived from close to underground openings by strain gauges will give design engineers a tool for the selection of support system for improving underground safety. By predicting the behavior of rockbolts in different grout media, economic and security problems can be avoided to the greatest extent possible. The monitoring of the axial force as a function of the distance to the loading point can be achieved by placing the strain gauges along the embedded length of the rockbolt. The data to be obtained in this way is very valuable in confirming analytical approaches ( The strain-gauged rockbolts having 12 mm diameter were embedded in boreholes having 24 mm diameter. A manual hydraulic pull test device with a capacity of 150 kN was used to load the strain gauged rockbolts. In order to compare five different grout types to each other, all pull out tests were carried out at the same loading rates. A very low loading rate was applied to obtain reliable data from strain gauges (1 mm/min). The pulling loads and strain values were computed by a computer controlled data logger (TDG AI8b) with eight channels ( The strain gauges were bonded to directly to the surface of rockbolts. Therefore, the strain experienced by the rockbolt was transferred directly to the strain gauge which responded with a linear change in electrical resistance. To measure these small changes in resistance, strain gauge configurations were based on the Quarter-Wheatstone bridge concept (Eq. A range of measures has been taken to reduce the effect of wiring. The length of the lead-wires used was kept constant for all strain gauges on the rockbolt and the wire lengths were chosen as short as possible. The pull-out tests were started after the data logger system reached thermal equilibrium. After the wire connections of the strain gauges were completed, the signals from the strain gauges were reset (pre-test) by the data logger software (TDG Coda). Four strain gauges were defencelessly mounted with equal distances along the length of the each rockbolt. The strain gauges were mounted 22, 74, 126 and 178 mm from the rock surface respectively ( The pull-out tests were conducted on strain-gauged rockbolts inserted into basalt blocks with different types of grouting mortars. Five types grout mixtures were prepared to examine the effect of grout strength on the stress distribution along the FGR. All mixture types were prepared with different mixture conditions for obtaining grouts having different strength properties. Grouts were made using different proportions of NPC 32.5 cement, NPC 42.5 cement, fly ash, silica fume and superplasticizer. The approximate mix proportions of grouts have been summarized in The casting work of the grout samples to be used in the double shear (τ Pull-out tests are one of the most practical methods to investigate the anchorage capacity of rockbolts. The analysis of the mechanic properties of rockbolts and its relationship with the outlying rock under the pull-out condition is significant for the research of rockbolt design and reinforcement quality. When the rockbolt is pulled, a shear stress develops and the transmission of force is from the rockbolt to grout material and then grout to rock mass. Through the pull-out test, the end of the rockbolt is exerted by a force Axial stress (σ According to The average bolt bond (shear) stress between the consecutive two strain gauges can be calculated by Eq. The basic parameter that determines the effectiveness of a rockbolts is the length of the bolt remaining in the overstressed rock zone. SSD and ASD of a grouted rockbolt are also related to the bolt length. Providing a balance between the surrounding ground and the bolt is very important ( All pull-out tests were come true as expected and debonding have arisen as the bolt-grout failure for each grout type at the end of the 7 days curing time. Ultimate pull-out loads of rockbolt in different grout mediums (M1-M5) were 66.2, 74.6, 97.1, 101.6, 104.8 kN respectively ( The axial and shear stress distribution curves were plotted with data derived from four strain gauges placed on the bolt. Data recording began with loading and it was completed with strain gauge deformation. There was strain gauge deformation at a certain stage of the applied load and communication with the data logger system was broken. This situation differed for each grout type. For this reason, the stress distribution curves were plotted against the applied load using the data taken at the same time from all of the strain gauges. Seven data items were selected from these data which show approximately equal intervals. For example, between 3.6 and 34.3 kN was used for the first type of grout and between 8.1 and 68.3 kN for the fifth grout type. In summary, when determining different loading levels, the conditions described above taken into account. As is shown in Shear stress in response to axial loading on the lateral surface of the rockbolt develops by debonding at the bolt-grout or grout-rock interface. The shear stresses occurring on the lateral surface of the rockbolt in response to axial loading occur through the dissolution at the bolt-mortar interface or at the mortar-rock interface. The shear stress on the side surface of the rockbolt in response to axial loading is developed by dissolution at the bolt-mortar interface or at the mortar-rock interface. One of the two parameters that have an important role on the behavior of the rockbolts is the shear strength and the compressive strength. It was observed that increase of the grouts shear strength logarithmically increases with bolts bond strength as shown in The aim of this study is to explain the ASD and SSD behavior of FGR under axial loading (different grouts) conditions. The results were showed that grout strength had a considerable amount of effect connected with SSD or an ASD along the rockbolt. The axial load uniformly distributed along the anchored rockbolt length and the composed stress was demonstrating elastic load transfer behavior from the rockbolt to the surrounding grout for each grout type. Axial stress curves were showed a more regular distribution with increasing of grout stiffness. Rockbolt-grout interface failure actualized gradually for grouts (M3-M4-M5) having relatively high strength. On the contrary of stiff grouts, the second part of rockbolt (70–190 mm) became almost completely active after decoupling occurred at first part (0–70 mm) for low strength grouts (M1-M2). The bolt bond stress was non-uniform and had a highly sharp distribution curve in the first section of the bolt and it became nearly uniform in the second section of the rockbolt. Ultimate bond stress occurred near the loading point of rockbolt (approximate 50 mm inside from the rock surface) for all grout type. Shear stress under the middle of the embedded length of rockbolt changed relatively a little amount. The bolt bond stress reached the highest value gradually after a small distance from the loading point. The bolt bond stress in low strength grouts (M1-M2) reached an exponentially unimportant value between 150 and 190 mm. Grouted rockbolts work with rock mass. Therefore, the length changes of the rockbolt are also equal to the deformations that arise in the rock mass. The monitoring of loads and displacements in the rock mass allows the selection of more effective ground support tools in mining operations. With this advantage, underground miners will have safer working conditions. The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 