BaCO3, a common mineral with important applications in industry, has been synthesized in the orthorhombic phase with a high purity. As a new precursor, barium-o-phthalate complex was applied to prepare BaCO3 nanoparticles via solvent-free thermal decomposition route. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was applied to determine the thermal behavior of the complex. The products were characterized by X-ray diffractometry (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR). The best results were obtained for the sample prepared at 500°C. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of this product shows “bean-like” shaped nanoparticles with an average size of 35–70nm. The purity, composition and stoichiometry of the as-prepared sample were studied by Electron Diffraction X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) spectra.Among the heavy metal carbonates, barium carbonate (BaCO The conventional methods to prepare BaCO Solid-state decomposition is another method for nanomaterial synthesis. It is introduced as one type of thermal decomposition process in a dry condition under air atmosphere. Hydrothermal, solvothermal and thermal decomposition using organic solvent or surfactant  For some years, our group has been interested in the synthesis of metal, metal oxide, metal sulfides and magnetic nanoparticles by using new inorganic precursors via decomposition method All the chemical reagents used in our experiments were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. Barium (II) chloride and phthalic acid were obtained from Merck Co. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was recorded by Shimadzu Varian 4300 spectrophotometer in KBr pellets. Thermogravimetric analysis was carried out using a BOIF-WCT-2A instrument in flowing air with a heating rate of 10 The stoichiometric amount of White BaCO  In XRD pattern of S4 ( In order to further investigation, the crystallite size of BaCO Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on the as-prepared precursor under an air atmosphere at a heating rate of 10  The size and morphological study of the precursor and barium carbonate nanoparticles were carried out using the SEM image. The typical SEM images of the precursor and BaCO In order to observe the detailed morphology of the BaCO Chemical purity and stoichiometry of the BaCO The detailed mechanism of decomposition of an alkali-earth metal phthalate complex is reported in the literature, before  Orthorhombic BaCO Authors are grateful to council of