Interest in meat fatty acid composition stems mainly from the need to find ways to produce healthier meat, i.e. with a higher ratio of polyunsaturated (PUFA) to saturated fatty acids and a more favourable balance between n-6 and n-3 PUFA. In pigs, the drive has been to increase n-3 PUFA in meat and this can be achieved by feeding sources such as linseed in the diet. Only when concentrations of α-linolenic acid (18:3) approach 3% of neutral lipids or phospholipids are there any adverse effects on meat quality, defined in terms of shelf life (lipid and myoglobin oxidation) and flavour. Ruminant meats are a relatively good source of n-3 PUFA due to the presence of 18:3 in grass. Further increases can be achieved with animals fed grain-based diets by including whole linseed or linseed oil, especially if this is “protected” from rumen biohydrogenation. Long-chain (C20–C22) n-3 PUFA are synthesised from 18:3 in the animal although docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6) is not increased when diets are supplemented with 18:3. DHA can be increased by feeding sources such as fish oil although too-high levels cause adverse flavour and colour changes. Grass-fed beef and lamb have naturally high levels of 18:3 and long chain n-3 PUFA. These impact on flavour to produce a ‘grass fed’ taste in which other components of grass are also involved. Grazing also provides antioxidants including vitamin E which maintain PUFA levels in meat and prevent quality deterioration during processing and display. In pork, beef and lamb the melting point of lipid and the firmness/hardness of carcass fat is closely related to the concentration of stearic acid (18:0).There has been an increased interest in recent years in ways to manipulate the fatty acid composition of meat. This is because meat is seen to be a major source of fat in the diet and especially of saturated fatty acids, which have been implicated in diseases associated with modern life, especially in developed countries. These include various cancers and especially coronary heart disease. In the UK, the The increasing awareness of the need for diets to contain higher levels of n-3 PUFA has focused on the importance of meat as a natural supplier of these to the diet. The ratio of n-6:n-3 PUFA is particularly beneficial (low) in ruminant meats, especially from animals that have consumed grass which contains high levels of 18:3. Ruminants also naturally produce conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs) which may have a range of nutritional benefits in the diet ( Fatty acids are involved in various “technological” aspects of meat quality. Because they have very different melting points, variation in fatty acid composition has an important effect on firmness or softness of the fat in meat, especially the subcutaneous and intermuscular (carcass fats) but also the intramuscular (marbling) fat. Groups of fat cells containing solidified fat with a high melting point appear whiter than when liquid fat with a lower melting point is present, so fat colour is another aspect of quality affected by fatty acids. The ability of unsaturated fatty acids, especially those with more than two double bonds, to rapidly oxidise, is important in regulating the shelf life of meat (rancidity and colour deterioration). However, this propensity to oxidise is important in flavour development during cooking. The aim of this article is to summarise the main effects of fatty acid composition on meat quality and to review recent work showing the effects on meat quality of changes in fatty acid composition achieved during production. A survey conducted by Differences in muscle fibre type between muscles are reflected in differences in fatty acid composition. “Red” muscles have a higher proportion of phospholipids than “white” muscles and therefore a higher percentage of PUFA. An example is given in Studies on poultry meat have shown similarities with pork i.e. the meat fatty acids are relatively unsaturated although 18:2 is at a higher level ( The components of technological meat quality influenced by fatty acids are fat tissue firmness (hardness), shelf life (lipid and pigment oxidation) and flavour. Although there have been suggestions that dietary fatty acids influence tenderness and juiciness, these are more likely to be affected by the total amount of fatty acids rather than individual ones. The effect of fatty acids on firmness is due to the different melting points of the fatty acids in meat. In the 18C fatty acid series, stearic acid (18:0) melts at 69.6 °C, oleic acid (18:1) at 13.4 °C, 18:2 at −5 °C and 18:3 at −11 °C. Thus as unsaturation increases, melting point declines. Variation in the structure of the molecule are also important. For example, The effect of fatty acids on shelf life is explained by the propensity of unsaturated fatty acids to oxidise, leading to the development of rancidity as display times increases. The colour change is due to the oxidation of red oxymyoglobin to brown metmyoglobin, this reaction generally proceeding in parallel to that of rancidity. Several studies have shown that lipid oxidation products can promote pigment oxidation and vice versa although the strength of the relationship between these two aspects of shelf life is sometimes low ( The effect of fatty acid on meat flavour is due to the production of volatile, odourous, lipid oxidation products during cooking and the involvement of these with Maillard reaction products to form other volatiles which contribute to odour and flavour. The unsaturated phospholipid fatty acids are particularly important in flavour development. Early research showed that the fat tissues in meat were the source of the characteristic species flavour ( Studies conducted at Bristol in the 1970s and 1980s showed that 18:0 and 18:2 are particularly important contributors to fat tissue firmness. As fatty acid composition was changed for reasons of diet, genetics, sex or fatness, these two showed the highest correlations with firmness measured subjectively (a finger test) or objectively (using a compression tester or penetrometer). The ratio of 18:0:18:2 was found by Fat tissue consists not only of fatty acids contained in fat cells but also the connective tissue matrix associated with water. In pigs, the concentration of water in thin (i.e. underdeveloped) backfat is very high as is that of collagen ( As subcutaneous fat tissue develops and changes in composition, it becomes more cohesive i.e. is less easily separated within itself layer by layer. The problem of fat tissue separation is unsightly in fresh pork and particularly in bacon or ham. Studies have shown that cohesiveness is closely related to water, collagen, 18:0 and 18:2 fatty acid concentrations, just as is firmness ( After slaughter, various changes occurring in pig meat favour oxidation, for example the release of iron from within cells and the loss of the glutathione peroxidase enzyme system ( Several papers have examined the effects of dietary oils containing a high proportion of 18:2 on the fatty acid composition and quality of pigmeat. Examples of such oils are soya, peanut, maize and sunflower. Concentrations of 18:2 can easily be raised from basal levels of around 10–15% of fatty acids to over 30% (  Supplementing pig diets with 18:3 to lower the n-6:n-3 ratio has been examined by several workers. Canola (rapeseed) oil and especially flaxseed (linseed) are good sources of this. In some papers, no effects on meat quality parameters have been observed (   In the study of Changes in fatty acid composition have not been directly linked to changes in myoglobin oxidation and muscle colour in many of the pig studies reported ( The total fatty acid content of muscle (i.e. neutral lipid plus phospholipid fatty acids), termed marbling fat, has long been recognised as a factor in eating quality, especially juiciness and tenderness although the strength of the relationship has been questioned ( Ruminant fat tissue is naturally firmer than that of pigs, because the fatty acid profile is more saturated. In the first stages of fattening in cattle, the concentration of saturated relative to unsaturated fatty acids increases as in pigs, but beyond a certain fat level in the animal this ratio then declines. In very fat cattle, fat is soft and oily, mainly due to an increase in 18:1 relative to 18:0 and 16:0 ( In lambs, especially ram lambs, soft fat develops in animals fed grain-based (concentrate) diets. This is due not only to a lower concentration of 18:0 but also to an increased deposition of medium to long-chain (C10–C17) branched chain fatty acids formed from methylmalonate, a metabolite of propionate ( The presence of the rumen makes fatty acid composition in beef and sheep more difficult to manipulate by changing diet than in pigs. Nevertheless, there are some clear effects of diet on tissue fatty acid composition. In order to understand the links between meat composition and flavour, the beef produced from the linseed, fish oil and linseed/fish oil diets was analysed for aroma volatile production after cooking in an autoclave. The results (  Although some dietary PUFA in linseed and other plant oils escapes rumen biohydrogenation, a high proportion (>90%) is hydrogenated leading to high values for saturated fatty acids in ruminant meats ( Studies with beef and lamb have shown that the concentrations of 18:3 and 20:5 in muscle phospholipids are higher when animals have consumed grass than when they have been fed grain-based (concentrate) diets. In the latter case, 18:2 and arachidonic (20:4 n-6) fatty acids are increased relative to 18:3 ( In the study of In a study involving British lambs fed grass and Spanish lambs fed milk and concentrates, analgous differences in fatty acid composition were observed, i.e. the grass fed animals had higher muscle concentrations of n-3 PUFA and the concentrate-fed animals had higher concentrations of the n-6 PUFA ( An explanation for these positive relationships between 18:3 and meat flavour is that the oxidation products of 18:3 and it's derivatives are directly responsible for the differences in flavour observed between grass-fed cattle and sheep. Several authors have shown that lipid oxidation and colour development in ruminant meats is influenced by both fatty acid composition and the concentration of the tissue antioxidant, vitamin E ( We are grateful to our collaborators in providing many of the results presented here, including Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research, Harper Adams University College and University of Reading. Funding was provided by Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), Meat and Livestock Commission, ABN Ltd, JSR Farms Ltd, Tesco Stores Ltd, Roche Products Ltd, International Fishmeal and Oil Manufacturers Association and Southern Counties Fresh Foods Ltd. We gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of Kathy Hallett, Fran Whittington, Kevin Gibson, Anita Robinson, Rose Ball, Anne Baker and Sue Hughes