A full-scale three-compartment FLSmidth® cement grinding ball mill with dimensions of Ø3.5×
                     L10 operating in open circuit was sampled to analyse the grinding media effect on specific breakage rate function of particles. Size reduction performance of the ball mill was evaluated with respect to the applied grinding media size. Samples from the circuit and inside the mill were collected. Mass balance of the circuit was done using JKSimMet Steady State Mineral Processing Simulator. Specific discharge and breakage rate functions of particles were estimated using perfect mixing modeling approach (Whiten, 1972) on the basis of the proposed open circuit three-compartment ball mill model structure (Genç and Benzer, 2015). Maximum specific breakage rate was related to maximum grinding media size in the grinding compartments. An exponential correlation was found to exist between maximum grinding media size and maximum specific breakage rate. Relationship between maximum grinding media size and maximum particle size was also fitted to an exponential function. Findings indicated that, grinding performance of cylpebs applied in the third compartment did not improved the size reduction performance as compared to the grinding performance of the first and second compartment.particle size fraction particle size fraction mass flowrate of mill feed (ton/h) mass flowrate of mill discharge (ton/h) specific breakage rate of size fraction specific discharge rate of size fraction normalized discharge rate of size fraction single column step triangular breakage function matrix mass of size fraction volumetric feed rate (m mill diameter (m) mill length (m) ratio of breakage rate to normalized discharge rate Cement is produced by intergrinding of clinker and additive materials such as gypsum (∼3–5%), trass, limestone, and slag in multi-compartment ball mills. Multi-compartment ball mills can have a single, two or three grinding compartments where coarse grinding is achieved in the first compartment. Second and third compartments are for fine grinding. The third compartment of the mill constitutes the finest media size distribution. Steel balls and cylpebs are widely applied grinding media types in cement grinding mills. Cylpebs are slightly tapered cylindrical grinding media with length equalling diameter, and all the edges being radiused ( Cement grinding is energy intensive process. 2% of the total electrical energy produced in the world is consumed in the grinding stage of cement production as stated by An extensive pilot-scale experimental study was reported by In this study, the approach was to relate maximum specific breakage rate ( Plant and laboratory scale studies were performed to evaluate the size reduction performance of the open circuit three-compartment FLSmidth® ball mill. Ball mill design and operational characteristics are given in Sampling survey was performed at the steady state condition of the circuit. Flowsheet of the circuit with the sampling points is given in Particle size distribution of the samples were determined using ro-tap screening from the top size down to 150 Some errors are inevitable in any sampling operation. Errors result from the dynamic nature of the system, and physical conditions at particular point. These errors can be grouped as random, measurement and human errors. Mass balancing involves statistical adjustment of raw data to obtain the best fit estimates of flowrates considering such errors ( Samples inside the mill were collected after crash stopping of the mill. The mill was cooled down for about 8 Particle size distributions of the mill inside samples in addition to the mill feed and discharge particle size distributions estimated from mass balance calculations are shown in Size reduction ratios which were calculated using the median size for the grinding compartments are tabulated in Standard Bond ball mill grindability test was used to determine the work index value of the mill feed material which is a comminution parameter expressing the resistance of the material to crushing and grinding. Standard Bond ball mill with dimensions of 30.5 Breakage distribution function is a material specific parameter of comminution models. It is assumed to be invariant with process conditions. It is usually expressed in a form which is independent of particle size. It is used to reflect material breakage characteristics to the grinding model parameters of the mill. In this study, single particle breakage test method was used to determine breakage distribution function. For this purpose, drop weight technique was applied. A modified manual version of a JK Tech drop weight test device ( Ball mill was modeled using the perfect mixing modeling approach ( In these equations;       In order to correct the variations in residence time,     Three-compartment ball mill modeling approach was to consider the mill as a perfectly mixed six tank. Each grinding compartment was divided into two perfectly mixed tanks ( Specific breakage rate ( Notations of       Specific discharge rates of particles in the grinding compartments were found to have different patterns due to the different operational conditions. There was a screening effect in the first and second compartment whereas particles were discharged through the mill in the third compartment without this effect as discharge diaphragm slot and grate openings were large enough to allow the passage of ground material ( Findings indicated that, the maximum particle size that can be broken by the top ball size can change due to the mill feed breakage characteristics for a constant mill diameter and ball top size ( A full-scale three-compartment FLSmidth® cement ball mill operating in open circuit was sampled. Specific discharge and breakage rate functions of particles were determined for the three-compartment ball mill on the basis of the proposed ball mill modeling approach. Correlation between maximum grinding media size and maximum specific breakage rate in addition to the correlation between maximum particle size and maximum grinding media size were established. An exponential function was found to define the relationship between maximum grinding media size and maximum specific breakage rate in the grinding compartments. On the other hand, variation of maximum grinding media size and maximum particle size was also fitted to an exponential function. Results also indicated that, cylpebs applied in the third compartment did not improved the size reduction performance of the mill. Author’s appreciation goes to SET Italcementi Group Balıkesir Plant (Turkey) for providing the access to the plant and their valuable support during the sampling survey. Prof. A. Hakan Benzer for his valuable discussions and contributions, and Assistant Prof. Okay Altun from Hacettepe University are also gratefully acknowledged.