Background
                  Distinct symptom subtypes are found in patients with OSA. The association between these subtypes and neurocognitive function is unclear.
                  Objective: The purposes of this study were to assess whether OSA symptom subtypes are present in a cohort of Canadian patients with suspected OSA and evaluate the relationship between subtypes and neurocognitive function.
               
                  Methods
                  Patients with suspected OSA who completed a symptom questionnaire and underwent testing for OSA were included. Symptom subtypes were identified using latent class analysis. Associations between subtypes and neurocognitive outcomes (Montreal Cognitive Assessment [MoCA], Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test [RAVLT], Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale [WAIS-IV], Digit-Symbol Coding subtest [DSC]) were assessed using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), controlling for relevant covariates.
               
                  Results
                  Four symptom subtypes were identified in patients with OSA (oxygen desaturation index ≥5 events/hour). Three were similar to prior studies, including the Excessively Sleepy (N=405), Disturbed Sleep (N=382) and Minimally Symptomatic (N=280), and one was a novel subtype in our sample defined as Excessively Sleepy with Disturbed Sleep (N=247). After covariate adjustment, statistically significant differences among subtypes (p=0.037) and among subtypes and patients without OSA (p=0.044) were observed in DSC scores; the Minimally Symptomatic subtype had evidence of higher DSC scores than all other groups, including non-OSA patients. No differences were seen in MoCA or RAVLT.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Results support the existence of previously identified OSA symptom subtypes of excessively sleepy, disturbed sleep and minimally symptomatic in a clinical sample from Canada. Subtypes were not consistently associated with neurocognitive function across multiple instruments.Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) is a common yet underdiagnosed respiratory disorder characterized by recurrent upper airway obstruction during sleep [ It is increasingly recognized that distinct subtypes based on self-reported symptoms are found in patients with OSA [ These symptom subtypes are associated with adverse outcomes and a differential response to treatment. For example, in a cohort from Iceland, symptom subtypes had a different symptomatic response after two years of treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) [ However, the association between these symptom subtypes and neurocognitive function has not been evaluated. Neurocognitive deficits associated with OSA include impaired episodic memory, executive function, attention and visuospatial cognitive functions [ The purpose of this study was: (1) to assess whether previously identified OSA symptom subtypes are present in a cohort of patients with suspected OSA recruited from multiple sleep centers across Western Canada, and (2) to determine the relationship between symptom subtypes and neurocognitive function in this cohort. Participants were recruited between July 2016 and February 2019 and enrolled in the multi-center Canadian Sleep and Circadian Network's (CSCN, Website: This study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board of the University of Calgary (ID: REB16-0211), the Biomedical Research Ethics Board of the University of Saskatchewan (ID: 16–106), and the University of British Columbia Clinical Research Ethics Board (ID: H16-00422). Patients were informed of study requirements prior to providing written informed consent. At the University of Calgary, OSA was diagnosed by unattended HSAT, whereas at the Universities of Saskatchewan and British Columbia OSA was diagnosed by in-lab attended PSG. OSA severity was defined based upon the oxygen desaturation index (ODI) as Non-OSA (ODI<5), mild OSA (5≤ODI<15), moderate OSA (15≤ODI≤30) and severe OSA (ODI>30 events/hour). All patients completed a standardized sleep questionnaire and cognitive testing prior to any treatment for OSA. Additional study protocol details are provided in the online data supplement. Sleep and its various stages were documented using standard electroencephalographic (EEG), electrooculographic (EOG) and electromyographic (EMG) criteria (Sandman 10.1 software). EEG was recorded with electrodes applied at C3-A2 and C4-A1 (according to the International 10–20 system). EMG activity was recorded from the submental muscles and anterior tibialis muscles. Airflow was detected by recording of nasal pressure and a thermocouple. Snoring was measured using a microphone that was attached to the middle of the respitrace band at the level of third intercostal space. The output of the microphone was fed into a sound meter (Model SL120, Pacer Industries, Toronto, Canada) that was calibrated in the range of 40–110 dB using a 1 KHz signal. A single ECG (modified V2) was monitored in order to detect cardiac arrhythmias. Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO HSAT was performed with either the Remmers Sleep Recorder (Sagatech, Calgary, AB, Canada), ApneaLink Air (Resmed, San Diego, CA, USA) or the Apnea Risk Evaluation System (ARES, SleepMed, Kennesaw, GA, USA). All three HSAT systems have been validated against PSG [ The same comprehensive survey instrument was used by all participating centers. The questionnaire included questions related to demographics, medical history, lifestyle comorbidities, medications, family history of medical disease, sleep schedule, sleep related symptoms and co-exiting sleep disorders (including restless legs syndrome and insomnia). Daytime sleepiness was assessed with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) [ The cognitive test battery assessed global cognitive function, episodic memory and information processing speed. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment Tool [ The MoCA was designed as a clinical screening instrument for mild cognitive dysfunction. It assesses different cognitive domains: attention and concentration, executive functions, memory, language, visuoconstructional skills, conceptual thinking, calculations, and orientation. The MoCA takes approximately 10 min to administer [ The RAVLT is designed to evaluate a wide variety of function, including immediate memory, new verbal learning, susceptibility to interference (proactive and retroactive), retention of information after a period of time, and memory recognition. The RAVLT Delayed Recall component is particularly effective in identifying dementia and Alzheimer's disease [ The DSC is a validated and sensitive measure of cognitive dysfunction impacted by many domains. Good performance on the DSC requires intact motor speed, attention, and visuoperceptual functions, including scanning and the ability to write or draw (ie, basic manual dexterity). Performance might also be affected by associative learning [ MCI was operationally defined as a total MoCA score<26 as per standard protocol [range: 0–30] [ A latent class analysis (LCA) was performed among patients with any OSA (ODI>5)using 14 symptom questions plus the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), reflecting questions similar to prior publications on symptom clusters in moderate-severe OSA [ After identifying the optimal number of subtypes, we evaluated differences among subtypes and between subtypes and a reference group of patients without OSA (ODI<5), for three neurocognitive outcomes – the MoCA total score, normalized RAVLT delayed free recall scores, and DSC scores. Analyses were performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA; unadjusted) or analysis of covariance (ANCOVA; adjusted for potential confounders including age, BMI, sex, ODI, education, hypertension, diabetes, COPD, and prior heart disease) applied via linear regression models, with subtype as a categorical predictor (see A total of 1499 subjects (185 without OSA and 1314 with OSA) with suspected and available symptom questionnaire data were included. Of these subjects, 1209 had PSGs and the other 290 had HSATs. Furthermore, 526 subjects underwent split night studies in which only the first half of the nights data was used. Characteristics of the patients are shown in Clustering analysis among patients with ODI>5 (n = 1314) identified four optimal subtypes based on symptoms.  When compared to the non-OSA group, all four subtypes had higher proportions of hypertension and diabetes. Finally, all of the subtypes except for the The majority of participants completed the battery of cognitive tests. In total, 1270 individuals completed the MoCA; 599 (47.2%) had MoCA score below 26, indicating a high degree of MCI within our cohort. This study demonstrates the existence of four distinct symptom subtypes in Canadian patients with OSA presenting to sleep clinics in three Western Provinces. Three of the four subtypes identified in the CSCN cohort were similar to those identified in multiple prior studies [ All prior studies, as well as the present analysis, support the existence of three core OSA symptom subtypes related to excessive sleepiness, insomnia and a lack of reported symptoms. However, additional subtypes have also been identified in specific cohorts, as in our sample. For example, the study by Keenan and colleagues [ In addition to confirming the existence of the OSA subtypes in another clinical cohort, we sought to understand the neurocognitive differences among subtypes. Ultimately, symptom subtypes were not significantly associated with neurocognitive impairment as measured by the total MoCA or normalized RAVLT delayed free recall scores. There were significant differences in DSC scores by symptom subtype, with the Several prior publications investigating community-dwelling volunteers have reported OSA to be an independent risk factor for the development of MCI and dementia [ This study has several limitations. First, not all patients in our cohort were diagnosed with OSA using the same methods. Patients were diagnosed by either unattended HSAT or PSG. In an effort to harmonize the OSA severity measures, we indexed them to the total recording time of the PSGs, the same denominator used to calculate these indices in HSAT. However, given total recording time is longer than total sleep time, OSA severity may be underestimated in our cohort. Second, we used a clinic-based cohort, and referral bias is a potential issue. For example, truly asymptomatic patients would be less likely to be referred to our clinic than patients who were either symptomatic or had clinical features predicting more severe disease (ie, high BMI or comorbidities). However, advantages of a clinic-based cohort include the relatively greater severity of OSA and presence of symptoms. Third, the MoCA has reduced sensitivity and specificity for detecting MCI in clinical populations apart from that on which it was validated [ In our study in a multi-center clinic-based cohort from Canada, we identified four distinct symptom subtypes, three of which were similar to those identified in previous studies. While our study supports them as robust traits of patients with OSA, these subtypes were not associated with neurocognitive function as assessed by a broad range of tests designed to detect mild cognitive impairment. This suggests that the neurocognitive deficits associated with OSA may not be attributable to the symptoms of disturbed sleep or sleepiness, but could be due to neuronal damage from nocturnal hypoxemia or sleep fragmentation not translated into symptoms. Future studies are needed to determine whether these symptom clusters are associated with future adverse health events, including cognitive decline.  The following is the supplementary data to this article: None. The ICMJE Uniform Disclosure Form for Potential Conflicts of Interest associated with this article can be viewed by clicking on the following link: