The severe abrasive wear of the current cemented tungsten carbide (WC) tools is a “bottleneck” that limits the usage of machinery in hard rock mines. To address this issue, a revolutionary thermally stable diamond composite (TSDC) based cutting tool, also called Super Material Abrasive Resistant Tool (SMART∗CUT) was developed by CSIRO. Before this novel tool is employed for practical rock cutting, the effects of the cutting parameters on the performance of the SMART∗CUT picks must be determined and the cutting forces of the picks have to be estimated as they directly affect the capability and efficiency of the selected cutterhead and hence the excavation machine. In this study, rock cutting tests based on Taguchi’s L25 orthogonal array were conducted to analyze the cutting parameters. The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios and the analysis of variance (ANOVA) were applied to investigate the effects of depth of cut, attack angle, spacing and cutting speed on mean cutting and normal forces during the rock cutting process. Empirical models for predicting the cutting forces on SMART∗CUT picks were developed using multiple linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural network (ANN) techniques. Parametric combinations for minimizing the cutting forces and the statistical significance of process factors were successfully determined by using the Taguchi technique. Good prediction capabilities with acceptable errors were achieved by the developed MLR and ANN models. However, the ANN models offered better accuracy and less deviation.Excessive abrasive wear of traditional refractory carbides, diamond impregnated metal matrix composites (DIMMC) or polycrystalline diamond compact (PDC) cutting elements has hindered the use of mechanical excavators as the temperature at the tool-rock interface could exceed 1300 Before the employment of SMART∗CUT picks in a rock excavation machine, it is important to estimate the magnitude of cutting forces applied to the picks under different cutting scenarios, in order to calculate the cutterhead torque and cutter motor power for any set of geological formations, cutterhead design, and operational conditions of the machine ( In this study, the Taguchi method is initially employed to find out the critical cutting parameters that influence the rock cutting process. Then, multiple linear regression and neural network techniques are adopted to develop empirical models of the cutting forces on SMART∗CUT picks as a function of depth of cut (DOC), attack angle, pick spacing and cutting speed. The performances of these models are also discussed. As illustrated in The cutting tool was adjusted both laterally and vertically, which allowed the cutting tool to be set to its required position relatively to the rock block. The setting of the cutting tool was manually driven by turning a handle (gears and screw system). Once the desired DOC (penetration) was achieved, the tool was secured into position using heavy screw threads and stops. An accuracy of 0.05 In this study, only the orthogonal force components  A block of Helidon Sandstone, collected from a local mining quarry near Brisbane Australia was used as the test sample; it had dimensions of 450 Four core samples were prepared for the UCS and elastic properties tests. As can be seen from The Taguchi method is a popular and efficient experimental design technique to investigate how different parameters affect the mean and variance of a process performance characteristic. The approach can optimize performance characteristics by optimizing the settings of design parameters and reduce the sensitivity of system performance to environmental conditions and variations ( In the present work, the main cutting parameters, DOC, attack angle, pick spacing and cutting speed were selected as the input variables. A 5-level and 4-factor L25 OA was used to design the rock cutting experiments. The selected process parameters and their corresponding levels are shown in Mean cutting force (MCF) and mean normal force (MNF) were selected as the response factors for the cutting performance analysis. The results obtained from the cutting tests are shown in The mean S/N ratios of each process factors at different experimental levels were obtained by averaging their S/N ratios at corresponding levels. For example, the mean S/N ratio for attack angle at level 1 was determined by averaging the S/N ratios for the tests 1–5 in The objective quality characteristic of this study was the-smaller-the-better, which means the smallest magnitude of the cutting forces would be the ideal situation. Thus, the desired cutting condition of this study should be obtained with the maximum mean S/N ratio of each process factor according to the Taguchi method. The level of each parameter with the highest S/N ratio was highlighted in red circles in the S/N response graphs ( The mean S/N ratio plot for mean cutting force is shown in Similarly, in ANOVA is an analysis tool used for studying the statistically significant parameters that influence the quality characteristic and identify the percent contribution ratio (PCR) of each process factor on output responses. The total variance of the response (i.e. the sum of squares of all the observation deviations from the grand mean) is decomposed into contributions related to each of the design parameter and the error ( The PCR of each design parameter is equal to the sum of squared deviations due to each design parameters The results of ANOVA for mean cutting and normal forces are presented in According to The effects of the main cutting parameters on the values of mean cutting and normal forces are shown in As shown in  Statistical methods of multiple linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural network (ANN) which have been widely used for prediction and forecasting in mining and underground tunneling engineering are applied to develop empirical models of mean cutting and normal forces on the SMART∗CUT picks. Multiple linear regression (MLR) is a statistical analysis technique to predict the linear relationship between a dependent variable and two or more independent variables with a mathematical formula ( In multiple regression analysis, multicollinearity needs to be checked. It occurs when two or more independent variables in the MLR model are highly correlated ( In this study, MLR models were developed to predict the relationship between dependent variables mean cutting force and mean normal force and the independent variables DOC, attack angle, pick spacing and cutting speed. The models for mean cutting force and mean normal force, i.e. Eqs. ANN is a complex computational method inspired from biological neural network ( The input and output data in The relationship between the measured and predicted values of mean cutting force obtained using the ANN model is shown in Similarly, These results indicate that both MLR and ANN methods can provide reasonably accurate predictions of mean cutting and mean normal forces; however, the ANN model is more accurate in predicting these forces using the stated rock cutting variables. The effects of attack angle, depth of cut, spacing and cutting speed on the cutting performance of SMART∗CUT picks was systematically investigated. The tests were performed on the basics of Taguchi’s L25 orthogonal array. The determined rock cutting parameters for minimizing the mean cutting and normal forces were obtained based on the mean S/N ratio. The parametric combination for mean cutting and normal forces was: attack angle of 60°, DOC of 6 From the ANOVA analysis, it was found that attack angle, DOC and spacing were the statistically significant factors influencing the mean cutting force. The most influential factor was DOC, followed by attack angle and spacing. The cutting speed had the least effect. However, for the normal force, all four factors had statistical significance with a significance order of attack angle Empirical models for predicting the mean cutting and normal forces on SMART∗CUT picks have been developed based on multiple linear regression (MLR) and artificial neural network (ANN) techniques. The established force models showed good predictive capabilities with acceptable accuracy. The ANN models offered better accuracy and less deviation than the MLR models. Technical support from Peter Clark and Craig Harbers of CSIRO Energy Flagship are gratefully acknowledged. Wen Shao also would like to express appreciation to the