Spent nickel-tungsten catalyst generated from hydrotreating petroleum industry always contains molybdenum about 0.1–2% as an impurity. Separation of Mo from spent Ni-W catalyst leach solutions is a critical step to produce high pure tungsten products like ammonium paratungstate (APT) and tungsten trioxide (WO3) for catalyst and tools applications. Though Mo and W have chemically similar properties but it is possible to exploit separation of Mo from W by modifying the aqueous phase species. In the present paper, alkaline leach liquor with a composition of 0.72g/L Mo and 18g/L W was taken. Selective separation of Mo as its thiocomplex from W was examined by Aliquat 336, a quaternary ammonium compound. Experimental parameters such as extraction pH, concentration of extractant and metal for extraction and selection of reagent and concentration for stripping were optimized to obtain maximum separation of Mo. Variation of extractant concentration indicated extracted Mo species as (R3CH3N)2MoS4. The McCabe-Thiele plots indicated that 2 and 3-counter-current stages are necessary at O:A ratio of 1:1 and 3:1 for quantitative extraction and stripping of molybdenum, respectively. A pilot run for 330h was operated with 3-stages of extraction, 1-stage of scrubbing, 3-stages of stripping and one stage of washing based on the equilibrium data to verify the performance of Mo separation from W from commercial point of view.Both molybdenum and tungsten find unique place in metal and chemical industries due to their extensive applications in different fields such as catalyst, alloys and tools. The gradual increasing demand of both the metals globally makes the metallurgists to focus on the recovery Mo and W from their different sources. The primary and secondary sources of tungsten frequently contain molybdenum as impurity in different stoichiometry and needs efficient separation and recovery methods for commercial exploitation. The secondary sources of tungsten (Spent catalyst) are generated from different catalytic processes such as hydrocracking, hydrodesulfurization, hydrodenitrogenation and hydrotreating, etc. However, the similar chemical properties of both the elements ( Generally tungsten raw materials like concentrate and spent catalysts contain Mo as an impurity varying from 0.1 to 2%. Hence, it is desirable to take up removal of molybdenum from the tungsten solution in order to produce commercially suitable tungsten products for chemical and tools application. Various processes such as sulphide precipitation, ion exchange, adsorption and solvent extraction for separation of molybdenum from alkaline leach solution of tungsten have been proposed. Among these methods, precipitation of molybdenum as molysulphide with alkali sulphide reagent is reported as the most adopted separation process. However complete removal of molybdenum was not achieved since some of the molybdenum still remained in the form of molybdic acid, which was not easily separated ( In another study, Separation of molybdenum and tungsten by using ion exchange technique ( Solvent extraction (SX) technique is widely used for impurity removal and concentrating step. SX technique for Mo removal from tungstate solutions has also other advantages over precipitation process such as no hazard in handling, no hazardous gas liberation and easy operation.  The separation of Mo from W using SX without thio-complexation was also reported by many researchers ( The objective of the present investigation is to extend the information generated in bench scale up to pilot plant scale. The study is broadly applicable to the treatment of tungsten spent catalyst. Extraction of Mo was carried out as its thio-complex by a quaternary ammonium salt (R Aliquat 336 (a mixture of tri-octyl/decyl ammonium chloride having average molecular weight 442 Toshniwal, model DP 505 digital pH meter was used for the measurement and adjustment of pH during the study. Magnetic stirrer (Remi 5MLH) was employed for the stirring of solutions in bench scale. However in pilot plant, peristaltic pumps (Watson Marlow 520 S) were used to maintain the flow rate of aqueous and organic solvent. The metal ion concentration in the aqueous phase was measured by ICP-OES spectrometer (Spectro, Spectro Arcos) after suitable dilution. The pilot scale mixer-settlers of rectangular box-type shape and made up of acrylic plastic with a capacity of 3 Molybdenum exists as MoO The extraction equilibrium constant (K The distribution coefficient, D of the system is defined as: By substituting Eq. The stripping of thiomolybdate loaded organic using NaOCl is presented by Eq. A suitable aliquot (40 The pilot plant study in the mixer-settlers was carried out in continuous mode for about 330 To obtain maximum separation of molybdenum from tungsten, it is necessary to have quantitative conversion of molybdate (MoO Extraction of thio-molybdate complex from a feed solution containing 0.72 The concentration of Aliquat 336 was varied from 0.5 to 8% to study its effect on separation of molybdenum from tungsten. The feed pH and the O:A phase ratio were kept constant at 8.3 and 1:1, respectively. The percentage extraction of molybdenum increased from 27.6 to 98% and tungsten from 0.3 to 5% with increasing extractant concentration from 0.5 to 3% ( The role of Mo concentration on separation of Mo and W was investigated by carrying out experiments with various concentration of molybdenum in feed solution ranging from 0.5 to 5 The equilibrium studies showed maximum separation of molybdenum and tungsten using 3% Aliquat 336 at equilibrium pH In any commercial SX plant operation, scrubbing of impurities from LO is carried out either with scrubbing agents such as distilled water or metal salt solution or with a bleed of the strip raffinate adjusted to acidic/alkaline conditions at higher O/A ratios from 5 to 20. High O/A ratios were operated so that less quantity of scrub raffinate would be generated thereby reducing the load on recycle of metal to extraction circuit. Keeping this objective, scrubbing of LO was carried out with 50 In any commercial extraction process it becomes imperative to back extract the metal from the loaded organic phase. A set of experiments were carried out to select the proper stripping reagent for thio-molybdate LO stripping, adopting prior oxidation of thio-molybdate complex followed by stripping with alkali/alkali salts to get back metal values from LO there by regenerating solvent for further use. The oxidation was carried out with H The loaded organic was found to contain 0.7 To determine the number of theoretical stages required for stripping, the loaded organic and 4% NaOCl were contacted at various O:A ratios within 1:4 to 4:1, while keeping the total volume of phases constant. The McCabe-Thiele plot ( To confirm the above generated data, pilot plant study in the mixer-settlers was carried out in continuous mode for 330 As the O:A phase ratio was maintained at 3:1 during stripping stage, it was predicted that stripping of Mo and W might be incomplete and resulted in lowering of extraction efficiency of Mo in extraction stage. Therefore stripping ratio was readjusted to 1:1 and re-run the pilot plant for few days. Similar observation of decrease in Mo extraction efficiency was also noticed in this second run. In order to increase the stripping efficiency, further experiment was carried out by increasing the strip feed concentration of NaOCl to 8% maintaining O:A ratio of 1:1. This third run was continued with 1% solvent top up. In spite of these modifications, the study ended up with the same result. Pilot plant run was discontinued and further investigation was carried out to solve the issue of metal stripping and regeneration of solvent on bench scale. The pilot study results were shown in A single stage extraction and stripping of LO and recycle of regenerated extractant were carried out for 10 In order to resolve the problem of incomplete stripping of LO, different concepts such as (a) oxidation of thiomolybdate complex of LO using H To confirm this, which was an outcome of inefficient stripping, another approach in which solvent was topped up to 0.5% in each cycle was carried out for 10 Strip raffinate containing 0.7–1 The separation of molybdenum as its thiomolybdate complex from alkaline leach liquor of tungsten spent catalyst was studied by solvent extraction using 3% Aliquat 336 The authors are thankful to the management of Rubamin Limited, Vadodara (India) for granting permission to publish this research work.