We present a numerical study on the influence of crystallographic texture on the earing behavior of a low carbon steel during cup drawing. The simulations are conducted by using the texture component crystal plasticity finite element method which accounts for the full elastic–plastic anisotropy of the material and for the explicit incorporation of texture including texture update. Several important texture components that typically occur in commercial steel sheets were selected for the study. By assigning different spherical scatter widths to them the resulting ear profiles were calculated under consideration of texture evolution. The study reveals that 8, 6, or 4 ears can evolve during cup drawing depending on the starting texture. An increasing number of ears reduces the absolute ear height. The effect of the orientation scatter width (texture sharpness) on the sharpness of the ear profiles was also studied. It was observed that an increase in the orientation scatter of certain texture components entails a drop in ear sharpness while for others the effect is opposite.The shape anisotropy of cup drawn metallic parts is referred to as earing. It is a characteristic phenomenon associated with the crystallographic texture and the resulting elastic–plastic anisotropy of metals Various concepts exist to introduce texture-related sheet anisotropy into finite element models for sheet forming. The initial material anisotropy existing before sheet deformation can be incorporated either through an anisotropic yield surface function or directly via the incorporation of crystallographic texture models into the finite element codes. The anisotropic yield surface models can be classified into two groups. The first one comprises empirical and phenomenological anisotropic yield surface equations, such as the equations of Hill from 1948 The advantage of yield surface concepts for mechanical anisotropy predictions are relatively short calculation times, when implemented into finite element models, although one must recall that the measurement of the mechanical anisotropy parameters and the fitting of the anisotropy coefficients must be added to the total time required for a prediction. The main disadvantage of the yield surface concept is that they do not consider that the inherited sheet starting textures may evolve further in the course of sheet forming. This means that reliable anisotropy simulations should incorporate the starting texture as well the gradual In order to take into account texture evolution during deformation, the crystallographic texture models have been developed. These models can be roughly classified into three groups, namely, combinations of a Taylor-type strain-rate homogenization model and finite element formulations, the crystal plasticity finite element model, and texture-function based crystal plasticity finite element models. The approach of combining a Taylor model with a finite element model was introduced by Gottstein and coworkers The crystal plasticity finite element models consist in a direct implementation of crystallographic slip kinematics into finite element models. It was first suggested by Peirce and co-workers For rendering the crystal plasticity finite element models more flexible with respect to the treatment of large polycrystalline entities Raabe and Roters recently introduced a texture component crystal plasticity finite element model Only few systematic simulation studies were published on the earing behavior of body-centered-cubic steels. For instance, Bacroix and Gilormini These studies provide in part excellent insight into the relationship between the initial crystallographic texture of steel sheets before cup drawing and the resulting ear profiles after deformation. Building on these observations the present study aims at pushing this effort a step further by, first, rigorously incorporating texture update into the simulations according to the crystal plasticity scheme, second, by a systematic variation of the relevant texture components typically occurring in body-centered-cubic steels A challenge of integrating constitutive polycrystal plasticity laws into finite element approaches lies in identifying an effective method of mapping a crystallographic texture which represents a It is an important condition in that context that crystal plasticity finite element models require a The texture component finite element method is a novel approach in the context described above As a rule texture components require positivity, i.e. Spherical central functions, including corresponding pole figures, can be written as series expansions of The corresponding projection of that component in a pole figure, The texture component method is well suited for an incorporation of texture into crystal plasticity finite element models because it is based on sets of localized spherical normalized standard functions which are characterized by simple parameters of physical significance (Euler angle triple for the main orientations, volume fractions, full widths at half maximum). Typically only a few texture components are required to describe the orientation distribution function which in turn can represent the texture of any grain assembly whatever size it may have. The input textures can be obtained from any experimental or theoretical source. The texture component method was originally introduced by Lücke et al. In Section In this study we use the constitutive crystal plasticity model suggested by Kalidindi et al. The stress measure is the elastic work conjugate to the strain measure In the present study, 24 slip systems with crystallographic 〈1 The main task of the new concept is to represent sets of spherical Gaussian texture components on the integration points of a finite element mesh for a crystal plasticity simulation. This procedure works in two steps, This means that the scatter which was originally only given in orientation space is now represented by a distribution both, in real space and in orientation space, i.e. the initial spherical distribution is transformed into a spherical It is an important detail that the use of the Taylor assumption locally allows one to map more than one preferred crystallographic orientation on each integration point and to assign to each of them an individual volume fraction. This means that the procedure of mapping and rotating single orientations in accord with the initial texture component scatter width is individually conducted for After decomposing and representing the initial texture components as a lateral and spherical single orientation distribution in the mesh, the texture The finite element calculations were conducted by using MSC/Marc in conjunction with the user defined material subroutine HYPELA2  The texture components which typically occur with notable volume fractions in rolled and subsequently heat treated body centered cubic steel sheets The texture component crystal plasticity finite element simulations in this study are conducted by using combinations of the texture components given above (with 7° and with 15° full width at half maximum) with a random background component, The random background texture component is in principle assigned to the integration points in the same way as the regular ideal texture components. This means that in the current study each integration point is described by one rotation matrix which is selected randomly from the set of spherical orientation component functions (typical texture components) and a second rotation matrix which is generated as a random orientation. Like the prescribed ideal texture components, the random texture component does cease to exist as a Owing to the orthorhombic sample symmetry each of the single orientations has in the starting texture to be balanced by three additional symmetrically equivalent orientations in order to correctly reproduce the response of the material in the crystal plasticity finite element calculations. Consequently, each of the symmetrical variants was assigned one quarter of the volume of the original component, i.e. 20  The course of the ear profiles (for both scatter widths) of the (1 In the six ear profiles of the two {1 The presented ear profiles of the four individual texture components suggest that they essentially reproduce the symmetry of the crystallography of the center orientation relative to the sheet and forming symmetry. According to the rim shapes characteristic differences occur in ear height for the various starting textures. The The ear profile generated by the It is well known that recrystallization in body-centered-cubic steel sheets is not homogeneous but highly orientation dependent We used a texture component crystal plasticity finite element method to investigate the effect of texture on the earing behavior in body-centered-cubic steel sheets. The conclusions are: The ear profiles depend strongly on the respective texture component: The two {1 An increase in the number of ears entails a drop in the ear height. An increase in the orientation scatter of the texture component before deformation does not generally lead to a drop in the resulting shape anisotropy. Owing to its large in-plane anisotropy the rotated cube component (which may result from pronounced recovery) should be avoided as a main texture component in body-centered-cubic steel sheets. In principal the incorporation of a random texture component prior to mechanical loading is useful in order to properly account for anisotropy which arises from texture evolution effects during forming. In the present case, however, texture evolution of that random component seems to be of minor importance for the final earing profile. The texture component finite element method can be used as an engineering numerical laboratory which helps the user to decide which forming situations require the direct incorporation of texture including texture update and which do not. Also, it can be used to derive phenomenological constitutive data as input parameters for instance for yield surface simulations. We assume that future commercial applications of anisotropy theory in conjunction with industry-scale forming and tool design simulations will make increasingly use of the texture component crystal plasticity finite element method owing to its physically-based foundations and the ever-decreasing costs associated with CPU time. The authors are grateful to the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (German Research Foundation) which is funding this study within the Schwerpunktprogramm 1138 (Modellierung von Größeneinflüssen bei Fertigungsprozessen).