An improved method for coal breakage characterisation has been developed at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC). Part 1 of this paper presents the breakage testing method and results, Part 2 gives a breakage model that determines the energy-size reduction relationship for multi-components of particle size and coal density, and Part 3 demonstrates the applications of the model for HGI predictions and coal breakage simulations.
                  The new method incorporates hardware for a fine particle breakage characterisation test, the JKFBC (JK Fine-particle Breakage Characteriser), a device modified from the standard HGI mill, which has a precision torquemeter installed to record energy utilisation during the experiments. Distinguished from the traditional HGI test, which is based on a single particle size with a single energy, the new characterisation test offers the flexibility to grind coal particles at various sizes, or various densities, or indeed (various components) with a range of energy levels. Energy consumption during the grinding was recorded. Using an Australian and a Chinese coal sample collected from power stations, this paper demonstrates the effects of particle size and density on coal breakage, and elucidates the deficiencies associated with the traditional HGI test.The comminution of coal is essential for its effective utilisation in the areas of coal combustion, carbonisation, gasification, the creation of coal slurry, and the incorporation of coal injection in cement kilns to make cement clinker or in blast furnaces to assist in economic iron making It is well known that coal grindability affects both coal comminution efficiency and milling capacity. The grindability of coal varies significantly with different deposits, seams, mineral compositions, relative density (RD) components, particle size, etc. Therefore measuring coal resistance to breakage, or coal grindability, is a standard requirement for the coal industry. The traditional grinding index, widely used by industry, is called the Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI). The original HGI test was developed by Hardgrove Despite its wide application, a number of limitations associated with the HGI test have been reported in the literature. The most fundamental criticisms focus on the attempt to mimic the continuous process of industrial coal pulverisation by batch processing of the HGI test Several attempts have been made to develop alternative tests, such as the Improved Grindability Test (IGT) Many of the limitations associated with HGI tests result from the lack of energy measurement. As demonstrated in Section Coal breakage characterisation should aim to develop a relationship between size reduction and energy application, i.e. taking into account both input and output of a characterisation process. In the more advanced simulation models such as the Discrete Element Model (DEM) and many mechanistic models of grinding processes, the relationship between size reduction and energy application is essential. In the recently developed Vertical Spindle Mill (VSM) model by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), a coal breakage characterisation model is incorporated. A breakage testing method that has been successfully applied in the mineral industry for ore particle breakage characterisation in the past 30 Particle breakage characterisation aims to quantify the product size distribution which results from the application of energy to a selected feed size via a specific breakage mechanism. Specifically it aims to establish the relationship between specific energy input and resultant product, through some type of laboratory test on a given sample The impact fragments are screened. The size distribution is used to define a single parameter A number of options were investigated to establish a suitable method for coal breakage characterisation, including the DWT – on a single particle and on a bed of particles, the JKRBT, the Piston–Die compression test, and an enhanced HGI tester with a torque measurement and recording system. After evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages associated with the various methods, the enhanced HGI mill was selected for coal breakage characterisation. The testing rig is named the JKFBC (JK Fine-particle Breakage Characteriser), to distinguish it from coarse particle characterisation devices such as the DWT and JKRBT. One particular consideration of this choice is that the JKFBC has a similar grinding mechanism to the industrial coal VSM, and hence the characterisation method can be closely related to full scale VSMs which are widely used in coal-fired power stations. The idea of installing a torque measurement system to the standard HGI mill is not new. The literature has reported similar work, such as in Austin et al. In the standard HGI test, a 50 The JKFBC testing rig was manufactured in the JKMRC workshop. As shown in Firstly the system was calibrated. The torque of the empty mill (without coal) was recorded at various loading weights (by adjusting the number of lead plates) and at various rotational speeds. It was found that the empty mill torque did not vary with loading weights (within the experimental errors), but increased with mill rotational speed, similar to findings published by Austin et al. During coal grinding, the torque varies with grinding time, as displayed in From physics, power is given by torque multiplying angular velocity, and energy is the power over a period of time. For each test, specific energy can be determined from the mill angular velocity, the torque reading, and the sample mass, by using the following equation: Eq. Two black coal samples were collected for breakage characterisation tests. One sample was from an Australian power station located in Queensland, and the other was from a Chinese power station located in Jiangsu Province. Both samples were collected from feed conveyors prior to pulverisation during the plant surveys in an APP (Asia–Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate) Project. The research project was undertaken by the University of Queensland through the JKMRC in Australia, with a collaborative research partner from China University of Mining and Technology (CUMT). The Australian coal had a nominal HGI of 53. The coal came from an open cut coal mine near the power station. The coal was highly abrasive, and had 30% ash content. The analysis of ash content reports high levels of SiO The Chinese coal sample had a nominal HGI of 80. Proximate analysis of the Chinese coal sample showed 50% fixed carbon, 15% volatiles, 1.7% moisture, and 34% ash content, all on an air-dry basis. The mineral matter in the coal includes a significant proportion of pyrite. XRD analysis indicated 1.93% sulphur content in the coal feed sample. The collected coal samples were sized, then float-sink tested to fractionate the samples into various size and RD groups (relative density – formally called SG: Specific Gravity). Two types of breakage tests were conducted. The first test type was the size-based breakage test, aiming to establish the energy-size reduction relationship. Experiments were designed, using the JKFBC, on four narrowly sized coal samples: 0.6–1.18 The second test type was the multi-component test. The experiment was conducted on a particle density by size basis. The four sizes were first separated into four RD groups: <1.4 RD, 1.4–1.6 RD, 1.6–1.8 RD and >1.8 RD. The <1.4 RD group is mainly the liberated coal, the >1.8 RD is mineral matter, and the other two medium densities are composites of coal and mineral matter. Each RD-size sample was subjected to four grinding times, i.e. a total of 64 tests for each coal sample collected during the site campaign. As some density fractions did not have sufficient particles for testing, the actual number of tests were 61 for the Australian coal and 59 for the Chinese coal. A 60 The ground product was collected for standard sizing analysis. The size distribution data were used to determine a fineness parameter, To estimate the experimental errors associated with the JKFBC for coal breakage characterisation, repeat tests were conducted by using the Chinese coal sample. Five samples in the group 0.6–1.18 The repeat tests demonstrate that the experimental errors associated with the JKFBC tests are very small, with a 95% confidence limit being 2% of the mean measured value. For example, for a mean t During each test, torque draw by the JKFBC was recorded. The raw torque signals, in volts over a 90  The torque draw is directly related to energy input (refer to Eq. The mechanism of torque draw in a JKFBC or a full scale VSM can be expressed by the following equation: Since the variables Comparison of the torque draw over a grinding period of 90  This torque draw observation can be explained by the HGI values of the two coals. The Australian coal has HGI of 52. The Chinese coal exhibits an HGI of 80, which is much softer than the Australian coal sample. The softer material would draw less torque, hence less energy under identical mill operating conditions. An experiment based on particle density and size was conducted in the JKFBC mill. About 60 tests (nominally 4 RDs It is obvious that larger particles produce a higher The size effect demonstrated in  Taking the 95% confidence limit of Nevertheless the density effect on coal breakage will play an adverse role in the full scale VSM grinding performance. The 0.6–1.18 An improved breakage characterisation method for coal has been developed. This new method incorporates hardware for a fine particle breakage characterisation test – the JKFBC, which was modified from the standard HGI mill, and is installed with a precision torquemeter to record energy utilisation during the experiments. It also incorporates a breakage model that determines the energy-size reduction relationship for various particle sizes and coal densities. (The model will be presented in Part 2 of this paper). Distinguished from the traditional HGI test, which is based on one single particle size with a single energy, the new characterisation experiment involves grinding a coal mixture of various sizes for various grinding times. The same procedures can be applied to size-by-density coal samples for multi-component characterisation, or a blend of coal samples from various components can be used to study the interactions of the coal components. The effects of particle size and coal density on mill torque draw, which determines the specific energy, and the size reduction have been presented. Statistical analysis of the data demonstrates that the trends observed are real. These effects can explain the deficiencies in the existing HGI tests reported in the literature. The importance of this work is that the new coal breakage characterisation can provide details of size reduction in relation to the applied energy required in VSM models for power station grinding circuit optimisation and for energy benefit assessments. The authors are sincerely grateful for the funds from ACARP C15079 Project and from the APP Project provided by the Australian Government Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism as part of the Asia–Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate program. APP is an innovative effort to accelerate the development and deployment of clean energy technologies, bringing together the countries of Australia, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, Canada and the United States of America in an effort to address the challenges of climate change, energy security and air pollution. Tarong Energy kindly provided the HGI mill and the torquemeter for the breakage characterisation work. The work done by the JKMRC pilot plant workshop and by Dr. Can Ozer in modifying the HGI testing rig was invaluable to this study. The Chinese coal sample was provided by the APP Project collaborative research team from the China University of Mining and Technology led by Prof. Yaqun He. The contributions made by Dr. Stephen Larbi-Bram in collecting the Australian coal sample from a power station and conducting part of the experimental work were gratefully acknowledged. Useful discussions with Dr. Terry Dixon and Mr. Leigh Miller of Tarong Energy on the power station research work were much appreciated. The support from Prof. Emmy Manlapig of JKMRC in the APP project was also gratefully acknowledged. 