The standard (p
                     ∘=0.1 MPa) molar enthalpies of combustion in oxygen of three crystalline N-benzoylthiocarbamic-O-alkylesters, PhCONHCSOR, R=Et (Hbtcee), n-Bu (Hbtcbe), n-Hex (Hbtche), were measured at T=298.15 K by rotating bomb calorimetry. The standard molar enthalpies of sublimation of the three compounds were measured using Calvet microcalorimetry. These values were used to derive the standard molar enthalpies of formation of the compounds in their crystalline and gaseous phases, respectively. 
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                       −Δ
                                          
                                             c
                                          U
                                             m
                                          
                                          ∘
                                       (cr)/(kJ
                                       ·
                                       mol−1)
                                    
                                       
                                          Δ
                                          
                                             cr
                                          
                                          
                                             g
                                          H
                                             m
                                          
                                          ∘
                                       /(kJ
                                       ·
                                       mol−1)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       N-benzoylthiocarbamic-O-ethylester
                                    5777.9±2.2
                                    112.2±1.3
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       N-benzoylthiocarbamic-O-n-butylester
                                    7094.5±2.5
                                    120.7±1.8
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       N-benzoylthiocarbamic-O-n-hexylester
                                    8402.2±3.1
                                    139.7±2.4 There are no reported values for thermochemical properties of the The presented results enabled the standard molar enthalpies of formation in both crystalline and gaseous phases to be derived. The obtained data for the condensed and gaseous phases are necessary for a thermochemical study of the metal complexes, in order to derive thermochemical parameters for the metal–ligand binding. The The purity of the samples was checked by i.r. spectroscopy and by elemental analysis; the mass fraction The enthalpies of combustion were measured with the rotating-bomb calorimeter formerly used at the National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, UK The energy equivalent of the calorimeter was determined from the combustion of benzoic acid (Bureau of Analysed Samples; Thermochemical Standard BCS-CRM 190-r), as described previously From series of eight calibration experiments the energy equivalent of the calorimeter, Samples in pellet form were ignited in oxygen at a pressure of 3.04 MPa with a volume of 10 cm Standard state corrections were calculated by the procedures given by Hubbard The standard molar enthalpies of sublimation were measured using the “vacuum sublimation” drop microcalorimetric method The calorimeter was calibrated  The internal energy for the isothermal bomb process, Δ For each compound, the products of combustion in the experiments consist of a gaseous phase and an aqueous mixture of sulphuric acid for which the thermodynamic properties are known. The values of −Δ  The individual results of the measurements of the enthalpies of sublimation for There are no previously determined values for the standard molar enthalpies of formation of these compounds and, at present, only a limited number of thermochemical studies on compounds containing similar structures are available. The obtained results are shown in This difference is possibly an expression for the increasing instability of the molecule caused by a prolongation in the alkyl chain, which may give rise to steric hindrance in the surroundings of the ester–oxygen- atom. This work is part of a joint research project between the Faculty of Science, University of Porto, Portugal, and the University of Leipzig, F.R. of Germany, under t he auspices of the INIDA program (Acções Integradas Luso-Alemãs 314-Al-p-dr), between ICTI (Instituto de Cooperação Cientı́fica e Tecnológica Internacional) Lisboa, Portugal, and DAAD (Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst), Bonn, Germany, to which we express our thanks. Thanks are also due to FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia), Lisboa, Portugal for financial support to Centro de Investigação em Quı́mica, University of Porto and, for the award of a post-doc research grant to B.S. (SRFH/BPD/3531/2000).