Bone infection is a feared complication following surgery or trauma that remains as an extremely difficult disease to deal with. So far, the outcome of therapy could be improved with the design of 3D implants, which combine the merits of osseous regeneration and local multidrug therapy so as to avoid bacterial growth, drug resistance and the feared side effects. Herein, hierarchical 3D multidrug scaffolds based on nanocomposite bioceramic and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) prepared by rapid prototyping with an external coating of gelatin-glutaraldehyde (Gel-Glu) have been fabricated. These 3D scaffolds contain three antimicrobial agents (rifampin, levofloxacin and vancomycin), which have been localized in different compartments of the scaffold to obtain different release kinetics and more effective combined therapy. Levofloxacin was loaded into the mesopores of nanocomposite bioceramic part, vancomycin was localized into PVA biopolymer part and rifampin was loaded in the external coating of Gel-Glu. The obtained results show an early and fast release of rifampin followed by sustained and prolonged release of vancomycin and levofloxacin, respectively, which are mainly governed by the progressive in vitro degradability rate of these scaffolds. This combined therapy is able to destroy Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria biofilms as well as inhibit the bacteria growth. In addition, these multifunctional scaffolds exhibit excellent bioactivity as well as good biocompatibility with complete cell colonization of preosteoblast in the entire surface, ensuring good bone regeneration. These findings suggest that these hierarchical 3D multidrug scaffolds are promising candidates as platforms for local bone infection therapy.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  The present study is focused in finding an adequate therapeutic solution for the treatment of bone infection based on 3D multifunctional scaffolds, which combines the merits of osseous regeneration and local multidrug delivery. These 3D multidrug scaffolds, containing rifampin, levofloxacin and vancomycin, localized in different compartments to achieve different release kinetics. These 3D multidrug scaffolds displays an early and fast release of rifampin followed by sustained and prolonged release of vancomycin and levofloxacin, which are able to destroy Staphylococcus and Escherichia biofilms as well as inhibit bacteria growth in very short time periods. This new combined therapy approach involving the sequential delivery of antibiofilms with antibiotics constitutes an excellent and promising alternative for bone infection treatment.Bone infection is a potentially devastating complication with important clinical and socio-economic implications Currently, the nanotechnology field has emerged as a powerful tool to combat the infection process Recently, a nanocomposite bioceramic (MGHA), formed by particles of nanocrystalline apatite embedded into amorphous mesoporous bioactive glass in the SiO Currently, the fabrication of The present study is focused in finding an adequate therapeutic solution for the treatment of bone infection by the design of hierarchical 3D multidrug scaffolds based on nanocomposite bioceramic, highly bioactive and biocompatible, with PVA polymer. These structures must be able to incorporate different drugs in various compartments for combined therapy, which allows to eradicate the bacterial biofilm and thus, to completely eliminate the bone infection. For antimicrobial therapy, currently there are many antimicrobial agents and combinations Herein, the present study proposes a 3D multifunctional scaffold as a novel drug delivery system for treatment of bone infection and bone regeneration. This 3D system will be constituted by a mixture of Highly mesostructured 3D multidrug scaffolds were prepared by rapid prototyping via direct-write assembly of precursor slurry using an EnvisionTEC GmbH 3-D Bioplotter™ device Cylindrical scaffolds of 1 For achieving an early and fast release of the antibiofilm antibiotic, an additional coating of mixture Gel-Glu containing RIF was applied by using the Structural, textural and chemical characterization was carried out by using different techniques. X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed on a Philips X’Pert diffractometer MPD (Eindhoven, The Netherlands) equipped with a support for thin films (grazing incidence) and CuKα radiation (40 With the aim of evaluating the The In this sense, the Prior to the bacterial tests, the samples were sterilized by UV-light radiation during 10 Parallel, the effectiveness of these 3D multidrug systems have been also carried out against Gram negative bacteria as In addition, the determination of number of colony-forming units (CFU) present in each biofilm (Gram-positive and Gram-negative) before and after treatment with 3D multidrug systems was carried out. Each biofilm coated glass disk was previously sonicated during 15 Previous to Activity of the lactate dehydrogenase enzyme (LDH) was determined in the culture medium in contact with the scaffolds after 1 and 7 For these studies, adherent cells of different samples were fixed with glutaraldehyde (2.5% in buffer solution, PBS) for 45 Fluorescence microscopy was performed with a confocal laser scanning microscope OLYMPUS FV1200 (OLYMPUS, Tokyo, Japan), using a 60x FLUOR water dipping lens (NA For evaluating cell mitochondrial activity of living cells on the different scaffolds as well as its surroundings after 1 an 7 ALP of the cells growing onto the scaffolds was utilized as marker of cellular differentiation in the evaluation of the phenotype expression of osteoblasts. ALP was measured employing the Reddi-Huggins method based in the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenylphosphate to p-nitrophenol. For this purpose, MTC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblastic cells (2.5 Matrix mineralization was measured by alizarin red staining after cell incubation with G Data was expressed as average/mean All scaffolds were structural, chemical and morphological characterized by different techniques. Firstly, the structural characterization of the MGHA powder (before and after LEV loading) and different 3D scaffolds (MGPVA, MG Textural properties revealed a significant decrease in both, specific surface area and total pore volume, before and after the LEV drug loading, respectively. It is reported in the literature that the decreasing in the values of specific surface area, total pore volume and pore diameter after drug loading process is related to the confinement of the drug into the mesoporous structure Concerning to the yielding of the drug loading process, it was determined by combination of elemental chemical analyses and TG studies. The percent of nitrogen, carbon and hydrogen for all samples obtained by elemental analysis have been collected in the Morphology study of the different 3D scaffolds was performed by SEM. Before dip-coating process, the MG In order to obtain an early release of RIF antibiofilm, MG   For porous and polymer matrices, it has been reported that drug release can be mediated by diffusion, erosion/degradation and swelling followed by diffusion. Although some matrix degradation is involved, under perfect sink conditions, the main driving force for drug delivery out of the mesoporous matrices is pore diffusion/convection, which can be fitted to first order kinetics. Additional parameters such as drug-carrier and host-guest interactions are key factors to dictate drug release profiles. Drug molecules could directly interact with the matrix, in this case, the mesoporous material, the PVA polymer and the Gel-Glu mixture retarding their release. The association and dissociation processes are assumed to be reversible. Furthermore, in general, the reversible association of a drug molecule with a carrier is assumed to follow first order kinetics. Therefore, the theoretical model adopted in this work considers first-order diffusion/convection and drug association/dissociation. Concretely, drug release patterns correspond to fast diffusion/convection but slow association/dissociation. This leads to a decoupling of drug association/dissociation from drug diffusion/convection: the fast release of initially free drug molecules via diffusion/convection and the slow release of initially bound drug molecules that is dictated by the dissociation process. Accordingly, two first order kinetics or two exponential release mechanisms can be described as follows Drug release profiles can be classified into four distinct categories (A-D). The categories are based on the magnitude of the initial burst release, the extent of the release and the steady-state release kinetics following the burst release. The burst release is described as the initial release before reaching the steady-state. In types A and B, the initial burst release is followed by little additional release. The release profile in type C is similar to that in type A in terms of initial burst, but the burst release is followed by a steady-state release of the remaining drug. Finally, type D exhibits a low initial burst release followed by a steady-state release until most of the loaded drug is released From the data of the RIF also presents k Once determined release profiles, antimicrobial assays have been carried out to determine the effectiveness of these multidrug systems against In general the resulting biofilm in a common infection case may not be single species biofilm. Thus, the effectiveness of these multidrug systems has been also determined on gram-negative pathogenic as In order to quantify the number of live bacteria present in each biofilm after of different treatments, CFU was determined. The results were summarized in the With the purpose of evaluating the biocompatibility of the fabricated 3D scaffolds for achieving bone regeneration, Cell morphology and cell colonization were studied by SEM and CLSM. A novel therapeutic solution for bone infection treatment based on 3D multifunctional scaffolds, which combines the merits of osseous regeneration and local multidrug delivery has been developed. The 3D multidrug scaffolds, containing rifampin, levofloxacin and vancomycin, have been designed by rapid prototyping of mixture of nanocomposite bioceramic and polyvinyl alcohol with an external coating of gelatin-glutaraldehyde. The different antimicrobial agents have been localized in different compartments to achieve different release kinetics. These 3D multidrug scaffolds, exhibiting an early and fast release of rifampin followed by sustained and prolonged release of vancomycin and levofloxacin, are able to destroy MVR acknowledges funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 