In this work, the combined effects of vibration parameters on the circularly screening processes are analysed based on the Taguchi orthogonal experiment method. First, numerical investigations of the screening process including the average particle velocity and screening efficiency of different particle size fractions are presented. The variations of the average velocity and the screening efficiency of different particle size fractions for both spherical and non-spherical particle models are examined. The effect of vibration intensity on the screening process is discussed and the potential error induced by the analysis of a single factor on the screening performance is demonstrated. Then, the orthogonal test data of average particle velocity and screening efficiency for 16 cases are analysed by using the direct analysis method. The combined effects of amplitude, frequency and the inclination angle of the screen deck on the screening performance are discussed based on the calculated average values of each level of the factors. The corresponding optimal combinations of the three factors for two screening performance indexes are obtained, respectively. The effect weights of the vibration parameters on the screening performance indexes are also obtained by comparing the ranges of the factors. This work should be helpful for the understanding of the combined effects of operation parameters and provides essential references for efficient operation and optimal design of a vibrating screen.Screening is an important unit operation, widely used in industry for size classification of particulate materials. Its performance indexes such as efficiency and throughput capacity, depending on the operation parameters such as amplitude, frequency and inclination angle of the screen deck, are crucial for the whole process line, which can significantly affect the product quality and economic benefit. Hence, it is a key concern of many studies for the design and operation of screening devices to achieve high performance, which requires a fundamental understanding of the combined effects of the vibration parameters on screening processes The screening process is complicated due to the interactions between particles, particles and screen surface, the effects of various operational parameters on particle motion and the complicated size distribution of particles To overcome the above limitations, numerical methods based on discrete element method (DEM), originally proposed by Cundall and Strack To date, there are increasing reports of DEM simulations of the screening processes in the literature. The initial studies with two-dimensional (2D) DEM were performed to investigate the particle motion in the screening process including the segregation of different size particles on the deck and the penetration of small size particles through the deck holes The particle model used in previous studies was mostly spherical which may induce a significant error because of the simplification of the particle shape. Recently, two kinds of non-spherical particle models were employed in the simulations of screening processes. One is called super-quadric particles presented by Cleary et al. The previous studies are helpful for the insightful understanding of the screening process and the independent effect of a single parameter on the screening performance. However, it is known that the screening performance depends on the combination of many factors such as particle properties, feeding rate, screen profile and vibration parameters. For a given screening system, the combination of vibration parameters including vibration amplitude and frequency plays the important role on the screening performance. So, it is necessary to optimise these vibration parameters. Recently, Li et al. This work uses the validated DEM model by Zhao et al. The laboratory-scale screening device simulated in this work is the same one as used in the previous validation study of the DEM model In the experiments, the total screening efficiency was calculated by the ratio of the mass of undersized particles collected in the bins to the mass of feeding material finer than the screen aperture. For calculating the particle velocity, a high-speed dynamic analysis system was employed to record the motion of the tracked particles  The vibration intensity of the screen is a key parameter affecting the screen performance which can be characterised by the vibration frequency The vibration intensity must be appropriate for the feeding materials with different properties. Insufficient vibration will cause pegging and blinding of particles. However, excessive vibration intensity will cause particles to bounce from the screen deck and be thrown so far from the deck that there are less effective presentations to the screen deck. So, the combination selection of these three vibration parameters is a crucial issue for a vibrating screen which will be discussed in To test the combined effect of the vibration parameters on the screening performance in an efficient way, an orthogonal experimental table was designed with 3 factors and 4 levels for each factor ( The DEM has proved as a powerful approach to investigate the granular processes as it can provide a precise description of both particle-particle and particle-wall interactions by tracking the motion of individual particles The CAD model of the screen used in the simulations was constructed, corresponding to the structure of the experimental device shown in Numerical investigations were performed based on the DEM model of the screening process. Direct analysis method was employed to analyse the orthogonal experimental data and the corresponding results were used to study the combined effects of vibration parameters on the screening performances. Optimal parameters for an overall high screening performance were obtained in the present study.  At the start, particles are discharged from the feeding bin. The vibrated screen throws the particles off the screen deck so that they can fall back and move downwards along the screen. During the screening process, the vibration induced stratification of the feed material, which allows fine particles to settle through the layer of materials to the screen surface and larger particles to rise to the top. The stratified fine particles that get the opportunity of passing through the deck openings become an undersize stream. The large particles and the part of retained fine particles are conveyed to the discharging end and become an oversize stream. When the particle materials cover the whole screen deck and the mass of undersize and oversize become relatively steady, the screening process reaches a dynamic steady state.  In   For a given screening system, the vibration intensity is the critical parameter affecting the screening processes. The industrial vibrating screens employed in mineral processing usually operate with a wide range of vibration intensity depending on the characteristics of processed materials. So it is necessary to discuss the effect of the vibration intensity on the screening processes which should be useful for a deep understanding of the screening mechanism. Based on the vibration parameter groups used in the orthogonal table (see  Based on the above analysis, it is clear that the relation between the screening performance indexes (average particle velocity and screening efficiency) and the vibration intensity should be more complex. Although there are certain correlations between them, significant errors may be induced by using the prediction equation as a function of the single factor of vibration intensity because of the highly random interactions between vibrated particles. According to Eq. For the convenience, Direct analysis method, which is a simple and efficient method for the analysis of the orthogonal experimental data, was adopted to analyse the above data and the results of spherical particles, non-spherical particles and experiments were listed in the second half of The factor which has the largest value of range will have the most important effect on the particle velocity while the smallest value of range has the least effect. In other words, the parameter with the largest range is the most sensitive factor influencing the value of particle velocity. So, it is clear from the table that for both the simulations and experiments the range values of the inclination are the largest, the values of the vibration frequency and the amplitude are the second and the smallest, respectively. The perfect consistency between the simulations and experiments demonstrates that the DEM models used in this works are reliable for predicting the particle velocity.  Panels a, d and g in  The effect of inclination angle on the particle velocity is shown in The vibration parameters of amplitude, frequency and inclination angle have different effects on the average particle velocity or the screening capacity. The analysis results of the effect of the single parameter on the screening process have certain limitations because the process performance is collectively determined by multiple parameters. Based on the orthogonal test data, it is convenient to choose a suitable group of parameters for a desirable screening performance. From the present study, if the screening capacity is the most important concern, the corresponding optimal parameters can be chosen directly from The same orthogonal experimental table was used to analyse the combination effects of vibration parameters on the screening efficiency which is shown in Similarly, the direct analysis method was applied to the orthogonal test data of the screening efficiency. The orthogonal analysis results obtained by the same calculation method discussed in For the simulation with spherical particles and the experiment, it is consistent that the inclination angle is the second and the amplitude is the third important factors that influence the efficiency. But the values are close which means that the two factors of inclination angle and amplitude have a relatively similar effect weight for the screening efficiency. The finding from simulations with non-spherical particles is different, where the amplitude is the second and the inclination angle is the third important factor. The mismatch may be due to the particle shape caused by the special non-spherical particle model.  Panels b, e and h in The effect of inclination angle on the screening efficiency is shown in Based on the above discussion, it is clear that the effects of the vibration parameters of amplitude, frequency and inclination angle on the screening efficiency are contrary to the trends of the average particle velocity. So the group of optimal parameters chosen for high screening efficiency is generally not suitable for the purpose of reaching a high screening capacity. When the screening performance indexes of both the screening capacity and screening efficiency are concerned, a compromise should be made.  Based on the same strategy the predicted optimal combination of parameters for the simulations with spherical particle models and the laboratory-scale experiments with real rock particles are obtained, which are listed in DEM simulations with spherical and non-spherical particle models and corresponding experiments were conducted based on the Taguchi orthogonal experimental design. Detailed analysis of the combined effects of vibration parameters of amplitude, frequency and inclination angle on the screening performance in terms of average particle velocity (screening capacity) and screening efficiency was carried out based on the orthogonal test data. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: The average particle velocity is a major factor determining the screening capacity. The combined effects of vibration amplitude, frequency and inclination angle on the average particle velocity show similar trends for both simulations and experiments. The results of orthogonal analysis consistently show that the inclination angle is the most significant factor on the average particle velocity, followed by frequency and amplitude. The optimal parameters for achieving the high screening capacity are 1.75 Similar trends are also observed in the results of the effects of amplitude, frequency and inclination angle on the screening efficiency of both simulations and experiments. The results of the orthogonal analysis show that vibration frequency is the most sensitive factor, while inclination angle and amplitude have similar effects on the screening efficiency. Optimal parameters for reaching the highest screening efficiency can be obtained based on the orthogonal test data, whose values are 2.0 The opposite trends between the effects of parameters on the average particle velocity and screening efficiency illustrate that a compromise for selecting the parameters should be made for obtaining a reasonable high performance for the whole screening process. The results based on the orthogonal test analysis should be more realistic and reliable than those from the study of the effect of a single parameter on the screening performance. In future works, it is better to implement cohesive or capillary force models for fine or wet particles in certain screening processes because these forces may significantly limit the motion of fine particles on the screen deck and hence reduce the screening efficiency. In addition, more factors such as feeding rate, particle shape, and the opening area of the deck should be considered in the simulation studies. The more advanced design of experiment method such as central composite design could be employed to study the regression equation that predicts the effects of the process parameters on the screening performance based on the DEM simulations. This work is financially supported by the