The sorption behavior and possible separation of zirconium and hafnium from acid solution was studied on Diphonix® chelating resin containing diphosphonic, sulfonic and carboxylic acid groups. Sulfuric acid solution was selected and then used in dynamic studies. The effects of acid concentration, temperature and solution flow rate on the separation of Zr and Hf using Diphonix® ion-exchanger were investigated. The best separation of these elements was obtained in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 22 °C with a linear flow rate <7.5 cm/h (<0.79 BV/h). Results show Diphonix® resin to be very promising in the separation of zirconium from hafnium.Hafnium occurs in all zirconium ores in the range of 2–3% but the use of these elements in the nuclear industry requires that reactor grade zirconium contains less than 100 ppm of hafnium, which is difficult because of their similar chemical properties resulting from almost identical atomic and ionic radii. Analytical problems also increase when the content of hafnium in zirconium compounds approaches the level of 100 ppm. Additionally zirconium minerals are the only sources of hafnium, which has many applications, e.g. semi-conductors, anti-reflective covers, incandescent fibers. The best method of separating these metals and the most frequently used are: solvent extraction ( In the case of ion exchange, different anion and cation ion exchangers are employed. The most often used are strong-base anion exchange resins, where zirconium is adsorbed in preference to hafnium from concentrated hydrochloric acid or diluted sulfuric acid solutions ( This information and the fact that the affinity of a chelating ion exchanger for specific metals depends on the reciprocal position of the functional groups, their spatial configuration, steric effects and other features related to the construction of resin ( In this paper the behavior of hafnium and zirconium on the Diphonix® resin has been investigated to appraise the possibility of separation of these metals in the selected system. Diphonix® and Monophos® resins were obtained from EiChrom Industries (France). Diphonix® and Monophos® were received in moist form and their moisture contents were determined to be 62.4 IRIS II ADVANTAGE RAD HR (serial no 7063) Thermo Jarrell Ash (USA) inductively coupled plasma emission spectrometer was used applying the instrument conditions and wavelengths reported in previous work ( In preliminary studies on weight distribution coefficients, the concentrations of metals in solutions were determined using ICP-AES ( To choose the best medium for zirconium and hafnium separation by continuous ion exchange, preliminary investigations were carried out in which the weight distribution coefficients of both elements were determined on Diphonix® resin in 1 M solutions of HCl, HNO Separation factor was also calculated applying the formula: All experiments concerning dynamic methods of Hf and Zr separation were performed utilizing a feed aqueous solution of zirconium sulfate containing the natural amount of hafnium of composition: [Zr] Experiments were performed at least in duplicate at room temperature (22  The breakthrough curves obtained for various concentrations of sulfuric acid are presented in The breakthrough curves obtained at a flow rate of 7.2 mL/h (0.79 BV/h) are presented in  Some experiments were carried out on a larger scale (  It is possible to utilize Diphonix® resin containing diphosphonic, sulfonic and carboxylic acid groups for separation zirconium and hafnium. The best medium for separation of hafnium and zirconium is 0.5 M sulfuric acid. A decrease in temperature from 22 °C to 5 °C lowers the degree of metals separation; while lower flow rates through the column increases zirconium and hafnium separation. Under the best examined conditions, a 10 fold decrease of initial content of hafnium in zirconium can be achieved, with an efficiency of zirconium recovery equal to 45%. These results prove that Diphonix® resin is very promising for the separation of zirconium from hafnium.