This paper presents a discontinuum modelling approach to investigate Longwall Top Coal Caving (LTCC) behaviour including stress distribution, coal and rock failures, top coal caving and roof strata rupture, and to analyse the impact of overburden movement on top coal caving. The current model ia successful in using plastic material in a discontinuum code for intact rocks. The model scale is large enough to capture the critical features of LTCC, including steady-state caving of top coal and repeatable periodic weighting of roof strata. The applicability of the numerical model was assessed by calibration with field measurements obtained from a longwall mine site. The numerical study found that the stress distribution caused by LTCC mining is in general similar to that caused by conventional longwall mining; top coal predominantly fails in shear whereas roof rock mostly fails in tension; top coal starts to cave in stress caving while main roof strata first rupture in crushing mode; and roof strata weightings periodically increase and decrease top coal cavability. The findings of this study should assist engineers in better understanding fundamental rock mechanics associated with LTCC, identifying key geotechnical parameters dominating caving behaviour, and managing top coal productivity and mine safety involved in LTCC operation.Longwall Top Coal Caving (LTCC) is considered one of the most efficient methods for mining thick coal seams. Successful evaluation of LTCC applicability is heavily dependent on the understanding of the important geotechnical mechanisms including stress distribution, coal and rock failures, top coal caving and roof strata movement that may result in technical risks such as face/roadway/support instability, increased surface subsidence, windblast and severe weighting events. A sufficient insight into these mechanisms is important for efficiently managing potential risks, improving mine safety and maintaining scheduled production of an LTCC operation. LTCC-associated mechanisms have been analysed in previous studies; however, they have not been understood to a satisfactory level. In a few studies, the fundamental LTCC behaviours including stress distribution and roof strata movement were not directly investigated but were assumed to be similar to those in conventional longwall mining. One main reason for the limited understanding of LTCC behaviours is partly due to the difficulties in numerical modelling in past studies. Although the previous studies were useful in improving general understanding of the behaviours, they were unable to sufficiently investigate stress distribution by explicitly modelling rock caving and roof strata movement. For example, continuum modelling methods are capable of analysing stress distribution and rock failure; however, they require a well-developed algorithm to implicitly represent caving progress, goaf consolidation and continuous mining. In this paper, a detailed discontinuum modelling analysis was performed by using plastic material for intact rocks in a field-scale LTCC model. The field measurements at a real LTCC face were used to calibrate and validate the proposed model. The LTCC model was then employed in detail to investigate stress distribution, coal and rock failure modes, top coal caving mechanism and roof strata rupture mode in LTCC mining. The impact of overburden movement on top coal caving was also analysed in this paper. The Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) Since UDEC is a two dimensional code, the three-dimensional geometry of a geological structure cannot be represented except for special orientations. However, in longwall mining, the face advance along panel length is much greater than the face advance along panel width. Hence, a UDEC model with the plane-strain condition, which represents an LTCC face advancing along panel length and located at mid-panel width, is capable of identifying fundamental rock responses caused by LTCC. It should be mentioned that in longwall mining, groundwater may facilitate the mining-induced fracturing, opening of natural joints, bed separation and rock caving. The LTCC model is based on one LTCC face in the Bowen Basin, Queensland, Australia. Owing to confidentiality matters, the name of the mine is not disclosed and is named “Mine A” in this paper. Mine A extracts the Goonyella Middle Seam, which has a depth of 80–300 m and an average seam dip of three degrees at the site. The field measurements at Mine A refer to the coal seam recovery rate, top coal caving distance, immediate roof caving distance and load on face support. The LTCC operation was considered successful with a seam thickness recovery rate of up to 85%. The model has a total height of 250 m representing the entire overburden strata and floor strata at Mine A. The total length of model is 1200 m, which is five times the length of mining area ( All coal and rocks in the LTCC model were simulated using UDEC plastic materials. The areas of interest consist of strain-softening materials to capture the rock strength disintegration. The strain-softening material model is based on the Mohr-Coulomb model with non-associated shear and associated tensile flow rules. All discontinuities including vertical joints and bedding planes in the LTCC model were modelled using the UDEC Coulomb slip model. This basic joint material model is the generalisation of the Coulomb friction law. It is noted that in past LTCC studies, the UDEC models have been limited in modelling coal and rock blocks as elastic materials. Poulsen No rock sample from Mine A was collected and tested in this study due to limited access. The intact Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) values of typical rocks at the mine and at its neighbouring mines are available in several studies. The properties of coal and rocks for the modelling are shown in There are a few guidelines for the determination of post-peak strength properties. The properties of discontinuities for the modelling are shown in The progressive mining in the LTCC model was simulated in a way that is similar to the mining progress in reality. The first step is to extract the seam by cutting one metre in the lower coal section. This small interval in extraction also minimises the transient effect of inertial reaction caused by the sudden cutting/deletion in the model response. The second step is to advance the face support by one metre by deleting the support at the old position and setting it again at the new face position. The third step is to run the model to reach equilibrium state. The last step is to recover the top coal by deleting the caved blocks located within the recovery area. After the mining cycle is complete, the next cycle will repeat the steps. All the mining tasks were implemented in the UDEC model using a built-in programming language (FISH). The interaction between face support, top coal and surrounding rocks contributes to the roof rocks’ behaviour. Hence, a realistic simulation of face support is required. In the current model, a set of support members available in UDEC was used to cover a space of 4.5 m, representing a practical length of roof canopy. Five indicators were developed and monitored during the progressive mining in the LTCC model. The indicators are “Load on face support”, “Front abutment stress”, “Mode of failure”, “Maximum subsidence” and “Top coal recovery rate”. The load on face support was measured through the total force exerted by the support members. The value of the force was obtained using a UDEC command. The force was recorded in every face advance when the model was in equilibrium. The front abutment stress was monitored in both lower coal and top coal sections. There are two ways of monitoring the stress. Firstly, the vertical stress was plotted along two horizontal lines located in the middle of the lower coal (line A) and in the middle of the top coal (line B). Secondly, the magnitudes of vertical stress at locations 10 and 15 m ahead of the face line and in the middle of lower coal and top coal thicknesses were monitored using a FISH function. These lines and locations (black dots) are illustrated in The LTCC model was calibrated against the first caving distance of top coal (the interval from the face entry to a face line where top coal starts to cave) observed at Mine A. The model was further validated by comparing the movement of roof strata and the load on face support to those measured in the field. The immediate roof started to cave at 23 m while the first rupture (or first weighting event as discussed in the next paragraph) of main roof occurred at 73 m of face advance. These distances were within 82% of the field measurements, indicating a good agreement. The computed load and field load on face support in the first 120 m of extraction are shown in The distributions of principal stresses at different stages of mining in the LTCC model are shown in It is also observed from these figures that in the unmined coal seam ahead of the face line, the direction of minor principal stresses changed from vertical to horizontal or nearly horizontal. Meanwhile, the direction of major principal stresses changed from horizontal to vertical or inclined. The changes are due to the concentration of vertical stress combined with the relief of horizontal stress in this area. Further into the unmined seam, the directions of principal stresses gradually returned to their pre-mining state. In cases where the pre-mining major principal stress is vertical, the change in direction may occur above and below the mined-out area. The vertical stress was plotted along the monitoring lines in The computed abutment stress is compared to that in similar numerical analyses of an Australian conventional longwall The changes in vertical stress at the monitoring locations are shown in The failure state of discontinuities at the end of the extraction in the LTCC model is displayed in The failure state of intact rocks at the end of the extraction is displayed in The failure modes of discontinuities and intact blocks can be explained by the interaction of material strength with stress distribution. In a normal mining cycle and in the top coal immediately above the support, the horizontal stress is considerably released. Meanwhile, the vertical stress still acts owing to the weight of overlying strata and the force from the support. This area is considered in low confining stress. In this condition, coal mass can fail in tension along the vertical joints ( From the LTCC model, a state of failure in the top coal before its first caving is shown in The progressive movement of overburden strata showed that the main roof bridged over a long distance of face advance and then ruptured at a face advance of 73 m. This stability can be explained by the formation and failure of voussoir beams in the strata. The voussoir beam theory has been applied to explain the stability of horizontally laminated and vertically jointed rocks above an underground excavation. After the first rupture, Main Roof 1 and Main Roof 2 continued to bridge and rupture periodically at 128, 179 and 233 m of face advance. Simultaneously, the upper strata continued to displace downwards increasingly. The first weighting event (WE1) of main roof strata was found to be related to the first rupture, as discussed in The impact of roof strata movement on top coal caving is analysed through the maximum subsidence and top coal recovery rate in the LTCC model. Steady, repeatable and realistic values of surface subsidence as the face advances denote a steady-state movement of the roof strata while the top coal recovery rate represents the cavability of top coal in every 10 m of face advance. The maximum value of surface subsidence after every 20 m of face advance is displayed in The top coal recovery rate in every 10 m of face advance is shown in The analyses of roof strata movement and associated top coal caving suggest that a steady-state caving of top coal can be achieved once periodic weighting of important main roof strata occurs. It can be seen from This paper presents a detailed discontinuum modelling analysis using a field-scale LTCC model. The current modelling, for the first time regarding LTCC problems, successfully uses the strain-softening material in UDEC for intact rocks. The simulation explicitly represents the top coal caving and adequately captures both failure and strength disintegration of rocks involved in LTCC operation. The model scale and progressive mining simulations sufficiently induce the steady-state caving of top coal under the repeatable periodic weighting of main roof strata. The developed model, while satisfactorily simulating a large-scale strata movement, inevitably requires more computation time. With a reasonable scale of geometry, the model can be efficiently used for the cavability assessment of LTCC for a new mine site. The accuracy and reliability of the model results could be ensured through the proper determination of input rock properties and the calibration and validation of the LTCC model against field measurements. The better understanding of the LTCC behaviours and of the impact of overburden movement on top coal caving has been considerably improved through investigations of the field-scale model's simulations. The study confirms that the stress distribution in LTCC mining is similar to that in conventional longwall mining. A high horizontal principal stress is found to reduce the magnitude of peak abutment stress and to change the direction of principal stresses ahead of the coal face. A detailed analysis of material failure provides further evidence to demonstrate that top coal predominantly fails in shear. The weighting events of roof strata are found to be related to the strata ruptures, which is consistent with past empirical studies. The Vietnam Ministry of Education and Training ( None.