 In addition to the previously mentioned processes, the CYMET process [ As already mentioned, the problem of the formation and behaviour of sulphur in the leaching processes has been investigated in several fundamental research studies but no complete explanation has as yet been proposed. In the majority of the studies it is stated that more than 90% and, in some cases, more than 95% of elemental sulphur is formed. Ravi et al [ The morphology of formed elemental sulphur is greatly affected by the particle size, the holding time in the medium, and the leaching conditions [  It may be seen that the amount of elemental sulphur, formed in the processes in the pilot plant or production conditions, is considerably smaller than in laboratory research. The residual sulphur is oxidised into soluble forms, in most cases sulphuric acid. It is the same product as in pyrometallurgy and the efficiency of marketing of the product determines the feasibility of the economic parameters of the process. Unfortunately, at present, sulphuric acid is almost impossible to sell anywhere profitably in the world and processing of the acid requires higher production costs. The majority of the primary raw materials of nonferrous metals and coats partially or completely the leached surface. The reagents must diffuse through this layer and this usually greatly hinders the overall kinetics of the process. The leaching processes may be relatively long (expressed in days) at relatively high temperatures (~ However, in reality, sulphide sulphur does not transfer completely to the elemental form in accordance with the equation If the system has a sufficiently high redox potential, for example, using ozone as the oxidation agent, or by high-pressure leaching, sulphur is not precipitated in elemental form, but in the form of a soluble sulphate: The system is characterised by a relatively high rate of the process because it is not hindered by the diffusion of reactants through the layer of elemental sulphur which is oxidised to sulphuric acid. The amount of sulphur in the soluble form varies in the range 3–40%,  The photographs also show that leaching is not uniform and does not take place gradually in all grains but in certain grains it is extensive or complete whereas in others it is not. With increasing temperature the number of reacting grains increases and all the grains react at temperatures above 90 The unleached particles show that the crystallographic orientation of the chalcopyrite grains may differ and the rate of leaching through these grains is slower than through the remainder of the grains. On the other hand, it appears that preferential leaching takes place on the particles with sharp edges and ledges on which the charge accumulates and is the driving force of the electrochemical reaction of leaching of chalcopyrite. Auxiliary experiments show that accurate polished surfaces of the massive chalcopyrite sample were leached only to the minimum extent in the same medium as the one used for the same chalcopyrite, processed by milling. A special role is also played by the accumulation of defects as a result of milling and the support of leaching by the defective structure [ The occurrence of sulphur in the form of individual globules, This mechanism better explains the observed morphology of sulphur than the surface migration of sulphur. Although the leaching reaction could be explained by a different mechanism, the morphological studies show that sulphur is at least partially dissolved and subsequently precipitates. In addition, as mentioned later, another reaction product was identified, CuS. Reaction The effect of the concentration of the leaching agent on morphology is shown in As assumed, the chalcopyrite grains are covered by elemental sulphur whose amount increased slowly with increasing concentration of the ferric ion, but it may be concluded unambiguously that the effect of temperature is much stronger than that of the concentration of the ferric ions. However, morphology is similar and the results indicate the formation of a discontinuous layer of sulphur in the globular form. The reaction rate and, therefore, nucleation of sulphur depend on the concentration of the ferric ions in the solution;  Generally, the surface of the particles is less attacked in comparison with leaching using the chloride. The presence of a large amount of sulphur is evident only at 99 In the sulphate medium, the linear kinetics of the process was detected, probably as a result of slower leaching in comparison with the chloride, representing the starting parts of the kinetic curves. The smaller amount of elemental sulphur, formed by the leaching reaction, is at least partly responsible for this course because sulphur does not cover completely the leached surface and, at the same time, since the degree of conversion is low, the interfacial area changes only slightly. Since the resultant sulphur does not completely cover the leached surface, photographs show directly chalcopyrite, The amount of SO  Since elemental sulphur does not cover the leached surface and the size of the surface rapidly decreases as a result of the high rate of the process, the observed parabolic kinetics indeed copies the model of the decreasing volume although it is obvious that the model cannot be completely exact because of the irregular form of the grains and/or formation of cracks and cavities which change the actual interfacial area. Despite this, examination by optical microscopy confirmed the formation of particles with different colours, as the main matrix of chalcopyrite, Careful handling of leached chalcopyrite in a solution containing ferric ions and additional experiments, including measurements of the redox potential of leaching, showed that CuS also forms in these cases, i.e., the formation of CuS in leaching is a regular phenomenon. The role of the organic solvent in the leaching processes is the permanent removal of the resultant elemental sulphur from the particle surfaces.  None of the photographs indicates the presence of elemental sulphur. The leached surface shows a relatively high degree of disruption. Taking into account the presence of a relatively large amount of small particles, it may be concluded that leaching is accompanied by the formation of relatively high stresses leading to gradual destruction of the leached particles. A detailed view of a particle of leached chalcopyrite at 90  In order to intensify the process of leaching of chalcopyrite, experiments were carried out with leaching in a high-frequency field, as described previously in [  The effect of the amount of the ferric ions, i.e., the leaching agent, is strong, as indicated by morphological examination. The use of more concentrated solutions results in the gradual covering of the leached surface with elemental sulphur. This sulphur is globular and highly porous,  As discussed previously, investigations were also carried out into the possibilities of acid leaching of the tetrahedrite concentrate in the solution of ferric chloride. X-ray diffraction phase analysis showed, in addition to the tetrahedrite Cu  Microscopic studies of solid residues after leaching of the tetrahedrite calcine in the ferric chloride acid solution, The leached particles are gradually coated with elemental sulphur, formed as a result of leaching. At the highest temperature, 88