As is known, the formation of nanocrystals is influenced by the cells with which they interact. In particular, the same materials could exhibit different properties depending on the type of cells. In this work, we used three different types of microbial cells (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Beer Yeast) as biological templates to control the crystallization of calcium carbonate particles before or after coated with several layers of polyelectrolyte films via Layer-by-Layer assembly and biomineralization process. The results showed that the resulting crystal types using different naked cells as templates all include calcite and vaterite, and the ratio of vaterite is higher. After encapsulating with polyelectrolyte, polyelectrolyte did not change the ratio of calcite to vaterite on the surface of E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus but yeast. Furthermore, it can weaken the intensity of vaterite and increase the proportion of calcite using the yeast as template. Differences in calcium carbonate crystal forms are related to the differences in cell wall components and cell secretion. So we mineralized calcium carbonate with the main components of the yeast cell wall (mannose oligosaccharide, β-glucan) and the Gram bacterial wall (peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide) directly, it was found that the composition of the cell wall did affect the crystal form and morphology of the calcium carbonate. This provides a reference for further study of the biomineralization mechanism and the selection of mineralization templates. Furthermore, this study provides some supplementary for understanding the natural mineralization process of CaCO3.The study on the interaction between nanoparticles and biological cells has attracted attention in many fields and has developed many applications on this basis. For example, some living cells can be modified with nano-materials to obtain new phenotypes based on the unique physicochemical properties of the selected nanoparticles Inspired by biological systems, such as diatom, eggs, and cells, biomimetic methods have been shown to be successful in the preparation of functional bionic materials As one of the most common biomineralized materials, calcium carbonate is widely existed in nature and organisms. Generally, calcium carbonate has three kinds of crystal polymorphs: calcite, aragonite, and vaterite In this study, we used three different types of microbial cells ( The polyelectrolyte polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride solution (PDDA, MW < 100,000, 35 wt% aqueous solution) and poly(styrenesulfonic acid) sodium salt (PSS,MW = 70,000) were sequentially purchased from Aladdin and Alfa Aesar. Sodium carbonate anhydrous (Na A liquid medium (1% tryptone, 0.2% beef extract, and 0.1% glucose or 0.5% NaCl, pH 7.0) was used to culture the microbial cells The yeasts/(PDDA/PSS)3 biotemplates were mixed in a 0.33 mol/L calcium chloride (CaCl For the cell wall component mineralization, add mannooligosaccharide and the β-glucanaqueous solution or peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharide solution to the CaCl Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-7100F, JEOL, Japan) was used to characterize the surface morphology of single-cell microorganisms and the morphology of mineralized calcium carbonate. X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Adv, Germany) was used to analyze the calcium carbonate crystal form. Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR, Bruke alpha, Germany) was used to analyze the effect of polysaccharides on nucleation of calcium carbonate. We used LbL techniques and biomineralization to integrate organic and inorganic elements on the surface of microbial cells. As is shown in Representative SEM images of the mineralized samples collected in the presence of three kinds of microbial cells after a week of reaction are shown in  The XRD patterns of the mineralized samples on the surface of three kinds of microbial cells were shown in The weight fraction of each CaCO  For The FT-IR spectra of the samples during the LbL process were showed in The bacterial extracellular matrix, composition of microbial cell walls and the substances secreted by bacteria also affect the crystallization of calcium carbonate  In addition, when adding mannose oligosaccharide and β-glucan, the approximate weight fraction of calcite and vaterite is 38.8% and 61.2%, respectively. While, when adding peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharide, the approximate weight fraction of calcite and vaterite is 16.6% and 83.4%. This is consistent with the results in The presence of both vaterite and calcite was confirmed by FT-IR in Hererin, we can explain the following reasons why polyelectrolytes bi-layer did not influence on the vaterite and calcite content in the case of Due to its excellent biocompatibility and pH responsiveness, calcium carbonate can be used as a cancer drug delivery carrier. This will be an extension of this research. Using the bacteria as a template to prepare the calcium carbonate crystals, and after calcination at 500 °C, the prepared calcium carbonate crystals will have a hollow structure left by the bacteria In conclusion, we used three different types of microbial cells (  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: