Dimethylglyoxime (DMG) is an analytical reagent used to precipitate Ni from its aqueous solution. The process is very efficient for Ni recovery in terms of selectivity and completeness but hardly adopted industrially. The reason is attributed to the loss of the reagent when calcined. The paper outlines extraction of DMG from Ni-DMG complex by sulphuric acid treatment in two methods i.e. leaching and dissolution-recrystallization. In leaching the Ni-DMG is just treated with sulphuric acid and DMG is recovered. In the second case the Ni-DMG complex is completely dissolved in sulphuric acid and recrystallized through refrigeration.Selective extraction of metal of interest is no doubt an area of common interest. There are some methods for high selectivity of metals like Ni, Co etc. Precipitation of dimethyl glyoxime complex of nickel is one such example. This method is implied for separation of cobalt and nickel ( Dimethyl glyoxime (Spectrochem), Ni(NO Nickel-DMG complex was prepared by using the standard analytical method (Vogel). The acid treatment is of two types. 1. Leaching, 2. Dissolution-recrystallization. To a 100 mL solution of sulphuric acid Ni-DMG was added. It was shaked with hand in a closed bottle at ambient temperature to ensure proper mixing (Otherwise Ni-DMG floats on solution with improper contact with acid). Then it was filtered. The residue was washed and dried. The amount of acid, pulp density, temperature and time were varied so as to fix an optimum condition. To 100 mL of sulphuric acid solution Ni-DMG was added at 80 °C and stirred for 1 h where all the material should be dissolved. After dissolution the liquor is kept in refrigeration unit to maintain 5 °C for 24 h where a white precipitate was obtained. Nickel present in the liquor was analyzed by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer model no. Perkin Elmer AAnalyst-200. The FTIR of the DMG and Ni-DMG in different stages were analyzed through JASCO FT/IR 420 spectrometer. Dimethylglyoxime (DMG) with molecular formula CH This planar complex is insoluble and precipitates as a deep red solid ( According to Eq. (1) the Ni-DMG complex is obtained in alkaline pH which falls exactly between pH 7.0 to 8.0. What happens if the Ni-DMG is treated with acid? Will the reaction go reverse? To answer these questions a set of experiments were carried out with the leaching of Ni-DMG complex with sulfuric acid. It was observed that the colour of the solution changed to green leaving some white residue. The green colour indicates liberation of Ni Acid is vital in the regeneration of DMG again as per the reaction of Eq. (2). The acid concentration was varied to get maximum recovery of DMG. It is observed from The molecular weight of Ni-DMG complex is 288.91 g and that of only DMG is 116.12 g. The calculation is like-288.91 g Ni-DMG contains 232.24 g DMG. So, 1 g Ni-DMG contains 0.8 g DMG. Similarly, 288.91 g Ni-DMG contains 58.69 g Ni Dimethyl glypxime (DMG) is dissolved with prolonged exposure to acidic solution. That is why the percentage of recovery falls with increase in time. Within 1 min of time only 60% DMG is recovered with 16.6% acid concentration. After 30 min the recovery is 20% and at the end of 1 h the recovery is 7.1% as plotted in It is observed that the FTIR bands of the original DMG and the residue of 10 min experiment are same. But in 30 min and 1 h samples only one extra band at 3650 cm When the temperature of the system is high the dissolution of Ni-DMG is very fast and complete. No residue is left at high temperature. So, the experiments were optimised in ambient temperature only. The details are tabulated in When the amount of Ni-DMG is varied keeping the acid constant it was observed that the recovery of DMG increases and the extraction of nickel remains constant ( The variation of acid and pulp density is studied individually. It is observed that the recovery decreases with increase in acid concentration and it increases with increase in Ni-DMG amount i.e. pulp density. By merging both the data one more plot is derived by taking the Ni-DMG/acid ratio. This gives the gist of both the experiments. The plot of DMG recovered versus ratio of Ni-DMG/acid is provided in It is reported in the last sections that Ni-DMG is getting dissolved completely in some cases. In all the cases the Ni The FTIR bands suggest that the recrystallized sample matches exactly with the original one. For DMG obtained through leaching with 16.6% acid and 30 min matches exactly with original otherwise one extra band at 3634 cm The Ni-DMG process is good for Ni extraction from pure as well as from multimetal solutions. However cobalt also forms Co-DMG complex. So to study the effect of cobalt even in greater amount than nickel a mixed solution of 1 g/L Co and 0.1 g/L Ni was prepared. To two sets of 50 mL of the mixed solution different amount of DMG were added. The results are tabulated in Out of both the method of leaching and dissolution-recrystallization it is observed that the former one is having higher yield. The presence of Ni as impurity is also very minimal. So, to recycle the produced DMG to synthesis Ni-DMG was carried out with leaching method. The reproduced DMG was again used for the synthesis of Ni-DMG complex and a red colour precipitate was obtained just like original DMG. For example – 2 g Ni-DMG complex was taken and leached in acid where a case of 61.31% efficiency experiment was considered for recycling. From the first batch DMG Cycle-1: 2 g Ni-DMG Cycle-2: 0.8 g DMG The photograph of original Ni-DMG and recycled Ni-DMG is presented in Nickel dimethyl glyoxime (Ni-DMG) complex is the common method for selective extraction of nickel from any multimetal solution. But recovery of DMG from the complex is a challenging job. Two processes are adopted in this study 1. Acid treatment and 2. Dissolution-recrystallization. In acid treatment the product recovery is more but the colour of the DMG is pink and it has Ni content varying from 0.03% to 0.165% which practically negligible when considered for extraction. In case of dissolution-recrystallization the quality of the DMG matches more with the original grade, no Ni content but the production yield is 53.42%. “There are no conflicts of interest to declare”. The authors are thankful to Director, CSIR-IMMT, Dr. S.K. Mishra for providing all the facility to carry out the work. The authors are also thankful to