The This new system however, lacks the modelling and history of application of thermosetting resins. It is thus desirable to generate process diagrams (akin to cure diagrams for thermosets), and models for the reaction kinetics, crystallisation, and rheology. Early work in this space by Davé et al. Early crystallisation leads to the trapping of monomers and results in reduced final conversion, whereas Late crystallisation leads to an increased time to demould, and thus less economic process overall, Late crystallisation also leads to polymer chain branching and other side-reactions being allowed to occur in the product, inhibiting the ultimate quality of the polymer crystals. The simultaneous phenomena significantly inhibits the ability to analyse the system with thermal analysis, due to the difficulty of dissociating the thermal contribution of crystallisation from that of the polymerisation. Finally, the autocatalytic effect of crystallisation (due to exothermic heating) may exaggerate thermal gradients, depending on part geometry. These complex interactions can be summarised in the roadmap schematic displayed in Most impactful in the field of the kinetic modelling of anionically polymerised polyamide-6 is the work of Malkin et al. All of these models were developed through thermal studies, whereby the (quasi-) adiabatic temperature rise is recorded and correlated to the rate of reaction by way of the reaction exotherm. This approach begins to break down where other, irreducible, thermal phenomena occur simultaneously (such as crystallisation, evaporation, or significant side reactions). When considering the manufacture of parts (especially composites), it is advantageous to conduct the injection and reaction below the melting point of the final polymer to avoid a time consuming cooling and solidification step. Thus it is desirable to polymerise and crystallise simultaneously in the interest of reducing the cycle time. Additionally, Davé et al. Crystallisation of polyamide-6 is typically modelled through use of the Avrami model Despite these challenges, Teuwen et al. Taki et al. Ishida and Scott A third method which has been explored for following the reaction kinetics is that of rheological analysis. While it is difficult-to-impossible to use this data to infer the reaction kinetic parameters for Eq. For the purpose of achieving appropriate mould flow and ensuring successful fibre wetting it is necessary to additionally to understand and model the rheological behaviour. Teuwen Note that model solutions from above are necessarily not closed form expressions (intractable), whereas a processing diagram may seem to imply otherwise. This does not belittle the usefulness of such diagrams as a guide when extrapolating beyond the tested heating profile. A good example of this is the isothermal processing diagram as generation by One such example of the use of reactive models in the mould-flow simulation of the APA6 system is the work of Nagy et al. The current state of the process modelling of the anionic polymerisation and crystallisation of polyamide-6 lacks the parameterisation of catalyst concentrations, as well as experimental reproducibility. Without further refinement of these models they are of little use to the commercial implementation of the system. The existence of these models still holds a distinct advantage over a purely heuristic approach due to the desirability of maximising monomer conversion (and thus minimising the potential for any monomer leaching out in application, as well as ensuring maximum mechanical performance of the polymer). Further work into the separation of polymerisation and crystallisation processes in DSC analysis for cases where distinct crystal melting cannot be observed after the fact (larger heating rates, or higher temperature isotherms) is required to complete the processing picture.