Artisanal mining (AM) activities are generally seen as a source of concern owing to their illegality and the environmental pollution that they cause, but in recent years it has been demonstrated that gold mining can be performed on a small-scale mining (SSM) in a responsible way outside of the artisanal dimension. A previous study by the same authors demonstrated how mineral resources and reserves can be managed to achieve a sustainable form of SSM, based on the concepts of proving a “minimum reserve” and working with “replication” of the operation on subsequent small reserves. It was shown that SSM can be viable with 1/100 of the reserves necessary to prove the feasibility of a large-scale mining business. However, that work made some simplifications in terms of value of money over time and taxation.
                  The present work continues by undertaking a realistic analysis of economic feasibility through a cash flow analysis (CFA) on various scenarios of investment strategy for the SSM business, considering the “minimum reserve” approach along with the traditional mining business strategy. The results show that the “minimum reserve” approach is always more attractive from an economic point of view, in terms of value of the project, rate of return of investment, and payback time. Finally, the most suitable profile for investors in the SSM business is discussed, and it is shown how small-scale investors and large corporations can fit into this approach.It is estimated that about 16 million artisanal miners produce between 380 and 450 t of gold per year ( The main challenge for AM is obtaining the necessary capital investment to upgrade to become responsible SSM ( To overcome this impasse, The large mineral companies invest a lot of time and money on exploration before starting to produce. The differential of this proposal is to produce as fast as possible to pay off the initial investment. Nevertheless, the work by Seccatore et al. was preliminary, and, to simplify the discussion, it was kept “taxless” and “timeless”: the original proposition considered neither cash costs over time nor taxes and financial costs. The present work continues from where the previous study left off, in undertaking a realistic analysis of economic feasibility. This requires the use of a method for evaluating mineral projects. The state of the art in the evaluation of mineral projects includes sophisticated techniques such as decision tree analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, and real options analysis ( The aim of this study is to analyze the economic feasibility of a mining project, adopting the approach of the minimum reserve, taking into account the influence of the time value of money and considering different strategies of geological exploration to prove the replication of the reserve. This work is based on the concepts of minimum reserve and replication, introduced and thoroughly described in To include these items and undertake an economic analysis of the minimum reserve approach, we use a method called A business must be profitable to exist. Profit is determined by a rate of return on the initial investment that is attractive to those who invest in the business. The future profit figures have a determinable value at the beginning of the business. This value is the net present value (NPV). It is the sum of the cash values of the various periods of the project at a discounted rate of return. The NPV is determined by the following equation: The minimum reserve of a production cycle may be defined as the one that generates an NPV equal to zero throughout its production. This concept is expressed by the following equation: The right-hand side of this equation is zero because it is considered that the net income generated by the production cycle of a minimum reserve should pay for the initial investment, development, and exploitation of the current cycle and the exploration and development of the next cycle. To simplify the mathematical discussion and show that the minimum reserve is the one that pays for its exploitation, the second term on the left-hand side is taken to be zero. However, this does not mean that the project has no value or that the business does not generate revenues: the profits are simply embedded in the discount rate. In this view, the minimum reserve volume is not fixed; rather, it depends on the mineral exploration strategy. The beginning of the exploration of the next cycle ( In this study, we analyze different mining scenarios to simulate different strategies of the investors. A period of analysis of 10 years was chosen because it is a suitable range for CFA. This time was applied to the four scenarios analyzed. These scenarios are shown conceptually in     The example of the application of the cash flow analysis was developed for the same mine as described in The mine used for the application example falls into the category “Metallic minerals/underground mining”. Therefore, the daily production is kept below 300 tpd to benefit from the special tax regime. The features of the tax regime for small-scale mining are as follows ( Royalties: 3%; applies to the final products for sale. Labor liabilities: 15% of the percentage of the profits (10% for employees and 5% to the state); applies to the net income. Income tax: 22%; applies to the net income after discounting taxes and depreciation. Value Added Tax (VAT): 0% (specifically for gold). Conservation of mineral rights: 2% of the unified base pay per mineral hectare (10,000 m Detailed definitions of the fiscal charges described above can be found in textbooks such as The gross income for a CFA period is equal to the production of ore in the period The volume of ore processed depends on the installed capacity of the plant and on its availability (the proportion of time during which the equipment is under operating conditions) and its use factor (the ratio between the time of actual use of the equipment and the total time during which it is available). This is expressed by the following equation: The calculation of the free CF of the project in the case of the Ecuadorian tax system is shown in The procedure described in The CF results are presented in By applying the minimum and replication reservation approach, in comparison with the classical mining company approach, it is evident that: The NPV is always greater. The internal rate of return (IRR) is also always greater. The payback is always faster. The initial investment in exploration, the one of higher risk, is always lower. This work was developed in the context of small responsible mining. In this approach, the goal is to transform AM operations into small responsible mines ( We have shown that the minimum reserve and replication approach is always more attractive, from the economic point of view, than the traditional approach of large-scale mining. In particular, the most striking parameter is the NPV of the project, which was more than double the NPV for a project developed according to the traditional approach. This is due to the fact that the revenues, in the traditional approach, enter the CF very late: the production starts in the fourth year, while for the strategies adopting the minimum reserve, the revenues begin in the second year. The NPV and the IRR are currently among the most commonly used parameters for the evaluation of mining projects ( Among the three strategies adopting the minimum reserve, the ideal one seems to be that with continuous exploration, because if the replication of the reserve is not confirmed for the next cycle, there is more time to plan for the closure of the mine. The main reasons why the minimum reserve approach is not commonly applied are as follows: Large corporate companies also aim to speculate on the mineral asset and not just on the production itself. Small deposits are of no interest to major industries, since the exploration of these deposits is not economically attractive to the rigid structure of corporate business. Small responsible mining projects differ conceptually from the corporate vision. The revenue generation strategy is through production and not speculation on the company's assets. Therefore, it is likely that participation in these projects is aimed at small investors rather than large corporations. This is the case for the analyzed project, where the foreign investor is a small Brazilian–Canadian joint venture ( This study was intended to provide a realistic analysis of the economic feasibility of a responsible mining project based on the minimum reserve approach. CFA was undertaken, comparing four scenarios: one with a traditional approach to mineral resources and reserves as commonly adopted by large-scale mining and three taking the minimum reserve approach with different strategies. The results show that the minimum reserve and replication approach is always more attractive from an economic point of view. The return on the initial investment is higher and acquired more rapidly, and the project has a present value more than double that of the same reserve mined using the traditional approach on a large scale. We have pointed out that this approach to responsible mining is based on the concept that revenue generation is achieved through production and not speculation on the company's assets, and therefore investment in small-scale mining projects best suits the profile of small joint ventures than that of large corporations. Future steps in this research will be to perform a stochastic analysis and a risk analysis of these projects. Also, different geological scenarios will be analyzed, since mine planning is an interactive process, and it is necessary to validate the initial estimate of the duration and cost of geological exploration considering different types of deposit. Special acknowledgment goes to