This study aims to use planetary ball-milling as an evaluation tool of material properties and the result is subsequently used to develop a model for the change in particle size distribution (PSD) during fluidization for a range of materials using artificial neural network (ANN) method. It is believed that material properties such as hardness, density, brittleness, structure, etc play a crucial role in the particle attrition behavior. Unfortunately, little information on material properties is available, considering the wide variety of materials present. As a result, planetary ball-milling is proposed as a fast assessment technique to identify the properties of different materials. Planetary ball milling devices are readily available in most laboratories and the reduction in PSD can resemble the particle attrition process during fluidization. A Rosin-Rammler (RR) distribution was used to describe the PSD for both fluidization and ball milling processes.Particle attrition during fluidization can cause a reduction of the particle size distribution (PSD) in the fluidized bed due to particle-particle and particle-wall collisions. The fine particles generated will affect the overall performance of the fluidized bed such as elutriation rate, bed heat transfer, reaction selectivity and conversion ( The complexity of particle attrition lies in the multi-level phenomena from sub-particle, particle, to system level ( Due to the complex nature and impact of particle attrition, it is important to describe the effect of particle attrition on the PSD. However, it is difficult to measure the material properties of powders and granular materials. One attempt to correlate material properties with particle behavior during comminution process is the use of Bond’s work index. It is a measure of the energy required to reduce the size in a batch of materials ( In our previous work, artificial neural network (ANN) was successfully applied to model the change of PSD during fluidization ( For ball milling, materials were ground in a Planetary Mill Pulverisette 5 (Fritsch, Germany) consisting of two grinding bowls. Each grinding bowl is 80 mL and five agate grinding balls of 10 mm diameter were used in each bowl. The samples were milled at 170 RPM and a constant fill ratio of 75% was maintained. Four materials were considered in the study including graphite, gypsum, silica and incineration bottom ash (IBA). Graphite, gypsum and silica were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, Singapore while IBA was collected from Tuas Incineration Plant, Singapore. The materials were milled until no further reduction in size was observed. Typical operating period for graphite, gypsum, silica and IBA were 10 min, 70 min, 120 min, and 180 min, respectively. Fluidization experiments were conducted in an acrylic fluidized bed ( The PSD of the various materials were measured at various time intervals using a sieving machine (RETSCH vibratory sieve shakers AS200) with the use of 5 sieves of mesh sizes 0.212 mm, 0.6 mm, 1.0 mm, 1.4 mm, and 1.7 mm. PSD can be described by different mathematical distribution functions such as normal distribution, log-normal distribution, Rosin-Rammler (RR) distribution, etc. It was demonstrated in a number of studies that PSD in comminution processes such as grinding, milling, crushing and fluidization, can be expressed appropriately by RR distribution ( The change in PSD from ball milling was first fitted to a RR distribution by least-square method. The The PSDs obtained from fluidization experiments were also fitted to a RR distribution by least-square method and the An ANN involves input layer, hidden layer and output layer. The hidden layer locates between the input and output layers. Each layer consists of input and output neurons that are connected by weights, biases, and transfer functions ( Two different ANNs were developed to model the PSD parameters, The accuracy of the constructed ANN models was tested using 80 data points from graphite, gypsum, and silica and 6 data points from IBA. Root-mean-square error (RMSE) and R Due to the large number of weights and biases, the ANN models developed are complex and difficult to apply. Symbolic regression (SR) was employed to simplify the complex ANN models by combining mathematical operators, functions, constants, and independent variables. In addition, symbolic regression can provide an ease of interpretation of the relationship between input and output parameters without the need to perform sensitivity analysis. SR makes use of different operators to find the potential solutions in between all possible scenarios. The operators used for SR in this work include add (+), minus (-), multiply (×), divide (/), and exponential function (exp). RMSE and R The parameters used in GA for ANN optimization and SR are listed in  The best-fitting case by RR PSD in ball milling is for silica after 108 min of ball milling ( The best-fitting case by RR PSD in fluidization is for silica after 240 min of fluidization with gas velocity ( Based on Eqs. A comparison of the model predicted RR parameters ( In addition to the examination of R-square and RMSE values of the testing points, the specific testing points having the highest and lowest error are then examined in detail in IBA fluidization results with gas velocity 0.78 m/s were used as testing points. The fluidization of IBA at 60 min and 1200 min were found to have the highest and lowest accuracies among the testing points, respectively. The experimental data, the RR PSD fitted to the experimental data and model predicted RR PSD are presented in In order to study the inter-relationship between PSD during fluidization and time, gas velocity and initial particle size, three-dimensional surface plots were developed based on the ANN models. The effect of gas velocity is also shown in  Symbolic regression (SR) is employed to provide simple equations for fast estimation of PSD during fluidization. GA is utilized to determine the SR parameters based on the input variables shown in In this study, planetary ball milling was successfully employed to evaluate the material properties using the training data obtained from three different materials, including graphite, gypsum, and silica. Planetary ball milling was then applied to incineration bottom ash (IBA) that has unknown material properties. The ANN-GA models developed were able to provide reasonably good PSD estimation during fluidization for particles whose material properties are unknown. The effect of gas velocity, initial PSD and material properties on the change in PSD were revealed. Finally, symbolic regression (SR) was applied to provide simple equations to determine the PSD of various material properties during fluidization.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is funded by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: