It is common for the fractured zone around dynamic faults to contain tensile cracks. The effect of Poisson's ratio (ν) on the creation of these cracks was investigated in this study as a function of the dynamic minimum strain energy density criterion (MSED-Criterion). In addition, the effect of rupture speed (c), friction coefficient (f), fault inclination angle (β) and confining stress (Ko) were taken into account. The MSED-Criterion permits the study of the creation of tensile cracks in brittle and ductile shear zones. It was found that by increasing Poisson's ratio, the rock behavior transfers gradually from brittle to ductile and as a consequence, the branching angle and fracture toughness increase. Whenever the rock mass tends towards ductile behavior, the possibility of creating tensile branches decreases. Ductile shear zones can sustain stresses greater than brittle zones before tensile branches are formed around dynamic faults. The branching angle of tensile cracks is directly proportional to (ν, c, β, f and Ko) and it varies between approximately 77° and 115°. These cracks are formed in the extensional side of a dynamic fault and they tend to grow towards the maximum far-field stress. The results of this study can be used in the field of earth science and earthquakes to identify the formation of tensile branches around dynamic shear ruptures and they were explained depending on experimental results and field observations of other studies.Minimum strain energy density criterion Strain energy density Rock strength against crack growing under MSED-Criterion Poisson's ratio Shear modulus Fault tip speed, rupture speed or fracture speed Dilation wave speed Shear wave speed Raleigh wave speed Dimensionless fault propagation speed (c/c Dynamic stress intensity factor under pure mode II Static stress intensity factor under pure mode II The ratio of dynamic to static stress intensity factors under pure mode II Fracture toughness under pure mode II The slowness of the fault tip The inverse of dilation wave speed The inverse of shear wave speed Radial distance from the fault tip Branching angle of tensile cracks from a dynamic fault Fault inclination angle The half-length of the fault tip Friction coefficient Stress ratio, the ratio between horizontal and vertical stresses Normal stress affecting perpendicular to the fault surfaces Shear stress affecting parallel to the fault surfaces Shear strength between fault surfaces Studying the parameters affecting fault branching in brittle rocks has a particular importance in understanding how these faults can propagate under the effect of dynamic loads induced by earthquakes, blasts, landslides etc. The orientation of a new branch depends on the loading conditions and is mainly affected by some important parameters such as fault tip speed (c), fault inclination angle (β), friction (f) between fault surfaces, confining stress (K Poisson's ratio is an elastic parameter which can be determined depending on the seismic wave velocity (P and S seismic waves). This parameter provides a better diagnostic tool for crustal composition rather than P-wave or S-wave velocities alone ( In this study an appropriate criterion was used to take the effect of Poisson's ratio on dynamic fault branching into account. This criterion is the minimum strain energy density criterion (MSED-Criterion) ( The effect of Poisson's ratio on the formation of tensile cracks from a dynamic fault was investigated in this study. In addition, the effect of the rupture speed, friction coefficient, confining stress and fault inclination angle was taken into account. The effect of Poisson's ratio was highlighted by using the MSED-Criterion. Two loading cases were studied, a fault under uniaxial compressive stress (K In this study, two loading cases were taken into account ( In this criterion, fracturing takes place when the minimum strain energy density attains the critical value of the material toughness and the orientation of the tensile crack corresponds to the direction of minimum strain energy density ( The MSED-Criterion can be used to study fractures in brittle materials. Thus, this criterion will be used in this study for brittle rocks. Rock brittleness is mainly affected by Poisson's ratio and the elastic modulus. Poisson's ratio plays an important role in determining the minimum strain energy density and the range of this parameter should be determined so that, the rocks behave as brittle materials. Poisson's ratio can change from 0.05 to 0.4 for different rock types ( Stress components (ϭ For a dynamic fault, the dynamic stress intensity factors are a function of the fault tip speed and Poisson's ratio. The expression of dynamic stress intensity factors can be presented as follows ( The static stress intensity factor K In the previous equation (a The effect of Poisson's ratio on the distribution of the strain energy density around the dynamic fault tip with a fault inclination angle of 45°, rupture speed (χ The shear stress and shear strength under uniaxial and biaxial remote compressive stress can be written as follows: As shown in Equation Equations In this study the direction in which a tensile branch can propagate from a dynamic fault tip under the effect of Poisson's ratio, rupture velocity, friction coefficient, stressing angle and confining stress was determined depending on the MSED-Criterion. The results of this study are illustrated in three cases: in the first case a normal fault is subjected to UCS (K This case corresponds to The effect of friction coefficient on the branching angle for (β = 45°, χ The effect of the fault inclination angle or stress angle on the branching angle for (χ In this case, a rock mass is subjected to vertical and horizontal remote stresses. The ratio between horizontal and vertical remote stresses is K The branching angle of a normal fault as a function of the stress ratio and friction coefficient for (β = 45°, χ The branching angle of a reverse fault versus the stress ratio and friction coefficient for (β = 45°, χ  Based on the previous analysis of the branching angle of tensile cracks around dynamic faults, this angle can change from approximately 77° to 125°. For friction coefficients less than 0.6, this angle can range between 77° and 115°. The classical theory from fracture mechanics indicates that this angle has a constant value of 70.5°. The models from this study was able to indicate why the branching angle of tensile cracks around mode II fractures (faults) does not have a constant value. Some natural examples of opening mode fractures around dynamic shear ruptures with a slip direction and branching angle are shown in Depending on the MSED-Criterion, tensile branches can be formed when the minimum strain energy density (S The dimensionless fracture stress (ϭ Dynamic weakening by processes such as the thermal pressurization or flash melting at asperities. Low friction coefficient between fault surfaces. High pore fluid pressure. The effect of Poisson's ratio on the formation of tensile branches around dynamic faults was investigated analytically in this study depending on the MSED-Criterion. The effect of rupture speed, friction coefficient, fault inclination angle and confining stress was taken into account. The results of this study can be summarized as follows: By increasing Poisson's ratio, the rock behavior transfers gradually from brittle to ductile behavior and as a consequence, the branching angle and fracture toughness of tensile cracks increase and the possibility of creating tensile branches decreases. The branching angle of tensile cracks increases with increasing rupture speed, friction coefficient, fault inclination angle and confining stress. This angle can range between approximately 78° to 115° for a reasonable value of the friction coefficient in natural faults (f < 0.6). Therefore, tensile cracks seem perpendicular to the fault surfaces as reported in the field observations. Tensile cracks develop in the extensional side of dynamic faults and they tend to propagate towards the maximum far-field stress (max of ϭ The possibility of fault activation increases with increasing deviatoric stress. We confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We would like to express our sincere thanks to Prof. Cara Burberry Angular functions under pure mode II The used stress intensity factor K