Integrated iron- and steelmaking plants generate large amounts of solid wastes, which are mainly blast furnace and steel furnace slags, dusts, sludges, etc. The main problem faced at Kardemir integrated iron and steel works is with the steelmaking slags, i.e. open-hearth furnace slag and more recently basic oxygen furnaces (BOF) slag. Over the last 50 years of operation, more than 5 million tons of slag has accumulated in the waste stockyard. To make use of this slag, a slag-processing plant came into operation at Kardemir in 1999. In this plant, after crushing and classification of the slag to various sizes, the magnetic particles present in the slag are separated by electromagnets. The magnetic 10–50 mm product of the slag-processing unit is charged to blast furnaces as raw material and the magnetic pieces in the range of 50–500 mm are charged to BOF as scrap. This study was undertaken with the objective of determining the effects of addition of the above-mentioned magnetic products of the slag-processing unit on the operation and performance of the blast furnace and the BOF. No magnetic separation is applied to the −10 mm fraction and this material is added into sinter mix as a source of iron and fluxing materials. A further objective of the study was determination of the effect of addition of the −10 mm product of the slag-processing unit on the properties of the sinter and use of slag-added sinter on the operation of the blast furnace. The slag-processing unit has been found to be a good solution to the environmental problems created by the accumulated slag.Integrated iron and steel plants generate large amounts of solid wastes This study is related to about 5 million tons of Kardemir steelmaking slags, which have accumulated at the waste yard during the last 50 years. Most of these slags were generated by the Siemens–Martin (open-hearth) steelmaking furnaces, which was in operation until 1998. Recently, basic oxygen furnaces (BOF) came into operation and the BOF slag produced for the last few years is piled separately and planned to be processed at a later date. A slag-processing plant was designed and set-up at Kardemir in 1999 to make use of the accumulated steelmaking slag. This plant has a capacity of 250,000 tons/year when operated on one shift basis. In this plant after the separation of the skull by the use of lancing facilities and dropballs, the slag is crushed, classified and magnetically separated. Magnetic concentrates produced in the particle size ranges of 10–50 and 50–500 mm are charged to Kardemir blast furnace and converters, respectively. The amount of magnetic pieces separated from the open-hearth slag varies in the range of 5–8% of the slag processed. The 10–30 mm non-magnetic pieces are sold as railroad ballast to Turkish Railroads and the 30–65 mm non-magnetic fraction is marketed as aggregates for road construction and for other purposes. No magnetic separation is applied to the −10 mm product of the slag-processing plant and this material is added into sinter mix as a source of iron and fluxes. Research related to the production of cement as well as grit material for shipping industry from the −10 mm slag fraction is in progress. The effects of use of various products of the slag-processing plant at Kardemir integrated iron and steel works as blast furnace charge material and as scrap for the converters are given in this study together with the effect of slag addition into sinter mix on the physical, chemical, mineralogical and reduction properties of the sinter produced. The magnetic concentrate in the size range of 10–30 mm produced at the slag-processing plant was charged into the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace. Chemical analysis indicated that the 10–30 mm particle size magnetic concentrate contained 70–85% Fe. In the first group of tests which lasted 1 month, 700 tons of this material was fed into the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace in quantities of 20–25 tons/day, which constituted ∼1% by weight of the iron-bearing burden (sinter+pellets+lump ore). An increase of about 12 tons/day was observed in the daily hot metal output of the furnace. In the second group of tests which lasted 2 weeks, 900 tons of this material was used, which was charged into the same furnace in quantities of ∼60 tons/day which constituted ∼2.7% by weight of the iron-bearing burden. The hot metal production was increased from 1500 to 1525 tons/day during this period. No operational difficulty was encountered in these tests and it appeared that larger quantities could be used. A change was made in the slag-processing unit so that the slag was crushed and classified to the sizes of −10, 10–50 and 50–500 mm instead of 10–30 and 30–500 mm sizes and the magnetic part of the 10–50 mm was charged to the blast furnace. This change resulted in production of a larger quantity of magnetic material to be charged into the blast furnaces. The Fe content of the 10–50 mm magnetic concentrate was also found to be in the 70–85% Fe range. Two groups of tests were made with the 10–50 mm size magnetic slag concentrate. The slag concentrate constituted 4.5% by weight of the iron-bearing burden in the first group of these tests as shown in By processing the open-hearth furnace slag, metallic pieces in the size range of 50–500 mm were also produced. These metallic pieces were used together with skull, which was obtained by dropping a steel ball on to the huge slag pieces. They were added in varying amounts to the converters at Kardemir. During the production of steel at 100-ton capacity converters of Kardemir, normally 20 tons of scrap is charged together with hot metal from the blast furnaces. In a series of tests conducted in the melt shop, various amounts of 50–500 mm scrap (CDH) and skull (OMS) obtained from slag were mixed with the normal scrap (S) and charged into the converter. The metallic yield, defined as the ratio of weight of steel produced to the weight of metallic material (hot metal+S+CDH+OMS) charged into the converter, was determined from the known weights of the charge materials and of the liquid steel produced. The weight of S+CDH+OMS used in these tests was kept constant at 20 tons/heat. The results of these tests are presented in The chemical analysis of the−10 mm slag fraction indicated that it contained 25–30% Fe, 17–22% SiO No significant change in the operation of the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace could be detected when slag-added sinters were used in the burden as stated above. Addition of slag into the sinter mix is expected to affect the properties of the product sinter, however. Based on this expectation, physical, chemical, mineralogical and reduction properties of the sinters were determined. The results of these studies are presented in this section. Chemical analyses of the −10 mm slag fraction and the slag-added sinters produced were given above. The −10 mm slag fraction and sinter samples containing 0%, 1%, 2%, 3% and 4% slag were subjected to X-ray diffraction studies and mineralogical investigation under an optical microscope with the objective of determination of phases existing in their structures. X-ray diffraction pattern of the −10 mm slag fraction is given in True and apparent densities of the sinter samples were measured to determine the total porosity. True densities were measured by use of crushed and ground sinter samples and water pycnometer and apparent densities of the of the sinter samples with the original size of 10–12.5 mm were measured by the mercury pycnometer as described in the Turkish Standard TS 4379. Total porosity, In a previous study The Japanese standard JIS 8713 known as Gakushin test was used to determine the reducibilities of the sinters. 500 g (±1 particle) of sinter oven dried at 105 °C for 1–1.5 h was placed inside the test tube and reduced with a reducing gas composed of 70% N  The international standard ISO 4696-1 was chosen as the procedure for determining the reduction–disintegration properties of the iron ore sinters in this study. Oven dried samples of 500g (±1 particle) weight were reduced with a reducing gas composed of 70% N A low reduction–degradation breakdown index, RDI The slag-processing plant built at Kardemir has been found to be a good solution to process more than 5 million tons of slag that has accumulated in the waste stockyard within the past 50 years. In this plant, after crushing and classification of the slag to various sizes, the magnetic pieces present in the slag are separated by electromagnets. The magnetic 10–50 mm product of the slag-processing unit is charged to blast furnaces as raw material and the magnetic pieces in the range of 50–500 mm are charged to BOF as scrap. No magnetic separation is applied to the −10 mm fraction and this material is added into sinter mix as a source of iron and fluxing materials. Use of the magnetic 10–50 mm product of the slag-processing plant has been found to increase the production rate and decrease the coke rate of the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace. This material has been charged into the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace at quantities exceeding 10% by weight of the iron-bearing burden and no operational problems have been encountered. The only problem with this material is its limited production at the slag-processing plant. Use of the magnetic 50–500 mm product of the slag-processing plant together with skull produced from open-hearth slag to replace scrap in the BOF has been found to decrease the metallic yield defined as the ratio of weight of steel produced to the weight of metallic material charged into the converter. The unit cost of the steel produced has been found to be decreased, however, by use of the magnetic 50–500 mm product of the slag-processing plant in the BOF due to the very low cost of this material compared to scrap. Visual observations indicate that the slag volume increases by use of OMS and/or CDH and handling of these materials is more difficult than that of normal scrap. Due to these, the quantity of OMS and/or CDH used singly or in combination in one charge is limited by 5 tons. The −10 mm fraction of the slag-processing plant was added into the sinter mix up to 4% by weight of the iron bearing charge and sinters thus produced were charged into the Kardemir No. 3 blast furnace. No beneficial or detrimental effect of the use of slag-added sinters on the operation of the blast furnace could be detected. Experimental studies conducted on sinters produced at Kardemir indicated that physical, chemical and mineralogical properties were not significantly affected by the quantity of slag added into the sinter mix and that the porosities, reducibilities, reduction–disintegration properties of the slag-added sinters were reasonably good. Based on these results use of 4% by weight of the iron bearing charge of −10 mm slag in the sinter mix has become a standard practice at Kardemir iron and steel works. This investigation was supported by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK) and Kardemir Iron and Steel works.