Process development for production of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) from regionally occurring zinnwaldite concentrate (3.0wt.-% Li2O) was conducted. By acid digestion with mineral acids, preferably hydrochloric acid under reflux (approx. 110°C) and atmospheric pressure, lithium is mobilised up to 94%. In contrast to using sulphuric acid no toxic hydrogen fluoride is released with hydrochloric acid, what is a crucial factor for digestion process design. Separation technologies for recycling of more than 80% of unspent hydrochloric acid, as well as the recovery of associated components, particularly iron hydroxide and potassium/aluminium/fluoride as sodium-potassium-cryolite, are part of the process. After removal of impurities by means of electrodialysis and concentration, technical grade lithium carbonate was obtained by precipitation with soda. Hot water washing furnishes crude-product purities ≥98.0% with a total lithium yield of ~70%.Lithium is a strategic metal, which most commonly is heard of being indispensable for future technologies such as energy storage, electric mobility and cordless devices. In fact, global lithium production for use in batteries has increased by approx. 20% per annum since 2000, resulting in 35% of the overall lithium consumption in 2015.( Lithium is almost half as abundant in the upper earth crust as zinc, and according to USGS estimates reserves of more than 13 In fact, Li At present, lithium is predominantly recovered from salt lake brines with Chile as most important producer.( In view of the unequal distribution of global resources (69% of worldwide resources are located in South America and another 18% in China) ( Zinnwaldite with the general formula KLiFeAl(AlSi Lithium recovery from siliceous ores is state of the art ( As an alternative to acid digestion a limestone digestion process has been developed, where α-spodumene is converted into β-spodumene, too. The thermal treatment step is conducted in presence of limestone which decomposes to give CaO reacting in situ with the ore to give lithium hydroxide. The latter is obtained through leaching with water. Subsequent precipitation with soda furnishes Li Where lithium recovery is to take place from micaceous ores, one typically focuses on lepidolite, K(Li,Al) It is this context, which prompted Czech scientists to design a lithium recovery process for zinnwaldite. Their gypsum method prevents fluorine from being released through formation of calcium fluoride. For these purposes zinnwaldite concentrate is mixed with gypsum (CaSO In addition, another zinnwaldite digestion with supercritical carbon dioxide in water ( In September 2015 Lithium Australia reported on a technology for the recovery of Li It is this special situation of iron being present in zinnwaldite in considerable amounts, which hitherto stood against zinnwaldite exploitation on a large scale. In addition, another challenge is the lithium content of zinnwaldite. The lithium content of used zinnwaldite concentrate (3.0 In fact, viewed from an economic angle, none of the protocols mentioned above is suited for technical lithium recovery from the mineral. Consequently, a material and energy effective lithium recovery process for zinnwaldite was required the design of which must take into account that there exists no protocol for by-element extraction, since upon exploitation of polymetallic mineral deposits there is a clear focus on the primary metal current processes are highly energy consuming there will be massive release of fluorine, typically in the form of silicon tetrafluoride (SiF Considering the above-mentioned issues led to the strategy to circumvent thermal treatment procedures since energy may turn out to be a prohibitive cost factor on a technical scale, in particular when realised in Germany. It was this unfavourable situation which prompted us to develop an integral process from which not only Li Chemicals and solvents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Taufkirchen, Germany. Standards were purchased from VWR International GmbH, Dresden, Germany and Carl Roth GmbH & Co. KG, Karlsruhe, Germany. Zinnwaldite was obtained from the lithium deposit in Zinnwald, Germany. Samples were kindly provided by the Mineralogical Collection of Freiberg University of Mining and Technology as well as SolarWorld Solicium GmbH, Freiberg, Germany and UVR-FIA GmbH, Freiberg, Germany. Before use the material was pre-treated by multi-stage crushing to a particle size of < Zinnwaldite concentrate digestions under elevated pressure were carried out in Hastelloy TGA-DTA-MS measurements were carried out with 20–25 Laboratory scale digestions with hydrochloric acid (HCl) were carried out in glass equipment using an experimental setup according to 200 Large-scale operations were conducted analogous to laboratory scale digestions using 6.0  Iron precipitation as Fe To 1.0 Release of α-FeO(OH) (goethite) and regeneration of Na 100  1.0 3.0 1.4  1.0 In order to avoid highly energy consuming thermal procedures, acid digestion of untreated zinnwaldite concentrate was tested. Yet, since fluorine release constitutes a serious issue in acid treatment of fluoride containing silicates, appropriate reaction conditions were to be identified under which fluorine emissions do not occur or are significantly reduced at least. Zinnwaldite concentrate was subjected to acid treatment with acids of different strength, H  As can be seen in All tested strong mineral acids (H In view of potentially realising the zinnwaldite process on a technical scale, two topics remained to be treated: (i) the question of fluorine emissions and (ii) digestion acid recovery. The first topic would render the process unfeasible from environmental aspects, the second one is crucial factor determining process economy. Determination of fluorine emissions for the mineral acids HCl, H Determination of fluorine emissions for the mineral acids HCl, H Release of HF or other fluorine containing compounds was not observed with HCl and HNO Release of HF or other fluorine containing compounds was not observed with HCl and HNO In fact, HCl is uncritical with regard to fluorine release. Although from As is evident from Consequently, further work utilised HCl as processing acid. The advantages are obvious: Lower digestion temperatures compared to H No HF (H In situ digestion and distillative acid recovery at moderate conditions of 107–108 Lower market price compared to HNO  Highest lithium mobilisation of 94% was achieved at 7 For large-scale operations, acid consumption is crucial for process economy. It was, for that reason, essential to reduce the amount of digestion acid employed. However, experiments gave less lithium mobilisation for all HCl/zinnwaldite ratios < It was too obvious from these findings that a low-temperature process circumventing the need for thermal zinnwaldite defluorination would have to run the digestion acid in a loop process. The acid digestion step is a significant cost factor of the entire process. Since HCl is employed in excess, it follows that surplus acid indispensably needs to be removed prior to elevating pH with the purpose of precipitating metals. Conventionally this is done by adding NaOH. From the viewpoint of a large-scale application, digestion of 1 For acid recovery a few industrially established processes are conceivable.( The considerations for an optimised acid digestion resulted in a reactive distillation at atmospheric pressure with the aim of separating and reusing unspent HCl. This way it not only was ensured that the amount of acid employed remains restricted to the amount actually consumed, one also has the benefit of substantially reducing the required amount of base for pH elevation in later working steps. The optimised protocol for HCl recycling comprises: i) distillative removal of HCl after 3 This protocol allowed for reducing the required amount of HCl (29%) from 3432 According to existing technology, an approach is to remove all by-components with the aim of obtaining Li The strategy was to separate iron, then aluminium and fluoride and eventually lithium. The most obvious approach to iron separation was precipitation as Fe(OH) The most obvious approach to iron separation was precipitation as Fe(OH) Hence, a de-ironing protocol was required that interferes neither with aluminium nor with lithium. In this context sodium oxalate was tested, which is a proven remedy in polymetallic separation problems.( Finally, it turned out that de-ironing via insoluble Prussian blue, Fe Finally, it turned out that de-ironing via insoluble Prussian blue, Fe In this “cold” process fluoride had not been eliminated prior to acid digestion. As mentioned above, pH has to be kept under 4 in order to prevent LiF from co-precipitating with Al(OH) A defluorination in the forefront to aluminium precipitation initially appeared most useful. Since however pH had to be kept under 4, addition of calcium chloride furnished calcium fluoride yields not exceeding 15%. The reason is that fluoride majorly is present in the form of HF (K The key to success was a cryolite precipitation, which in industry is used particularly in aluminium production, but also for making welding agents, blasting and pyrotechnics and abrasives ( By cryolite precipitation at pH By cryolite precipitation at pH After cryolite filtration, lithium, surplus potassium, sodium as well as rubidium, caesium and impurities remained in the filtrate, the lithium content of which was determined to range between 1.7 and 2.5 Electrodialysis appeared attractive, since it might allow for simultaneously concentrating and purifying the lithium brine. By using monovalent cation exchange membranes, which preferably allow monovalent cations such as lithium to pass, this method is a powerful means of separating monovalent cations from highervalent species, particularly magnesium, calcium, aluminium and iron. Roughly 90% of the divalent and 94% of the trivalent cations were separated this way. While the highervalent species mostly remained in the lithium depleted diluate, lithium, potassium, rubidium and caesium enriched in the concentrate. Thus, simultaneous concentration and purification has the potential to replace the required precipitation and filtration steps for highervalent cations as being done by addition of NaOH and soda in the lepidolite/spodumene process. However, electrodialysis is suited to achieve a concentration of approx. 6–7 To achieve lithium concentrations of 10–12 Subsequent downstream chemistry was similar to the established lepidolite/spodumene process. Precipitation was carried out by adding Na The mother liquor is composed of soluble lithium (1.5–1.6 Rb concentrations in the mother liquors were sufficiently high (3.0–4.0 Rb concentrations in the mother liquors were sufficiently high (3.0–4.0 Lithium ore digestion with mineral acids constitutes a powerful alternative to classical routes if unconsumed acid is recovered. Fluorine liberation is avoided with mineral acid the Hammett acidity of which is lower than that of hydrogen fluoride. Best results, with no fluorine release were obtained with hydrochloric acid with which a high degree of lithium mobilisation (> Interference with iron, aluminium and fluoride was excluded by iron separation via Prussian blue and subsequent hexacyanoferrate recycling with sodium hydroxide. Aluminium and fluoride were removed as (Na Process economy is optimised through an almost complete utilisation of zinnwaldite and using sodium based precipitants. Apart from Li Follow-up activities aim comprise a detailed economic analysis (operational- and capital expenditures) comparing process economies of the zinnwaldite approach with established Li The following are the supplementary data related to this article. The different process steps are summarised below in a process mass flow diagramme ( As zinnwaldite is rich in potassium, but contains no sodium the process appears interesting to be run on the basis of potassium reagents (K Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Financial support by the