This paper presents an explanation of the system dynamics method. It is based on the development of a detailed simulation model designed to examine the effectiveness of various environmental, fiscal and corporate policies on the flow of investment funds and mineral resources among a number of simulated mining firms and competing countries. Emphasis is placed on the development process and the reader is referred elsewhere for presentation and discussion of model output.The most recent Irish government publication pertaining to the mining industry, published in April 1995, is the National Minerals Policy Review Group (NMPRG) Report. This report begins by stressing the need to “recognise the complexity and interdependence of the factors which have influenced investment in the minerals sector in Ireland over the past three decades” ( System dynamics provides a methodology for better understanding the interrelationships and complexities. The growing per-capita demand for minerals, coupled with the depletion of the highest grade ore deposits, has led to an increase in the average size of mining operations and an increase in the average amount of waste generated per tonne of mineral recovered ( The aim of the model discussed in this paper is to examine how environmental policy affects the investment and development decisions of the mining industry within the broader context of government minerals policy. However, environmental and government policy do not exist in isolation. Therefore, more specifically, the aim of the model is to expose the complexity and interdependence of those factors which impact on the relative attractiveness of a country as a location for minerals exploration and development, so as to evaluate the nature and significance of environmental policy. This aim is addressed through the development of a number of tightly coupled system dynamics sub-models, outlined as follows. The mining firm is viewed as a particular case of a typical business entity, which is assumed to have the objective of maximising profits. The mining firm sub-model attempts to capture the essential decision-making structures which determine how (and where) its profits are re-invested through further exploration and development activity. Individual countries compete for mineral investment funds, either directly through specific minerals policies, or indirectly through prevailing government and economic conditions. Domestic environmental policies may have a large impact on the relative attractiveness of a country to the mining industry. The objective of this sub-model is to expose those factors which directly impact on the investment decisions of mining firms. Base metals are traded on the international commodity markets. These markets, which can be considered exogenous to both individual firm behaviour and government policy, are subject to fluctuations which impact on the performance of mining firms and the relative attractiveness of mineral producing countries. The high-level interaction of these sub-models is summarised in the sector map presented in A hypothetical mining firm might decide to invest a proportion of its exploration budget in a particular country, on the basis of the prevailing investment climate in that country. It is more likely that it will spread its investment among a number of countries as a function of their relative attractiveness, in which decision-making process environmental regulation represents an important factor. Furthermore, the firm's decision mechanisms do not exist in isolation, but are dependent on the activities of its competitors, reflected in the behaviour of the international minerals market. As a means of simulating the competitive nature of the industry, the array features of Powersim modelling software are used to expand the model to allow for multiple mining firms and countries. In this way, the decision-making structures are exposed through a graphical interface to facilitate an understanding of the complex dynamics which determine the behaviour of the system. This approach is in keeping with current thinking regarding the effectiveness of computer simulation models ( To illustrate some of the principles of complex systems, consider the following example of public opposition to mining This legislation works by increasing the cost of extraction, thereby reducing the economic viability of marginal deposits (B2 — a policy change). However, these more stringent environmental regulations will, in the long term, force firms to find more effective ways to deal with environmental impacts. This may be achieved through increased investment in research and development which, in turn, may result in improved engineering and processing technologies, thus again increasing the economic viability of marginal deposits (R2 — a shift in dominance). As a result, dominance eventually returns to the positive reinforcing loop around increased mining activity (R1), albeit from a base of lower grade ore. In this way, mining activity continues to increase in the face of increasing public opposition, because mining, like any industry, is driven primarily by economic incentives and, operating as it is within the current system of consumer behaviour ( The literature presents a number of formal methodologies, in the form of step-by-step procedures, for developing system dynamics models. However, many of these formal, step-by-step methodologies are similar in nature to what Polya continuously emphasised the importance of finding “a related problem” to the one under investigation. In this respect, the mining industry is an example of a system within a system, the higher level system being that of natural resource utilisation. Since 1970, a number of system dynamics models have been developed to assess the adequacy of natural resources to meet human needs. Much of this work has centred around the long-term implications of the depletion of natural resources, an issue which, although of obvious importance to mining firms, is not of direct concern in this work. With this in mind, many of these models were reviewed with the specific intention of providing a foundation for a detailed ‘process model’ of mineral extraction. The system dynamics development process is iterative in nature. There is no initial template upon which to base the model structure. Instead it evolves over time as more accurate information becomes available as to the relative importance of the various information flows which feed the critical decision points in the system. In a system dynamics model such as the one described here, the state of the system (as defined by the collective values of all level variables) is changed over time as a result of actions carried out to implement management decisions (defined by the values of rate variables in each time-step). These management decisions are in turn driven by the current system state as well as any guiding polices (defined as model constants). For example, any change in the amount of extracted ore in a given country in a particular year, as defined by the value of the Extracted_Ore level, is determined by the difference between the Extraction_Rate and the Refining_Rate. The decision on how much ore to extract is determined by the current state of the system, defined for the purposes of this decision as the availability of ore (Mineable_Reserves) and the relationship between Price and Unit_Operating_Costs. The original implementation of this process sub-model was based primarily on these criteria. Economics literature shows how the firm's production levels are curtailed when unit operating costs exceed price, and this information was ‘programmed’ into the Price_Cost_Multiplier table function. However, when the model was calibrated using real-world data, it became clear that not all mining firms showed the same response to the price/cost relationship. Sometimes, as when the primary role of mine output is to feed the downstream industries of the parent firm, extraction rate may be completely insensitive to price. For this reason the model required enhancements to reflect the individual firm's ‘policy’ towards price sensitivity. This is just one example of how the model evolved through the identification of instances in which it was unable to capture real-world behaviour. Developing a system dynamics model to expose the dynamics of management behaviour (as opposed to purely physical models) involves identifying the key decision points in the system. These decision points form the basis of system sub-models in that they may be developed and tested in relative isolation. However, once each of the decision sub-models is sufficiently complex to accurately capture the real-world decision processes, and at a level of abstraction deemed suitable to meet the objectives of the model, then the next main task (and another source of project evolution) is to capture the feedback between the various decision points or sub-systems. In this respect, much of the significant dynamics in a complex system arises from delayed feedback between decision points, particularly when the feedback crosses organisational boundaries. For example, the decision on where to explore in the future is significantly affected by the success or otherwise of previous exploration efforts. This information is captured in the model through the difference between perceived and actual geology. Actual_Geology is a component of the main mining process model and is specific to the individual country (and deposit). Perceived_Geological_Potential, on the other hand, is specific to the individual firm and the difference between the two values is determined by the particular firm's prior exploration activity in the country in question, other firms' exploration activity and, most importantly, the delays involved in making the results of the exploration activity available (the accuracy of the geological information). It is very important for the model to distinguish between perceived and actual information as actual information is almost never available to act on immediately, and so decisions must be made on perceived values. This is another attribute of the model which was fine-tuned through successive iterations to better approximate real-world behaviour.  Each of these graphs show clearly oscillating trends. System oscillation occurs when the main balancing loops governing the system are themselves not in equilibrium, and is usually caused by substantial delays inherent in the system which prevent it from ever being in a steady-state ( The nature of these dynamics is borne out by the history of mining activity in Ireland over the past 75 years. The mining industry in Ireland is a classic case of a system sub-structure, tightly coupled with the prevailing system of government and international market conditions. When viewed from this perspective a number of emergent properties become apparent and, to a large extent, the industry's performance over the last 75 years is dependent on a series of chance events coupled with the prevailing government policy and the delay mechanisms inherent in the system itself. Some of the most important events are summarised as follows: The Irish Government of the 1920s recognised that change was needed if the new State was to survive and prosper. Unfortunately however, the system resisted change and through the following 20 years Ireland was faced with continuously high levels of unemployment and an international balance of payments deficit. This was counteracted with a policy of import substitution and substantial tariff barriers. In systems terminology, the government created a goal-seeking feedback loop driven by the gap between the desired and actual level of economic performance. From earlier times, there was a perception that Ireland lacked significant mineral resources ( This changed with the outbreak of World War II and the resulting raw material shortages. Demand for minerals led to the government re-examining some of the old abandoned mines. St. Patrick's Copper Mines Limited were granted a mining lease in 1956. However, the firm failed to raise enough capital and called on the Irish government to guarantee loans. The mine operated from 1958–1962 and, despite State aid, was placed in receivership in May 1962. The government received much criticism over its involvement despite the fact that the failure was mainly due to the lower than expected ore grade, the depressed state of the world copper market ( The Government's Programme for Economic Expansion in 1958, prompted by the 1955 balance of payments crisis (chance event), aimed to industrialise the country (  In the 1980s, exploration activity in Ireland was continued on a small scale by junior Irish exploration firms, after the departure of many of the multinationals. Subsequent discoveries, along with an improvement in market prices, again promoted the dominance of the exploration-discovery feedback loop and resulted in an increase in exploration activity which led to the discovery of significant zinc/lead ore bodes in 1986 and 1990. System dynamics models are complex and therefore evaluation of their effectiveness is not straightforward. Also, it is a fundamental premise of system dynamics that systems (structure) resists change. It follows therefore that system behaviour can be expected to prove relatively insensitive to changes in parameter values (within a plausible range). However, as in the case of this model, sensitivity tests almost always expose a few sensitive parameters and these are considered here in turn. The system dynamics model contains over 8000 individual model objects (array elements and scalars). Almost all of these objects are dependent variables, that is, their value at any particular time is determined mathematically based on the current ‘state’ of the system. System state is defined by the collective values of the level variables in the system, of which there are 31. These level variables, together with the 24 model constants, act as initial conditions for the model and can be changed at the beginning of, or during, the simulation run to reflect particular circumstances such as changes in corporate or government policy.  Each model object (level or constant) may be assigned a range of values. However, for the sake of simplicity it is assumed here that each object has a single value. In this respect, there are 32 possible variations if each object is changed independently. However, to reflect a particular set of circumstances, or initial conditions, a number of objects often needs to be changed together. If two objects are changed together then there are 32×31 or 992 possible variations, each resulting in different simulation output. If three objects are changed, then the number of possible combinations rises to 29 760 and so on. If it is now assumed that each object may take on one of a range of values, then the complexity of the system, as defined by the possible set of initial conditions, quickly becomes apparent. Note also that constant values can be changed externally throughout the simulation run to reflect policy changes, such as changes to the environmental planning and regulatory requirements in a particular country in year 20 of the simulation run, so as to model the effects on future exploration spending. The system dynamics literature stresses the importance of model validity. Specifically, in order to determine the validity of a model, and to develop confidence in it as a useful tool for system understanding and policy evaluation, a number of validity checks are recommended. These checks, presented below, form the basis for a discussion on model validity with the purpose of demonstrating that best practice is applied here in the development of this model. All model variables are fully documented and results, in the form of output graphs and tables, are readily reproducible. However, the following point must be noted: some variables are programmed to produce random output. This is a useful simulation feature for making the model more realistic. For example, it is used here to produce different physical characteristics for each potential deposit. Following is a list of the model variables with random components. Meaningful variable names are applied throughout, even at the risk of cluttering the structure diagram. Also, every attempt was made to ensure that the feedback and decision structure is transparent in the model diagram. All units are dimensionally consistent. Note that Powersim does not enforce dimensional consistency, so that it must be verified manually. For example, Operating_Costs is defined as Refining_Rate∗Unit_Operating_Costs. Operating_Costs is measured in Dollars/Year, Refining_Rate in Tonnes/Year and Unit_Operating_Costs in Dollars/Tonne. Unit dimensionality can be verified as follows: These are a number of frequently recurring and standard building blocks which form the basis of system dynamics models. These sub-structures provide a framework for model building using elements that are already tested. For example, the net present value (NPV) sub-model is based on one of Hines' “Molecules of Structure” ( The model is based around a formal ‘process model’ of the mining operation. Materials are conserved throughout. For example, the waste sub-structure ensures that no material is lost through the conversion of raw ore into refined mineral. First-order controls such as MIN and MAX are applied to all rate variables where there is a possibility that levels might take on negative values. The model was verified to behave as expected under extreme conditions as defined by unrealistically small or large parameter values. Division by zero exception errors are prevented through the use of the DIVZ0 language construct In order to avoid integration errors, the literature recommends a time-step of less than half of the smallest time constant in the model. The smallest time constant of interest in this model is the desired inventory coverage for zinc of 6.5 weeks, represented in Desired_Inventory_Coverage as 0.125 (or 1/8 of a year). 0.03125 was chosen as the time-step of the main model, being 1/4 of this value. Aggregation simplifies model structure through the use of arrays. Individual mining firms are aggregated on the assumption that they have the same basic behaviour patterns and decision mechanisms. Similarly, individual countries and deposits are aggregated giving a three-dimensional structure to the model. Aggregation in this manner greatly simplifies the model structure and documentation and yet facilitates the incorporation of additional mining firms, countries or deposits. At the same time, individual firms, countries and deposits can retain their individuality through the use of different initial conditions and parameter values. The model captures information delays through the difference between perceived and actual values. Examples are perceived and actual price, and perceived and actual ore grade. It is critically important to distinguish between perceived and actual values as decisions are often made on the basis of perceived values, whereas actual values only become apparent after a delay. The nature of this delay acts as input to the first-order exponential smoothing curve which defines how the gap between perceived and actual values is bridged. Material delays are modelled through the use of the in-built DELAYMTR function in Powersim. Discovery_Rate is modelled as a third-order material delay, Proving_Up_Rate which is modelled as a first-order delay and Mine_Construction as a pipeline delay where all proven reserves become available for extraction as determined by the planning and construction delays. The main use of a multiplier in a system dynamics model is to act as a changing (dynamic) pressure on decision-making. This is in contrast to the static, normal, value which takes effect when the system is in equilibrium. For example, the decision of how much to invest in exploration, represented by the Exploration_Budget, is defined as the product of static and dynamic pressures as follows: Exploration_Budget_Normal represents the typical exploration budget, all other things being equal. The size of the exploration budget is affected by changes in expected price. This price pressure, which cannot be ignored, is modelled through the use of an expected price to exploration budget multiplier as shown in The model contains 33 constants, 17 multipliers and 34 levels. Many of the levels are initialised to zero, particularly those forming part of the ‘process sub-model’. Where specific real-world values are required to drive the simulation process, these are all chosen from the zinc industry so as to ensure consistency. Sensitivity tests were performed for all constant and level variables which involved setting high and low extremes for each parameter in turn, while holding all others constant and comparing output against the standard run. As might be expected the model proved to be more sensitive to some variables than to others. In such cases it is especially important to ensure accuracy of parameter values. Values to which the model proved to be particularly sensitive are presented below. Of particular importance within the context of exploration investment are parameters which significantly affect the size of the exploration budget over time, such as Paid_in_Capital, Actual_Geology and Interest_Rate. Paid_in_Capital is used to finance the activities of the mining firm before it generates any income and is typically used to fund initial exploration activity, as mining firms generally cannot borrow to fund exploration. Consequently, if Paid_in_Capital is significantly below the average Cost_of_Exploration_Effort, then the mining firm more often than not will cease operating (see The definition of Paid_in_Capital is modified in Interest rates are also fundamentally important, particularly with regard to the economic viability of marginal deposits. Excessively high interest rates reduce profitability and have a similarly negative impact on future exploration investment, as can be seen from The model as presented here is the present state of an iterative evolutionary process Our aim here is to use published and privileged information to build a model which may be used to improve our understanding of environmental and other factors which impact on the investment decisions of the mining industry. This aim was achieved. A computer simulation of this complexity, addressing this specific problem area, has not been previously published. Many of the important dynamics presented in verbal models have been exposed. As a result, the numerous interrelating factors which impact the effects of government mineral policies may be examined afresh, using systems methodology. However, as an attempt to apply best practice in the application of the system dynamics method to problem resolution, it may be considered less than completely successful in that the model development did not have continuous direct involvement from a specific individual highly placed within the Irish mining industry, as was initially planned. In spite of numerous attempts, only a superficial interest could be fostered among Irish mining firms and policy makers regarding the ‘results’ of the model. However, there was much greater interest at international level. The primary product, therefore, is a quantifiable representation of the authors' mental model of the interrelationships which impact the investment decisions of international mining firms and the place of environmental concerns within this. It has an emphasis on breadth rather than depth and was derived from an extensive review of the mining literature stemming from the It is not the authors' expectation that policy makers will adopt this model representation in its entirety as a basis for future decision-making. Neither is it expected that they will necessarily accept all the premises on which it is based. Instead, to allow this work to be developed in the future, it is hoped that this model will be used as a foundation for further development. In future, specific components of the model may be dis-aggregated to address particular problems which are deemed important by policy makers and/or the mining firms, such as waste management. Initially it was intended that the model would act purely as a sounding board to test the validity/effectiveness of the environmental and fiscal proposals outlined in the Therefore, the project scope was revised to provide a system dynamics perspective to the overriding issue addressed by the report, which was to expose and address the most important factors impacting the flow of investment in minerals exploration and development. More specifically, emphasis was placed on the role of environmental policy within the context of the flow of mineral investment. Soon, however, it became apparent that environmental policy, although the main focus of the project and the primary source of the authors' expertise, could not be examined in isolation but instead had to be considered as part of a complex web of factors which impacted the flow of minerals funds. These include corporate policy, market economics, equity issue, discounted cash flow, perceived and actual geology and risk exposure. The most difficult task in developing the model was to gain a proper understanding of the factors which impacted the state of the system and in deciding which to omit for the sake of clarity without jeopardising the effectiveness of the model. In summary, the development of a powerful simulation model, whatever the context, requires exposure to a diverse set of subject matter and technical issues, which, through this very exposure, results in a continuous reformulation of the project objectives and scope. The greatest advantage in adopting system dynamics as an analytical tool is that it exposes the many interrelationships which structure and influence the behaviour of a complex system. In a complex system, such as the flow of mineral investment funds, the same change to environmental or fiscal policy introduced in a number of states/times does not always have the same effect in all of them. Instead, the effect is dependent on the ‘state’ of the system at a particular point in time. Through its effectiveness at capturing and exposing the state of the system, this model improves on more conventional methods for evaluating policy effectiveness. In a simple system or mental model, cause and effect are closely related in space and time. From such a perspective, for example increased planning delays would simply result in increased planning costs. However, increased planning delays may, under adverse market conditions, have a significant impact on mine profitability, far in excess of the original increase in planning costs. Not only does the model provide a means of evaluating the effects of alternative policies but, equally importantly, it provides a very powerful means of evaluating the effects of the same policy under different conditions. Another major benefit of this model is that it makes explicit its underlying assumptions. If the user does not agree with these assumptions then it is possible to modify them either by making changes to system structure or adjusting parameter values. The model may then be re-run to test the implications of the new set of assumptions on system behaviour. This is in sharp contrast to verbal or written descriptions in which assumptions are often implicit and difficult to quantify. Furthermore, the multi-dimensional aspects of this model allows the user to test different sets of assumptions and policies at the same time, by setting different parameter values for each of the mining firms and countries in the simulation. In this way, the dynamics of relative attractiveness may be exposed through the flow of exploration funds between countries. The model provides an interface to parameter settings through a basic management flight simulator, allowing users to act out policy changes at the corporate and government level on a year by year basis. Annual financial data, in the form of income statements and balance sheets, are provided as a basis for decision-making in this respect.  System dynamics models are loosely characterised as explanatory or predictive, aggregated or highly specific. Using this classification, the system dynamics model described here is a highly aggregated explanatory model. In many instances the model simplifies reality for the sake of clarity. Consequently, there is much room for its expansion, according to the nature of the circumstances being investigated. In this respect, however, it should be remembered that this model does not attempt to examine environmental policy per se, but rather how it relates to the investment decisions of multinational mining firms. Indeed, it is a fundamental premise of this model that it is meaningless to examine environmental policy except in the context of a more specific issue. It follows then that a change of issue requires a change of emphasis in the model. In summary, the model aims to encapsulate best practice in the field of system dynamics. It emphasises the difference between actual and perceived conditions as a basis for action. It makes explicit the underlying assumptions as a basis for further expansion. It highlights system structure as a catalyst for change. It does not by itself provide objective answers. Instead, it is a learning device, an aid to understanding (