The high-temperature acid pressure leaching of nickeliferous laterites has attracted considerable attention from the nickel industry during the recent years. The process is especially advantageous for low-grade limonitic laterites. It is also applicable to mixtures of limonites and high-grade saprolites, although at higher acid consumption due to magnesium. It is advantageous, therefore, to derive a universal kinetic equation of Ni dissolution that is equally applicable to both types of feed. In the present work, a kinetic equation was derived using the concentration of hydrogen ion “at temperature” calculated from a solution speciation approach, and the assumption that nickel associated with magnesium dissolves instantaneously. This universal kinetic equation was successfully tested against various feeds that contained from 1.2% to 1.9% of Ni and up to 3.85% of Mg at temperatures from 230°C to 270°C, acid/ore ratios from 0.15 to 0.5, and concentrations of solids in the feed (pulp density) of up to 30%. The use of acidity “at temperature” made it possible to explain an apparent dependence of the ultimate Ni extraction on the acid/ore ratio, and on the terminal stoichiometric acid concentration during leaching.Direct sulphuric acid leaching is the process of choice to recover nickel and cobalt from limonitic laterites. Limonitic laterites are rich-in-iron oxide ores with iron content higher than 40 wt.%. Other elements found in limonites include aluminium, chromium, manganese and silicon. These ores contain 1.1–1.4 wt.% of nickel and 0.1–0.2 wt.% of cobalt that are extractable hydrometallurgically. Most of the Ni in limonitic laterites is found in solid solution with goethite. Direct sulphuric acid pressure leaching is the preferred route, because under conditions of 250–280°C and 20–30 g/L free H Saprolitic laterites are rich-in-magnesium ores with magnesium content in the range of 10–20 wt.% and iron content between 10 and 25 wt.%. Serpentine, the major Mg phase in saprolites, dissolves very quickly in sulphuric acid: Most of the Ni in saprolitic laterites is associated with Mg substituting the latter in serpentine. This Ni is also readily soluble. Although saprolites are richer in nickel (up to 3 wt.%), the high magnesium content results in higher acid consumption, which renders the process less economical. However, an optimal mixture of limonites and saprolites may form a high-grade feed that at the same time yields an acceptable acid consumption. Previous experience demonstrated that a highly agitated continuous autoclave (or series of autoclaves) is the best choice for successful nickel and cobalt extraction This paper continues the series of publications that report a study of the sulphuric acid pressure leaching of nickeliferous laterites conducted at the University of Toronto. Since laterites usually contain ten times as much Ni as Co, the kinetics of Ni dissolution is the focus of the present communication. Two Ni dissolution kinetic equations were proposed in the past. The first one was based on experiments with a limonitic feed and measurements of free acidity at room temperature We should emphasise the difference between free acidity and acidity “at temperature”. Free sulphuric acid measured at room temperature by titration does not necessarily reflect the activity (or concentration) of hydrogen ions at elevated temperatures. Water properties at elevated temperatures change dramatically leading to a speciation different from that at room temperature. In the absence of suitable pH sensors capable of measuring H In a previous publication Leaching experiments with a limonitic feed used to derive Ni dissolution kinetics were reported elsewhere It should be noted that the ore samples for all the experiments were extremely fine (−100 mesh, mean particle size of 3 μm). Thus, it was practically impossible to separate these samples by size and study the size dependence of the kinetic rate constants. Moreover, Ni is mostly associated with the finest fractions of the ore (this consideration was the major reason for screening the samples at 100 mesh). Thus, different size fractions would rather reflect the effect of mineralogy, than the particle size effect. As a result, we were always working with the samples “as is”, i.e., with no size classification of the samples. Leaching tests were performed in a 2-L titanium autoclave, manufactured by Parr Instrument. Temperature was controlled within ±2°C by a temperature control system, manipulating both an electrical heating mantle and a water-cooling stream. A magnetically driven titanium twin impeller provided agitation. The autoclave was equipped with an acid injection device. Acid was injected after the slurry in the autoclave was heated up to the desired temperature. The autoclave was also equipped with a dip tube to withdraw samples that were then cooled by a co-current heat exchanger. Liquid (not slurry) samples were taken during all the tests to prevent a possible re-dissolution of the precipitates during cooling. Thus, the kinetics reported here represent actual kinetics “at temperature”. A 45-μm pore graphite filter, manufactured by Union Carbide, was utilised in order to prevent solids from passing through the sampling tube. Solution aliquots were periodically withdrawn and analysed. The first 8 mL were discarded to clean the tube. Then, 4 mL were withdrawn and sent for analysis. Metals were analysed using flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS). A fully automated instrument (VARIAN SpectrAA 250 Plus) was employed for this purpose. FAAS analysis was followed by complexiometric titration of the stoichiometric free acidity. The metal cations were first chelated in order to prevent them from reacting with NaOH used for titration. Calcium cyclohexane-1,2-diaminetetraacetate (Ca-CDTA) was used as the chelating agent. The free acid measured corresponds to the total sulphate minus that bound to metals stoichiometrically assuming simple sulphates. Prior to each experiment, the feed samples were analysed for moisture and elemental composition. At the end of each test, the residual slurry was also collected, dried and weighed, and analyzed for its metal content. Solids analysis was as follows. About 1 g of solids was crushed and dissolved in boiling aqua regia. The solution was filtered, diluted (4×) and then analyzed by FAAS. Hence, calculations of ultimate Ni extractions reported in this work are based on the analysis of two solid phases, the feed and the residue. Experimental results obtained for the two limonitic feeds were similar to those reported previously At high acidity (acid/ore ratio of 0.4 and 0.5 at 250°C and 0.5 at 270°C), Ni extraction to the aqueous phase reached an ultimate value of >95% and did not change. The same (but to a lower ultimate level) was found for Mg. An example of Ni and Mg behaviour is given in As illustrated in At lower acidity (acid/ore ratio of 0.3 and below at 250°C, and 0.4 and below at 270°C), leaching kinetics of Ni and Mg showed a different behaviour. The concentration of both metals in the solution first increased and then decreased, indicating that precipitation occurs during leaching. Precipitation of Mg as a sulphate salt was previously reported by AMAX researchers Experiments with blend I at an acid/ore ratio of 0.2 showed that the ultimate extraction values were below 65% after 90 min of leaching. It should be pointed out that the term “ultimate extraction” includes all Ni that is extractable including the fraction that potentially re-precipitates “at temperature” (inside the autoclave) as a sulphate salt. Ni precipitated at temperature re-dissolves completely during cool down and this precipitation does not affect the recoverable amount of Ni. The Ni “under-extraction” was also observed at 250°C and 0.3 acid/ore ratio. Two experiments with the limonitic feed II and an acid/ore ratio of 0.085 were conducted to examine if this effect exists for limonites (Experiments 22 and 23, An attempt to investigate whether the cut-off depends on free acidity is shown in As follows from the previous discussion, a universal Ni dissolution kinetic equation, which is equally applicable to both limonitic and saprolitic feeds, cannot be developed using free sulphuric acid measured at room temperature. The free-acidity-based kinetic equation developed previously for a limonitic feed In the absence of suitable sensors, the [H A kinetic equation for Ni dissolution from limonitic feeds was developed based on acidity “at temperature”. Nineteen experiments performed under conditions ranging from 10% to 30% solids in the slurry before acid addition, 230°C to 270°C, acid/ore mass ratio from 0.15 to 0.35, agitation from 400 to 650 rpm, were used The goodness of fit was estimated using root mean square (RMS) errors calculated for each experiment as: In limonitic/saprolitic blends, Ni is associated with goethite (Fe), serpentine (Mg) and to a much lesser degree with asbolane. It is natural to assume then that Ni associated with Fe follows the limonitic kinetics Kinetic equations, Ni dissolution kinetics for blend II was significantly faster than for blend I at the same acid/ore ratio. This was because blend II contained only 2.69% of Mg vs. 3.85% in blend I. As a result, the concentration of hydrogen ion “at temperature” at the same acid/ore ratio was considerably higher for blend II than for blend I. The kinetic equations predicted that by 2.5 min, more than 90% of Ni should be extracted in both experiments with blend II. This was in accord with the experimental data. A more accurate comparison was not feasible due to the very fast kinetics. The fraction of Ni associated with Mg in the blends was calculated as follows:  Ultimate Ni extraction values for limonitic/saprolitic blends are given in As discussed earlier, at lower acidities, the ultimate Ni extraction decreases significantly with the acidity decrease. The ultimate extraction values were once more plotted vs. the calculated average [H In order to confirm that the presence of Mg decreases the acidity “at temperature”, which may eventually slow down or even stop the dissolution of Ni, an additional experiment with a limonitic feed mixed with 12 g/L of Mg (in the form of Mg sulphate) was conducted (Experiment 24, A universal kinetic model of Ni dissolution from limonitic feeds was derived based on the concentration of hydrogen ion “at temperature”. The model is applicable to the acid pressure leach of both limonitic and mixed limonitic/saprolitic feeds. The hydrogen ion concentration at temperature was calculated from a speciation technique developed previously. The use of acidity at temperature allowed for applying the same kinetic equation to feeds with different compositions because the effects of ore composition, solids loading and acid/ore ratio are taken into account by the speciation model. The use of a high-temperature chemical model also allowed us to relate the decrease of the ultimate Ni extraction to [H Dissolution of Mg from limonitic/saprolitic blends occurs very fast; within the first 5 min of leaching. Hence, the kinetics of Ni dissolution from limonitic/saprolitic blends was considered as a combination of instantaneous dissolution of the Ni associated with Mg (saprolite) and dissolution Ni associated with Fe (goethite). It was also found that Ni and Mg may precipitate as (probably mixed) sulphate salts if acidity “at temperature” is below 0.1 mol/L. This work was financially supported by Inco Technical Services Limited (ITSL) and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors wish to thank the personnel of ITSL for the continuous support, suggestions and fruitful discussions over the course of the project.