The radiogenic ingrowth and diffusive loss of 4He in accessory minerals is used to determine the timing of low-temperature thermal processes such as shallow tectonic, magmatic, hydrothermal, and geomorphic events. While the thermal history experienced by a sample cannot be directly constrained by a single (UTh)/He total gas age, 4He concentration profiles, normalized against irradiation-induced spallogenic 3He, have been shown to reliably recover continuous thermal history constraints if the parent nuclide distribution is either spatially uniform or can be determined. As such, 4He/3He thermochronometry has been successfully applied to apatite. However, individual zircon grains can contain complex parent nuclide zonation. Using moderately zoned, euhedral zircon grains from the rapidly cooled, distal Fish Canyon Tuff, we investigated the potential of the zircon 4He/3He thermochronometer through combining 4He/3He diode laser fractional loss step-heating with detailed analysis of parent element zonation. We present a routine method for the quantitative characterization of parent nuclide zonation by LA-ICP-MS depth-profiling. This study also demonstrates the importance of thermal control and avoidance of intra-sample thermal gradients during laser step-heating fractional loss experiments. Accurate and stable thermal control was achieved with an optimized sample-holder design, laser defocusing, and PID control loops to minimize temperature overshoot, failure to reach set-point, and temperature drop-offs. These analytical developments illustrate both the pitfalls and promise of zircon 4He/3He thermochronometry and create a reproducible methodology for 4He/3He thermochronometric applications to zoned and slowly cooled zircon.Over the past three decades, (U Similar to the K However, the spatial distribution of Apatite Only one publication has documented the utility of zircon Our study aims to build upon Tripathy-Lang's investigation, specifically by exploring the impact and crucial importance of proper thermal control during in-vacuo fractional loss laser step-heating experiments of ultra-low mass single zircon samples. Fish Canyon Tuff (28.2 Ma) has been extensively studied as a reference material for geochronometry and low-temperature thermochronometry, making it ideal for this study ( After morphometric characterization, individual zircon crystals were packed into platinum (Pt) tubes, then loaded into Pt sample holders with embedded K-type thermocouples inside a 3.75-in. ultra-high vacuum chamber with a sapphire viewport. Samples were heated in-vacuo using a 75 W PhotonMachine diode laser following prograde heating schedules that were characterized by temperature set points increasing in 20 °C steps, between 300 and 900 °C. 3–4 additional steps between 1000 and 1200 °C ensured total He degassing. Individual laser heating steps were 30 min long after reaching set point (<1 min) and returned to ambient temperature during 60 min of mass-spectrometric analysis time (Fig. S1). Liberated gas from each heating step was expanded through a stainless-steel ultra-high vacuum extraction and purification line with a cryogenic trap at 40 K. Purified gas was inlet and analyzed using a Thermo Helix Split Flight Tube magnetic sector mass-spectrometer (SFT) with both After step-heating, zircon grains were removed from Pt tubes and mounted on double-sided tape for 1-D parent nuclide LA-ICP-MS analysis (Fig. S2A) ( A new 2-D parent zonation mapping technique was also explored using a grid of 5 μm wide laser spots spaced 2 μm apart (Fig. S3A) ( A published T-t path for Fish Canyon Tuff and U and Th concentration profiles were forward modeled using HeFTy software ( Fish Canyon Tuff zircon grains were analyzed using the discussed methodologies with one important distinction. Individual zircon grains were heated either by direct or indirect laser illumination. Direct illumination refers to samples heated with a 1 mm diameter laser beam directly hitting the Pt sample packets on a Pt foil bed with an embedded thermocouple ( To achieve better thermal control during step-heating experiments, we tested several indirect illumination setups ( Arrhenius relationships for the indirect illumination setups were plotted, and a linear regression was applied to the data ( For ease of comparison, measured 1-D parent nuclide and calculated eU zonation profiles were plotted beneath the In order to qualitatively examine a 2-D cross section of the internal growth and elemental zonation of each zircon grain, CL images were acquired ( To remedy this, a newly developed 2-D parent zonation mapping technique was tested on zircon grain ir-zUTFCT-682 ( A simple T-t path was input for all HeFTy forward models, assuming eruption at 28.2 Ma and geologically instantaneous cooling to ambient temperatures, which was expected for zircon grains from the distal lobe of the Fish Canyon Tuff ( Beyond the complications of parent nuclide zonations and possible related spatial variations in radiation damage, zircon  To visualize how the measured Qualitative CL imaging ( According to the preliminary forward modeling results of Tripathy-Lang et al., a rapidly cooled zircon grain with oscillatory zonation should have similar An in-depth comparison between the 1-D parent nuclide depth profile ( Our study investigated the complexities of zircon Although the Fish Canyon Tuff has a very simple geologic history, these results show promise for future applications of zircon The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Research was funded by the UTChron laboratory at the University of Texas at Austin, a  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at