The surface charge densities and surface potentials of selected phyllosilicate surfaces were calculated from AFM surface force measurements and reported as a function of ionic strength at pH 5.6. The results show that the silica faces of clay minerals follow the constant surface charge model because of isomorphous substitution in the silica tetrahedral layer. A decreasing surface charge density sequence was observed as follows: muscovite silica face>kaolinite silica face>talc silica face, which is expected to be due to the extent of isomorphous substitution. In contrast, at pH 5.6, the alumina face and the edge surface of kaolinite follow the constant surface potential model with increasing ionic strength, and the surface charge density increased with increasing ionic strength.
                  The cluster size of suspended kaolinite particles at pH 5.6 was found to increase with increasing ionic strength due to an increase in the surface charge density for the alumina face and the edge surface. However, the cluster size decreased at 100mM KCl as a result of an unexpected decrease in the surface charge of the alumina face. When the ionic strength continued to increase above 100mM KCl, the van der Waals attraction dominated and larger clusters of micron size were stabilized.The availability of fresh water resources is of global concern, especially in dry, remote areas (e.g. southern Peru and northern Chile). Industries with extensive water consumption such as the mining industry are in a difficult position. The use of saline water or seawater in the mineral processing and mining industries has gained more and more attention recently. Of course, the reuse of process water with higher ionic strength is one way to conserve fresh water resources. Already mineral processing plants using salty water have been in operation The surface charge of clay particles results in the formation of their electrical double layer in aqueous suspensions. The DLVO theory, composed of van der Waals attraction and electrostatic interactions, most commonly accounts for particle interactions and can account for collector or specific adsorption in some cases The basal plane surfaces of clays are expected to exhibit a permanent negative charge due to isomorphous substitution in the crystal structure, and thus it is expected that the surface charge will remain constant with increasing ionic strength The competition between the van der Waals force and electrostatic interaction is believed to be the major contribution which accounts for the extent of particle interaction as a function of ionic strength Muscovite mica sheets were purchased from SPI Supplies (West Chester, PA). High quality talc samples were obtained from the College of Mines and Earth Science collection, at the University of Utah. A natural kaolinite sample with an average particle size of 500 For each experiment, fresh muscovite and talc basal plane surfaces were acquired by peeling off several layers with adhesive tape. The alumina and silica basal plane surfaces of kaolinite were prepared following procedures described in the literature A fused silica wafer was used to characterize the surface charge of the AFM tip. The silica wafer was rinsed in RCA SC-1 cleaning solution composed of 5 A picoforce AFM with Nanoscope V controller (Veeco Instruments Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) was used with a PF-type scanner designed for picoforce measurements. Sharp triangular silicon nitride tips (NP-S10, Bruker AFM Probes, CA) with spring constants varying from 0.17 The AFM tip quality and radius were evaluated with the Nanoscope software (Veeco Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) by reverse imaging of a sharp test grating TGT01 (NT-MDC Co. Moscow, Russia). The tip evaluation was performed before and after force measurements, making sure the tip was not worn or damaged. The tip radius is between 15 and 25 The geometry of the AFM tip can be approximated as being conical in shape with a spherical cap at its apex. The geometry of the system and the parameters used for analysis are shown in The DLVO theoretical model for the conical tip-flat substrate system is derived and discussed in the literature The total DLVO force: Electrostatic double layer force for constant surface charge density: Electrostatic double layer force for constant surface potential: Here subscripts The surface potential The cluster size of kaolinite particles in suspension at the desired ionic strength was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS). The scattered light from the particles by their Brownian motion is collected at a scattering angle of 90° by an optical fiber, and detected by a photo-electric detector. The 0.05 The surface charge and surface potential of the AFM tip were determined by measuring the surface force between the AFM tip and a silica wafer. The surface potential of silica as a function of ionic strength from AFM fitted force curves is shown in The origin of the surface charge of the muscovite basal plane surface is usually considered to be due to isomorphous substitution in the crystal lattice. In theory, the surface charge density of the muscovite basal plane surface is supposed to be independent of ionic strength A representative AFM image of a talc basal plane surface, which has a surface roughness of 0.838 A representative AFM image of kaolinite particles with the silica face exposed is shown in Results based upon fitting of the force curves, the surface charge densities and surface potentials of the muscovite basal plane surface, the talc basal plane surface and the kaolinite silica surface are summarized in The isomorphous substitution is also believed to be responsible for the wetting characteristics of these three clay minerals The surface charge densities of all three clay minerals are almost constant for low ionic strength solutions, as expected, but increase at high ionic strength. The surface potentials of all three minerals decrease with increasing ionic strength for low ionic strength solutions, but change little at high ionic strength. The surface charge densities of clay minerals at high ionic strengths are difficult to maintain constant, maybe due to the strong compression of the electrical double layer and limited diffuse ions confined in the electrical double layer. In the case of muscovite [KAl Typical force curves between the AFM tip and kaolinite alumina face and edge surfaces are shown in The surface charge densities and surface potentials of kaolinite surfaces, obtained from the force curves, are summarized in The cluster size of kaolinite particles in suspension at pH 5.6 is shown in The cluster size of kaolinite particles as a function of ionic strength is the result of the competition between electrostatic forces and van der Waals forces. The van der Waals attractive force is independent of ionic strength, and is of the right magnitude and range to compete with the electrostatic force For 100 Using AFM, the surface charge and surface potential of muscovite basal plane surfaces, talc basal plane surfaces and kaolinite surfaces were analyzed as a function of ionic strength based on the DLVO theory. The silica face of these phyllosilicates follows the constant surface charge model with the addition of an electrolyte; the surface charge having a slight increase at high ionic strength. In addition, the surface charge of the muscovite was found to be much greater than the surface charge of the talc surface. The silica face of kaolinite shows a moderate surface charge density, consistent with, and explained by, the degree of isomorphous substitution in the crystal lattice. It is also expected that only 10 of 340 potassium ions, or about 3%, are released from the muscovite face surface in order to account for the surface charge calculated from the AFM surface force measurements. The surface charge densities of the kaolinite alumina face and edge surface increased significantly with increasing ionic strength, except at high ionic strength, where the surface charge of the kaolinite silica face increases, and the surface charge of kaolinite alumina face decreases. The cluster size of kaolinite particles for selected ionic strength solutions was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy. With increasing ionic strength, the cluster size first increases, decreases at 100 Results from this research are important for solving environmental issues, such as colloid transport, and are also useful in the development of flotation technology. The effect of ionic strength on the surface charge and cluster size of clay minerals has been established and will provide a foundation for the modeling of aggregation phenomena. The effect of ionic strength on collector adsorption and the flotation recovery of clay minerals should be studied in the future. It is expected that the results from this study will provide scientific support in the use of saline water for the processing of mineral resources containing clay minerals, including processing operations, such as flotation and sedimentation for water recovery and utilization. The financial support from the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy with Grant Number DE-FG03-93ER14315 is gratefully acknowledged. We also appreciate the help from Ms. Linda Sandaklie-Nikolova with the sample preparation of the kaolinite edge surfaces using ultramicrotome.