There has been much interest in alternative fuels made from coal which is much more abundant than oil. The coal–oil–water slurry is a new type of oil-based synfuel composed of finely pulverized coal, oil and water. It has lower viscosity, lower ignition point and higher heating value than coal–water slurry. The preparation of stable water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion is critical for the success of production of stable coal–oil–water slurry. The present study was undertaken to experimentally investigate the effects of different process variables on emulsion stability. The emulsion was prepared using 100 ml colloid mill with sorbitan monooleate (SM) as emulsifier. The variables studied include emulsifier dosage, ratio of oil to water, stirring intensity, emulsifying temperature and mixing time. The results showed that the optimum process conditions are: emulsifier dosage, 0.5%; oil to water ratio, 1:1; stirring intensity, 2500 rpm; and mixing temperature, 30 °C.An emulsion is defined as two immiscible liquids wherein droplets of one phase (the dispersed or internal phase) are encapsulated within sheets of another phase (the continuous or external phase) two liquids must be immiscible or mutually insoluble in each other; agitation must be applied to disperse one liquid into the other; and emulsifying agent or a combination of emulsifiers must be present. Coal is the major energy source for the world. Fine coal slurry is a promising alternative fuel that may replace oil in some cases. However, the thermal energy per unit volume of coal slurry is low compared to oil. Moreover, burner nozzles and boilers have to be modified if oil is substituted with coal slurry, which has hindered commercialization of the technology. One of the most important tasks in developing coal slurry as the alternative fuel is to improve the combustion efficiency and reduce the environmental pollution. A new type of oil-based synfuel composed of finely pulverized coal, oil and water offers several advantages including lower viscosity, lower ignition point, higher heating value, higher combustion efficiency and lower particulate soot formation than coal–water slurry. Coal–water slurries have been developed over the last 15 years as an alternative to fuel oil mainly in industry and power station boilers. Numerous processes are available for preparation of stable coal–water slurry. However, the technology for producing stable coal–oil–water slurry is much less sophisticated Given the ingredients of an emulsion and the emulsifying machine, the most significant parameter that can be varied to produce different emulsions is the stirring intensity. More efficient agitation gives better emulsion. Emulsion formation in simple mixers has been the subject of many detailed studies Temperature often has indirect effects on emulsification as a result of altering the interfacial tension, adsorption of emulsifier and viscosity. Because both viscosity and interfacial tension decrease with the increase in temperature, higher temperature is favorable for emulsification. There is also some evidence that a sharp increase or decrease of temperature tends to coagulate the particles, thereby causing the deterioration of emulsions. In recent years, considerable attention has been given by chemical engineers to the determination of the optimum emulsifying temperature for different emulsifiers. The emulsifying agent may be any surface-active substance which can form a thin interfacial film between the two liquids and maintain the emulsion by minimizing the contact, coalescence and aggregation of the internal dispersed phase. The surfactant should surround the dispersed droplet as a nonadhering film. In water-in-oil emulsions, asphaltene, resins and paraffin waxes act as natural emulsifying agents stabilizing W/O mixture The preparation of stable water-in-oil emulsion is essential for the production of stable coal–oil–water slurry. The effects of several process variables on the stability of oil-in-water emulsion were studied in the present work. The variables included emulsifier dosage, ratio of oil to water, stirring intensity, emulsifying temperature and mixing time, etc. The emulsifier used in the experiments was sorbitan monooleate (SM) acquired from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. The oil employed was a commercial diesel in China, which does not freeze at −10 °C. Predetermined amounts of oil and emulsifier were introduced to a 100-ml colloid mill. All the measurements were made under the following conditions unless otherwise specified: the ratio of oil to water was 1:1 by volume; the stirring intensity, 2500 rpm; the mixing time, 15 min; the emulsifying temperature, 25 °C; pH value 6.0. The stability of the emulsion may be characterized by monitoring the droplet size distribution with the NMR self-diffusion method The most important task in preparation of emulsions is the selection of suitable surfactant which will satisfactorily emulsify the chosen ingredients at a given temperature. It has long been recognized that with a homologous series of surfactants, there is a range in which the polarity of the molecule, i.e., the relation between the contributions of the polar hydrophilic head and the nonpolar lipophilic tail, is optimal for a specific emulsion. Griffin The stability of a W/O emulsion is defined as the resistance by the dispersed water droplets against coalescence. It is dependent on a variety of factors including the presence or absence of the emulsifying agent, viscosity (influenced greatly by temperature), specific gravity, water content and the age of the emulsion. Surfactant dosage is one of the most important factors influencing the stability of emulsions. Several investigations have demonstrated that emulsifier concentration can strongly influence emulsion stability It has been reported that emulsion type is dependent on the relative phase volume. Ostwald  There are many different ways of preparing emulsions of two liquids that are insoluble or possess only slight mutual solubility. Emulsification is usually achieved by the application of mechanical energy. Initially, the interface between the two phases is deformed to such an extent that large droplets are formed, and these large droplets are subsequently broken up into smaller ones. During emulsification, the interfacial area between two liquids increases. Liquids tend to minimize this surface area; therefore, mechanical energy is required for emulsification to proceed. It was reported that increasing local dissipation of energy in breaking zone due to the rise of circulation consumption through mixer zone is found to be the most effective method of drops diameter decrease To investigate the effect of temperature on the emulsion stability, the relative emulsion volume was determined at temperatures ranging from 30 to 70 °C. The mixture was stirred for 15 min at different temperatures, with increments of 10 °C. The results of relative emulsion volume vs. time are shown in The mixing time is another important factor for emulsification. Verbich et al.  A stable O/W emulsion was produced using the diesel as the oil and sorbitan monooleate as the emulsifier. The optimal emulsifier dosage was 0.5% by volume. At lower emulsifier dosages, the emulsion was unstable; the instability at higher emulsifier dosages was a result of rapid coalescence and concentration. The emulsion stability increased with decreasing oil-to-water ratio. The optimum ratio was 1:1 by volume. Higher stirring intensity resulted in more stable emulsion. The optimum stirring intensity was 2500 rpm for the emulsion system investigated. High temperature reduced emulsion stability, and the optimum emulsifying temperature was 30 °C. Emulsion stability increased with stirring time up to 15 min, beyond which the stability decreased with further increase in stirring time due to the drop-out of emulsifier from oil–water interface.