The effect of coalification jumps on petrophysical properties, and the evolution of porosity and permeability of metamorphic coals are poorly understood, which significantly influences coalbed methane extraction. We estimated pore throat diameter, specific surface area, connectivity, moveable fluid space, heterogeneity, porosity and permeability in a series of 41 coal samples (maximum reflectance of vitrinite in 0.34–4.24%) over six coalification jumps, by processing low temperature nitrogen adsorption, mercury intrusion porosimetry and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements. Each coalification jump generally leads to abrupt change of petrophysical properties from dehydration to graphitization. Connectivity parameters (efficiency mercury withdrawal and the ratio of movable fluid to bounded fluid) and fractal dimensions (D
                     NA1, D
                     NA2, D
                     MIP, D
                     NMRS and D
                     NMRM) present binomial function with vitrinite reflectance. Generations of thermogenic gas and fractures growth are attributed to increasing pore-fracture connectivity in bituminization and debituminization. Fractures begin healing and compaction, as well as reduced connectivity, at the fourth jump in graphitization. Heterogeneous pore-structures (high D
                     MIP and D
                     NMRM) usually have low connectivity. Moveable fluid space and its porosity from NMR are negatively correlated with the increase in coal rank. The evolution and origin of porosity and permeability (<1 mD) during coalification is proposed. Coal permeability (>1 mD) has no relation with coal rank and is related to fracture characteristics. Unlike the origin of porosity, which intrinsically inherits from progressive coalification, the origin of permeability is attributed to both progressive coalification and tectonic stresses. This study reveals the complex pore-fracture structures variation and the effect of stages in coal maturation on petrophysical properties of coalbed methane reservoirs.Coalification is a burial metamorphic process fundamental to understand the origin and nature of coals and petroleum ( Many researchers have reported abrupt changes in reflectance values ( To achieve this objective, a total of 41 samples with coal ranks from lignite to anthracite were analyzed using low temperature nitrogen adsorption (LTNA), mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) and low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to characterize the petrophysical properties. This study provides insight into the effect of six coalification jumps known to exist in liptinite and vitrinite maceral groups on petrophysical properties involving pore throat diameter, specific surface area, connectivity, moveable fluid space, heterogeneity, porosity and permeability. The contribution of each coalification jumps on the multiscale pores (micro-, transit-, mes- and macro-pores) contents are also determined. Finally, the coal porosity/permeability evolution from dehydration to graphitization at each abrupt jump during coalification (0.34–4.24% 41 block samples were obtained from 41 underground coalmines from the Junggar Basin, Sanjiang Basin, Ordos Basin, Qinshui Basin, Huaibei coalfield, Jiaozuo coalfield, Handan coalfield, and Xinggong coalfield ( LTNA at 77 K and MIP was conducted to detect the adsorption-pore (<100 nm) and multiscale pore (>3.5 nm) structures, respectively. Adsorption pore size distribution (PSD) and pore volumes were calculated with the Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) model and surface area was acquired from the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) multilayer adsorption equation ( We establish fractal analyses of the adsorption-pores (<100 nm, including micropore of 0–10 nm and transition pore of 10–100 nm), seepage-pores (10 Coal samples 41 in total were gathered from the Middle Jurassic Xishanyao Formation (J LTNA and MIP results for 41 tested coal samples are shown in Results of adsorption-pore BET surface areas and BJH volumes are presented in Combining LTNA and MIP pore volume percentage results, the effect of six coalification jumps on the contribution of multiscale pore volume can be observed in The efficiency of mercury withdrawal can be used to estimate pore-fracture connectivity and assess coal matrix permeability ( Moveable fluid space determines the capacity of mass transport in CBM reservoirs ( Fractal dimensions obtained from LTNA, MIP and NMR measurements can characterize multiscale pore-fracture structure heterogeneity ( Gas flow capacity in coal seam is determined by porosity, permeability ( It should be noted that abrupt changes on pore-fracture structures correspond with relatively low correlation coefficients ( Maceral, structural and fractal characterization of pore-fracture were proposed by combining optical microscopy, LTNA, MIP, NMR and fractal theories in 41 coal samples (0.34–4.24% With the increase of coal ranks, liptinite cannot be distinguished in low-volatile bituminous, semi-anthracite and anthracite coal samples. Decrease in hysteresis loop size, specific surface areas and volumes of adsorption pores is likely associated with the increase in rank, which is inverted for adsorption-pore diameter. Each coalification jump attributes to abrupt changes in pore volume content. High content of ink-bottle shaped pores has high specific surface areas and allows for high capacity to absorb and hold gas. Connectivity parameters (efficiency mercury withdrawal and FFI/BVI) present polynomial function with vitrinite reflectance, with a maximum value at the fourth jump. Thermogenic methane and fractures growth attribute to increase pore-fracture connectivity in bituminization and debituminization. Fractures begin healing and compacting during graphitization, which reduce connectivity of pore-fracture. The ΔS and moveable fluid porosity in NMR is used to estimate moveable fluid space and the control of fluid osmosis, which are negatively correlated with rising vitrinite reflectance. Fractal dimensions ( Coal porosity and permeability (<1 mD) weakly decreases with the increase in rank. Coal permeability (>1 mD) predominantly originates within tectonic stresses and are controlled by fracture characteristics. Unlike the origin of porosity, which intrinsically originates in the organic matter and ranks of progressive coalification, the origin of permeability verifies dual causes: coalification and tectonic stresses. Abrupt jumps on pore-fracture characteristics propose heterogeneous variation and relatively low correlation coefficient fitting petrophysical properties with coal rank. This study was funded by the