IMAC (Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography) is one of most selective chromatographic techniques for protein retention. In this technique, a complexing resin containing, for example, iminodiacetic groups, is saturated with a metallic ion, and when the solution of proteins is contacted with the saturated resin; the affinity of the proteins for the metallic ions produces the retention of the protein by the support. In the present study, an iminodiacetic resin (Lewatit TP-207) was saturated with copper and the retention of bovine serum albumin and α-lactalbumin was tested. Equilibrium analysis was carried out in column, a constant separation factor isotherm being used to obtain the equilibrium constants. The kinetics was studied in batch experiments; a superficial mass transfer and a pore diffusion model were considered to obtain the mass transfer coefficient in the film and the pore diffusivity. The equilibrium is unfavorable and the kinetics very fast. Finally, breakthrough curves were obtained and modeled with a proposed column model taking into account equilibrium, kinetics and hydrodynamic parameters. The column model adequately fits the experimental breakthrough curves. This resin may be used to retain proteins from wastes from the food industry.specific area of the particles (cm solution concentration of species pore solution concentration of species initial solution concentration of species equilibrium fluid concentration at the surface solid/liquid (g l particle diameter (m) pore diffusivity (m diffusivity of species number of mass transfer units for species factor separation constant for species film mass transfer coefficient (cm min film mass transfer coefficient (min exchanged particle concentration of species particle concentration of species total capacity of the resin for species average concentration of species pore concentration of species separation factor radial coordinate (m) radius of particle (m) time (s) superficial velocity (m s volume of solution (l) dimensionless concentration in liquid phase dimensionless concentration in solid phase diffusivity ratio for species resin porosity reactor porosity The applications for purified proteins have grown considerably over recent years due to their biological and nutritional properties especially in the fields of biochemistry and medicine. Many industrial waste products contain an appreciable amount of proteins suitable for recovery. Among these waste products, for instance, are whey from the dairy industry or blood from slaughter-houses. These products contain mixtures of several proteins and methods need to be developed to separate and purify each protein from the mixture. There are principally three methods available for separating proteins: chemical fractionation, methods using membranes and methods using chromatography. In the case of whey there exists a chemical fractionation method that uses FeCl One important aspect of chromatography is the sorbent support. Packing materials for protein separation have been continuously improved. Initially extremely soft gels of polyacrylamide or agarose were used, and later, macroporous materials based on synthetic polymers with a large number of hydroxyl groups were designed with large pores to permit the entrance of the proteins in the sorbent thus improving the mass transfer between the solid and the liquid phases. More recently two new concepts have been developed; namely ‘perfusive chromatography’ The high affinity of proteins (especially albumins and hemoglobin) for ions such as Cu This technique, called IMAC (Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography), has been studied by several authors such as Beitle and Ataai In the present work, an iminodiacetic resin (Lewatit TP-207) was saturated with copper and the retention of albumin proteins in a column filled with this resin was tested. Equilibrium analysis was carried out in column and a constant separation factor isotherm used to obtain the equilibrium constants. The kinetics was studied in batch experiments; a superficial mass transfer and a pore diffusion model were considered to obtain the mass transfer coefficient in the film and the pore diffusivity. Finally, breakthrough curves were obtained and modeled with a proposed column model. This resin is very cheap in comparison with other sorbents (Poros, HyperD) manufactured specially for protein separation. The resin Lewatit TP-207 is used in the hydrometallurgy industry for heavy metal recovery in wastewaters, so its cost is low, currently $2 l The proteins used in the experiments were albumins, such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma, St Louis, MO). This protein is frequently used as a standard for testing different supports in protein chromatography. BSA is present in the plasma of blood and in whey, waste products of interest from the point of view of protein recovery as has already been stated. Some tests were also carried out using α-lactalbumin (also from Sigma). This is another albumin protein present in whey. The determination of the protein concentration was carried out using a Shimadzu UV–vis spectrophotometer model UV-1203. The wavelength used was 280 nm. A Helma continuous flow cell connected to the spectrophotometer was used to carry out continuous analysis for kinetic experiments. Concentration patterns of between 0.5 and 2 g l The resin used was Lewatit TP-207 manufactured by Bayer, the characteristics of this resin are shown in An agitated batch reactor of 55 mm diameter and 70 mm height was used for the kinetic experiments. Wet resin (10 ml) was contacted with 120 ml of protein solution. The concentrations of the protein solution were 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1 g l A fixed bed column of 32 mm diameter and 31 mm height was used for column experiments to obtain the breakthrough curves. The column was first filled with the Lewatit TP-207 resin saturated with copper. Then the column was equilibrated with the acetate/acetic acid buffer at pH 5.3; after conditioning, the protein solution in the same buffer was introduced into the column at 20°C. A Cole-Palmer peristaltic pump model Masterflex 7550-62 was used to introduce the solution into the column. The flow rates used were 0.8 and 1.3 ml min The equilibrium results obtained, values of One of the advantages of this resin is its low price; the cost of Lewatit TP-207 is around $2 l An important parameter in the IMAC is the pH, especially in resins functionalized with iminodiacetic acid, which is a weak acid group. Kinetics of the retention process is very important for the use of this iminodiacetic-Cu bounded resin at the preparative scale. The experimental results show that the kinetics of the process is quick, and the system reaches equilibrium for BSA in approximately 3 min. The kinetics for α-lactalbumin is slower, reaching equilibrium in 10 min, the reason being that the size of the BSA is greater than that of α-lactalbumin, and under these conditions, α-lactalbumin can penetrate the pores of the resin more easily, thus taking more time to cross the column. Two models based on kinetics of the process controlled by diffusion inside the particle and in the film surrounding the particles respectively, were used to fit the experimental kinetic results, namely those of surface diffusion in the film and the pore diffusion model. With these fittings it is possible to obtain the apparent diffusivities, and the mass transfer coefficient in the film, which can be used in the modeling of the breakthrough curves in the column experiments. In this model, the retention of the protein molecules (i.e. the resin retention capacity) is limited by the external surface of the particles, which may act essentially as ‘pellicular’ media. The basic equation of the model considers a linear driving force equation: This model considers the resin as a porous matrix, and the organic matrix is crossed by pores of different size and diameter that has to be taken into account in the model equations. The basic equations of the pore diffusion model are: mass balance inside particles: mass balance in solution: average concentration in particle: Initial and boundary conditions: initial conditions:  when washing is carried out if there is no washing boundary conditions: in the particle: at the interphase: A FORTRAN subroutine, PDECOL The diffusivities obtained for the proteins studied by Tyn and Gusek  The kinetics of BSA is faster than α-lactalbumin as BSA diffusion is only restricted to the resin surface while for α-lactalbumin, the pore diffusion is the control diffusion mechanism. The copper ions are more accessible for α-lactalbumin than for BSA, so a higher capacity is hoped for α-lactalbumin than for BSA as experimental data show. After analysis of the equilibrium and kinetic experiments, breakthrough curve experiments were carried out. The shape of the experimental breakthrough curves for BSA and α-lactalbumin are very similar. The breakthrough curves obtained can be fitted using a model taking into account equilibrium and kinetics parameters obtained in the independent experiments discussed above and the hydrodynamics of the column (axial dispersion). The basic equations of the proposed model in this case are: General mass balance to solute in the bed: The effect of the hydrodynamics of the column in the model is represented by the term containing the axial dispersion. Mass balance of solute inside particles: initial and boundary conditions: initial conditions: in boundary conditions in particle: in the column: z=0, The use of an iminodiacetic-Cu bounded resin for the retention of proteins in a column, was found to be a valid method for carrying out the retention of proteins, the principal advantage being its low price. This resin presents good physical and mechanical properties which makes it useful for industrial-scale columns. Equilibrium experiments showed an unfavorable isotherm, with values of the equilibrium constants of 0.165 for BSA and 0.33 for α-lactalbumin using the constant separation factor isotherm. The kinetics of the process is very quick, and the system reaches equilibrium in less than 5 min for BSA. The film mass transfer model and the pore diffusion model were found to fit the experimental kinetic results well for BSA and α-lactalbumin, respectively. A proposed model, which takes into account equilibrium and kinetic parameters and the hydrodynamics of the column, adequately fitted the experimental breakthrough curves obtained in the fixed bed column, using axial dispersion