Experiments were performed to determine crystallization of Fe,S-melts (pyriti≿ and troilitic with molar ratio S/Fe ratios of 2 and 1, respectively) containing traces of gold and silver at (Ag/Au)wt ratios varying from 10 to 0.1. The solid products were studied by optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), microprobe analysis, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) in order to reveal the concentration limits of “invisible” gold and silver in magmatic iron sulfides, and to determine the influence of sulfur on forms of precious metals in the Fe–S system with different Ag/Au ratios.
                  Au–Ag phases do not form inclusions but instead concentrate on the grain boundaries in the synthetic pyrrhotite and troilite, while pyrite comprises micro- (1–5 μm) and macroinclusions of Au–Ag alloys and Au–Ag sulfides. In “pyriti≿” systems, the fineness of alloys increases from 650 to 970‰ and the composition of sulfides changes from acanthite (Ag2S) to uytenbogaardtite (Ag3AuS2) and petrovskaite (AgAuS) as the Ag/Au ratio decreases. The concentrations of “invisible” precious metals revealed in troilite were 0.040 ± 0.013 wt.% Au and 0.079 ± 0.016 wt.% Ag. Measured concentrations in pyrite and pyrrhotite were <0.024 wt.% Au and <0.030 wt.% Ag. The surface layers of iron sulfides probed with XPS were enriched in the precious metals, and in silver relative to gold, especially in the systems with Fe/S = 1, probably, due to depletion of the metallic alloy surfaces with gold. Au- and Ag-bearing iron sulfides crystallized primarily from melts may be the source of redeposited phases in hydrothermal and hypergene processes.Iron sulfides, pyrite (FeS Cook et al. Modern surface-sensitive methods provide evidence for the existence of nanometer-sized objects at the surfaces of ore minerals. Gold was found in natural iron sulfides as surface phase Magmas play an important role as a source of metals and sulfur for hydrothermal ore deposit formation. During the two last decades a considerable attention has been paid to the investigation of gold and silver behavior in Fe, S-containing melts In the Fe–S system, Fe Gold contents reported for natural hydrothermal pyrites vary from 10 Although invisible silver in iron sulfides has been proven and measured in a number of studies, understanding of silver incorporation in iron sulfides lags well behind that of gold. Huston et al. In this work we performed the experiments on coupled gold and silver solubility in magmatic iron sulfides (pyrite, troilite, pyrrhotite); the study was confined to the simple Fe–S system with Ag/Au ratios typical for sulfide ores. The aim was to reveal the solubility of gold and silver and to determine the influence of sulfur on visible forms of precious metals in Fe–S system with different Ag/Au and S/Fe ratios. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was also applied to characterize the surface layers of the mineral assemblies largely determining their reactivity upon weathering and the mineral processing. The starting materials were elementary gold and silver (99.99%), sulfur (99.9%) and iron (99.5%). The compositions of chosen samples can be formally written down as FeS For each sample the charge and the quartz rod, which was used to minimize the free volume, were loaded into a quartz ampoule. Sealing of the ampoules was performed after evacuating them to a residual pressure of ∼10 The samples were preliminary studied by optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Polished sections were prepared from 1/3 part of each sample. The chemical composition was determined by energy-dispersive (EDS) and wavelength-dispersive (WDS) electron microprobe analysis (EPMA) using a scanning electron microscope MIRA 3 LMU (Tescan Orsay Holding) combined with X-ray microanalysis systems INCA Energy 450+ Xmax-80 and INCA Wave 500 (Oxford Instruments Nanoanalysis Ltd). EDS EPMA was carried out at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, probe current 1.5 nA, live acquisition time of spectra 30 s. For the analysis we used the Xray K-series (S, Fe) and L-series (Ag, Au). The spatial resolution of the analysis was about 3 μm. Relatively large grains more than 10 μm in size were examined to avoid background fluorescence from surrounding phases. Pure metals (Au and Ag) and pyrite (FeS The amount of invisible gold in sulfides was estimated by WDS EPMA using Au M-line at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV, probe current 20 nA, acquisition time of 400 s for peak, and 200 s for background measurement on each side of the peak. The concentration of silver was measured by the Energy-dispersive spectrometer (live acquisition time 570 s). The analyses were made on the 10 × 10 μm X-ray powder diffraction patterns were collected on a Stoe STADI MP diffractometer (CuKα1 radiation, Ge(111) monochromator, 40 kV, 40 mA) equipped with a MITHEN 1K linear detector. The diffraction data were collected from 15 to 60° 2θ angular range with a step of 0.015° and accumulation time of 15 s per step. The results were processed in the program WinXPOW 2.21 (Stoe). The database of PDF-4 Minerals (The Powder Diffraction File PDF-4 +, 2006) X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) experiments were performed on specimens crushed to 100–200 μm in a jasper mortar, immediately attached to a conductive carbon sticky tape and transferred to the vacuum chamber. The measurements were carried out using an SPECS instrument equipped with a hemispherical analyzer PHOIBOS 150 MCD 9 at electron take-off angle 900. The pass energy was set at 8 eV and 20 eV for high resolution narrow scans and for survey spectra, respectively; unmonochromatized Mg Kα radiation (1253.6 eV) of the X-ray tube was used for excitation. The lines were fitted with Gaussian–Lorentzian peak profiles after Shirley background subtraction using CasaXPS software. The starting compositions and the results of analyses of the solid phases crystallized in the “pyriti≿» (Py1 ÷ Py7) and “troilitic” (Tr1 ÷ Tr7) experiments are shown in The major phases in «pyritic » experiments are represented by pyrrhotite (Fe The X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the samples produced in experiments Py1 ÷ Py7 contain cubic pyrite FeS The concentrations of “invisible” precious metals in pyrite and pyrrhotite are lower than the sensitivity limit of X-ray spectral microanalysis (Au < 0.024 and Ag < 0.030 wt.%). “Surface” Au–Ag phases were observed both on pyrite ( Surface compositions determined using XPS are in a qualitative agreement with those for the bulk, except that surface layers are enriched in silver ( The highest intensity of the pyritic iron line was observed for the sample with the largest content of silver. The S 2p The Ag 3d The quantities of gold found using XPS correlate with the bulk ones ( Troilite (Fe According to the results of XRD study, the solid phases synthesized in experiments Tr1 ÷ Tr7 are hexagonal troilite (The Powder Diffraction …, 2006, card 01-075-8712) and silver (card 04-007-7997) and gold (card 04-007-8000) or Au–Ag alloys. The photoelectron Fe 2p spectra collected from samples prepared in the sulfur-depleted system FeSAg The intensity of Ag 3d spectra and atomic S/Ag ratios ( Texture study of the synthesized samples suggests the sequence of crystallization of Au–Ag phases and iron sulfides, and reveals formation conditions of invisible and native form and sulfides of gold and silver. The first phase solidified in the sulfur-rich system is hexagonal Au, Ag-bearing pyrrhotite. The next stage of solidification is a formation of pyrite by a peritectic reaction between pyrrhotite and liquid. Precious metals, apart from those solved in Fe–S solid phases, crystallize at the final stage forming xenomorphic fine grains of native gold and Au–Ag sulfides in pyrite; this is well seen in The sequence of crystallization of phases in sulfur-depleted system (experiments Tr1 ÷ Tr7, Our results on solubility of gold and silver in iron sulfides are in general agreement with those obtained by other authors for experimental The data obtained here support the model of fractional crystallization of sulfide melts, according to which the precious metals should form their own minerals The existing methods for the recovery of precious metals from sulfide ores are focused on native (metallic) form of gold and silver and largely disregard the presence of Au–Ag sulfides – acanthite, uytenbogaardtite and petrovskaite. Data on the solubility of precious metals in iron sulfides are important to balance the various types of gold occurrence in the sulfide ores.  Crystallization of pyrrhotite and pyrite as major phases occurs in the sulfur-rich system (S/Fe = 2). Precious metals are concentrated in pyrite as inclusions of alloys and sulfides. With decreasing Ag/Au weight ratio from 10 to 0.1 the fineness of Au alloys increases from 650 to 970‰ and the composition of sulfides changes from acanthite to uytenbogaardtite and petrovskaite. The content of “invisible” precious metals in pyrite and pyrrhotite does not exceed 0.024 and 0.030 wt.% for Au and Ag, respectively. The sulfur depleted system (S/Fe = 1) forms troilite with isomorphous precious metals; their concentrations can reach 0.040 ± 0.013 and 0.079 ± 0.016 wt.% for Au and Ag, respectively. Most of “visible” Au–Ag phases are located between or close to the grain boundaries. The photoelectron spectra characterizing a few nanometer thick layer showed preferentially Ag–Au sulfide phases on the surfaces of ground specimens. Moreover, almost no surface gold was observed in the samples depleted in sulfur (“troilitic”), where the precious metals are present mainly in the elementary form. Probably, the surfaces of metallic Ag–Au alloys are enriched in silver, and the effect being more pronounced in the S-bearing systems due to a higher Ag affinity to S. This may affect the leaching of gold; and it should be taken into consideration for the reactions of weathering and processing of Au-bearing ores. This work is supported by