Slurry particle shape is an important variable in determining equipment life in mineral processing operations, especially in the grinding circuit. Slurry particles here are generally coarse, sharp and at high concentrations. Little information is available to guide practitioners in measuring particle shape or understanding the impact of particle shape on the wear rate of the hard white irons that are commonly used in processing equipment.
                  The first part of the current work has explored the differences between 2 methods of measuring particle shape – Circularity Factor (CF) a ratio of the perimeter to projected area of the particles and spike parameter (SPQ) which is an analytical method of fitting triangles to the prominent features of the particle outline. Calculating the CF and SPQ for a wide range of particle shapes (from angular to round) found a close linear correlation between the two. This was surprising given that the more complex SPQ methodology was developed to improve particle shape characterisation.
                  The second part of the work used a large scale Coriolis tester to determine the effect of particles of different shape on the wear rate of white cast iron. To simulate the type of wear experienced in grinding circuits a range of different particle shapes with similar CF to those observed in field applications were tested. Coarse silicon carbide, alumina and silica sand particles were individually run through the Coriolis tester. By recirculating the particles in the rig, the shape became more rounded (with CF eventually spanning the range seen in field applications) without dramatically impacting particle size. An inverse power law relationship was found between the CF and the erosion rate for white iron. This correlation should be able to be used to determine the impact of changes in CF on equipment wear life.
                  A third element of the work was a microscopic investigation of the worn sample surface from the Coriolis tester to identify changes in wear mechanisms with particle hardness and shape. In addition a comparison was made with worn slurry pump parts to ensure that the mechanisms of wear from the Coriolis test were representative of those seen in equipment in the field.The wear of mineral processing equipment such as slurry pumps, hydrocyclones, screens and pipes in grinding circuits is quite severe. Wear in this equipment is mostly hard particle slurry erosion. A typical worn slurry pump impeller made from high chrome white iron is shown in Mineral particles in the grinding circuit are relatively sharp and quite coarse as they are crushed by balls or rods in the mill and undergo further attrition due to the high concentrations and velocities (viz. particle–particle collisions) required for transporting and classification. While the size of the particle is important to wear rate, the “sharpness” is also a significant factor. There is very little data available on mineral particle shape in grinding circuits and no data specifically looking at the effect of particle shape on wear of hard white iron. The objective of the current research is to establish a measure of typical particle shape and particle size in grinding circuits and then measure the wear rate of different particles in a representative test to establish what impact shape has on wear of white irons. There has not been a lot of prior research on the impact of particle shape on wear of materials and the little there is has focused on wear of ductile materials, not hard white iron. In addition, none of the wear test methods reported (dry-sand rubber wheel and ball on plate abrasion test and air jet, slurry jet and slurry pot erosion test) accurately simulate the type of wear seen in slurry handling equipment, particularly pumps There are a variety of methods that have been used to characterise particle shape in wear situations. The simplest and probably most common of these methods is the Circularity Factor (CF) developed by Riley in 1941 Levy and Chik Bahadur and Badruddin Desale et al. Woldman et al. Vite-Torres et al. A more sophisticated alternative for particle shape measurement in wear scenarios has been proposed by Stachowiak To better understand the relationship between Circularity Factor and SPQ, comparison has been made by calculating CF from known SPQ values in published material In an earlier study, Walker Given the close correlation between the SPQ and CF methods, the work here will use the CF approach to shape measurement because of its simplicity and no proprietary software being required. Open source image analysis software packages are available to perform the CF measurement but it is necessary to understand the limitations of such digital interpretation. For instance, a circle digitally measured CF is 0.9 (rather than 1.0) due to the perimeter length increase with pixel step measurement. As the size of shapes change they must be represented by the nearest combination of whole pixels that are available. Square shapes are the only shape that can be realistically represented with a Cartesian grid of pixels. Curved shapes must always be an approximation when represented in a pixel based system. Image boundary clarity and resolution as well as method consistency are critical to developing good particle shape data. For the current investigation, particle images were taken with a USB microscope at up to 300× magnification. Some experimentation with different lighting approaches led to the use of a light box to back illuminate particles, prevent shadowing and provide a clear outline image. Resolution at this magnification was not a problem for the particles used as most were larger than 0.5 The image analysis software used was ImageJ Typical grinding circuit applications have a very broad size particle distribution Roco and Minani To determine a realistic range of test CF values, slurry samples were obtained from a number of mineral processing sites. As detailed above, the d85 particle size was determined from the overall particle size distribution for the sample. A sub-sample was collected from the screen (sieve) size immediately below the d85 that had passed the sieve immediately larger. The CF was then measured for this sample. The specimen material was 27%Cr eutectic white iron to ISO21988/JN/HBW555XCr27 Llewellyn et al. Even with their higher discriminative power, the Coriolis testers described in the literature The Coriolis wear tester design developed for this work was based on a 6 For each test series, fresh particles of silicon carbide (SiC), alumina (Al The distributor bowl is directly driven by a 2 pole motor capable of speeds in the range 0–3000 At least 2 samples were analysed at the same time, with the slurry being sampled every half hour for concentration and CF analysis. Furthermore, a fresh sample face was exposed to the recirculating slurry every 1 or 2 Material loss determinations for the wear scars were carried out with a non-contacting optical 3D surface imaging system – Talysurf CLI 1000. The vertical resolution of this instrument is 2 The average depth of wear over the area of the scar is calculated from the measured mass loss divided by the density to get volume removed which is then divided by the wear scar surface area. The average material depth is then normalised by the test time to get an average material removal rate in mm/day. As there are a minimum of 2 samples per test the final result is then the average of the samples tested. Particle samples from a range of mineral processing sites were obtained to determine a range of CF of interest for the Coriolis testing. These are shown in The particle characteristics including size, shape (CF), Coefficient of Variance (COV) of the CF and hardness used in the Coriolis wear testing are summarised for comparison in Photos of the various particles and their shapes are shown in The sample wear rate for varying CF is shown for all three erodents in As can be seen the wear rate decreases for increasing CF following a power law relationship. The general form of the resultant empirical wear rate relationship can be expressed as While the particle shape became more rounded during the tests for the SiC and alumina erodents, as can be seen from For the SiC erodent there was no measurable change in the particle size from start to finish. For the alumina, there was a reduction in average size of about 10% over the 8 Even though the source sand was initially much larger, as a result of the sand fracturing, average particle size for all the erodents during the measured wear test was in the range 500–800 A SEM photograph of the surface of a worn 27%Cr iron casing from a slurry pump in a grinding circuit application is shown in  The wear appearance of the test samples looks more severe than that which occurs in the field. With the ploughing marks overlapping, there is no visual evidence of the carbide structure or carbide cracking as compared to the field sample. The more severe wear in the Coriolis tester relative to the field wear could be caused by a number of different factors: Higher hardness of the erodent particles relative to the white iron phases. Hardness of SiC, alumina and sand grains are around 3300, 2400 and 1400 Rotational speed of the Coriolis tester being too high leading to a higher normal component of particle impact than that seen in the field. Narrow particle size distribution of large particles in Coriolis test slurries means that effect of smaller particles on wear pattern (smoothing sharp edges and erosion between carbides) is missing To check if the speed and particle size were major factors in the wear surface appearance a further test was completed with the Coriolis tester running at 1000  Particle shape can be simply characterised for wear purposes by use of the CF. When measuring CF, care must be exercised to ensure good edge resolution (through adequate lighting and contrast) and minimum 2000 pixel particle length dimension. There is a linear relationship between CF and SPQ over a wide range of particle shapes. The wear rate of ductile steels and hard white irons decreases with increasing particle CF. The wear rate of white irons shows an inverse power law relationship with CF, but specific wear rates will depend additionally on particle size, density, etc. as well as predominant impingement angle (lower angle giving higher wear rate). The use of hard SiC, Alumina and even silica sand particles in testing to simulate wear in mineral processing may be problematic due to the high relative hardness compared to common mineral ores. Fine sand particles in a Coriolis tester give similar surface appearance to mineral ore wear for white irons in terms of the apparent wear mechanisms, but care is needed to choose contact conditions that replicate as close as the possible field situation. The power law relationship found should be able to be used to calculate the relative impact of a change in CF on wear rate for 27%Cr white iron. The permission of The Weir Group PLC to publish this paper is gratefully acknowledged.