Indian shale samples, collected from Permian Damodar valley and Late Oligocene Assam basin were collected and studied thoroughly to know their hydrocarbon generation potential and pore characteristics. Rock eval pyrolysis, low-pressure adsorption (N2), and x-ray diffraction analyses were performed on four Permian and three Late Oligocene shales considered as potential targets for shale gas exploration in India. The relationship between the source rock characteristics, mineralogy, BET surface area and pore volume were discussed. The study reveals a good to excellent hydrocarbon potential with high TOC content (4.8–37.3) of type III and type II+III kerogen. Thermal maturity data shows that Permian samples are mature (Tmax 440 °C–465 °C), whereas Late Oligocene samples are immature (Tmax 422 °C–434 °C). Mineralogy reveals a clay rich nature of the shale samples. BET surface area of the samples were between 0.7 and 13.6 m2/g and total pore volume ranged from 0.011 to 0.027 cc/g. Pore size distribution for all samples are found to be unimodal or bimodal (peaks at around pore radius 1.1 nm and at >3 nm). Kerogen type is observed to have a significant contribution on pore volume; type II+III shale samples (HI > 300) have higher average pore radius (6.62 nm) and higher average total pore volume (0.020 cc/g) than that of type III samples (4.2 nm and 0.018 cc/g respectively). Samples of higher surface area and total pore volume show smaller average pore radius. Clay minerals positively influence the BET surface area and total pore volumes of the samples. A negative relationship between quartz and TOC in the shale samples suggest a non-biogenic detrital source of quartz grains.In the last few decades shale gas has globally emerged as an unconventional energy resource. Shale acts as both source and reservoir to the generated shale gas, primarily methane; it is generated from different organic matters trapped in shale being subjected to pressure and temperature with increasing burial. Type III organic matter is identified as a source for commercial hydro-carbon deposits in various basins throughout the world ( A variety of the geological factors such as, mineralogy, source rock characteristics, texture of shale, the types of clays and organics, govern the porosity and pore-size distribution and finally the matrix permeability of the reservoir ( India with an objective to exploit its shale-gas resource has started to approach all the research areas related to shale gas. However these studies are in very nascent stage with very few published results. In this paper a multidisciplinary approach has been taken to understand the source rock characteristics and nature of porosity and pore size distribution of a few Indian shale samples from different age groups which are potential for future shale gas explorations. Four Permian and three Late-Oligocene samples were characterized in terms of composition and distribution of minerals and organic matter, porosity and pore size distribution. Assessment of source rock characteristics is based on the results of geochemical, petrographic, and vitrinite reflectance analyses. Here an effort has been made to study the controls of mineralogy and kerogen characteristics on the porosity and pore size distribution of Indian shales. Studied samples were collected from Damodar valley and Upper Assam basin. Four shale samples of Permian age were collected from Damodar valley basin and three samples of Late-Oligocene age were collected from Upper Assam Basin. The sample locations are shown in Shale samples were crushed into fine powder (−212 μm) for analysis. X-ray diffraction analyses were done in IIT Kharagpur, using Bruker D8 Advance instrument with Cu target and lynxeye detector. X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) patterns were recorded for 2θ values in the range of 7–80° using Copper Kα radiation. The clay and non-clay minerals peaks were distinguished, using basal spacings ( All of the collected samples were wiped with wet towel to remove surface contaminants or dust particles. Then the samples were air dried for few minutes prior to crushing. The samples were crushed to powder and screened through −212 μm sized mesh and then were well homogenized before carrying out the analyses. A Rock-Eval 6 instrument was used for the rock eval pyrolysis and TOC analysis of the samples. Different parameters like TOC content, S1, S2, S3 pyrolysis yields and temperature of maximum S2 pyrolysis yield (Tmax) were measured. Genetic potential (GP), hydrogen Index (HI), oxygen index (OI), and production index (PI) were calculated. Particulars on rock eval, parameters acquired and explanatory guidelines have been discussed by several workers ( Samples were crushed to <250 mm for low pressure N XRD analysis was done in order to understand the presence of different mineral phases and ultimately their controls on the pore size distribution. Samples have a varying combination of quartz, clay and carbonate ( Rock-Eval pyrolysis was carried out to estimate the hydrocarbon potential of the samples and the results are shown in Results show that shale samples are organically rich as indicated by excellent TOC content ranging from 4.84% to 37.36% ( Tmax values ( TOC vs S2 plots for the shale samples are shown in Low pressure N BET surface areas and pore volumes, obtained from N According to the IUPAC classification, pores are classified according to the different range of pore radius with, micro-pore (dia<2 nm), meso-pore (dia 2–50 nm) and macro-pore (dia>50 nm). The pore volume distribution (with respect to pore size) is explained by cumulative pore volume versus pore radius plots ( The dV/dlogr plot indicate N An attempt has been made to find out the effects of thermal maturity on total pore volume (N The relationships of the total pore volume, N The relationship of clay mineral constituents with N Further, a negative relationship was observed between quartz- and total organic carbon-content of the studied shale samples (R Pore size study, Rock eval pyrolysis, petrography and XRD analysis on Indian shale samples display wide differences in pore structure and pore size distribution which are associated with organic and inorganic constituents and are affected by source-rock properties. Significant conclusions are as follows: Shale samples are richer in clay (with average of 55.9%) than quartz (average of 33.3%). Rock-Eval analysis of all the samples indicates that these are rich in organic carbon. Tmax values indicate that Damodar valley shale samples are mature (Tmax > 440), whereas shales from Assam basins are immature with Tmax < 435. The HI values suggest that these shales are comprised of type III and type II+III organic matter. From the results of Rock-Eval pyrolysis, a very good to excellent hydrocarbon generation potential can be inferred for all the studied shales. The dV/dlogr plots suggests mainly unimodal or bimodal pore size distribution in the studied shale samples with major peaks around 1.1 nm and 3.6 nm. Pore volume is observed to be decreasing with increasing thermal maturity. This phenomenon could be attributed to primary pore loss with thermal maturation, compaction of grains A detailed observation reveals that type II+III samples (HI > 300) have higher pore radius and higher average total pore volume than type III samples. Hence it can be inferred that shale porosity also gets strongly affected by the type of organic matter. Positive correlation between the N Positive correlations are seen between total pore volumes and BET surface areas and clay minerals for all the shale samples. Therefore, clay minerals have a positive influence on the porosity of the samples. A negative relationship was observed between quartz content and TOC in the studied shale samples suggesting a non-biogenic detrital source of quartz grains in these shales. The authors express their sincere appreciation to North Eastern Coalfields Limited, Bharat Coking coal Limited, Electrosteel Castings Limited and Tata Iron and Steel Company for supplying the samples for this study. The authors acknowledge Dr. Sujan Saha of CIMFR for his help to analyze the samples for N