Excavating of rock requires drilling in conventional drilling and blasting methods or utilization of mechanized excavators such as roadheaders, TBMs, surface miners, and various other machines used in mining and civil applications. Various cutting tools are commonly used to penetrate the rock by the application of forces to crush and ultimately break the rock. These tools are subject to wear as the excavation process proceeds. As such, a major part of excavation costs are related to repair or replacement of the cutting tools. Replacement of worn bits, disks, and picks is one of the main activities during any rock excavation process which must be considered in the planning stage and minimized as much as possible. This is because, in addition to the cost of the tools, the cutter change will reduce machine utilization and hence productivity of the units. The life and performance of the rock cutting tools are a function of tool material, shape, and rock characteristics, in particular rock strength and abrasivity. A common procedure to assess abrasivity of rocks is laboratory testing. Many tests have been developed and used for this purpose. However, the basic problem with many of the tests is that the results are highly dependent on test mechanisms and its conditions Among the rock abrasivity tests that have been proposed and are in use, the Cerchar abrasivity index test is a simple and fast method that is most commonly used for this purpose. The results of Cerchar testing are widely used in classification of rock abrasivity and estimation of wear life of the rock cutting tools and estimation of the tool consumption. The test was originally introduced by the CERCHAR Institute (Laboratoire du Centre d’ Etudes et Recherches des Charbonnages de France) in France in the 1970s There are various configurations for testing machine including three different generations of Cerchar testing devices. The general description and pros and cons of using each configuration were discussed by Rostami et al. Many researchers have investigated the effect of various factors on the results of the Cerchar abrasivity test. These factors can be divided into two categories of geological and geotechnical factors which are related to rock samples, equipment, and testing procedures. Despite its popularity, there is a lack of understanding about the pin–rock interaction in the Cerchar test. Another deficiency in this testing is the lack of clear understanding of the effect of different parameters on the nature of the wear process. Thus, developing a new testing apparatus that could monitor the process of wear during the test could offer a better insight to the wear mechanism and possibly offer solutions to reduce operator sensitivity of the test by more accurate control of testing parameters such as testing length and speed. For this purpose a new device was designed to include an electric motor and several sensors to measure and control testing parameters such as velocity and distance of sliding. This device is able to monitor and record horizontal force and vertical displacements of pin continuously during the test. Detailed discussion of the new Cerchar testing device and the preliminary test results are offered by Hamzaban et al. In order to control the parameters affecting the results of Cerchar test and monitor the interaction of the rock–pin during the testing process, a new version of the Cerchar testing device ( To evaluate the pin–rock interaction in Cerchar test a testing plan was developed. All tests were carried out according to ISRM and CERCHAR standards on sawn surfaces of rock samples. Hardness of pins used in the testing program was 43 and 55 in Rockwell Hardness scale (HRC). For each sample, To simplify the subsequent analysis, the force–displacement and pin vertical movement curves obtained for testing of each pin were combined in one curve, by averaging the measured values. The average curve was obtained by averaging the values of five measured curves at the same sliding distance ( For each sample, The value of the pin tip wear at the end point of the test is determined by The applied horizontal force at the end point of the test (    In The central area of the groove in the pictures of sample surfaces after testing shown in In By careful reviewing of images, it is obvious that the grooves have been formed on samples of each class are very similar. So, it can be concluded that the proposed classification, based on The rock–pin interaction, when using the pins of various hardnesses, can be compared by In this study, a new device is introduced for conducting the Cerchar abrasivity test on rock with additional features on the device that allows for better monitoring of rock–pin interaction. This includes accurate and automatic control of the test variables such as sliding length and its velocity, and continuous measurement horizontal force for scratching pin on rock surfaces and its vertical displacements. The analysis of the test results using the new Cerchar testing device has led to the following conclusions. The force required for scratching pin on rock is mostly related to pin penetration into the specimen. Accordingly, the area under the force–displacement curve of which represents the energy consumed in process, primarily reflects the energy spent by making a groove in the rock surface. A Modified Cerchar Abrasivity Index ( Experiments showed that classification of rocks based on the More testing and analysis of the rock abrasivity using the proposed new device is underway to examine the nature of the pin–sample surface interactions on single mineral specimens. The additional analysis and examination of the applicability of The authors would like to express their gratitude to Mr. Reza Sanajyan and Mrs. Mahdieh Nasiri in Folowrd Industrial Plans Co. for their technical support in designing and manufacturing of the testing device. Also, the authors wish to appreciate Iran Water & Power Resources Development Co., Mr. Banihashemi of Mahab Ghods Consultant Engineers Co. and Mr. Mahinraad of Moshanir Consultant Engineers Co. for providing the samples used in testing and additional information necessary to conduct experiments and subsequent analysis.