To reveal quantitatively the hardness of clayware and stoneware, Mohs, Vickers (micro and macro) and superficial Rockwell indentation measurements were applied to roofing tiles with different porosity. This work discusses the comparison of different indentation results, indentation size effect on porous clayware and the effect of microstructure on hardness of tiles. As a result, for Vickers indentation test, the critical indent load was found to 0.5 and 1 kg for soft and hard tiles, respectively, and indentation size/load effect (ISE) appeared clearly in hard tiles. The relationship between load (P) and indent size (d) on tiles was very close to a modified Myer’s law. The PSR (proportional specimen resistance) model gave P/d=0.67+0.02d, P/d=1.33+0.1d for soft and hard tiles, respectively. It was found that there were no difference in hardness of tiles mounted with epoxy or copper and as-received sample under superficial Rockwell indentation. These concepts on the harness evaluation of tiles would be applicable to other clayware.Recently, discovery of old science and technology through traditional ceramics, especially pottery, has been of interest in archaeology and history as well as in modern ceramics due to development of characterization methods and diverse applications. Although data from Mohs scratch test, Knoop, Vickers and Rockwell indentation methods for hardness of ceramics is available and the hardness database has increased, the experimental conditions are not constant and ambiguous so that the comparison of data is quite difficult. In this work, several hardness measurements, Mohs, Vickers (macro and micro) and superficial Rockwell tests, were made on roofing tiles and the results were compared. The ISE was applied to tiles and the physical meaning of the ISE result on tiles was discussed based on the previous suggestions by others. Six different roofing tiles (MS, SS, KS, MH, SH, KH), which have different porosity, were used for materials for the indentation test. After cutting samples with a dimension of 1.5×1.5×1.5 cm For measurement of hardness, a Mohs scratch tester (HS94-2012, Hansol Edu., Korea), a micro Vickers tester (MVK-E3, Mitutoyo, Japan) loading at 200, 300 and 500 g load and macro Vickers tester (AVK-2, Akashi, Japan) loading at 1, 2 and 5 kg loads for 15 s were used. Also, a superficial Rockwell hardness tester (Indentec, UK) was employed with 1/16 in. steel-ball indenters loading at a minor load of 3 kg and major load of 15, 30 and 45 kg. Three different mounting procedures were used for measuring superficial Rockwell hardness testing: epoxy molding (cold mounting), copper molding (hot mounting) and no mounting (on plane-surface anvil). Ten determinations were performed on each test piece and the results averaged. Porosity and water absorption of tiles followed the method ASTM C20-92 and microstructure images were obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-3500N, Hitachi, Japan). Crystal phases of tiles were investigated using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, XD-D1 Shimadzu, Japan). Mohs hardness of tiles is given in The Vickers hardness of tiles under different loads is shown in With a superficial Rockwell tester, hardness of tiles with different mounting methods was compared: without mounting, with mounting of copper metal and with epoxy resin. In Hard and soft tiles had a high standard deviation of hardness when a Vickers indenter was used because traditional ceramics like roofing tiles have non-uniform microstructure consisting of pores and many mineral phases in the matrix ( The change of hardness with load as shown in However, for the PSR coefficients from The Very recently, Gong et al. Hardness values of tiles prepared by three mounting methods (without mounting, with mounting on copper metal (Hv=443 MPa at 0.2 kg load) and with epoxy resin (Hv=246 MPa, at 0.2 kg load) showed no significant difference when tested using a superficial Rockwell indenter. The standard deviation of the results are nearly the same as shown in The hardness of tiles was dependent on the microstructure consisting of pores with complex matrix. Tiles were classified to two groups in terms of hardness. Under Vickers indenter, soft and hard tiles showed different critical indent loads, 0.5 and 1 kg, respectively. The trend of decreasing hardness with increasing load appeared clearly in the lower range of load, and the ISE (indentation size/load effect) boundary was distinct in hard tiles. Regarding the ISE, the indentation load and the resulting indention size from the hardness of roofing tiles was close to a modified Myer’s model. Superficial Rockwell indention data is only available for hard-type tiles, not soft types and does not suggest that there is a difference between hardness values when tiles were mounted using copper or epoxy, or when tested as-received (without mounting). This paper was funded by Research Foundation of Engineering College, Sunchon National University, South Korea. The authors wish to thank Professor D.K. Kim’s (KAIST) discussion on this paper.