Three oxidants, hypochlorous acid, chlorate and nitrate, were assessed for their ability to oxidise chalcopyrite (CuFeS2). Hypochlorous acid was the most aggressive oxidant trialled, with copper extraction reaching a plateau after 1–5h. Extraction in this system was complete at room temperature when reagent concentrations of 0.3–0.4M were supplied. Optimal conditions utilising chlorate as an oxidant measured final extractions of 66–72% after 168h. Optimal conditions utilising nitrate enabled a final extraction of 92% in systems using milled ore. Gangue dissolution in the presence of each oxidant varied. The system utilising nitrate resulted in comparatively high levels of magnesium and aluminium extraction, 28% and 32%, respectively. The chlorate system, over an identical time period and similar solution pH, had magnesium and aluminium extractions of 7% and 6%. These data, together with those for silicon dissolution, are indicative of incongruent silicate dissolution. Iron extraction data indicated that ferric hydroxy-oxide precipitates formed during leaching in both nitrate and chlorate systems. All systems tested offered improved rates of copper extraction relative to systems utilising ferric sulfate as an oxidant.The overall limitations of the poor dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in ferric sulfate systems (with or without microorganisms – catalysts) drives the search for innovative ways to increase dissolution kinetics using different oxidants, different temperatures, controlled redox leaching, and pre-treatment of concentrates or ores. The purpose of this study is to describe copper extraction at atmospheric pressure in sulfate-free or minimal-sulfate media with selected oxidants other than ferric sulfate. The use of chalcopyrite concentrate for most tests permits comparisons of leaching rates in systems largely free of gangue minerals that might react with test reagents and obscure the targeted results. The most commonly employed hydrometallurgical process for the oxidation of chalcopyrite and extraction of copper is the sulfuric acid–ferric sulfate system. Reactions The slow dissolution kinetics are thought to be consequences of the mineral crystalline structure and changes therein ( proportional to CuFeS independent of acid concentration as long as there is sufficient to keep ferric ions in solution, slightly dependent on Fe faster at mid-range oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) than at high ORP, enhanced in the presence of iron(II) oxidising strongly dependent on temperature in the range 25–100 There have been numerous studies aimed at overcoming the slow dissolution kinetics, the vast majority employing chalcopyrite concentrate regardless of the intended material to be treated in the final process. The present study was focused on the use of alternative oxidants for the dissolution of chalcopyrite in mildly acidic conditions at atmospheric pressure. Background information for the study was obtained during the preparation of two substantive reviews of chalcopyrite oxidative dissolution ( nitrate-based; sodium nitrate (NaNO chlorate-based; NaClO hypochlorous acid-based (HClO), readily prepared by acidifying household bleach with HCl. The selected alternative oxidants all have higher reduction potentials than ferric ion ( The strong oxidising power of NaClO The presence of NaClO The application of aqueous hypochlorous acid to the oxidative dissolution of CuFeS Given that ferric ions in acidic solutions are the most commonly applied system for sulfide dissolution, comparative data pertaining to ferric ion as oxidant were also obtained using the experimental apparatus and conditions. All chemicals used in this study were analytical grade reagents unless otherwise stated and all solutions were prepared with deionised water. The oxidants were introduced as sodium chlorate, acidified hypochlorite solution or potassium nitrate. The use of potassium nitrate rather than sodium nitrate as the salt, did not cause substantive differences in leaching chemistry or copper extraction. A pH meter (TPS–Smartchem model) and glass membrane electrode (Ionode PBFC), calibrated using pH 1.68 and 4.00 buffers, were used to measure pH. Solution potentials were measured using a redox electrode (Ionode model IP1306, internal Ag/AgCl A size fraction of +35 to −53 A series of batch leaching tests were prepared with the selected solution conditions. A 500 Tests were conducted under the standardised conditions using different ferric salts to provide baseline comparative data; solutions were acidified to an initial pH 1.5 ( Nitrate concentration did not greatly influence copper extraction but low nitrate concentration caused slower kinetics initially ( In this system both nitrate and ferric ion could act as oxidants. When ferric ion (as ferric nitrate) was added to a system with a nitrate concentration of 0.6 The opportunity was taken to confirm that copper extraction from CuFeS The effect of sulfate ion on copper extraction from chalcopyrite concentrate was investigated by progressively substituting ferric sulfate for ferric nitrate while maintaining a constant Fe(III) concentration at 0.1 Conversely, the substitution of ferric chloride for ferric nitrate while maintaining the total ferric ion concentration at 0.1 Increased chlorate concentration resulted in slightly lower copper extraction from chalcopyrite concentrate in 168 The effect of Fe(III) addition on chlorate leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate was tested by adding the Fe(III) as different salts ( Hypochlorous acid was expected to be the most aggressive of the oxidants tested. Thus the experiments were conducted over a 24 Tests were conducted to evaluate the selected oxidants on samples of a milled chalcopyrite ore. This was undertaken to assess the effect of gangue silicate minerals on leaching kinetics. The conditions utilised for each oxidant were chosen based on optimum conditions from chalcopyrite concentrate leaching tests. The leach medium used in these tests contained 0.4 Given the composition of the leach medium, the elements Mg, Al, Na and Si were used to describe the leach chemistry of the bulk minerals in the ore. High proportions (20–30%) of the Mg, Al and Na were extracted from the ore in the 5-day nitrate test ( Copper extraction of about 65% was achieved after 120 There was rapid extraction of copper from the ore (55–60 Potassium extraction from silicate mineral interlayers was rapid, within 2 Ferric ion is the most common oxidant employed for the dissolution of chalcopyrite, whether as a concentrate in tank leaching or in heaps of low grade ores. In the present study, chemical leaching tests were conducted at 50 In media with potassium nitrate as oxidant and nitric acid addition to achieve the desired initial solution pH, without other additives, copper extractions from CuFeS The reactions shown for nitrate oxidation of CuFeS For tests at or below pH 2, the ORP remained high and oxidising conditions persisted during the test, for solutions pH While it was intended to investigate the nitrate system as a suitable medium for CuFeS Conditions chosen for the leaching of milled ore varied slightly from the ‘most efficient’ leaching medium thus far for CuFeS In the chlorate tests of the present study, CuFeS According to reaction The changes in solution ORP showed considerable variations between tests and during leaching, with sensitivities towards chlorate concentration, initial solution pH, and the Fe(III) salt added ( For ore leaching with NaClO In the current study, hypochlorous acid was the most aggressive of the oxidants tested. Thus the experiments were conducted over a 24 The pH sensitivity of the reaction was evident ( The initial rapid copper extraction from CuFeS The milled ore (10 Historically, it has been accepted that the breakdown of minerals during weathering in near-neutral conditions or during leaching in stronger acidic or alkaline conditions can occur congruently or incongruently. An example of congruent leaching is that of calcite, where the structure of the mineral disintegrates and ions (or other soluble products) are released to solution in proportion to their stoichiometry (reaction Incongruent dissolution of silicate minerals may be an initial reaction that with time changes to congruent dissolution, resulting in stoichiometric release of ions to solution during prolonged treatment (leaching) (e.g., The extractions of Mg, Al and Si from the ore used in the present study for the week-long nitrate and chlorate experiments are indicative of incongruent silicate dissolution ( Data for iron and calcium are not shown. Iron(III) was an added component of two media and the results provided evidence of iron(III) hydroxy-oxide precipitate formation during leaching; 17% of the iron(III) in the nitrate medium and 13% in the chlorate medium. Calcite was a minor component of the ore. The measured 90% and 80% calcium extractions from the ore in the first hour of leaching in the nitrate and chlorate media, respectively, are mainly attributed to calcite dissolution. The subsequent small increases up to the 85–100% calcium extraction in the final solutions are mainly attributed to calcium extraction from silicate minerals. Less than 0.1% of the iron in the ore but more than 80% of the calcium was extracted during the 24-h hypochlorous acid leach. A simplistic economic analysis was applied to the optimum leaching systems trialled. Costs obtained for reagents were an average of several quotes, with transport costs not included. The cheapest available compound containing the relevant oxidant was assumed to be used, and reagent loss through gangue reactions and volatile compound use, to be minimal. These data are compared with that of a ferric sulfate leach system, where the cost of sulfuric acid (the sole reagent) is estimated to be 0.1 Of the alternative oxidants, the system containing 0.4 The costs of using the chlorate and hypochlorous acid systems are significantly higher. The optimal chlorate system, which comprised 0.4 The question in evaluating alternative oxidants against the ferric sulfate system is whether the increased reaction rates for the alternative oxidants could compensate for the higher costs of copper extraction. Based on the simple analysis, extraction/extraction rates for the selected alternative oxidants would need to be two orders of magnitude greater than that for the ferric sulfate system to be competitive. Fastest rate (see Three reagents, namely hypochlorous acid, chlorate and nitrate, were assessed for their ability to oxidise CuFeS When optimal test conditions for each oxidant were used to extract copper from milled chalcopyrite ore, the rank order was NO Gangue dissolution in the presence of each oxidant varied. The system utilising nitrate resulted in comparatively high levels of magnesium and aluminium extraction, 28% and 32%, respectively. The chlorate system, over an identical time period and similar solution pH, had magnesium and aluminium extractions of 7% and 6%, respectively. These data, together with those for silicon dissolution, are indicative of incongruent silicate dissolution. Iron extraction data indicated that ferric hydroxy-oxide precipitates formed during leaching in both nitrate and chlorate systems. Hypochlorous acid leaching was conducted over a 24 In respect of the three alternative systems tested, all of which were more efficient than the ferric sulfate–sulfuric acid system, the use of nitrate as an oxidant is the most cost-effective option. This system also has the advantage of not involving a volatile oxidant that can lessen oxidation efficiency, in contrast with both hypochlorous acid and chlorate oxidants, which generate gaseous chlorine during leaching. A mechanism to control the buildup of sulfate in the nitrate system would be required, such as lime addition, as concentrations of sulfate as low as 0.025 The financial support of the