Due to the complexity of occurrence of valuable metals and high content of alkali gangue in nickel-copper sulfide concentrate, traditional pyrometallurgical processing is not suitable. In this work, a two-stage co-sulfating roasting process was used to selectively extract valuable metals from Chinese nickel-copper sulfide concentrate. A mixture of (NH4)2SO4 and Na2SO4 was selected as the co-sulfating agents. The effect of the dosage of (NH4)2SO4 and Na2SO4, first stage roasting temperature, roasting time and second roasting temperature on metal’s extractions were investigated. XRD, SEM, DTA-TG, and DSC-TG were used to reveal the mechanism of action of Na2SO4 and the mineral phase transformations in the two-stage sulfating roasting process. The results show that nearly all of Ni and Co, Cu, and 1.12% of Fe were extracted at the mass ratio of ammonium sulfate to ore of 3.5, first roasting at 500 °C for 2 h, dosage of sodium sulfate of 4 g (10 g ore), followed by second roasting at 680 °C for 2 h, then water leaching at 95 °C for 2 h. Na2S2O7 generated from Na2SO4 in the roasting process, shrinks the particle size of the ore, decrease the surface area of the roasted product, significantly promotes extent of the sulfating of metals, in particular for Ni. Thermal analysis kinetics indicates that Na2SO4 significantly reduces the apparent activation energy of the sulfating roasting process. The metal bearing mineral phases were transformed into sulfates or sodium double or ternary sulfates in the first roasting process, then the sodium double sulfates of Na3Fe(SO4)3 were decomposed.Jinchuan Group Ltd. is a large mining group engaged in mining, concentrating, metallurgy, ranking the fourth nickel and the second cobalt manufacturing enterprise in the world and the third copper producer in China. It also has the largest sulfide nickel ore reserves in China ( The pyrometallurgical process used to treat copper-nickel sulfide concentrate containing high concentrations of MgO is uneconomical because of high energy requirements and the low recovery of valuable metals. In the past decade, studies on processing sulfide nickel concentrate using hydrometallurgical methods included bioleaching, high pressure sulfuric acid leaching, atmospheric acid leaching, ammonium leaching, ferric chloride leaching, organic acids leaching ( Ammonium sulfate roasting-water leaching is a promising and clean method due to the elimination of SO Sodium sulfate is an efficient additive in both the sulfating process and for grade enrichment. Much research has been carried out to reveal the effect of sodium sulfate in the sulfating roasting process ( Furthermore, controllable phase transformation of metal bearing phases can be achieved by controlling the roasting conditions, and the selective separation of metals is obtained because of the different thermal stability of metal sulfates. In this study, co-sulfating roasting-water leaching was used to process copper-nickel sulfide concentrate. We focused on the phase transformation behavior and mechanism in ammonium sulfate roasting, and the activation mechanism of the addition of sodium sulfate, by using XRD, SEM and DSC-TG analysis. The effects of different variables, such as the (NH The concentration of Ni and Cu in the final leach liquor were measured using a double beam UV–vis spectrophotometer (TU-1901, Beijing Puxi Co., Ltd.), the concentration of Fe was determined using a titration method ( The copper-nickel sulfide concentrate used in this study originates from low-grade copper-nickel ore flotation from Jinchuan Group, China. The chemical composition of the concentrate is shown in The main minerals in the concentrate, as determined by X-ray diffraction (see  Chemical phase analysis (the method, see section 2 in Supplementary Materials) was used to further confirm the phase distribution of nickel and copper ( The copper-nickel sulfide concentrate was dried at 80 °C for 12 h, and then divided into 10 g aliquots to mix with solid ammonium sulfate (and sodium sulfate) at a particular mass ratio in each experiment. The mixture was placed into a corundum crucible and put into a horizontal crucible furnace, connected with an intelligent temperature control instrument (accuracy ±5 °C), with an inert synthetic air gas (80% N The effect of mass ratio of ammonium sulfate to copper-nickel sulfide concentrate on the extractions of metals was studied at the roasting temperature of 400 °C, roasting time of 2 h, the roasting products were then leached at 95 °C for 2 h. The results are presented in It can be seen from The effect of roasting temperature in the range of 300–550 °C on the extractions of nickel, copper, cobalt, magnesium and iron was investigated using the mass ratio of ammonium sulfate to ore of 3.5, roasting time of 2 h, leaching at 95 °C for 2 h. As shown in The low extraction of nickel means that the sulfating capacity of ammonium sulfate is limited with regard to the treatment of copper-nickel sulfide concentrate. Sodium sulfate is a common addition to promote the sulfating process and increase the extraction of value metals, especially in the sulfating of laterite ore whose nickel is substituted in serpentines, hydrous magnesium silicates, goethite or limonite ( As shown in  As can be seen in The measurement of surface area of the residue aims at minishing the interference of measuring process ( The effect of roasting time on the extraction of metals shows in As shown in The diffraction peaks of Na The raw material used in the second roasting process was the yield from roasting of ammonium sulfate to ore at the mass ratio of 3.5, roasting temperature of 500 °C, roasting time of 2 h, dosage of sodium sulfate of 4 g, and the leaching conditions were kept the same as previous experiments. The second roasting time was fixed at 2 h. As shown in In contrast to the first stage roasting, the extraction of nickel, copper and magnesium increased 6.8%, 2.4% and 3.1%, respectively, at the roasting temperature of 680 °C. Almost all nickel, copper and cobalt had been extracted from concentrate as sodium sulfate promoted the extent of the sulfating reaction. According to the results, sodium sulfate accelerates the extraction of nickel significantly. DTA-TG, XRD, and SEM were used to reveal the mechanism. The two DTA curves in In range 1–1′, there are two endothermic peaks corresponding a weight loss of 8.4%, which can be attributed to the decomposition of (NH In range 1–1″, presented in For thermally stimulated solid-state reactions, the following formula of kinetics has been widely accepted ( The isoconversional methods according to Kissinger and Flynn-Wall-Ozawa can be expressed as (  The samples examined were homogeneous mixtures of nickel-copper concentrate, ammonium sulfate and sodium sulfate in various mass ratios of nickel-copper concentrate (C): ammonium sulfate (N): sodium sulfate (Na) = 1:3.5:0 (S1), 1:3.5:0.2 (S2), 1:3.5:0.5 (S3). The DSC and TG curves of each mixture at different heating rates are shown in As can be seen from The apparent activation energy ( As shown in The non-isothermal process can be regarded as an isothermal process on an infinitesimal time interval, therefore, the general formula of an isothermal process is suitable to describe the reaction rates in this study. The reaction rate (s For S1, For S2, For S3, A controlled two-stage roasting and water leaching process was used to extract valuable metals from Chinese copper-nickel sulfide concentrate. Using an ammonium sulfate to ore weight ratio of 3.5, first roasting temperature at 500 °C for 2 h, dosage of sodium sulfate of 4 g (per 10 g ore), followed by second roasting at 680 °C for 2 h, then water leaching at 95 °C for 2 h, nearly all of the Ni and Co, and 99.9% of the Cu and 1.1% of the Fe were extracted. The addition of Na By applying Kissinger, Flynn-Wall-Ozawa and Starink methods, the average apparent activation energy and pre-exponential factors of the solid-state reaction of (NH This research was jointly supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 