This study aims to investigate the effects of different drying methods namely, ultrasound-assisted vacuum-drying (USV), freeze-drying (FD), infrared-drying (ID) and hot-air drying (HAD) on bioactive compounds, phenolic profile, in vitro bioaccessibility of phenolic compounds, color change, sugar profile and HMF formation of persimmon fruits. Total phenolic contents (TPC) were 77.2, 112.5, 124.9 and 262.4 mg GAE/100 g for HAD, ID, USV, and FD, respectively. CUPRAC, DPPH, β-carotene and lycopene level were 219.2–635.2 mg TE/100 g, 101.1–299.7 mg TE/100 g, 294.3–438.5 mg/100 g and 720.6–966.5 mg/100 g, respectively. Drying methods significantly affected both amounts of individual phenolics and their distribution (P < 0.05). Epigallocatechin was determined as a major phenolic compound for all samples (88.2–383.2 mg/100 g). All drying process significantly increased the bioaccessibility of phenolic compounds (P < 0.05). HAD showed the highest in vitro bioaccessibility. All drying methods significantly affected ΔE values (P < 0.05). HMF values were 12.1, 15.0 and 23.4 mg/kg for ID, USV and HAD samples, respectively and was not found for FD. This study suggested that USV and ID could be used as an alternative drying method to FD and conventional drying due to high drying rate, less phenolic degradation, HMF formation, and color change.Persimmon is from Ebenaceae family, is cultivated widely in warm temperate regions, including China, Korea, Japan, Brazil, Turkey, and Italy ( Drying is one of the most common methods used in the preservation of fruits and vegetables. Hot-air drying or conventional drying is the most popular drying methods due to its low cost and easy application ( Freeze-drying (FD) is considered the best drying method because FD produces high sensory and nutritional quality dried foods and provide in lower shrinkage, and higher rehydration capacity. However, it is not preferred because it is a prolonged and expensive process and not easy use ( Some studies have reported on the drying of persimmon. Fresh persimmon fruits were purchased from a local market in Istanbul, Turkey. Fruits with homogeneous characteristics (of the same size and color) were selected, and damaged fruits were discarded. Until drying processes, the fruits were stored at 4 Persimmon samples were dried with four different methods which are infrared drying (ID), ultrasound-assisted vacuum drying (USV), hot-air drying (HAD) and freeze-drying (FD). Before drying processes, persimmons were cut into equal slices with 2 mm thickness and 5 cm length. USV was carried out according to the method described by Fresh and dried persimmon samples were extracted by methanol-water (50:50). The ratio of solid material to the solvent was 1:10. The mixture was homogenized by an ULTRA-TURRAX (Daihan, HG-15D) at 10.000 rpm for 2 min. After homogenization, the mixture was incubated by shaking for 2 h at room temperature. At the end of the incubation, samples were centrifuged at 3920 g. The supernatant was filtered by a 0.45 μm filter. The total phenolic content (TPC) of persimmon samples was performed according to the modified method expressed by The total flavonoid content (TFC) found in extracts was estimated according to the method described by ( 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and the copper-reducing antioxidant capacity (CUPRAC) methods were used to determine the antioxidant capacity of extracts. In the DPPH method, a 0.1 mL of persimmon extract was mixed 4.9 mL DPPH solution  Individual phenolic compounds of fresh and dried persimmon samples were determined by HPLC coupled to a diode array (HPLC-DAD, Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan). The previously obtained extracts for used in TPC analysis were filtered through a 0.45-μm membrane filter and 1 mL of the filtered sample was analyzed in an HPLC system (LC-20AD pump, SPDM20A DAD detector, SIL-20A HT autosampler, CTO-10ASVP column oven, DGU-20A5R degasser, and CMB-20A communications bus module; (Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan). Separations were conducted at 40 °C on a reversed-phase column (Intersil® ODS C-18, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) with a 250 mm × 4.6 mm length, 5 μm particle size. The mobile phases were solvent A (distilled water with 0.1% ( The extraction of both carotenes was performed according to the method described by The β-carotene and lycopene analysis was performed by by HPLC coupled to a diode array (HPLC-DAD, Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan) with HPLC system (LC-20AD pump, SPDM20A DAD detector, SIL-20A HT autosampler, CTO-10ASVP column oven, DGU-20A5R degasser, and CMB-20A communications bus module (Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan); was used. Separations were conducted at 40 °C on Intersil® ODS C-18 reversed-phase column (250 mm × 4.6 mm length, 5 μm particle size). The mobile phase was distilled water acetonitrile and methanol (100/10/5). A gradient elution were 10% B (0–2 min), 10%–30% B (2–27 min), 30%–90% B (27–50 min) and 90%–100% B (51–60 min) and at 63 min returns to initial conditions. The flow rate was adjusted as 1 mL/min. Chromatograms were recorded at 450 nm. Identification and quantitative analysis were performed based on retention times and standard curves. β-carotene and lycopene results were expressed as mg/100 g for fresh and dried samples. Determination of sugar composition of the samples was performed using the HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan), equipped with a refractive index detector (RID-10A) and CARBOSep CHO-682 Pb column. The column temperature was thermostatted at 80 °C. The chromatographic separation was obtained using the isocratic flow of ultrapure water at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. For each analysis, 10 g of sample was extracted with the addition of 100 mL of distilled water for 4 h using mechanic shaker at room temperature. After that, the extract was filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane filter, and 20 μL filtrate was injected into the column. The number of sugars was calculated using an external calibration curve, and the results were expressed in g/100 g sample. An HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a diode array detector, an autosampler and a temperature-controlled column oven, Inertsil ODS3 C18, five μm, 4.6 × 250 mm column was used to determine HMF content in the persimmon samples. The isocratic mobile phase was 0.1 g/100 mL aqueous acetic acid solution and acetonitrile (90:10, v/v) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The column temperature was 40 °C, and the injection volume was 20 μL. Data acquisition was performed ranged from 220 to 660 nm wavelength, and the chromatograms were acquired at 285 nm. The amount of HMF was calculated using an external calibration curve (R A chroma meter (CR-400, Konica Minolta, Tokyo, Japan) with a measuring head of an 8-mm aperture and the CIE Standard Illuminate D65, di:8° (diffuse illumination/8° viewing angle) was used for the color measurements. Chroma ( The statistical analysis was performed using the Statistica software program (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK). All the analyses for dried and fresh samples were performed in triplicate. The standard deviation and mean value were expressed. ANOVA was performed to determine the differences between samples. Duncan, multiple comparison tests at 95% significance level was used to evaluate the effect of different drying methods on bioactive compounds,   Similar results were reported for TFC of persimmon. HAD, ID and USV heat treatments caused a significant decrease in TFC of persimmon. There was no significant difference in TFC values of fresh persimmon (15.56 mg CE/100 g DM). and FD persimmon (15.19 mg CE/100 g DM) (P > 0.05). The lowest TFC value was obtained from the HAD sample (6.52 mg CE/100 g DM). DPPH and CUPRAC methods were used to calculate the antioxidant capacity of persimmon. A high correlation was observed with antioxidant capacity and, TPC and TFC results. Pearson's coefficient of correlation (  The reduction in β-carotene (40%) and lycopene (22%) level of firm persimmon during the drying process at 45 °C was reported from  Epigallocatechin was determined to be major phenolic compounds for all samples and ranged from 88.20 to 383.27 mg/100 g. The samples dried by FD and ID showed the highest and lowest epigallocatechin level, respectively. All drying methods, except FD, reduce epigallocatechin level during the drying process. USV showed the second-highest epigallocatechin level (361.95 mg/100 g). Higher retention in epigallocatechin for USV treated sample could be explained by the breakdown of the plant cell by cavitation effects generated from the ultrasound. Gallic acid was found as major phenolic acid, and its highest level was obtained from the samples dried by FD and ID (24.50 and 20.62 mg/100 g respectively). Gallic acid was not detected from the samples dried by HAD, indicating that degradation of the gallic acid occurred during a long period of conventional drying. Epi-catechin was the third major phenolic compound, and its level significantly changed according to drying methods (1.22–2.28 mg/100 g). FD showed highest epi-catechin level followed by USV, ID, and HAD. Similar to the other phenolics higher reduction in epi-catechin level was observed from HAD. In conclusion, individual phenolic compounds level and distribution significantly were affected by drying methods. USV techniques showed higher phenolic distribution and major phenolic levels. Therefore USV could be used as an alternative technique to FD to preserve phenolic compounds and bioactive compounds during the drying process with lower drying times and operation cost. Effect of the drying methods on the Considering macronutrients, persimmon has around 16% carbohydrates of sugars, which are mostly fructose, glucose, and sucrose. These sugars can be found in a higher amount than in other fruits which are commonly consumed ( According to the HMF analysis, sugars were exposed to chemical transformation by heat applications. These applications could lead to Maillard reaction and caramelization of sugars in the acid medium of persimmon samples, and therefore, variable amounts of HMF were detected in the samples (  In this study, four different drying methods were applied to determine the effects on phenolic and sugar composition, bioaccessibility, and color of persimmons. All drying methods, except FD, showed a significant change in all determined parameters. HAD caused the highest reduction in phenolic compounds β-carotene, lycopene, and antioxidant capacity level. Highest color change and HMF formation were also observed in HAD treated samples. In contrast to these disadvantages, HAD led to an increase