This study presents statistical evaluation of the shape parameters for different mill products of talc mineral using Clemex image analysis system. The aim of this study was to determine whether the image parameters of the three different mill products were statistically different from each other or not. Image analysis of talc particles ground by laboratory size ball, rod and autogenous mills was performed with a Nikon SMZ 800 stereoscopic zoom microscope and a Clemex PE image analysis system. A total of 446 particles were measured by image analysis for these three different mill products. The shape data such as area, perimeter, convex perimeter, sphericity and roughness were compared by applying one way ANOVA (analysis of variance) method followed by post hoc Tukey's test using the software SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) with a .05 significance level. Multiple comparison tests revealed that, the difference between the image data group for different mill products are significant with a 95% confidence level. Finally, autogenous mill products had the highest sphericity and the smoothness among the ball and rod mill products due to its abrasion effect on talc mineral studied. On the other hand, the roughest and most elongated particles of talc mineral studied were obtained by rod milling.Particles and particle technologies have profound impact on our lives. In the US alone, the industrial output impacted by particulate systems was almost one trillion dollars in 1993 for ten major industries A large proportion of cosmetic, polymer, roofing, paper, paint and plastic involve the use of particulate talc mineral. As it is known, particle shape affects the physical characteristics and behaviour of talc mineral. Therefore, there is a need to control and manipulate particle shape. In any industry where talc particles are involved, it is assumed that, the consumption will increase in the next decades because of the important properties of talc such as softness, slip, oil-and-grease absorption, chemical inertness, high fusion point, low electrical, low heat conductivity, high dielectric strength, whiteness, hiding power and high specific heat Image analysis provides detailed information about size and shape of the particles. It can be used for control of quality of the product. The morphology of the talc particles is the main physical parameter that determines whether specific talc is suitable for a specific application or not. For example, the effect of talc addition on polymers depends heavily on the particle shape and the crystallinity of the sample Since one of the main industrial methods for creating particles is to grind by conventional (ball and rod mill) and autogenous mills, the effect of the breakage method on the particle shape becomes very important aspect This study presents statistical evaluation of the shape parameters of different mill products using Clemex image analysis system applying one way ANOVA (analysis of variance) and post hoc Tukey's test using the SPSS software called “Statistical Package for Social Science” 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine whether the image parameters of the three different mill products were statistically different from each other. Hence, the effect of different grinding on the shape properties of our samples used in previous studies could be investigated by utilizing another image analysis technique In this study, talc mineral from Turkey was used. The mineralogical analysis showed that the sample contains 59.2% SiO All of the grinding tests were performed in dry conditions. Feed sizes were − The shape properties of the particles ground in different mills were determined based on the projections of particles by using a Nikon SMZ800 stereoscopic zoom microscope and a Clemex PE image analysis system as shown in As an image analyzer that walks around an object, the following primary parameters can be easily obtained: Perimeter is the sum of pixels around an object ( Area is the sum of pixels within an object ( Convex perimeter is line joining feret tangents points or string around the tips of feature ( From these primary measurements, a number of parameters can be derived. The most common parameters are sphericity and roughness; Sphericity is a measure of how spherical (round) an object is. The roundness or sphericity of a particle is measured by its deviation from a sphere; i.e., the sphere is used as the quantitative measure of roundness which was first stated by Wadell Roughness is one of the most striking properties of solid surfaces. It is of interest to a wide range of researchers in materials related science and applications. It gives an indication of how smooth an object is and takes a value of 1 for smooth surface and 0 for rough surface. As shown in Standard Excel™ spreadsheet data from the image analysis were imported by a software called “Statistical Package for Social Science” 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) to determine whether the shape parameters of three different mill products were statistically different from each other. The mean values of each shape parameter for three different mill products were compared by applying one way ANOVA and post hoc Tukey's multiple comparison tests with a .05 significance level.   In the light of the pair-wise multiple comparison results obtained, the sphericity and roughness parameters of three different mill particles were proved to be statistically different from each other in the confidence level of 95%.  As outlined In generally it is concluded that there is a significant difference in the particle shape of different grinding methods statistically as reported in the literature The usefulness of the mills for intended goal and degree of the success for further processing is dependent on the product shape, since the shape affects the chemical, physical and surface properties of particles. The shape of talc particles ground by different mills was successfully determined by using a Nikon SMZ 800 stereoscopic zoom microscope and a Clemex PE image analysis system. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post hoc Tukey's test were utilized to determine the shape data which are significantly different from each other for the different mill products. The SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) was used for the statistical analysis. They gave a good picture of particle shape. The differences in shape parameters among the mill products of talc particles were statistically significant with a 95% confidence level. In other words, three number of populations (shape parameters) represented by three different mill products were not identical. The milling is likely to affect the shape of the particles. Finally, the particles ground by autogenous mill had the highest sphericity and smoothness comparing to the ball and rod mills due to the abrasion effect. The roughest and most elongated particles were obtained by rod milling. The differences arise in particle shape are due to those grinding mills that have different breakage actions on the particles.  Area, µm Perimeter, µm Convex perimeter, µm Sphericity Roughness The author would like to thank Hikmet Aksoy from Hitas Elektronik ve Tıbbi Cihazlar Ltd. Sti., (Turkey representative of the Clemex Technologies Inc.) for the imaging study of the samples. The author also gratefully acknowledges the kind support by Professor Ali Cetin from the School of Medicine of Cumhuriyet University for the application of ANOVA to the image analysis results.