A molecular dynamics simulation was used to investigate the adsorption performance and mechanism of a tertiary amine surfactant and the surface of magnesite ore in aqueous solution at the molecular level. The molecular dynamics simulation results revealed distinct differences among the adsorption performances to quartz, magnesite, and dolomite with bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dodecylamine (BHDA) (quartz > dolomite > magnesite). The results of adsorption tests, flotation, and zeta potential measurements confirmed the same tendencies in the adsorption behaviors. The differences in flotation behavior could be ascribed to electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bonding. Property analyses showed that hydrogen bonding played a considerable role in the adsorption process of BHDA. The introduction of multiple hydroxyl groups improved the water solubility of BHDA and enhanced its adsorption on mineral surfaces containing exposed O atoms. The higher flotation selectivity of BHDA compared to dodecylamine (DDA) was attributed to the relatively weaker electronegativity and the stronger steric hindrance of BHDA.Magnesite is regarded as one of the materials with the greatest potential in metallurgical refractory applications [ Flotation is often considered to be one of the most effective methods to separate and purify magnesite ore, particularly in the separation flotation of dolomite and magnesite [ Molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) is one of the visual tools which is often used to study the adsorption of the surfactant on the solid surfaces at a microscopic level [ In this study, an MDS was used to investigate the adsorption performance and mechanism of a tertiary amine surfactant and magnesite ore surface in aqueous solution at the molecular level. The novel tertiary amine collector (bis(hydroxyethyl)dodecylamine, BHDA) was chosen due to its superior selectivity in the separation flotation of magnesite ore. MDS provided detailed information about the adsorption between BHDA and magnesite ore, which was used to better analyze the molecular mechanism of the phenomenon. The properties of the mineral surface were analyzed in detail and were used to understand the microcosmic differences among magnesite, dolomite, and quartz. The properties of BHDA were also analyzed to illustrate the influence of the ethanol substituents on its adsorption behavior and mechanism. The studies could provide an important resource for the choice and design of tertiary amine collectors for magnesite ore, and could also enhance the comprehensive utilization of magnesite ore powder. Quartz, dolomite, and magnesite were gained from Haicheng City (Liaoning Province, China). High purity samples of these minerals were crushed, ground, and purified to obtain the −0.074 + 0.015 mm fractions. The quartz samples contained 99.42% SiO BHDA, which contains two hydroxyethyls, was employed as the collector. Nucleophilic substitution reactions were used to synthesize BHDA in the laboratory and the purity of it was about 98.0%. The pH of the slurry was adjusted by adding sodium hydroxide or hydrochloric acid (HCl) solutions. All chemicals in the tests were purchased from Sinopharm, and they were of analytical grade. The water used in the tests was chosen the deionized water. The adsorption quantity between the collector and the surface of minerals was measured using TOC-L CPH/CN (Shimadzu Corporation). The mineral samples were agitated and treated with the same concentrations of BHDA as those used in the flotation tests. The sample was then centrifuged for 10 min. The residual concentration of BHDA in the supernatant was measured, and the adsorption amount of BHDA on the mineral was calculated. Three separate runs were conducted for all the adsorption tests, and the average value was used as the final result. The zeta potential analyzer (Nano-ZS90, Malvern Instruments Ltd. Britain) was used to measure the zeta potential of the minerals before and after adding the collector at 25 °C. Firstly, the samples (20.0 mg) below −5.0 μm were introduced into 1.0 × 10 A laboratory flotation machine (XFG All the simulations in this paper were conducted using Materials Studio 8.0. Models were built in the Materials Visualizer module. The geometry optimization and property calculations of the minerals and BHDA were conducted in the CASTEP and Dmol Based on the structural database, the crystal structures of magnesite, dolomite, and quartz were built, and then optimized in the CASTEP module [ In the study, the pH values of flotation were mainly studied in the range 6–8. Based on solution chemical calculations, BHDA predominantly existed in its ionic form in the range of the studied pH. The BHDA molecule and its positive ion were built and optimized in the Dmol Based on their principal cleavage properties and references, the principal cleavage plane (101) was established as the surface for magnesite and dolomite. The (101) surface of quartz was built and determined using the lowest surface energy [ To study the hydration of the mineral surfaces, mineral-water complex models were established. Each model contained 2000 TIP3P water molecules. To study adsorption, mineral-water-reagent models were also built, each of which contained approximately 2000 water molecules and the collector. Na In this work, △E  where △E In view of the obtained optimal models by the MD simulation, the relative efficiencies of the interaction between the different collectors and the mineral surface were measured using the interaction energy, which was calculated by the following expression [  where Adsorption tests were used to experimentally study the selective adsorption behavior of BHDA on the minerals [ The zeta potential values of the pure minerals and minerals after adding 40.0 mg/L BHDA were tested over the pH range 1–12. The flotation recoveries as a function of pH were also tested. These results are shown in In order to explain the selective adsorption performance and mechanism in the adsorption process of BHDA on the surface of these minerals, MDS were conducted. Mineral-water-reagent models ( To further quantify and assess the performance of BHDA as a collector, the hydration energies of the three minerals and the interaction energies of their surfaces with BHDA were calculated, the results are shown in The adsorption energies between BHDA and three minerals were calculated, in view of the obtained adsorption models of the equilibrium state ( The relative concentration of O and N atoms of BHDA on the different minerals was also investigated in order to further analyze the adsorption behavior and mechanism. This analysis can provide an intuitive understanding of the distribution of BHDA and its main mechanism of action. By combining the analysis of the relative concentration with the interaction models, the adsorption behavior and mechanism of BHDA could be identified. As shown in The packing arrangement of the surface atoms affects the electronegativity of the mineral surface. Using the analysis of the mineral cleavage surface (  In this paper, an MDS was used to study the adsorption interactions of BHDA on the surface of magnesite ore. The results of the adsorption tests, flotation tests, and zeta potential measurements showed obvious differences in adsorption behavior of the collector on quartz, dolomite, and magnesite (quartz > dolomite > magnesite). The adsorption models and energies revealed that the differences in the adsorption behavior were in agreement with the experimental results. The relative concentration of O and N atoms of BHDA on the mineral surface could reflect the relative adsorption quantity and strength of the interaction. The differences in the adsorption behavior were caused by the electrostatic affinity between the electronegativity of the surface of quartz and BHDA, as well as the hydrogen bonding affinity between the oxygen and nitrogen atoms of BHDA and the exposed O atoms of the quartz surface (O The authors gratefully thank the