Ecological models may be considered synthesis of our knowledge about a question (problem) associated with an ecosystem. As we know that ecosystems are adaptable systems and are able to shift the species composition, it may often be important that these processes are included in the development of an ecological model. They can be described by optimization of exergy, which have been used successfully to set up prognoses based on ecological models in 13 case studies, in the sense that the models were able to describe the observed change in properties of the core organisms. It would therefore be obvious to examine if the method could also be used to improve the calibration of models. Modellers of very dynamic ecosystems, for instance lakes or rivers, have the experience that it is often very difficult to calibrate the model because one set of parameters cannot fit to the observations that are based on seasonal changes in the species composition, the so called succession. It has been examined whether variable parameters based on a current optimization of exergy and describing the succession would yield a better calibration. The results show that it is, at least in the currently examined case study, possible to improve the calibration by this method. Therefore, it is recommended to test the method further for a later incorporation into a modelling routine.Models can be considered synthesis of our knowledge, whether it is observations or general knowledge about the system or the state variables of the model ( It is of course a very important progress in modelling to use exergy as goal function or orientor or expert knowledge when the model is used for setting up prognoses, as they may be totally wrong when they do not account for the shifts in parameters due to adaptation and/or shift in species composition. The idea to use a goal function or rather orientor to describe the changes in the parameters has also been used to find parameters which are difficult to find by calibration or from the literature. The calibration of structurally dynamic models has been carried out in the usual way, it means that the set of parameters which gives the best fit between observations and model results, is found. It implies that one set of parameters are used for instance for a eutrophication model, although we know that adaptation and a variation of species take place, the so called succession. The right theoretical calibration would therefore be a variable parameter set for the parameters describing the properties of organisms. If we apply only one (rigid) parameter set to describe the parameters for a whole year, we do not use the full knowledge that we have about the ecosystem. We know that a succession takes place, but we do not account for that process in our calibration of the model. This paper examines the possibilities to obtain a better calibration of a eutrophication model by use of exergy as goal function to describe the succession, in parallel of course to our entire knowledge about the eutrophication and the ecosystem (a lake or a reservoir) including the available observations. As the calibration time increases exponentially with the complexity of the model, a medium to simple model was selected for the test of the proposed calibration procedure. The model developed in STELLA is shown in 1a. 1b. 2a. 2b. 3a. 3b. 3c. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 and 9. 10. 11. 12 and 13. 14 and 15. 16 and 17. 18 and 19. The equations in the STELLA format are shown in The optimum temperature is between 14 and 20 The average temperature of the previous 10 days determine the optimum temperature within this range. Observations from Glumsø for 1 full year from 15th of October 1974 to 15th of October 1975 were applied to test and calibrate the model. These observations were published in The variable size calibration was carried out as follows: the starting size was LVP=1.4 and LOVZ=1.6, but for every 10 days it was examined if exergy calculated (see It was, however, necessary to modify this procedure to account for the observations. As already pointed out, a model is a synthesis of what we know about the ecosystem. We presume that an ecosystem attempts to move as far away from thermodynamic equilibrium it means to obtain as high exergy storage as possible. Therefore, it should be considered in the model that the exergy is as high as possible under the prevailing conditions including the present size of phytoplankton and zooplankton. The observations are, however, another part of our knowledge about the system that we should utilize for the calibration as well. To avoid that the selection of parameters based on exergy would go completely out of track, it was therefore necessary to introduce the following set of rules for the variable size calibration: find the combination of sizes with the range previous values ±0.2 that give the highest exergy, but exclude any combination of size that gives a deviation from the observations that is higher than 40% relatively. In this particular case, it was necessary to exclude two times the combination with the highest exergy and select the third highest respectively the fourth highest exergy to replace the combination that gave the highest exergy because the deviation from the observations exceeded 45%. Some 45% has been selected because it is possible to calibrate most models with a S.D. of 45% or less. The previous Glumsø model, which has 18 state variables, gave an average 31% deviation between model results and observation at a validation based upon data from an independent year. By use of calibration based on intensive measurements, it was even possible to improve the validation result to 16%. Some 45% should therefore be considered a suitable upper limit for an acceptable deviation between model results and observations. The results of the calibration using only one size for the entire year of calibration and a variable size calibration are shown in A model may be considered a synthesis of all that we know about a given problem in a given context—in this case about eutrophication and lake or reservoir ecosystems. A model is not only based on the observations as statistical methods, but consider for instance our knowledge about the structure of the ecological network: phytoplankton uses phosphorus and nitrogen, zooplankton grazes on phytoplankton (not opposite) and so on. It is a hypothesis that ecosystems move away from thermodynamic equilibrium and if more pathways are offered, those that give the highest exergy will take over or expressed differently, adaptation and shifts in species composition can be described by optimization of exergy. All modellers will acknowledge that it is often very difficult to calibrate a model, particularly a eutrophication model. Improvement in this modelling step is therefore most welcome. We know that a seasonal succession of species takes place as the prevailing conditions change radically by time. It is therefore sometimes difficult to find one set of time independent parameters that give an acceptable calibration. It seems therefore to be an important improvement of the calibration procedure, if we could incorporate a description of the succession into the model. This is possible by a current change of the parameters according to the above mentioned hypothesis, it means by optimization of the exergy. As for structurally dynamic models, the rate of change is of course limited. Adaptation takes time. It depends on the generation time. It takes also some time before new and better fitted species waiting in the wings can take over. The experience from structurally dynamic modelling shows that ≈10% change in the properties for every 10 days is able to describe actually observed structural changes. It was therefore natural to choose the same rate of possible changes in this calibration case study. The observations are used by this new calibration procedure to calibrate the parameters not associated with phytoplankton and zooplankton and to ensure that the observations are still in accordance with the model results by setting up an upper limit for deviation between observations and model results. In this case, 45% chosen, but when more experience is gained by the use of the calibration procedure, it may be possible that another value will be selected. The proposed variable size calibration has clearly given a better result than the usually applied procedure, as shown in It is necessary to test this new calibration procedure in more cases before a definitive conclusion can be taken. If we, however, presume that the results are robust and sustainable, a new calibration procedure, as the one presented in An improved calibration procedure (see It is recommended at this stage at least to test the proposed calibration procedure, whenever an ecosystem with a dynamic structure is modelled. At a later stage, if the method shows similar results in a number of case studies, the procedure in