The transport of niobium(V) in chloride medium through a supported liquid membrane (SLM), using Alamine 336 and tributyl phosphate (TBP) as carriers, has been investigated. The work has been undertaken by first determining the liquid–liquid extraction distribution of niobium(V) between aqueous solution and different organic solutions. Optimum conditions for both extraction and stripping were established. The mixture of Alamine 336 and TBP provided the best extraction in high chloride medium, while low HCl concentration stripped the ion from the loaded organic phase. Transport experiments were carried out with a permeation cell having a continuous flow system and constant agitation. The study of the liquid membrane included the chemical conditions, i.e. carrier concentration and hydrochloric acid concentration in the feed solution. Maximum niobium recovery at 10% of Alamine 336 in TBP was obtained at HCl concentration between 6 and 7 mol/dm3. The mechanism postulated is referred to a synergistic extraction of Nb(V) by means of a co-transport process. Nb(V) can be concentrated in the stripping solution and the SLM showed a good performance for Nb–Ta separation.Niobium has a broad spectrum of applications in a variety of different forms: as an alloying element in iron and steel, as a constituent in superalloys and in alloys used in the nuclear industry, as niobium-based alloys, and as unalloyed niobium and niobium chemicals and compounds. Since the chemical purity of this metal plays a vital role in the properties of the system, the extraction and purification of niobium constitutes an important problem of study A large number of solvent extraction processes using different combinations of various organic reagents and mineral acids have been investigated for the extraction and separation of niobium. The reagents that have been shown to be suitable for the extraction/separation of niobium can be grouped broadly under two categories. One includes neutral oxygenated extractants, such as ketones, tributyl phosphate (TBP), triocytlphosphine oxide (TOPO), N-oxides, sulfoxides, etc. However, there is an attractive alternative to conventional solvent extraction; this is the supported liquid membrane (SLM) process, which combines the metal extraction and stripping processes in a single step. The SLM process has a relatively low cost and is energy saving. Processes using this technique could become very competitive when the ions in aqueous solution are the species for separation and concentration. This technique is successfully employed with various organic acids as specific complexing agents in the separation of Cu(II) and various divalent cations In this work, a supported liquid membrane (SLM) system for enhanced niobium transport has been developed. Liquid–liquid partition experiments were carried out, where different organic reagents were tested as diluents for Alamine 336. This niobium solvent extraction study was applied to liquid membrane transport. The membrane phase consisted of an organic solution of tributyl phosphate (TBP) and Alamine 336 The organic phase of the liquid membrane was tributyl phosphate (TBP), manufactured by Merck (Germany), and the ternary amine Alamine 336 The niobium and tantalum concentrations in the aqueous solution were determined by a method of differential spectrophotometry As stated in the literature The solutions obtained were stable for a practically unlimited period of time and obeyed Beer's law in the concentration range between 0.8 and 12 μg Me The equilibrium distribution of metal ion between the aqueous and the organic phase was determined by contacting equal volumes (0.01 dm Densities and viscosities of the organic solutions were measured for comparison of the transport properties of metals with the physical properties of the carrier–diluent organic phase. Viscosities were measured at 298±0.2 K using a Cannon–Fenske viscometer, and densities were determined with a digital densimeter (PAAR DMA 46). The results obtained are shown in The transport cells and equipment used in permeability studies are described elsewhere The metal flux, To enhance the Nb(V) transport with respect to the previous paper  Furthermore, the results indicate that niobium transport depends on the hydrochloric acid concentration. The complex ions that could be formed at the various concentrations of Cl in 3–6 mol/dm in 6–8 mol/dm over 8 mol/dm  ⋅The amine denoted as R ⋅According to Marcus ⋅Assuming that the TBP in high acid medium acts as a Lewis base, an ion association complex with the anionic complex could also be formed. These schemes for the facilitated transport of niobium in the maximum permeation range: 6–7 mol/dm The experiments described in the above section were carried out under conditions where there was no niobium in the initial feed of the stripping solution. Experiments were also performed in which the feed and strip solutions initially contained the same niobium concentration (13 mg/dm Niobium and tantalum, because of their similar chemical properties, always occur together in nature. Using the optimized conditions for niobium mass transfer through the liquid membrane, a series of experiments were carried out to determine the possibility to separate Nb(V) from Ta(V). For this purpose, a synthetic solution containing a mixture of Nb(V)–Ta(V) at a concentration of 15 mg/dm A stable supported liquid membrane was developed for niobium transport. Alamine 336 and TBP were used as carriers, and the metal flux was enhanced with respect to TBP alone as a carrier for Nb(V) This research was supported by the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas y Técnicas and the Agencia Nacional de Promoción Cientı́fica y Técnica of Argentina, which is greatly appreciated.