This paper is an overview of the application of hydrometallurgy in the processing of minerals in Kazakhstan. Hydrometallurgical processes are generally used for the recovery of rare metals.Kazakhstan is the second largest republic of the former Soviet Union countries and has developed mining and processing industries. More than 90 minerals are found in the territory of Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan is a leading country in the world with respect to reserves of chromium, uranium, lead, zinc, gold, manganese, tungsten, molybdenum, copper, alumina, and rare metals (rhenium, gallium, indium, thallium, cadmium, selenium, tellurium). However, there are no monomineral ores, many ores are difficult to concentrate and those which are generally processed are complex. Therefore, the major concept of mining-processing industry development is the comprehensive use of minerals. Kazakhstan is a major producer of alumina, copper, lead, and zinc. The production of heavy metals is generally based on pyrometallurgical processes resulting in the generation of by-products that contain rare metals. Hydrometallurgical methods are widely used in the processing of rare scattered elements, in particular rhenium, indium, thallium, cadmium, gallium, as well as gold. In pyrometallurgical processing of copper concentrates containing rare metals, these metals are concentrated in metallurgical gases. During the purification of the gas phase, rare metals are distributed between dusts and wash sulfuric acid. Dusts are sent to lead smelters, and rhenium is recovered from wash sulfuric acid. Wash sulfuric acid contains 0.1–0.4 g/L rhenium, 0.1–0.8 mg/L radiogenic osmium, 80–200 g/L sulfuric acid and some zinc, cadmium, aluminum, iron, fluorine, and chlorine. Two copper smelters in Kazakhstan use sorption and extraction for recovering rhenium from wash sulfuric acid solutions Balkhash mining and processing integrated works initially used a sorption-ion-exchange process for rhenium extraction Later, a process was implemented for recovering rhenium by direct ion-exchange method using the same ionite, omitting the stage of rhenium concentration on charcoal KAD Eluates having a low content of rhenium are used during the second elution and those rich in rhenium are evaporated until rhenium content reaches 65–70 g/L. Crude ammonium perrhenate crystals are precipitated from the cooled evaporated solution, then they are subjected to recrystallisation. After rhenium elution and washing with water, anionite is reclaimed with 5 mol/L hydrochloric acid to convert it to the initial chloride form. Rhenium recovery by using this flowchart is 90%. Zhezkazgan mining and processing integrated works uses an extraction for rhenium recovery from wash sulfuric acid with C Subsequently, the flowchart was improved by the substitution of liquid-phase extraction for the solid-phase one, during which rhenium is precipitated from the organic phase in the form of salts. This permits a significant simplification of marketable salt conversion from crude ammonium perrhenate It was determined that in the course of rhenium extraction, 15–20% osmium contained in wash sulfuric acid passes into the organic phase In the course of hydrometallurgical processing of rotary-oxides at zinc smelters, lead cakes containing considerable amount of cadmium (0.2–0.5%) and indium (0.03–0.05%) are produced Rotary-kiln processing oxides and dusts are subjected to sulphatization by sulfuric acid or spent zinc electrolyte in a fluidized bed kiln. After leaching of sulfate product, solutions containing rare metals are produced  Rhenium extraction with trialkyl amine in the presence of considerable amount of chlorine is accompanied by cadmium extraction Kazakhstani operations involved in the processing of rhenium-containing minerals use electrodialysis as a basic method for the production of marketable product from crude ammonium perrhenate After recovering rhenium, solutions are used for the extraction of indium After extracting indium, the raffinate is subjected to hydrolytic treatment by using ferric (II) sulfate and hydrogen peroxide to remove iron and arsenic. After separating iron-arsenic cake by filtration, solutions are purified of copper with zinc sulfide, and of lead with strontium carbonate Cadmium and thallium are cemented from the purified solution in a centrifugal vessel with zinc dust. Thallium–cadmium sponge is processed by pyrometallurgical method to produce individual metals. Zinc-containing solution is evaporated in a fluidized bed kiln to produce zinc sulfate At Ust–Kamenogorsk lead and zinc smelter, rare metals are recovered from solutions produced after the combined sulphatization of lead cakes resulting from zinc production and that of lead dusts resulting from lead production. Indium extraction occurs similarly as described above. After extracting indium, raffinates are subjected to the extraction of thallium and cadmium After stripping cadmium and thallium, raffinates are processed for the production of zinc salts. A method for tellurium extraction from a solution generated after decomposition of tellurium concentrate produced from drossings of crude lead refining has been developed and implemented. Tellurium is extracted from sulfuric–hydrochloric acid solutions by trialkyl amine in kerosene. This extraction provides the production of marketable grade tellurium The major source of gallium production in Kazakhstan is solutions resulting from the processing of bauxite ore by sintering with soda and limestone followed by the leaching of cake with caustic soda solution. Relatively high gallium concentration in various Bayer process solutions (0.2–0.5 g/L) defines the basic feature of gallium recovery from these solutions. This is the reduction of gallium from aluminate solutions omitting the stage of gallium concentration. Gallium recovery from aluminate solutions produced at Pavlodar aluminum operation is carried out by cementation of gallium with aluminum gallam (alloy of aluminum and gallium) from purified solutions (vanadium, silicon) The process for heap leaching was implemented for the first time at Kazakhstani operations for the processing of dumped clay ores of Vasilkovsky deposit A pilot unit of 300,000 t ore capacity was constructed in 1991, and in 1993 the first line of the commercial unit of 1-million-ton capacity was commissioned. The process was commercialized and implemented based on oxidized poorly infiltrated ores having initial gold content of 2–2.4 g/t. The main elements of the process are as follows: the piling of ore on impermeable pads in the form of a heap, leaching of gold with sodium cyanide solution, sorption of gold from solutions on AM-2B resin, desorption of gold by thiourea, electrolysis of eluates, and smelting of electrographite material resulting in the production of gold ingots. The chlorine process was used for the neutralization of leach solution to remove soluble cyanides. The process for stacked and winter leaching has been studied. The experience gained at Vasilkovsky mining and concentration works is currently disseminated for other gold-producing operations in Kazakhstan. The analysis of research-technical literature and patents has shown that hydrometallurgical processes in Kazakhstan are used for rare metal production technology to recover, concentrate, and purify metals. Because average metal contents in original minerals are constantly decreasing, and since lean ore reserves and stripped ore dumps are huge, hydrometallurgical processes will find wider application in the metallurgical industry of Kazakhstan.