12% Cr heating resistant steels with single (martensite) and dual (martensite and ferrite) phases were prepared to investigate not only the effect of the phase difference in substrate on the alloy formation but also the growth kinetic of the alloy layer during aluminizing and diffusion treating. Scanning electron microscopic observation and X-ray diffraction analysis revealed that the alloy layer was identified as Fe4Al13 (FeAl3) during aluminizing and annealing treatment and the thickness of the layer in both specimens increased as the temperature and time increased. For comparison of the parabolic coefficient and activation energy of two specimens, the specimen with the single phase presented a higher coefficient and lower activation energy than that with dual phases. This may be due to structural differences relating to the ease in which the Al atom migrates into the substrate and the fact that martensite contains a larger fraction of defects. Additionally, the results for the annealing treatments for diffusion after aluminizing clarified that both specimens showed lower activation energies than during aluminizing treatment because the formation of voids and their aggregation during annealing treatment after aluminizing contributed to lower activation energies for diffusion.8–12% Cr ferritic/martensitic heating resistant steels have been extensively used in many parts, such as in boilers, turbines, diaphragms and so on and in fossil fuel power plants as well as structural materials such as F82H and Eurofer97 in a fusion reactor because they are favoured in high temperature applications. Moreover, since many parts in such plants are exposed to water vapour, oxidation resistance is highly important. In order to improve the oxidation properties, accordingly it is preferable to increase the amount of Cr in steel. However, since δ ferrite is formed in the martensitic matrix with increasing amounts of Cr, the steels are composed of dual phases: martensite and ferrite. If the dual phase is formed in the heating resistant steels, the high-temperature properties may deteriorate in light of the changes in the mechanical properties as well as the oxidation resistance due to variations in the microstructure. Furthermore, volume fraction of the ferrite is strictly restricted with less than 5% because it can be problematic from viewpoint of high temperature properties. Therefore many methods aimed to improve oxidation resistance without increasing the Cr amount have been reported. The immersion treatment of Al into the steel matrix is generally known to improve the oxidation and corrosion resistance, heat resistance and wear-resistance properties of steel In the present study, activation energies of the alloy layers aluminized and diffusion-treated were evaluated as a function of temperature and time in order to investigate the effect of the phase difference on the growth kinetic of alloy layer during aluminizing and diffusion treatment in both single phase and dual phase 12% Cr heating resistant steels. The martensitic heating resistant steel with a single phase was fabricated as an ingot type by centrifugal casting and forced air cooling after melting electrolytic iron, Fe–Cr and so on, in a high-frequency melting furnace. In contrast, the specimen with dual phases, martensite and ferrite, was air cooled after casting. The chemical composition of the specimen is as follows: 11.60% Cr–0.60% Si–0.41% Mn–0.12% C–0.003% P–0.002% S–Fe (Bal.) After fabrication of the ingot, it was cut into 20 Additionally, to investigate the effect of diffusion, diffusion treatments were carried out at 1023, 1123 and 1223 The specimens aluminized and diffusion-treated after aluminizing treatment at various temperature and time were evaluated by a scanning electron microscope (S-2400, Hitachi, Japan) and optical microscope (gx51, Olympus, Japan) to observe the thickness of the alloy layer. Additionally, chemical line profiles from the surface were investigated using an electron probe micro-analyzer (epma-1600, Shimadzu, Japan). In order to evaluate the structure of the alloy layer as a function of depth from the surface, X-ray diffraction analysis (D/Max-IIA, Rigaku, Japan) was conducted by polishing the specimens at 100 Based on the analytical results of the thickness of the alloy layer, the parabolic coefficient and activation energy were calculated with the following equations: l  For confirmation of the chemical composition of the alloy layer formed by aluminizing, EPMA line profiles from the surface of the specimens aluminized at 1073 In aluminizing treatment, the kinetic of the diffusion is controlled by various parameters, such as temperature, time, aluminium content, type and content of activator and substrate material, which affects the microstructure, thickness and species of the alloy layer. In particular, temperature and time on the formation of the alloy layer play an important role, since both factors have a significant effect on the thickness according to Fick's law of diffusion.  In parallel to temperature dependence, the effect of aluminizing time on the formation of the alloy layer was investigated. It depicts that the thickness increased with an increase of time for both specimens. This tendency for the thickness to be proportional to temperature and time is in good agreement with others In the aluminizing process, some reported that a growth in the Fe To investigate the growth of the Fe  To evaluate the activation energy of the aluminizing process, the values of K for two specimens were plotted as a function of the reciprocal of the temperature (1/T) (see In parallel to aluminizing treatment by immersion of Al into the 12% Cr heating resistant steels, diffusion treatments were carried out at 1023, 1123, and 1223  The parabolic coefficient of the Fe The specimens with single (martensite) and dual (martensite and ferrite) phases were fabricated to investigate the effect of phase difference in substrate on alloy formation and growth kinetic in aluminized and diffusion-treated 12% Cr heating resistant steels. The layer formed during the aluminizing and diffusion treating treatment was detected as the Fe