This paper presents the first experimental study on the axial compressive behavior of high-strength concrete (HSC) confined by shape memory alloy (SMA) wire. Concrete cylinders that were prepared using two different grades of concrete, namely normal-strength concrete (NSC) and HSC, were confined with Nitinol (Ni-Ti) SMA spirals having a pitch spacing of 36 and 20 mm, respectively. Preliminary material tests were performed on SMA wires to investigate the tensile strength and strain of SMA in martensitic and austenitic phases and the effect of the temperature on the recovery stress. The confining pressure was applied on concrete cylinders by SMA spirals that were prestrained at 0, 5.5, and 9.5%. The material test results show that an increase in the prestrain level from 5.5% to 9.5% leads to an increase in the recovery stress of SMA wire at temperatures higher than the austenitic finish temperature (90 °C). The compression test results of SMA-confined concrete specimens show that an increase in the prestrain level leads to an increase in the peak axial stress and corresponding axial strain of SMA-confined concrete. Confinement of NSC and HSC specimens by 9.5% prestrained SMA spirals results in a 38.1% and 23.6% higher peak axial stress and a 333% and 346% higher corresponding axial strain, respectively, compared to those of unconfined specimens. It is also shown that because of the more brittle behavior of HSC specimens, SMA-confined HSC fails at a lower axial strain compared to SMA-confined NSC. The lower ultimate axial strain of HSC specimens is also attributed to the lower confinement ratio of the HSC specimens of the current study compared to that of NSC specimens. The promising findings of this study point to the significant potential for the use of SMA spirals in the construction industry for the development of high-performance composite structural members and for strengthening and retrofit of existing concrete members.It is now well understood that through lateral confinement the strength and ductility of concrete can be greatly enhanced Most of the existing studies in the literature on the behavior of actively confined concrete used mechanically prestressed materials or triaxial testing devices to provide confining pressure on the concrete In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted to understand the mechanical performance of concrete confined by SMAs. Andrawes and Shin This paper presents the first experimental study on the compressive behavior of HSC columns confined by SMA spirals. The paper initially provides a summary of the experimental program, including material properties, specimen properties, and testing procedures, which is followed by the results of the experimental tests on the SMA material and SMA-confined concrete specimens. A detailed discussion on the results is subsequently presented to discuss the effect of the SMA confinement on the axial compressive behavior of both NSC and HSC cylinders. The results of this study contribute strongly to the development of this novel confinement technique intended for the construction of the next generation of high-performance composite structural members and retrofit of existing concrete members. The concrete specimens were manufactured using concrete mixtures of two different grades (referred to here as NSC and HSC). These mixes consisted of crushed basalt stone with a nominal maximum size of 10 mm as the coarse aggregate, and river sand with a 0.4-mm nominal maximum size as the fine aggregate. Ordinary Portland cement, supplied by Adelaide Brighton Cement Ltd., was used as the binder in both mixes. NSC and HSC mixes were designed to develop a 28-day unconfined compressive strength ( A Ni-Ti SMA spiral was used in this study. 16 concrete cylinders were prepared in eight groups at the Concrete Materials Laboratory of the University of Adelaide. These included two control groups (unconfined NSC and HSC), two NSC and HSC groups confined with unstrained SMA spirals, two NSC and HSC groups confined with 5.5% prestrained SMA spirals, and two NSC and HSC groups confined with 9.5% prestrained SMA spirals. The cylinder specimens were 100 mm in diameter and 200 mm in height, and two nominally identical specimens were tested for each confinement configuration. The concrete series in this study were labeled as follows: each label starts with the letters “A” and “B” for first and second nominally identical specimen configuration and is followed by letters “N” and “H” for NSC and HSC mixes, respectively. SMA-confined specimens were followed by numbers 0, 5.5, and 9.5, which indicate the level of prestrain applied to the SMA spirals. For instance, A-H-5.5 is the first of the two identical SMA-confined HSC specimens confined with an SMA spiral prestrained to 5.5%. In order to measure thermomechanical properties of SMA material, preliminary tests were conducted on SMA wires. As can be seen in Two prestress levels (as recovery stress) were selected as 35% and 70% of the austenitic rupture stress (referred to as the tensile strength in this paper) based on the fact that they correspond to approximately 1/3 and 2/3 of    Thermomechanical tests were conducted on SMA wires to investigate the influence of the temperature on the recovery stress of SMA material. As was discussed in Section    It can also be seen in  As was defined in previous studies  In order to investigate the confinement effectiveness of SMA under different levels of prestrain, the relationship between strength and strain enhancement ratios and confinement ratio is studied. The values of strength ( As can be seen in the table, at a given The experimental study on the axial compressive behavior of NSC together with the first study on HSC under SMA confinement has been presented. On the basis of the experimental results and discussions the following conclusions can be drawn: Ni-Ti SMA wires develop lower tensile strength and strain in austenitic phase compared to they do in martensitic phase, which is because in austenitic phase SMA is in more solid-state than it is in martensitic phase. The difference in the tensile strength is relatively small (i.e. 795 MPa vs 880 MPa), whereas that in the tensile strain is significant (i.e. 0.21 vs 0.34). An increase in the temperature of the SMA wire results in a higher recovery stress at a given prestrain level, attributing to the fact that the SMA becomes more austenitic (superelastic) at higher temperatures. An increase in the prestrain level from 5.5% to 9.5% leads to a decrease and increase in the recovery stress of the SMA wire at 90 °C and 120 °C, respectively, pointing to the dependence of the effect of prestrain on the recovery stress on the level of austenitic transformation. SMA confinement, especially when applied through prestrained wires, significantly increases the compressive strength and corresponding axial strain of NSC and HSC. NSC and HSC specimens confined by 9.5% prestrained SMA spirals respectively exhibit an increase of 38.1% and 23.6% in their compressive strength and 333% and 346% in the corresponding axial strain compared to those of unconfined specimens. An increase in the prestrain level results in an increase in the peak axial stress and corresponding axial strain of SMA-confined concretes. SMA-confined NSC and HSC specimens under 9.5% prestrain level respectively exhibit 2.1 and 3.4 times the strength enhancement and 1.9 and 2.3 times the strain enhancement compared to those of the unstrained specimens. SMA-confined HSC develops a lower ultimate axial strain compared to SMA-confined NSC owing to the more brittle behavior of HSC specimens. It is worth noting that the lower ultimate axial strain of HSC is also partly attributed to the lower confinement ratio of the HSC specimens of the current study (0.12) compared to that of NSC specimens (0.17). The promising findings of this study point to the possibility of the use of SMA spirals as a novel confinement technique to develop high-performance composite structural members and as an efficient prestressing technique to strengthen and retrofit existing concrete members. The authors thank Messrs. Giannini, Koch, Lim, and Shaw for completing the tests reported in this paper as part of their Honour’s thesis and PhD students Messrs. Fang and Gu for their assistance with the analysis of some of the test results.