We developed a calcium phosphate (CaP)-assembled polymer nanocarrier for intracellular doxorubicin (DOX) delivery based on a mussel-inspired mineralization approach. A DOX-loaded core-shell polymer nanoparticle (DOX-NP) consisting of a poly(3,4-dihydroxy-l-phenylalanine) (PDOPA) core and a poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) shell was utilized as a nanotemplate for CaP mineralization. The mean hydrodynamic diameter of the DOX-loaded CaP-mineralized polymer nanoparticles (DOX-CaP-NPs) was 154.3nm. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy confirmed that the DOX-CaP-NPs contained substantial amounts of Ca and P, elements found only in the CaP mineral. The loading efficiency and content of DOX, estimated by fluorescence spectroscopy, were 54.0% and 10.8wt%, respectively. The CaP deposited in the PDOPA core domain enabled the DOX-CaP-NPs to maintain a robust structure and effectively inhibit DOX release at extracellular pH, whereas at endosomal pH, the CaP core dissolved to trigger a facilitated DOX release. The DOX-CaP-NPs may serve as robust nanocarriers with a high delivery efficacy for cancer chemotherapy.Polymer nanocarriers assembled with bioabsorbable inorganic components have attracted a growing interest in the field of cancer diagnosis and therapy Most recent approaches to assemble bioabsorbable minerals in organic polymer nanoparticles are based on template-assisted mineralization Catecholic amino acid 3,4-dihydroxy- Herein, we aim to develop a novel class of calcium phosphate (CaP)-mineralized polymer nanocarriers through mussel-inspired DOPA-mediated mineralization. Doxorubicin (DOX) was selected as a model anticancer drug. The DOX-loaded polymer nanoparticles (DOX-NPs) were prepared by self-assembly of the poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) copolymer (PEG-PDOPA) in the presence of DOX. CaP was deposited on the PDOPA core domains of the PEG-PDOPA core-shell nanoparticles. We demonstrate that such CaP-mineralized DOX-loaded nanocarriers (DOX-CaP-NPs) indeed enhance the robustness of the polymer nanoparticle in aqueous phase and preferentially trigger DOX release in response to endosomal pH. The formation and characteristics of the DOX-CaP-NPs were examined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering, TEM-associated energy-dispersive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (TEM-EDX), and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. The pH-dependent release kinetics of DOX were correlated with the pH-dependent dissolution behavior of the CaP phase of the DOX-CaP-NP cores. Using SCC-7 head and neck cancer cells, the cellular uptake, cytotoxicity, and endosomal dissolution of the DOX-CaP-NPs were evaluated. α-Methoxy-ω-amino-poly (ethylene glycol) (CH The PEG-PDOPA block copolymer was synthesized by a three-step synthetic procedure established in our laboratory PEG-PDOPA (10 Dynamic light scattering analyses performed using a 90 Plus particle size analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation). A vertically polarized He-Ne laser (632.8 The physical stability of the DOX-CaP-NPs in serum-containing aqueous solutions was evaluated by dynamic light scattering analysis. For the stability in serum conditions, the stability of the DOX-CaP-NP (3 The pH-dependent DOX release from DOX-CaP-NPs was estimated in aqueous buffer solutions (pH 7.4 PBS, pH 6.4, and pH 5.0 acetate buffer). The aqueous solution of DOX-CaP-NPs (1 The pH-dependent CaP dissolution of DOX-CaP-NPs was monitored in the aqueous buffer solutions (pH 7.4 PBS, pH 6.4, and pH 5.0 acetate buffer). The DOX-CaP-NPs solution (1 SCC-7 head and neck cancer cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Seoul) and cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Gibco BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) supplemented with 10% (v/v) RPMI 1640, and 1% (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco BRL). Cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 SCC-7 cells were seeded at 5 SCC-7 cells were seeded at a density of 1.0 SCC-7 cells were seeded at a density of 1.0 × 10 The self-assembling block copolymer for the PEG-PDOPA nanoparticles was synthesized by ring-opening polymerization of (AC As illustrated in We were interested in knowing whether CaP mineralization of the PDOPA core domain can enhance the robustness of the DOX-NPs against serum proteins, which are the major disrupting species of the assembled nanoparticles in blood We next examined the effect of CaP mineralization on the DOX release kinetics. As shown in We hypothesized that the pH-dependent dissolution behavior of CaP minerals deposited on DOX-loaded PDOPA is a main factor affecting the pH-controlled DOX release kinetics. The CaP dissolution behavior was estimated by monitoring Ca The DOX-CaP-NPs can effectively release DOX only when the CaP minerals deposited within the nanoparticle cores dissolve into ions. To visualize the intracellular dissolution of CaP minerals from the DOX-CaP-NPs, a membrane-permeable precursor of calcium-specific Rhod-2 (Rhod-2/AM) was used. Rhod-2/AM is rapidly converted to Rhod-2 within cells and specifically binds with Ca To observe endocytosis and intracellular localization of the DOX-CaP-NPs, confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was used. The acidic compartments of the SCC-7 cells were labeled with green-fluorescent LysoTracker. The cells were incubated with free DOX, DOX-NPs, or DOX-CaP-NPs. After incubation for 1 In this work, we have developed a novel and robust CaP-mineralized polymer nanoparticle that could preferentially release loaded DOX under intracellular acidic endosomal compartments. The DOX-loaded PDOPA core contained catecholic OH that provided a useful template for CaP mineral deposition. The CaP-mineralized DOX-CaP-NPs maintained a robust nanoparticle structure at extracellular pH and effectively inhibited DOX release. At endosomal pH, the CaP core dissolved to trigger the facilitated DOX release. This mineralized organic-inorganic nanoparticle may serve as a useful intracellular nanocarrier of many hydrophobic anticancer drugs. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: