Comminution in mineral processing must be tailored to the final product requirements. In many cases the requirement for comminution is to generate the maximum amount of size reduction in the minimum number of equipment stages. There are however certain applications where maximum size reduction, or fines generation, are not desirable.
                  In such cases, and where the material characteristics allow, the application of twin rolls, toothed mineral sizers is often advantageous. This paper examines the function of an MMD 625 mineral sizer in terms of its mechanical design parameters and its interaction with the feed material. Using the understanding developed during the study a mechanistic predictive model of the sizer is generated that allows analysis of product size distribution, wear and throughput.Key sectors of the minerals industry require comminution machinery that can crush material to a given size without over-crushing. These include: Coal––due to relatively fragile nature of the material and the undesirability of fines. Iron ore––in cases where fines are of a lower value, or where ultrafines should be minimized. In such applications, equipment that is capable of inputting high energy levels should be avoided. It should also be noted that in the examples given above the commodities are those regarded as bulk materials. As bulk materials command a relatively low price, any process equipment used in their treatment should be capable of high throughputs particularly in relation to the capital cost. One device capable of high throughputs coupled with restrained comminution is the mineral sizer. As the name implies sizers combine a classification (sizing) and crushing (top size control) function due to their design. The main feature of mineral sizers is that the crushing takes place between toothed crushing rolls and/or stationery surfaces. Other advantages claimed include: Ability to deal with high clay content, or sticky feed. Design is self-screening, thus removing the requirement to pre-screen. The focus of this paper is the MMD 625 mineral sizer, where the 625 designation refers to the distance in millimetres between the centres of the two crushing rolls. MMD are the original and largest manufacturer of mineral sizers with their range covering various duties from a primary sizer (MMD 1500) down to the MMD 500. Due to the varying machine duties the design and configuration of the MMD machines differs. The machines designed for primary duty are the largest throughput coarse comminution devices available. Typically the MMD 1500 machine is capable of taking a feed size of 2 m down to a produce size of −350 mm at a rate of 10,000 tph. The MMD 625 is regarded as a secondary machine and can be delivered in a variety of length with either inward or outward rotation of the crushing rolls. The main performance control features of the MMD 625 are: Length of crushing rolls––throughput; Inward/outward rotation––size reduction top size control and throughput; Rolls speed––throughput; Rolls separation––top size control, size reduction and throughput; Rolls/stationery surface separation––size reduction and throughput; Tooth configuration––manageable feed top size and size reduction. The MMD 625 sizers modelled in this paper are installed at the Hamersley Iron Yandicoogina operation in Western Australia. The operation produces a −10 mm pisolitic iron ore at a rate of 18 million tones per annum from a three stage crushing and screening circuit. Two MMD 625 machines act as secondary crushers receiving an all in feed from a primary jaw crusher. Product from the sizers is screened using three high “G” force banana screens, with the undersize reporting to final product and the oversize being crushed using three tertiary MP1000 cone crushers set at 14 mm closed side setting in closed circuit with the screens. The MMD 625 sizer is shown in Outward rotation––crushing between toothed rolls and stationary fingers; Rolls speed: 60 rpm; Rolls teeth––stationery teeth gap: 70 mm. Tooth design comprises five teeth on a segment with 48 segments on each roll (96 segments per machine), the tooth design is shown in The machine configuration at the Yandicoogina operation was determined by MMD to meet the process specification of 1400 tph (per machine) and a product top size of 80 mm. The MMD 625 sizes and crushes material in a variety of ways due to the geometry of the teeth and the interaction with the feed material. The model consists of eight modules (see The aim of the modelling is to determine: product size distribution, throughput, power consumption, rate and pattern of tooth wear. The rate and pattern of tooth wear being of particular importance as this in turn impacts the other process parameters that are being calculated ( The key information passed between each module is the percentage weight of feed of a specific particle size at a particular tooth position. This information can be represented in a 2D matrix as shown in For the previous example, particles in the −5000 mm to +4204 mm size fraction, at the 3rd tooth position represent 0.05% by weight of the original feed. 5000 mm has been assigned the value of the maximum feed size for this model. This is deemed to be in excess of the run-of-mine feed that a primary crushing device could be expected to handle. By default the top row of % weights will always contain zero, as no feed can be in excess of 5000 mm in size. The size fractions differ by a factor of Given the design of the MMD sizer the feed distribution along the length of the machine and the position of the falling curtain of feed with respect to the rolls is particularly important as this controls the maximum throughput of the machine and the wear pattern of the teeth. The feed system into the MMD sizers at Yandicoogina consists of a conveyor belt that empties into a trouser leg chute that splits the feed to the two parallel sizers. Due to constraints with the feed system the distribution along the length of the sizers is biased towards the centre section of the rolls and the curtain of feed tends to fall to the outside of the rolls. As these factors have a major impact on the process performance of the sizers a method of modelling this feed distribution is required. The feed distribution module’s aim is to simulate the way feed enters the sizer. To cater for the variety of feed distributions, the model employs three types of feed profiles: uniform, triangular or parabolic. The “a” and “b” parameters correspond to the tooth position of the feed boundaries. This allows uneven feed to be modelled, and will enable the user to determine the effect of different feed arrangements ( Particle motion within the sizer is a critical aspect in understanding how material is captured and broken. The action of the machine is that material falls in a curtain between the two outward rotating rolls and material that is smaller than the rolls separation falls through without breakage, but the larger material is carried by the teeth to the outside where it is broken between the teeth and the stationary “fingers”. The function of the particle movement module is twofold: To determine the proportion of particles that will pass through the centre of the sizer, without undergoing breakage and concomitantly the amount reporting for breakage. Model the movement of particles from the centre of the sizer to the outer edge. Trapezoids were selected as having the optimal shape for calculating the probability of passing easily. The probability of a particle passing through the gap is determined using the ratio of passable area to total area. In The probability of selection for passage described above is analogous to the selection function used in many other types of breakage modelling. In this case the more mechanistic approach to the issue of selection was taken due to the action of the MMD and the existence of a selection function for each tooth. It should also be noted that the selection function will change dramatically with wear and the non-uniform wear rate and pattern.  The variation in selection function along the length of five toothed segments is shown in The particle movement section deals with the change in position of the rocks as they move from the middle of the sizer to the breakage side. Since it is assumed that the sizer is under steady state conditions, any vertical trajectories can be ignored. From video footage it was determined that the movement of the rocks is random. Thus it is appropriate to use the random normal distribution function to calculate the probability of rock trajectories. The only parameter that is required in such a case is the standard deviation of normal distribution. From the video, it was observed that no rock moved more than nine teeth positions in either direction. Therefore if we assume that 18 teeth positions is equivalent to ±3 Just as the gaps in the middle of the sizer will act to screen undersized material, a similar effect occurs on the outer edge of the sizer. In this instance the crucial factor is the geometry of the fingers. Before and after each breakage event, undersized particles may fall through the gaps in the stationary fingers. The action of the outer section where the teeth and stationary fingers interact is critical in determining the size reduction behaviour of the sizer. The stationary fingers are located on “in-fill” boxes so that their position relative to the teeth can be adjusted to account for wear. On the MMD 625 there are five fingers per in-fill box. The sizing function of this outer area is particularly important as there is no method of adjusting the gap between the rolls to account for wear. As with the particle movement module the selection of material for breakage is a key element and the calculation of the function is undertaken in the same manner. Any rock undergoing breakage will have a particular amount of energy applied to it. This module determines the amount of energy that will be applied to a rock, according to the machine geometry. Once the specific energy is determined, the sizes and proportions of breakage products can be calculated.  Thus Kick’s law can be used in the following form: It is important to note that the geometry of the machine and the rock strength parameters (captured within the coefficient) are the sole determining factors for the specific energy. It must be noted that another advantage of using the Kick equation is that the coefficient also takes into account the efficiency of energy transfer. Single particle tests to determine the comminution behaviour of rock can be separated into pendulum and drop weight based tests. The twin pendulum test relies on the particle being broken between an input pendulum released from a known height and a rebound pendulum. The drop weight test differs in that the particles are placed on a hard surface and struck by a falling weight. Both these approaches have been used extensively in the field of comminution. The JKMRC has specialized in the application of these test methods since the work of The drop weight apparatus is seen to have several advantages including: extended input energy range compared to the twin pendulum devices, shorter time span of operation compared to the pendulum test, extended particle size range, ability to conduct particle bed breakage studies. The standard drop weight device is fitted with a 20 kg mass, which can be extended to 50 kg. The effective range of drop heights is 0.05–1.0 m, which represents a wide energy range from 0.01 to 50 kW Following sample preparation the mean mass of each set of particles to be broken is calculated. Based on the required specific input energy for each test, the height from which the drop weight is to be released is determined using the relationship below: Typically 10 mm is added to the calculated drop height for each test. This ensures that the required final specific comminution energy is obtained, since after breaking a particle the drop weight is brought to rest at a height above the anvil. The average offset can be measured for each sample of particles broken, in which case the applied energy is The results from the drop weight tests provide an energy/input size/product size relationship. This relationship is analyzed using a set of curves to describe the size distribution produced from breakage events of increasing size reduction or energy input. The descriptor employed in this approach is the The To make use of this description of ore breakage the marker points  The The ‘ Using this approach to comminution the key factors are The teeth and fingers of the sizer will wear significantly over time causing an increase in the gap size. The mechanism of wear in the sizer was examined to determine an appropriate simplification that could be used in the model. Initial thoughts on the type of wear that is experienced by the sizer teeth were weighted towards the idea of gouging wear. To investigate this issue a series of micrographs were taken of the surface. The results of the examination contradicted the initial thoughts, in that the percentage of gouging wear seen on the surface was less than 5–10%, with a majority of the wear being attributable to hard particle abrasion. The finding that high impact gouging wear is not a major mechanism also allowed the issue of work hardening to be ignored for modelling purposes. Work hardening of the surface occurs as the crystal structure of manganese steel alters under repeated, high force impacts. The change in structure causes significant changes in surface hardness. The lack of the impact, gouging wear mechanism precludes work hardening, with this being confirmed by hardness testing of the manganese steel surface. With these findings regarding the wear mechanism and absence of work hardening the assumption was made to treat the wear as a function of flow rate and differential velocity between rolls and ore material. In order to estimate wear, the teeth and fingers were modelled as triangular prisms. It was not viable to create an exact model of each tooth due to the affects of boltholes, chamfers, hard facing and the irregular wear pattern. By determining the wear profile of the teeth, a spectrum of product size can be derived as the geometry of the machine changes.  Effect of feed rate on feed distribution along the length of the sizer. Preference for larger particles to migrate towards the ends of the sizer. Mixture of wear mechanisms. The feed rate to the sizers varies considerably over time as the circuit prior to the sizers is a straight-through design where there are no bins or buffers to smooth the flowrate. Without these means to smooth the flowrate variation is introduced mainly from truck tips at the primary crusher. At the higher flowrates the curtain of feed into the sizers extends further towards the ends of the machines, thus causing higher wear rates. The action of the sizers also tends to direct large particles along the length of the sizer to be crushed. Given that there are also a variations in the sizer feed size due to variations in primary crusher setting (due to wear) the percentage of larger feed is not always consistent through the life of the sizer teeth. Another observation that may impact the wear towards the ends of the sizers relates to the identification of greater gouging wear in these areas. Although not representing sufficient events to cause work hardening the increased incidence will accelerate wear as the gouging and stressing of the surface allows the hard particle abrasion to be more efficient in the removal of material. It is believed that the greater incidence of gouging wear may be related to the discussion above regarding the migration of larger material towards the end, which is more difficult to grip and break. A further observation from  The model assumes normal feed conditions, uses machine geometry values derived from the appropriate engineering drawings. The model shows good correlation with the measured data, although it tends to overestimate the size reduction in the lower end of the size distribution curve. The divergence is minor and well within the measurement accuracy of the sampling. Should the divergence be due to deficiencies in the model it is suggested that the main causes could be either the selection function used, or the shape of the feed material particles. Product size distribution and crushing component wear are key parameters in determining the performance of a crushing device. This paper has described the key modules used in the modelling of the MMD 625 Mineral Sizer. Using machine geometry, ore breakage characteristics and representations of selection and energy input a model has been derived that successfully predicts product size distribution and tooth wear. The next stage of the work is to apply similar techniques to the primary MMD mineral sizers at the Robe River Pannawonica operation. The authors would like to thank operations staff at Hamersley Iron Yandicoogina (John Smoothy), MMD (Alan Potts, Ali Benbia) and Transmin (Ross Nunn, Evan Douglas).