To understand the role of eggshell organic matrix on the biomineralization process, we have tested the influence of different purified fractions of the eggshell organic matrix on calcium carbonate (CaCO3) precipitation. Purification was carried out after successive anion-exchange chromatography, hydrophobic interaction chromatography and gel filtration chromatography of two different prepurified eggshell extracts (A) and (B); the purified fractions (named g, h, n and r) and (c′, g′, i′, k′) respectively were diluted to 50μg/ml before being tested in vitro and analysed by the sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) procedure and mass spectrometry. The precipitation experiments were carried out by the method of vapour diffusion on crystallization mushrooms. Each purified fraction showed a different effect on CaCO3 precipitation. Some of them exhibited a strong inhibitory effect on nucleation, thus suppressing the precipitation of CaCO3 almost totally while the others did not produce any notable effect. However, all fractions favoured the precipitation of calcite over the other CaCO3 polymorphs. Additionally, all fractions modified in a different manner the size and morphology of the precipitated calcite crystals.The hen eggshell is a protective barrier for the egg content which allows the extrauterine development of the chick embryo Calcite crystals forming the eggshell precipitate in the uterine fluid, an acellular milieu containing ionized calcium and bicarbonate greatly in excess of the solubility product of calcite, as well as the native and soluble organic precursor of the shell matrix The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of different purified fractions containing an array of eggshell organic matrix components on CaCO Organic matrix proteins were extracted by demineralization of the eggshells of 50 hen eggs using acetic acid as a demineralizing agent Fractions A and B were further purified by anion-exchange chromatography (7.5×50 Certified chemical reagents and Milli-Q water (Millipore) were used to prepare stock solutions of CaCl The time elapsed from the moment of closing the The electrophoretic profiles of fractions The effects of the purified fractions on the CaCO A notable effect of organic fractions on CaCO In the presence of fraction In the presence of purified fractions In the agglomerates formed in the presence of fraction The effects on CaCO The purification experiments reveal the great complexity of the eggshell organic matrix, with numerous proteins present in eggshell extract. Some of them have also been identified in the uterine fluid and may have been trapped along the different stages of the process of shell calcification. They represent a broad range of putative functions which are currently explored either by analogy with the role of these proteins in other organs, or by direct test Fractions affect precipitation at different levels: (i) All fractions select calcite among three possible anhydrous polymorphs, e.g., calcite, aragonite or vaterite. This result shows that soluble organic components participate in the selection of the eggshell mineral phase. Similar specificity over polymorphic selection has been observed by other authors using soluble organic macromolecules extracted from mollusc shells (ii) All fractions modified in a different manner the morphology of the precipitated calcite crystals. The change in the growth morphology is obviously produced by the presence of one or a group of soluble macromolecules with a certain three-dimensional conformation. These macromolecules have a high number of –COO In the presence of fractions (iii) Some fractions exhibit a strong inhibitory effect on nucleation, suppressing the precipitation of CaCO In conclusion, the effects of purified fractions of the eggshell organic matrix on CaCO This work has been partially financed by the Projects “EggDefence” of the CE VFP, PIE 200630l133 of Spanish CSIC and MAT2006/11701 of the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science. The Spanish team acknowledge also to the Factoría de Cristalización (Consolider-Ingenio 2010) for logistic support. AHH acknowledges a fellowship from CONACYT (México). ARN acknowledges financial support through the Program Ramón y Cajal (Spain). We thank Dr. J. Cartwright for English corrections.