Column leaching test was carried out for uranium ore samples obtained from a uranium in-situ leaching (ISL) mining site using 2.45 bed volumes (BVs) of 0.255M sulphuric acid to study the evolution of uranium concentration and its isotopic 234U/238U activity ratio in the pregnant leach solution. The activity ratio of the two uranium isotopes in the pregnant leach solution was measured by alpha-spectrometry following radiochemical separation. Three phases of uranium leaching were identified based on the observed uranium concentration and the 234U/238U activity ratio. The first phase, up to 0.8 BVs, was characterised by low uranium extraction at approximately 3% and a 234U/238U activity ratio in the range of 1.21–1.25, which can be attributed to hexavalent uranium leaching from mineral grain surfaces. The second phase, up to 1.8 BVs, with somewhat over 80% uranium extraction is related to the oxidation and dissolution of tetravalent uranium from uranium-bearing minerals, mostly uraninite, with a 234U/238U activity ratio of 0.92–1.00. Uranium leaching was very slow in the third phase (between 1.8 and 2.45 BVs), with only 0.5% leached and the 234U/238U activity ratio raised to 1.05–1.16. The total recovery of uranium at 2.45 BVs was 85%.As worldwide demand for energy continues to increase resulting from population growth and the emergence of new, fast-growing economies, nuclear power is likely to play a significant role in meeting future energy needs, reducing over-reliance on fossil fuels while achieving supply security and minimising carbon emissions. Kazakhstan is a major producer of uranium, with over a quarter of the worldwide production in 2012 mined in Kazakhstan. Uranium extraction by in-situ methods involving underground leaching using dilute sulphuric acid solutions has been conducted in Kazakhstan since the 1970s ( Significant improvements have been made over the years concerning the leaching techniques employed to extract uranium from the ore bodies. Many physico-chemical studies on the effectiveness of uranium leaching using various complexing agents and oxidants have indeed been conducted as part of this optimisation process ( Past physico-chemical studies on sulphuric acid leaching have not considered isotopic signatures and the disequilibrium between different nuclides pertaining to the uranium chain series ( Our study reports changes in total uranium concentration with The The behaviour of uranium isotopes and their activity ratio are essential information in monitoring the genesis of uranium at different geological sites such as ore deposits. One of the most interesting sites for observing uranium isotope disequilibria are uranium roll bedding deposits. The uranium roll front moves slowly downflow, in the direction of the fluid flow. It recycles continuously by dissolving from the oxidising zone and moving to the reducing zone at the front where it precipitates again. As the roll front advances the precipitated uranium becomes part of the oxidising zone again. During the motion of the A uranium ore sample originating from a deposit in South Kazakhstan was obtained as drill chips, sampled by drilling plants from three newly drilled wells. This ore deposit is related to infiltration type and is located in the south-eastern part of Shu-Sharasu uranium province, where uranium moralization is associated with regional zones of formation oxidation. The uranium content of the drilled wells is close to the average of the entire site. The < The ore sample was examined by using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) to investigate the texture and mineralogical composition, and to identify uranium-bearing minerals. XRD patterns were measured with a Philips PW3020 goniometer equipped with curved graphite crystal monochromator, and an X'Pert PW3710 MPD control unit. A long fine-focus Cu X-ray tube was run at 40 Electron probe micro-analysis was performed by wavelength-dispersive spectroscopy using a Cameca SX100 instrument at a 15-kV acceleration voltage and a 10-nA beam current with 1–5 Scanning electron microscopy analysis was performed using a Hitachi S-4800 FESEM instrument at a 20-kV acceleration voltage and a 15–20-μA beam current after carbon coating of the primary ore grains. The total organic carbon (TOC) of the ore was determined by first treating the dried ore sample with hydrochloric acid to remove inorganic carbon and then by the dry-oxidation of organic carbon in a furnace followed by the collection and determination of evolved CO A 1-m-long PVC column (ID 3 The column leaching test was conducted in a horizontal mode at room temperature under atmospheric pressure in conditions with a constant pressure gradient ( After removal of air-oxidised uranium, the leaching by formation water, made 0.255 Metal concentrations, including uranium, were analysed using inductively coupled optical emission spectrometry (Optima 8000). Uranium isotope activities were determined by alpha spectrometry (Alpha analyst) following radiochemical separation of uranium by solvent extraction techniques as described in The tetra- and hexa-valent oxidation states of uranium in the ore material were chemically separated by DOWEX anion exchange resin after dissolution in 6 Quartz was overwhelmingly the most common mineral component in the ore sample (> SEM analysis along with EPMA results (Cameca SX100 instrument) showed that the main part of uranium was present as small particles (≈ Particle size distribution was determined using a sieving method. Most of the ore mass (51%) lies in the 0.1–0.5 The ore sample contained low contents of organic material (0.043%) and sulphides (< The isotopic activity ratio The When leaching the ore column with formation water, the pH slightly increased from 7.90 at the beginning of leaching to 8.37 at the end, while Eh increased from 175  The pH and Eh of the pregnant leach solution when leaching with dilute sulphuric acid (0.225 The evolution of Fe, Ca, Mg and Al concentrations in the pregnant leach solution is presented in The uranium extraction degree did not exceed 85% during the acid leaching stage. The uranium extraction degree during acid leaching is shown in The evolution of uranium in the pregnant leach solution can be divided into three phases according to the measured uranium concentration and the The second phase in the evolution curve, after ca. 0.8 BVs of acid solution, begins dissolving the U(IV) minerals. This phase is characterised by elevated uranium concentrations and a lower The third phase in the evolution curve was represented by the Established relationship between the activity ratio of uranium isotopes and uranium extraction can potentially be used in real leaching operations as an indicator for uranium sources during in-situ leaching. The data on uranium isotope activity ratios was used to interpret the uranium extraction processes in the column leaching of uranium ore. The evolution of uranium concentration in a column test was supported by measurements of This work has been carried out under the sub-project “Practical application of natural radionuclide isotope ratio in uranium hydrometallurgy and radioecology”, which is funded under the