Worldwide identified resources of beryllium somewhat exceed 80 000t. Beryllium production in all the countries of the world in 2012 was about 230t. At the same time, some conceptual designs of fusion power reactors envisage utilization of several hundred tons of this metal. Therefore return of beryllium into the production cycle (recycling) will be necessary. The beryllium ore from some main deposits has uranium content inadmissible for fusion reactors. This fact raises a question on the need to develop and apply an economically acceptable technology for beryllium purification from the uranium. Practically any technological procedure with beryllium used in fusion reactors requires its detritiation. A study of tritium and helium release from irradiated beryllium at different temperatures and rates of temperature increase was performed at Kurchatov Institute.Beryllium (Be) is considered as a material that holds promise for the usage in fusion power engineering, but its resources are very restricted. The world identified resources of Be somewhat exceed 80 000 The main difference between the US, Chinese and Russian–Kazakhstan beryllium grades is in an abundance of the uranium impurity. According to the Materion Corporation specification for the beryllium grade S-65 uranium content in beryllium is up to 150 Measurements of the uranium content in Russian–Kazakhstan beryllium were performed with 35 samples. There were 20 samples of commercial beryllium produced by vacuum casting technology and 15 samples — by vacuum distillation technique. The samples were fabricated from powders with different particle sizes. Different compacting methods were used for these samples fabrication: vacuum hot pressing, hot isostatic pressing, hot extrusion and upsetting. The measurements have shown that the uranium concentration in a commercial beryllium lies within 0.16–18.0 In 1989 the beryllium production in Russia was stopped practically in all the deposits It is scheduled to recommence the beryllium ore mining at the East-Siberian deposit Ermakovskoye (Russia) in near future. The ore will be processed into an ore concentrate at the Zabaikalskij ore dressing and processing enterprise and the concentrate will be sent to the UMP for metallic beryllium production The uranium presence in beryllium does not create a concern in the areas where neutrons are not available ( A quite different situation is in nuclear (including fusion) reactors. Due to the presence of natural uranium in the beryllium first wall armor or in blankets as neutron multiplier, these components can be considered as combination of fertile ( The design of the Russian DEMO-type fusion power reactor (FPR) DEMO-S with fusion power of 2.4 Thus, the difference between so called “pure” fusion reactors and the fusion-fission hybrid reactors seems to be rather conditional. If uranium is present in beryllium in a “pure” fusion reactor we have the whole bouquet of different transuranic elements (actinides): from Pu to Am and Cm weighing several kilograms. A specific activity of the beryllium with initial U concentration of 30 wppm after 300 years of cooling ranges from 3 Consequences of a possible ITER accident at the end of its lifetime with a Be dust release were considered in the paper The long-term ingestion and inhalation doses from the beryllium dust were calculated on the base of the European Activation System According to Russian regulations The highest difficulties resulted from Be contamination with U can be met at burial of irradiated Be. Specific activity of beryllium by the end of the ITER life time due to No existing waste repositories could be found that would accept transuranic Be waste from a nuclear reactor. Even the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant in New Mexico, which accepts transuranic waste from defense programs, could not accept such a Be, in part because of its large According to the IAEA recommendations The Russian Radiation Safety Regulations Designers of China ITER TBM estimated a contact dose rate from the Be neutron multiplier with U concentration of 100 wppm. The contact dose rate from Be, permissive hands-on handling of the metal structural elements without any protector (10 Shielded hands-on handling (using simple protectors, like glove boxes) is possible at the contact dose rates less than 2 Practically all the technological operations with the beryllium irradiated in FPR conditions require its detritiation. Apparently, the basic procedure for tritium removal from beryllium will be thermal desorption (maybe with replacement of tritium with protium). Post-irradiation studies of The experiments have shown that tritium and He releases from samples have a non-diffusive (explosive) nature. Under small temperature increase rates (TIR) and fast neutron fluence of ∼3.10 The temperatures of The reason that tritium and He, formed through the reactions It is appropriate to mention here that tritium, co-deposited with beryllium under interaction of plasma with the surface of the vacuum chamber, can be removed at an appreciably lower temperature (about 350 The beryllium production in all the countries of the world in 2012 was about 230 A preliminary development of the laboratory radiochemical technology for Be purification from activation products and recycling has been carried out at V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute, in Saint-Petersburg Besides U and tritium, some other isotopes play an important role in safety and environmental characteristics of beryllium. They are Potential needs in beryllium for fusion power engineering may exceed its resources if beryllium recycling is not realized. It is necessary to develop an economically acceptable technology for purification of the beryllium destined for fusion reactors from uranium impurity and an optimal technology for irradiated beryllium detritiation on an industrial scale.