Background context
                  Traditional short-segment fixation of unstable thoracolumbar injuries can be associated with progressive kyphosis and implant failure. Load sharing classification (LSC) recommends supplemental anterior reconstruction for fractures of score 7 or greater. Posterior fixation including the fractured vertebra (PFFV) has biomechanical advantages over conventional short-segment fixation. However, its efficacy in severe thoracolumbar injuries (LSC≥7) has not been studied.
               
                  Purpose
                  To study the clinical, functional, and radiologic results of PFFV for severe, unstable thoracolumbar injuries (LSC≥7) at a minimum of 2 years.
               
                  Study design
                  A retrospective review of case records.
               
                  Patient sample
                  Thirty-two patients with an unstable burst fracture of LSC≥7 treated with PFFV were included.
               
                  Outcome measures
                  They included clinical outcomes: American Spinal Injury Association grade, visual analog scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI); and radiologic measures: segmental kyphosis angle, vertebral wedge angle, and percentage loss of anterior and posterior vertebral height.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-two patients with LSC≥7 who had undergone PFFV, with a minimum follow-up of 2 years were studied for demographic, injury, and surgical details. Clinical and radiologic outcomes were measured before surgery and at 6, 12, and 24 months postoperatively. The presence of screw breakage, screw pullout, peri-implant loosening, and rod breakage were considered as criteria for implant failure.
               
                  Results
                  None of the patients had postoperative implant failure at the final follow-up. The mean preoperative kyphosis angle was 22.9°±7.6°. This improved significantly to 9.2°±6.6° after surgery (p=.000). There was a loss of mean 2.4° (mean kyphosis angle of 11.6°±6.3°) at the final follow-up. The mean preoperative wedge angle was 23.0°±8.1°. This was corrected to 9.7°±6.2° (p=.000). There was a loss of kyphosis (mean 1.2°) in the follow-up period. The mean anterior and posterior vertebral height also showed significant improvements postoperatively, which were maintained at the final follow-up. The mean ODI and VAS scores at the end of 2 years were 17.5% and 1.6, respectively.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Reduction of unstable thoracolumbar injuries even with LSC≥7 can be achieved and maintained with the use of short-segment pedicle screw fixation including the fractured vertebra, avoiding the need for anterior reconstruction. In the current era of evolving concepts of fracture fixation, the relevance of LSC in the management of unstable burst fractures is questionable. Traditional approaches for the operative management of unstable burst fractures often involved extensile posterior constructs or the use of antero-posterior techniques. In the era of modern surgical instrumentation, the question remains as to whether such surgical approaches are still applicable, or if less invasive options can be applied. To this effect, the authors review their experience treating unstable thoracolumbar injuries using short segment techniques that incorporate the fractured vertebra. This retrospective review considered the cases of 32 patients with unstable thoracolumbar injuries. Average follow-up approximated 2 years postsurgery, with no patient achieving a true three year evaluation. The authors report satisfactory mid-term results. No instances of implant failure were encountered. This study presents the results of a retrospective, uncontrolled series of patients and is thus subject to confounding by selection as well as indication bias. The authors’ approach to radiographic evaluation also subjects the work to the potential for information (measurement) bias. This effort demonstrates the feasibility of short-segment instrumentation techniques in a select group of patients. Its findings, however, cannot be generalized.  A balance between avoiding anterior surgeries and preventing failure in posterior surgeries can be achieved by increasing the number of fixation points along the posterior construct Previous studies in the literature have shown that the use of intermediate screws have better outcomes than patients with short-segment posterior fixation alone The study was performed in a tertiary spinal care center and was approved by the institutional review board of the hospital. It was a retrospective review of case records of all patients with unstable thoracolumbar fractures with LSC≥7, who had completed a minimum follow-up of 2 years. In the authors' institute, PFFV is the standard surgical technique for all unstable thoracolumbar fractures. A total of 277 patients with thoracolumbar fracture had been treated in the institute during the study period. Of these, 44 patients with LSC≥7 had undergone a PFFV, among which 32 patients had a minimum follow-up of 2 years. The patients' demographic, clinical, and injury details (age, sex, mode of injury, time to surgery from injury occurrence, associated injuries, pre- and postoperative neurologic status, and perioperative complications) were studied ( In the radiographs, the following parameters were studied: segmental kyphosis angle, wedge angle, anterior vertebral height loss, and the posterior vertebral height loss ( A standard posterior midline approach was performed and pedicle screws were inserted into the vertebra cephalad and caudal to the fracture. Screws were inserted into the pedicles of the fractured vertebrae (intermediate screws) using freehand technique. The intermediate screw heads were left slightly proud to act as a push point and also achieve reduction of kyphosis. Intermediate screws were inserted in both the pedicles of the fractured vertebra; however, if the pedicle walls were found to be broken, no screw is inserted into that pedicle. No extra effort was taken at achieving complete reduction of kyphosis or restoring vertebral height by rod over contouring, compression, or distraction. In fractures with neurologic deficit or if the spinal canal compromise is greater than 50%, a midline decompression was performed at the level of the pedicles. The degree of kyphosis correction and the position of the screws were assessed by the postoperative radiographs. In patients with coexistent fractures at adjacent levels, additional vertebrae were fixed. All patients were periodically followed-up with clinical and radiologic evaluation. Radiographs were performed at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months. Thirty-two patients with a mean follow-up of 26.5 months (range: 24–34 months) were analyzed. The preoperative clinical data are presented in Among the vertebral fractures, L1 was the most commonly affected vertebra (n=12), followed by L2 (n=8), T12 (n=6), L3 (n=5), and T11 (n=1). Thirteen patients had normal neurology (American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) E), 16 had incomplete deficits (ASIA B, C, D), and three had complete deficit (ASIA A). All the fractures had a load sharing score of 7 or more. Twenty-three patients had a score of 7; eight patients had a score of 8; and one patient had a score of 9. According to AO Spine TL spine injury classification system, 19 were Type A4, 5 were A3 type, 5 were B2 with A4 type body injury, and 3 were B2 with A3 type body injury. Fall from height was the most common injury mechanism (n=23) and rest of the injuries occurred in a road traffic accident. Posterior instrumented stabilization was performed in 13 patients (all ASIA E) and midline decompression with stabilization was performed in 19 patients with neurologic deficit. In 28 patients, only a three-level fixation has been used (one screw each at one level above, below, and at the fracture level). In four patients, four levels were fixed because of coexistent fractures at adjacent levels. In 30 patients, screws were inserted at both pedicles at the fractured vertebra, whereas two patients had screws inserted unilaterally due to broken pedicles on the opposite side. The mean operating time was 112±36 minutes, the mean blood loss was 264±95 mL, and the mean duration of hospitalization was 5.1±2.6 days. Patients with complete neurologic deficit (n=3) did not show any neurologic recovery. All three ASIA B patients improved to ASIA C. Five ASIA C patients improved to ASIA E. The remaining five ASIA C patients improved to ASIA D. All three ASIA D patients improved to ASIA E. None of the patients had any postoperative implant failure at the final follow-up. All patients received only posterior surgery and anterior decompression surgery was not performed in any of the patients. The mean preoperative kyphosis angle was 22.9°±7.6°. This improved significantly to 9.2°±6.6° in the immediate postoperative period (p=.000). There was a loss of mean 2.4° (mean angle of 11.6°±6.3°) at the final follow-up ( At final follow-up, the average VAS score for back pain was 1.6±0.9 (range, 1–4). The mean ODI score at final follow-up was 17.5% (range from 11% to 22.8%). Short-segment posterior stabilization of the injured vertebral motion segments is one of the standard methods of stabilization for unstable thoracolumbar injuries. The advantages include the familiarity and simplicity of the approach and lesser complications as compared with anterior surgeries The LSC was developed by McCormack et al. Wang et al. It has been almost 20 years since the classification was first published in 1994, and since then, it has been cited in 522 articles. The article has limitations including that it is a retrospective study of only 28 patients, injuries of all severity including fracture dislocations have been included, and older generation Steffe plates and screws were the implants used to stabilize the fractures. With significant improvements in spinal stabilization systems, there have been various modifications in the surgical concepts and approach regarding spinal trauma care. Anterior approach and vertebral body reconstruction can be potentially morbid surgeries in a patient with spinal fracture, and hence, various modifications to posterior stabilization have been made to improve stiffness of the construct and reconstruct the anterior column. This includes transpedicular morselized intracorporeal bone grafting, vertebroplasty, and kyphoplasty with hydroxyapatite or calcium phosphate In an animal cadaveric burst fracture model, Anekstein et al. There have been prior clinical studies using the PFFV technique for stabilization of thoracolumbar burst fractures. In a prospective randomized study by Farrokhi et al. Although the biomechanical advantages provided by intermediate screws have been proved in clinical studies, its role in the management of burst fractures with LSC≥7 has not been studied previously. The present study indicates that even in fractures with severe vertebral comminution and kyphosis, the use of intermediate screws provides good clinical and radiologic outcomes ( Proponents of anterior surgery in thoracolumbar fractures cite the ability for complete kyphosis correction and direct spinal cord decompression as important advantages. It has been well documented in many studies that there is no direct correlation between the amount of kyphosis and clinical symptoms and the functional outcome There are theoretical concerns regarding the use of pedicle screws into the fractured vertebra as to whether it is safe to insert a screw through a broken bone without risking breach into the spinal canal. In most patients with burst fractures, the walls of the pedicle are usually intact. So inserting a screw is similar to pedicle screw insertion in other vertebrae. Our follow-up computed tomography images have also demonstrated good containment of screws ( Reduction of unstable thoracolumbar injuries even with LSC≥7 can be achieved and maintained with the use of short-segment pedicle screw fixation including the fractured vertebra. This technique allows good correction of segmental kyphosis, vertebral wedging, and vertebral height loss. The radiologic correction achieved is maintained even at the end of 2 years and reflected in good functional outcomes.