Direct H2S decomposition induced by plasma with an aid of alumina-supported metal sulfide semiconductors (ZnS/Al2O3 and CdS/Al2O3) for the production of hydrogen was investigated in a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) reactor. Effects of specific input energy (SIE), feed flow rate, metal sulfide loading, and added hydrogen on the performance of H2S decomposition were studied. With the aids of ZnS/Al2O3 and CdS/Al2O3, full conversion was obtained at reasonably low energy costs. The 100-h test runs indicated that both ZnS/Al2O3 and CdS/Al2O3 were stable in the course of H2S decomposition. A supported metal sulfide solid solution (Zn0.4Cd0.6S/Al2O3) exhibited higher performance than ZnS/Al2O3 and CdS/Al2O3, achieving full conversion at a reduced energy cost. The mechanism of the plasma-induced H2S decomposition with an aid of a semiconductor catalyst was tentatively proposed.Hydrogen sulfide (H Several approaches have been investigated to split H In the present paper, the non-thermal plasma-catalyst hybrid process was investigated extensively, and the possible pathways in H Al The non-thermal plasma was generated at atmospheric pressure by dielectric barrier discharge (DBD). A high-voltage generator (CTP-2000K; Corona Laboratory, Nanjing, China) was applied to supply a voltage (peak-to-peak voltage) from 0 to 15 kV with a sinusoidal waveform at a frequency of about 10 kHz. The DBD reactor mainly consists of a quartz tube and two electrodes ( In H The area of the Lissajous diagram measures the energy dissipated in the discharge during one period of the voltage. The charge was determined by measuring the voltage across the capacitor of 0.47 μF connected in series to the ground line of the plasma reactor The energy consumption for hydrogen production ( The XRD patterns of supported metal sulfides, both fresh and spent, were characterized on a Rigaku D/Max 2400 diffractometer using nickel-filtered Cu-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 100 mA. The Nitrogen sorption isotherms were obtained at −77 K on a Micromeritic TriStarII 3020 instrument. Samples were degassed at 623 K under vacuum for 10 h prior to measurement. The total specific surface was calculated according to the Brumauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. Many studies have shown that the formation of free radicals or ion-radicals is the first and decisive step in H Among the steps, only the primary H Since the breakdown voltage of H   It also can be seen that the conversion increased with increasing SIE for all the DBD reactor configurations. However, the trends for CdS/Al CdS and ZnS are effective semiconductor catalysts for H In a non-thermal plasma, there exist UV–visible light irradiation and strong electric field H To investigate the effect of metal sulfide loading on the catalytic activity, we prepared CdS/Al  Molecular hydrogen, the main product of H The H As a typical solid solution semiconductor, Zn A Zn Dependence of H A synergy of semiconductor catalysis and a DBD non-thermal plasma led to significantly improved performance in H The authors acknowledge the financial supports from