The results of proximate, ultimate, and petrographic analysis for a wide range of Kentucky coal samples were used to predict Free Swelling Index (FSI) using multivariable regression and Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). Three different input sets: (a) moisture, ash, and volatile matter; (b) carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and mineral matter; and (c) group-maceral analysis, mineral matter, moisture, sulfur, and Rmax were applied for both methods. Non-linear regression achieved the correlation coefficients (R2) of 0.38, 0.49, and 0.70 for input sets (a), (b), and (c), respectively. By using the same input sets, ANFIS predicted FSI with higher R2 of 0.46, 0.82 and 0.95, respectively. Results show that input set (c) is the best predictor of FSI in both prediction methods, and ANFIS significantly can be used to predict FSI when regression results do not have appropriate accuracy.All types of coal undergo chemical changes, but caking coal exhibits physical changes in addition to chemical changes when heated. ( Knowledge of the plastic properties of coal is commonly used to predict coke quality ( The Free Swelling Index (FSI), an important property for both metallurgical and steam coals ( The relationship between coal's plasticity and its physical and chemical properties was studied in previous works ( Fluidity is also dependent upon the organic sulfur content in coal ( Petrographic analysis can provide insight into the thermoplastic properties of a particular coal, which are of significant importance in the coking industry (  Some problems associated with the ASTM D-720 FSI method are the proper heating rate, oxidation or weathering of the coal sample, and an excess of fine coal in the analysis sample ( Using the experimental data, computing techniques have been applied to many aspects of coal processing that were mentioned in the references of the paper ( The aim of the present work is prediction of FSI of coal according to the proximate and ultimate analysis, group-macerals, mineral matter, and vitrinite maximum reflectance (R A remarkable mathematical model requires a comprehensive database to cover a wide variety of coal types. That model should be capable for predicting of FSI with a high validity. Data used to test the proposed approaches are from studies conducted at the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research. The database includes the determined proximate and ultimate analysis, petrography, mineral matter, and R The main objects of fuzzy systems that decision-making by using the knowledge about a target, include human knowledge and perform interfacing ( The fuzzy inference system (FIS) based on the concepts of fuzzy set theory, fuzzy if-then rules, and fuzzy reasoning ( The methodology of the fuzzy logic controller (FLC) when the processes are too complex for analysis or the available sources of information are interpreted qualitatively, inexactly, or with uncertainty, appears very useful by conventional quantitative techniques ( An Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS), based on the architecture of the Takagi–Sugeno-type fuzzy inference system, is one of the most popular neural fuzzy systems (FIS) ( Fuzzy clustering is the partitioning of a collection of data into fuzzy subsets or clusters based on similarities between the data ( Using all parameters of proximate or ultimate analysis in one equation may increase the bias. For example, proximate analysis contains the determination of moisture, volatile matter, ash, and fixed carbon (ASTM D-3172–D-3175). Fixed carbon depends on relative amounts of moisture, ash, and volatile matter then the difference of these three values summed and subtracted from 100, Fixed Carbon To prepare linear equations the stepwise variable selection procedure was used, in which variables are sequentially entered into the model. The first variable considered for entering into the equation is the one with largest positive or negative correlation with dependent variable. The procedure stops when there are no variables that meet the entry criterion ( Unlike linear regression, which is restricted to estimate linear models, non-linear regressions create equations with arbitrary relationships between independent and dependent variables. In this study, some input variables have non-linear relationships with FSI. Therefore, with respect to linear regressions, non-linear regression was used to develop equations between Free Swelling Index and coal analysis variables. In order to cover the whole structure of coal samples, three different input sets of coal analyses were applied as FSI predictors: Proximate analysis (moisture, ash, and volatile matter); Ultimate analysis (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur), forms of sulfur, and mineral matter; Group-macerals analysis (vitrinite, inertinite, and liptinite), mineral matter, moisture, vitrinite R The statistical parameters of input variables are shown in By a least square mathematical method, the inter correlations of moisture, ash, and volatile matter with FSI were − A linear relationship between input variables and FSI can be shown as following equation: In addition, the non-linear relationship as following equation: Where M, A, and VM denote the percentage of moisture, ash, and volatile matter, respectively. The other non-linear equations were examined, and they did not improve the correlation coefficient. The normal distribution of difference between FSI predicted from Eq. The inter correlations of carbon (C), hydrogen (H), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), organic sulfur (S The best linear and non-linear relationships between these variables and FSI can be shown as the following equations: The normal distribution of difference between FSI predicted from Eq. The inter correlations of vitrinite, inertinite, liptinite, and R In this section, the following combinations of different coal analyses were used: Group-macerals, mineral matter Group-macerals, R Group-macerals, R Group-macerals, R Group-macerals, R Finally, the combination ‘v’ was found to be the best predictor of FSI. So as an input set, group-macerals (vitrinite, inertinite, and liptinite), R The normal distribution of the difference between FSI predicted from Eq. To increase accuracy of regression results, ANFIS procedure was applied. The input models (a) to (c) ( In this work, genfis2 was used as a stand-alone, fast method for generating a fuzzy model from data. Hybrid learning algorithm, a combination of least squares and back propagation gradient, was applied to identify the membership function parameters of single-output, Sugeno-type fuzzy inference systems (FIS). In genfis2, the default input membership function type is ‘gaussmf’ (Gaussian type membership function), and the default output membership function type is ‘linear’ ( On the other words, the rule extraction method, in genfis2, first uses the subclust function to determine the number of rules, and antecedent membership functions and then uses linear least squares estimation to determine each rule's consequent equations. This function returns a FIS structure that contains a set of fuzzy rules to cover the feature space ( The training can be made more efficient by certain pre-processing steps. In the present study, all inputs and output data in the training phase were preprocessed by normalizing the inputs and targets so that they have means of zero and standard deviations of 1: Where A The normal distributions of difference between estimated FSI and actual values in models (a), (b), and (c) are shown in Eqs. The percentage of accurate prediction of FSI by multivariable regression procedure using input model (c) regarding caking ranges (0–2, 2–4 and 4–9) were 29.9, 67.62, and 83.81%, respectively (  According to the above-mentioned results, ANFIS can predict the FSI with more accuracy than regression. In addition, as input variables the combination of group-macerals, mineral matter, moisture, organic sulfur, and R  Because associated problems with the ASTM D-720 method to determine FSI of coal such as need to the proper heating rate, oxidation or weathering of the coal sample, and an excess of fine coal in the analysis sample, prediction of FSI from basic characterization data is valuable. Three models of: (a) proximate analysis, (b) ultimate analysis and mineral matter, and (c) group-macerals analysis, mineral matter, moisture, R The inter correlation between input variables (coal rank parameters) and FSI showed, with increasing of moisture and oxygen content of coal, the FSI decreased. Higher amount of carbon, vitrinite, and R The non-linear equations can predict FSI with correlation coefficients (R The ANFIS procedure can predict FSI with correlation coefficients of 0.47, 0.82, and 0.95 for the input models of (a), (b), and (c), respectively. The results are much better than multivariable regression. The percentage of accurate prediction of FSI using input model (c) in caking ranges of 0–2, 2–4, and 4–9 by ANFIS procedure were 90, 91.84, and 98.78%, respectively. The results are shown that ANFIS can be applied as a reliable method to predict FSI using group-macerals analysis, mineral matter, moisture, organic sulfur, and R