Background
                  The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical and radiologic outcomes of open reduction and internal fixation with a screw and washer for a displaced greater tuberosity fracture of the proximal humerus through a small incision.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 29 patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation with a screw and washer for a greater tuberosity fracture of the proximal humerus. After surgery, the patients were immobilized in a brace for 4 weeks. To determine clinical outcomes, we evaluated a visual analog scale pain score; the Subjective Shoulder Value; the University of California, Los Angeles shoulder score; the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score; and active range of motion.
               
                  Results
                  All patients achieved bone union within 3 months after surgery. At the 2-year follow-up, the mean visual analog scale pain score was 1.1 ± 1.1; Subjective Shoulder Value, 93.4 ± 5.3; University of California, Los Angeles shoulder score, 31.2 ± 2.7; and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score, 92.6 ± 6.7. Mean active forward flexion, external rotation, and internal rotation were 144° ± 16°, 33° ± 11°, and 13.3 ± 1.7, respectively. Postoperatively, 9 patients (31%) had stiffness and pain refractory to conservative treatment and underwent arthroscopic release.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Although minimal open reduction and screw and washer fixation resulted in bone union in all cases, the incidence of postoperative stiffness was relatively high in patients with displaced greater tuberosity fractures because of prolonged immobilization after surgery.Greater tuberosity (GT) fractures account for approximately 20% of all fractures that occur in the proximal humerus, The GT provides an anatomic footprint for rotator cuff insertion and allows external rotation of the shoulder. Thus, when a fractured fragment of the GT displaces posterosuperiorly from its original anatomic position, it can lead to alterations in shoulder biomechanics that result in impingement or limitation in range of motion (ROM) in the shoulder joint. Currently, most surgeons use open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) with plate or arthroscopic reduction and fixation of the displaced GT. The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical and radiologic outcomes of ORIF with a screw and washer for a displaced GT fracture of the proximal humerus through a small incision. We hypothesized that, considering a metaphyseal fracture with a wide contact area, bone healing might be obtained in all cases. However, we are aware that the rate of postoperative stiffness could be high because of 4 weeks of immobilization after surgery and the inability to immediately exercise. The indication for surgery was displacement of the GT of 5 mm or more as observed on either radiography or computed tomography (CT). The fracture pattern was assessed according to the classification system of Mutch et al. The visual analog scale for pain assessment; the Subjective Shoulder Value; the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score; the University of California, Los Angeles shoulder score; and active ROM were evaluated for the functional assessment. Active ROM was measured based on forward flexion in the scapular plane, external rotation with the arm at the side, and internal rotation. Internal rotation was estimated by determining the highest spinal segment that the patient could reach with his or her thumb. For ease of statistical analysis, spinal segments were converted into numbers: segments T1 through T12 were designated as 1 through 12, segments L1 through L5 were designated as 13 through 17, and the sacrum was designated as 18. For the radiologic evaluation, a true anteroposterior view and 3-dimensional CT scan of the shoulder were obtained prior to the operation. Fragment size and displacement were measured by the longest fracture line observed on coronal and axial views on CT. The split type had a mean fragment height and width of 33 ± 6 mm (range, 24-41 mm) and 19 ± 5 mm (range, 15-33 mm), respectively, with mean displacement of 7 ± 2 mm (range, 6-14 mm), whereas the avulsion type had a mean fragment height and width of 22 ± 4 mm (range, 19-31 mm) and 19 ± 4 mm (range, 15-25 mm), respectively, with mean displacement of 19 ± 9 mm (range, 7-30 mm). After surgery, true anteroposterior views (neutral, 20° of external rotation, and axillary) were taken at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years. The operation was performed with the patient under general anesthesia in a 20° beach-chair position. A single longitudinal skin incision of approximately 3 cm in length was made from the anterior one-fourth of the acromion ( The arm was immobilized with a brace for 4 weeks in a neutral position to prevent internal rotation ( The 29 patients comprised 19 men and 10 women, and the mean age at the time of surgery was 56.7 years (range, 24-79 years). The mean duration between injury and the operation was 3.5 days (range, 1-9 days), and the mean operation time was 33.9 minutes (range, 23-43 minutes). Of the patients, 17 had split-type GT fractures and 12 had avulsion-type GT fractures. All patients achieved bone union within 3 months postoperatively. The mean visual analog scale score measured at 2 years postoperatively was 1.1 ± 1.1; Subjective Shoulder Value, 93.4 ± 5.3; University of California, Los Angeles score, 31.2 ± 2.7; and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score, 92.6 ± 6.7. Mean active forward flexion, external rotation, and internal rotation of vertebral levels were 144° ± 16°, 33° ± 11°, and 13.3 ± 1.7, respectively. Arthroscopic release was performed in 9 patients with stiffness and pain refractory to conservative treatment (9 of 29, 31%). This study was designed to investigate clinical and radiologic outcomes of minimally invasive ORIF with a screw and washer for displaced GT fractures of the humerus. Although all patients achieved bone union as hypothesized, without reduction loss or screw pullout, the incidence of postoperative stiffness remained high. Liao et al Nonetheless, the advantage of arthroscopic surgery is that it can treat concomitant injury of the glenohumeral joint or subacromial space without the need for a second surgical procedure to remove hardware. Ji et al On the other hand, Gillespie et al We argue that our method is a relatively simple and time-saving procedure compared with the aforementioned methods. Bone healing was obtained within 3 months in all cases, but postoperative stiffness with pain showed a relatively high incidence and was refractory to conservative treatment in some patients, requiring arthroscopic release. Through a small incision and with minimal intervention, we reduced the fragment. However, use of the screw and washer cannot provide solid fixation as does a plate and so represents a limitation of our procedure. Our study has some limitations. First, because this study was a retrospective study, it did not have a control group in which other fixation techniques, such as a locking compression plate or arthroscopic fixation, were used. Second, this study has a relatively small sample size, and we could not compare between the split and avulsion GT fracture types. Although minimal open reduction and screw and washer fixation resulted in bone union in all cases, the incidence of postoperative stiffness was relatively high in patients with displaced GT fractures because of prolonged immobilization after surgery. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.