Very few studies have been related to soluble organic nitrogen (SON) in forest soils. However, this nitrogen pool could be a sensitive indicator to evaluate the soil nitrogen status. The current study was conducted in temperate forests of Thuringia, Germany, where soils had SON (extracted in 0.5M K2SO4) varying from 0.3 to 2.2% of total N, which was about one-third of the soil microbial biomass N by CFE. SON in study soils were positively correlated to microbial biomass N and soil total N. Multiple regression analysis also showed that mineral N negatively affected SON pool. The dynamics of the SON was significantly affected by mineralization and immobilization. During the 2 months of aerobic incubation, the SON were significantly correlated with net N mineralization and microbial biomass N. SON extracted by two different salt solution (i.e. 1M KCl and 0.5M K2SO4) were highly correlated. In mineral soil, SON concentrations extracted by 1M KCl and 0.5M K2SO4 solutions were similar. In contrast, in organic soil layer the amount of KCl-extractable SON was about 1.2–1.4 times higher than the K2SO4-extractable SON. Further studies such as the differences of organic N form and pool size between SON and dissolved organic N (DON) are recommended.It is almost impossible to get the actual chemical components in soil solution in situ because of their adsorption to soil surface and changeability fluctuating soil moisture ( In this paper, we define the SON as the dissolved organic N extracted from soil by shaking with water or salt solutions in laboratory. In contrast, DON is the dissolved organic N in soil solution under natural condition and collected by suction cup (or other similar equipment) or from drainage water in field. Although very few studies were related to the relationships between SON and DON, theoretically, we can assume that the SON may be the potential source for DON. To some extent, soil solution is also a kind of salt solution, therefore, the SON and DON should be closely correlated. The study of Soil samples were collected in November 2000 from six selected different forest stands located at three sites in Thuringia forest, Germany. This sampling time was just after the tree growing season, thus the freshly fallen leaves were included in this study. We expected that at this time the SON pool in different stands at different sites would be relatively constant, so that the data could be precisely compared between tree species or among sites. Each of the sites had two contrasting forest tree compositions: beech ( In each study forest stand, soil samples were taken stratigraphically: LOf The laboratory work was as follows: soils (adjusted approximately at 60% of WHC with de-ionized water) were aerobically incubated in eight 500 EF−N=N extracted after fumigation−N extracted without fumigation SON (K Soil mineral N (N SON (K It has been proved that about 60% of microbial biomass residues can be extracted by K We used the aerobic incubation method to quantify the soil mineralization process and SON dynamic. During N mineralization, the soil SON and microbial biomass N changed as well. The relationships among SON, microbial N (flush N) and net accumulative N during incubation are shown in Different salt solutions can affect the amount of extracted SON. Comparing solutions of 1 In recent years, the dissolved soil N (DON) in forest soil has attracted attention. In forest ecosystems, nearly half or more of the N in soil solution occurs in organic form ( In conclusion, SON in our study forest soils could be a very important indicator for soil N status. It closely reflects the soil total N (N The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (German Research Council) for the financial support of the research (DFG Graduiertenkolleg 339 ‘Medienübergreifende Stofftransport- und Stoffumwandlungsprozesse an den Kompartimentgrenzen zum Wasser’), Mrs Mitschik, Mrs Rüger, and Mrs Unger for the technical assistance in the laboratory.