Recycling of lead dust generated from waste lead battery smelter has been attempted to minimize the environmental pollution. For this aim, preparation of basic lead carbonate from lead dust has been tested with hydrometallurgical processes. The major component of lead dust used in the work was found to be PbS and the fraction less than 325 mesh size was about 64%. As a result of leaching with nitric acid, leaching efficiency of lead was more than 95% at the condition of 4 N nitric acid, 40 °C, and slurry density of 50 g/l. In the leaching of lead dust with sulfuric acid, the addition of nitric acid was essentially required because only 4% of lead dust was dissolved by sulfuric acid without nitric acid. In the carbonation test, carbonation of lead sulfate could be successfully accomplished at the reaction temperature of 30 °C while direct carbonation of lead dust was found to give the negligible conversion.In Korea, the number of automobiles registered in 2004 was reported to be more than 14 million and the number of ELVs (end-of-life vehicles) was supposed to be about a million per year. Accordingly, the number of waste lead battery ( It is reported that more than 95% of waste lead battery generated in Korea is collected and recycled to prepare lead metal which may be used mainly for the lead battery. However, since waste lead battery was composed of lead sulfate, lead oxide and lead ( However, the research on the treatment of lead dust is hardly performed until now. In Korea, to diminish the treatment cost lead dust is partially recycled into a smelter, which may result in depression of recovery and/or the purity of lead metal. Moreover, when lead dust is discarded without the proper treatment, it may cause a severe environmental pollution due to toxicity of lead. In the present work, the treatment of lead dust has been attempted to prepare pure lead carbonate with the hydrometallurgical processes ( Lead dust used in the work was delivered from Korea Lead Battery Co. where waste lead batteries were treated to recover lead metal using a lead smelter. As shown in Variation of the content of Pb, S and C with the particle size of lead dust was given in As shown in On the other hand, burnt lead dust, which was occasionally generated by the self-burning of PbS was also delivered along with unburned lead dust. The result of chemical analysis of burnt lead dust was given in As shown in  When the concentration of nitric acid is lower than about 10 N, the reaction of Eq. Lead sulfide, the major compound of lead dust, cannot be dissolved by mineral acids except high concentration of nitric acid as discussed previously. If lead sulfide is converted into lead carbonate by sulfation with sulfuric acid followed by carbonation, it can be easily dissolved by weak nitric acid. In this work, sulfation of lead dust with sulfuric acid was tested to convert lead sulfide to lead sulfate. As shown in the figure, the sulfation of PbS was drastically increased with an increase in the concentration of sulfuric acid above 4 N. Eventually, the sulfation of PbS reached more than 90% above about 7 N sulfuric acid. However, according to the preliminary test for the sulfation of lead dust, it could not be accomplished without nitric acid since the rate of following reaction was very slow. Therefore, in order to obtain the sufficient sulfation of lead dust, nitric acid should be added to some extent with sulfuric acid.  On the other hand, the reaction temperature would also play an important role in carbonation of lead sulfate. As far as the effect of CO  Finally, basic lead carbonate, Pb A research on the preparation of basic lead carbonate from lead dust generated at lead recycling smelter has been performed with the hydrometallurgical processes. For this aim, leaching test with nitric acid and/or sulfuric acid, sulfation and carbonation as well as the purification of lead compounds have been carried out in laboratory scale. In the leaching of lead dust with nitric acid, when the concentration of nitric acid was increased up to 8 N, leaching efficiency of lead was found to increase. However, leaching efficiency of lead was abruptly decreased above 10 N HNO As far as the effect of CO This research was supported by a grant from the Fundamental R & D Program for Core Technology of Materials funded by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy, Republic of Korea.