Ni nanoparticles with different shapes and having a core–shell structure of Ni–nickel oxide have been prepared by a combination of chemical and gaseous reduction. The first step involves chemical reduction of nickel chloride in an aqueous medium with sodium borohydride (NaBH4). In the second step, the as prepared Ni-complex is reduced further in the presence of 2% H2 and 98% Ar gas mixture at different temperatures ranging from 550 °C to 850 °C. For gaseous reduction temperatures up to 750 °C, structural studies done at room temperature indicate a core–shell structure of Ni–Ni-oxide whereas for reduction at 850 °C, essentially a single phase of Ni is seen. The particle size ranges from 20 to 120 nm with different shapes for the particles: spherical, ellipsoidal, cylindrical, hexagonal, and polyhedral. The electrical resistivity in all the cases exhibits a typical metallic behavior and the absolute resistivity decreases with increasing gaseous reduction temperature, indicating a progressive reduction of Ni-oxide. The magnetization studied as a function of temperature and field shows a clear core–shell behavior: very high magnetization saturation fields and thermal hysteresis of magnetization.Synthesis of ferromagnetic nanoparticles with various sizes and shapes and a core–shell structure has received considerable interest in recent years due to their technological interest In the present work, differently shaped Ni nanoparticles with nickel oxide as the shell have been synthesized by a combination of chemical and gaseous reduction processes. Structural, electrical and magnetic properties of these nanoparticles are studied in detail. Ni nanoparticles with an oxide shell and different shapes were synthesized by aqueous and gas reduction. The first stage involves precipitation of the Ni-complex particles from an aqueous salt solution of nickel chloride by a reducing agent such as sodium borohydride, NaBH  Reducing the as prepared Ni powder at 550 °C in 2% H Different shapes of nanograin Ni particles with a Ni-oxide shell structure were observed by transmission electron microscopy ( The electrical resistivity as a function of temperature of the Ni–Ni-oxide core–shell structure is shown in The magnetization M as a function of external field H at room temperature, 300 K and 5 K is shown in The magnetization data of Ni–nickel oxide nanostructures along with that of pure bulk nickel are given in The variation of magnetization with temperature in the range 5–300 K in an external field of 100 Oe shows a path dependant hysteresis behavior both for the Ni-nanoparticles and Ni–Ni-oxide core-shell structures, Nanoparticles and core–shell structures of Ni have been synthesized by a combination of chemical and gaseous reduction process. Structural studies show that the particle size ranges from 20 nm to 120 nm. The particles were found to have different shapes (spherical, cylindrical, ellipsoid, hexagonal and polyhedral) independent of gaseous reduction temperatures. The absolute resistivity decreases as temperature of reduction increases and this is due to a decrease in the fraction of insulating phase made of Ni-oxide. The magnetization values are much lower compared to bulk values and it is due to the presence of non-magnetic/antiferromagnetic secondary phase of Ni-oxide. The ZFC and FC magnetization curves at 100 Oe do not superpose and show a blocking temperature The authors acknowledge the Dept. of Science and technology, Govt. of India for financial assistance.