Shape properties of calcite and barite particles ground by ball, rod and autogenous mills were examined by using scanning electron microscope (SEM). Shape properties have been stated in terms of shape descriptors such as elongation ratio, flatness, roundness and relative width by measuring about 200 particles. The results were correlated with the critical surface tension (γ
                     c) of wetting determined by contact angle and micro-flotation methods. The correlations set between the shape properties and the wettability for the minerals studied are in the form of “γ
                     c=a (shape property) + b” type of equations (where a and b are constants). The results revealed that particles with higher flatness and elongation ratio had higher apparent hydrophobicity without being affected by the mill type.Grinding is essential to liberate valuable minerals from its gangue as well as to decrease the size that is preferred-for projected mineral processing method. Some investigators have studied and reported that shape and morphological properties of particles affected subsequent processes such as flotation Mechanical grinding can change shape and morphological properties of particles. Abrasion, impact and chipping occur in some degrees depending on the grinding method employed. It is known that the abrasion was the main mechanism of grinding in autogenous mills, while impact forces predominate in ball milling. Autogenous grinding produced rounded particles with lower roughness, which resulted in higher recoveries in flotation On the other hand, the low flotation response of produced ore particles was presumed due to the rounded shape of particles The hydrophobicity, which has a key role in flotation, can be estimated by a number of techniques. These are immersion time The contact angle is the most used technique for the estimation of the degree of hydrophobicity. A rectilinear relationship exists when the cosine of the contact angle of a liquid resting on the solid is plotted against the surface tension of the liquid. The intercept of this straight line with the abscissa at This paper presents the results obtained from our studies and sets relationships between the particle shape parameters and critical surface tension of wetting determined by two widely used methods, namely contact angle and flotation. Two minerals were used throughout the research for the determination of the role of the shape of particles on hydrophobicity. Pure calcite with 99.14% CaCO All of the grinding tests were performed in dry conditions. A laboratory ball mill having Rod milling tests were conducted at For autogenous grinding, a Sixteen minutes of ball and rod milling and 128 The grinding times for barite were found as 8 In order to determine the critical surface tension of wetting ( The surface tensions of the methanol–water solutions ( The critical surface tension ( Flotation was another way to determine the critical surface tension of wetting ( The EMDEE Micro FLOT instrument was used throughout the flotation tests where test tube filled with sample and solution was shaken for 40 times. The froth products were vacuumed, dried and weighed to determine the recoveries of the mineral floated. The critical surface tension ( In order to compare the shape properties of the particles ground by different mills, a simplified method based on microscopic measurement was used The COREL Draw 10.0 computer program was used to measure the lengths and widths of particles in question. From the parameters, length ( The shape parameters studied, roundness (Ro), flatness ( The method for the determination of the critical surface tension ( As it is easily seen, the lowest The results of SEM measurements revealed that the particles ground by autogenous mill have the highest flatness and elongation ratio with the lowest relative width and roundness. However, the highest roundness and relative width along with the lowest elongation ratio and flatness were obtained by rod milling. These results are presented in In that case, it can be discussed that the autogenous mill product having the highest flatness maintained the highest apparent hydrophobicity, while the rod milled product showing the lowest apparent hydrophobicity with rounder shape. It can be said that attachment of an air bubble to flat particles is more likely than the round ones. This relationship can be expressed in a correlation between the shape properties of calcite particles and the  The Although the The determined The results of microscopic measurements of barite particles by using SEM showed that the particles ground by ball milling have highest elongation ratio and flatness with lowest roundness, relative width. The lowest elongation ratio and flatness were obtained with autogenous mill product. Autogenous mill product had the highest roundness and relative width. The results are outlined in In that case, the results prove that the shape properties are important rather than milling type. Although the barite was ground by ball mill, it had highest flatness and elongation ratio. The possible reason of producing flat barite particles by ball milling unlike calcite is the crystal lattice difference of these two minerals. The shape properties of barite were correlated with the ( The shape properties of calcite and barite particles were studied by using SEM. The highest elongation ratio and flatness were obtained for calcite particles produced by autogenous milling, while for barite, the maxima were obtained with ball milling. Apparent hydrophobicity of calcite and barite minerals were measured by means of the critical surface tension ( The established correlation between the surface properties (i.e. flatness, roundness, relative width, elongation ratio) and critical surface tension Finally it can be concluded that the particles with higher flatness and elongation ratios have higher apparent hydrophobicities, independently of the method of milling. Particles with higher roundness and relative width have lower apparent hydrophobicities. Thanks are given to the Scientific Research Projects Council of Cumhuriyet University (CUBAP) and the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) for their financial support to this study. Thanks are also extended to the Department of Mining Engineering of Middle East Technical University (METU) and Cumhuriyet University, for allowing to use their laboratories.  area of the particle projection (μm elongation ratio flatness length of axes of particle projection (μm) perimeter of the particle projection (μm) micro-flotation recovery (%) roundness relative width the contact angle (°) the critical surface tension of wetting (mN/m) the liquid-air surface tension (mN/m)