Nanocrystalline powders of the nearly equiatomic composition Zr56C44 have been successfully synthesized at room temperature by high-energy ball milling of elemental Zr and C powders. For the purpose of the present study, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) have been employed to monitor the progress of the solid state reaction at several stages of the milling time. A complete single phase of fcc-ZrC was obtained after 173 ks of milling time. No free Zr and/or C crystals could be detected at this final stage of milling. The lattice parameter of the as-milled ZrC was calculated to be 0.47082 nm. The fabricated ZrC powders posses excellent morphological characteristics, such as homogeneous shape (spherical-like morphology) with fine and smooth surface relief and uniform size (less than 0.5 μm in diameter). These fabricated refractory material powders have fine cell-like structure with nanoscale dimensions of about 5 nm in diameter. Cold and hot pressing techniques have been used to consolidate the end-product of the milled powders (259 ks) into fully dense (>99.5%) compact. In the consolidation procedure, the powders were pressed at 1573 K with a pressure of 1.0–1.5 GPa for 43 ks. This consolidation step led to a remarkable grain growth, and the compacted ZrC sample contained grains larger than 95 nm in diameter, but maintained its nanocrystalline unique characteristics. The density and Vickers hardness of the bulk ZrC were measured as 6.56 g/cm3 and 27 GPa, respectively. A model for the formation of nanocrystalline fully dense refractory materials is proposed, taking the ZrC binary system as a typical example.Amongst the nonequilibrium materials (amorphous, quasicrystals and solid solutions), nanocrystalline materials Carbides, especially those of the transition-metal carbides of IV and V groups in the periodic table possess unusual properties that make them desirable and useful engineering materials for many industrial applications. They have great hardness values, ranging between 20 and 30 GPa In the industrial scale of production, ZrC is prepared at a temperature ranging between 2000 to 2300 K, using the methods listed in Here, we demonstrate the feasibility of employing the MA process for preparing nanocrystalline Elemental powders of high purity (99.9%) Zr (–100 mesh) and C (–350 mesh) were used as starting reactant materials. The powders were mixed to give the desired average composition of Zr The milling process was interrupted after selected milling times, and a small amount of the ball milled powder was taken from the vial in the glove box for several analyses. X-Ray diffraction (XRD) with CuKα radiation, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) operated at 200 kV, have been used to monitor the structural changes of the powders after several ball milling times. However, some samples have been characterized by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) operated at 200 kV. The samples of the TEM and/or HRTEM have been prepared by mixing the powders with a small amount of alcohol (2 ml volume) and stirring for 30 s. Two or three drops of the suspension were dropped on a Cu-microgrid and then well dried for about 1.8 ks before mounting the microgrid onto the TEM sample holder. The morphological (shape and size) changes of the powder after selected milling times were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) operated at 15 to 25 kV. In order to determine the Zr and the contamination of Fe, which usually comes from the milling media, the powders of the final product (259 ks) were analyzed by the induction coupled plasma emission method. On the other hand, the concentration of C, and oxygen contamination content that is introduced to the powders during the milling procedure and/or during the powder handling outside the glove box, was determined by the helium carrier fusion–thermal conductivity method. The powders of the end-product were consolidated into compact samples, using two steps. In the first step, the powders were cold-compacted at room temperature under a purified Ar argon atmosphere, using a tungsten carbide die of 13.0 mm in diameter at a pressure of 1.0 GPa for 70.2 ks. The obtained green compact which has a relative density of about 70% of the theoretical density was then transferred to another tungsten carbide die of 15 mm and then hot-pressed in vacuum under a pressure of 1.5 GPa at 1573 K for 43 ks without the addition of any binding materials. The density of the consolidated samples was determined by Archimedes’ principle, using water immersion and was found to be 6.56 g/cm   Detailed TEM analyses have been performed in order to understand the local structure change of the milled powders and to monitor the changes in the grain size during several stages of ball milling. The HRTEM micrograph of the powder, milled for 22 ks, shows the lattice fringe-images of unprocessed C and Zr ( The bright field image (BFI) and the corresponding selected area diffraction pattern (SADP) for the sample that was milled for 43 ks, are shown together in The BFI and SADP of ball milled ZrC after 173 ks of milling are shown in During the last stage of milling (259 ks), the powders of the brittle ZrC phase are refined dramatically, and nanostructured grains with an average grain size of 5 nm (or less) are obtained ( The SEM technique was used to follow the change in size and shape of ball milled Zr After few kiloseconds of milling (3.6 ks), the elemental metallic Zr powders tend to agglomerate as a result of the cold welding and form larger particles with rough surfaces ( Increasing the ball milling time to 43 ks (intermediate stage of milling) leads to a dramatic decrease of the particle sizes to form powder particles that widely vary in size (10 μm to 60 μm) and shape, as shown in Towards the end of the milling processing time (259 ks), the powders have smooth surfaces with homogeneous equiaxed spherical morphology ( Consolidation of the ball milled powder is required for most practical applications and necessary for obtaining reliable mechanical and physical properties. The nanocrystalline powders of ZrC that were milled for 259 ks were consolidated into compacts following the consolidation procedure described in The sample that was hot-pressed at 1873 K has large grains of about 125 nm, being far above than the standard size of the nanocrystalline materials The BFI (near-edge) of as-consolidated ZrC at a temperature of 1573 K, is presented in  A well-known empirical dependence of strength and hardness on porosity and grain size for ceramics materials is given by  Whereas ZrC alloys are usually prepared at high temperatures (above 2000 K), the present study demonstrates a powerful technique for fabrication of single phase