Background
                  Coronal shear fractures of the distal humerus can include some or all of the cartilaginous and bony surface. Fixation is preferred, but severe comminution, nonunion, and avascular necrosis may mandate excision. The amount of distal humerus that is safe to excise is unknown. This study examined the effect of excision of the capitellum and trochlea on elbow kinematics and stability with intact collateral ligaments.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight cadaveric arms were mounted in an upper extremity joint testing system. Electromagnetic receivers on the radius and ulna enabled quantification of ulnohumeral and radiocapitellar kinematics. The distal humeral articular surface was sequentially excised to replicate clinically relevant coronal shear fractures, leaving the collateral ligaments undisturbed. The arms underwent simulated active flexion in vertical and valgus-loaded positions, and passive forearm rotation in the vertical position.
               
                  Results
                  In the vertical position, sequential excision of the articular surface increased valgus angulation during active flexion (P ≤ .04), and excision of the entire articular surface increased ulnar external rotation compared to the intact elbow (P ≤ .02). In the valgus position, excisions involving the trochlea increased valgus angulation for active flexion (P ≤ .04). The radial head moved distal, posterior, and medial on the capitellum with some or all of the trochlea excised (P ≤ .02).
               
                  Discussion
                  While the capitellum alone does not contribute to elbow stability, the trochlea has an important role. Excision of the trochlea resulted in multiplanar instability of the ulnohumeral and radiocapitellar joints. Therefore, excision of an irreparable capitellum fracture may be considered if collateral ligaments are intact, while excision of some or all of the trochlea may not.Coronal shear fractures of the distal humerus are uncommon injuries that usually result from a fall on an outstretched arm. Historically, these fractures were treated by excision of the fracture fragment(s). The purpose of this study is to determine the effect of excision of the capitellum and trochlea on elbow kinematics and stability in the setting of intact collateral ligaments of the elbow. We hypothesized that excision of the trochlea would result in measurable changes in elbow kinematics and stability while excision of the capitellum would not. Eight fresh-frozen human cadaveric arms (mean age, 71 years; 5 right and 3 left) were amputated at the mid-humerus level and stored at −20°C until use. Three had evidence of mild articular cartilage loss of the radial head and capitellum consistent with early degenerative changes at the elbow joint. A posterior midline skin incision was made and full-thickness skin flaps were raised circumferentially around the elbow. The distal tendons of the triceps, biceps, and brachialis tendons were sutured using a heavy braided line. These muscles were each attached to servo-motors on an upper limb joint motion simulator A repeated-measures experimental design was employed. The control states were: intact, in which the elbow joint was not violated, and postcapsulotomy, in which the anterior capsule was excised. Access to the elbow joint was obtained by retracting the biceps and brachialis anteriorly off of the capsule. A large window in the capsule was created over the capitellum and trochlea. The annular ligament was left intact distally. Four fracture states of the anterior distal humerus were assessed: type 1 Hahn-Steinthal fracture, type 2 Kocher-Lorenz fracture, a fracture extending to the trochlear groove, and a fracture comprising the entire anterior distal humerus ( Specific bony landmarks were digitized after testing was completed for each specimen, using a stylus mounted to an electromagnetic receiver. The position of the various landmarks in relation to each other was used to generate 3-dimensional coordinate systems for each bone, using a previously described series of algorithms. Each arm was put through an active flexion arc with the forearm pronated and supinated in vertical and valgus-loaded positions ( Two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance was performed, followed by post-hoc pair-wise comparisons using the Bonferroni correction. The independent variables of interest were the type of distal humeral excision and the effect of flexion angle. A separate analysis was done for each position (vertical and valgus) and each dependent variable. Dependent variables were valgus angulation and ulnar rotation during elbow flexion, and translation of the radial head with respect to the capitellum during forearm rotation. Significance was set at α = 0.05. All calculations were performed with SPSS 16.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). Two control states were tested: the fully intact elbow and the elbow after the anterior capsulectomy. For all motion pathways (both active flexion and passive forearm rotation), there was no significant difference between the 2 states ( Sequential excision of the distal humeral articular surface had a significant overall effect on valgus angulation during active flexion, leading to increased angulation with increased size of excision with the forearm in both pronation ( Progressive excision of the articular surface was associated with a significant increase in external ulnar rotation during active flexion with the forearm in pronation ( The excisions created a significant increase in valgus angulation with the forearm in pronation and supination ( Rotating the forearm from pronation into supination was associated with significantly increased posterior ( Rotation of the forearm from supination to pronation was associated with significantly increased posterior ( This cadaveric-based study quantified the effect of progressive excision of the distal humeral articular surface on elbow kinematics and stability in 6 degrees of freedom. The coronal and rotational plane ulnohumeral angulation and radiocapitellar translations are reported. With respect to the results for the coronal plane, excision of the capitellum did not produce a statistically significant increase in valgus angulation of the ulnohumeral joint, even with application of a valgus gravity stress. This suggests that the capitellum does not have an important role in maintaining stability of the ulnohumeral joint when all other stabilizers are intact at the loads used in the current study. However, with excision of the lateral trochlea, a significant increase in valgus angulation was seen; and with excision of the entire articular surface, varus angulation was also observed in the vertical position. These data indicate that all of the trochlea is important in maintaining coronal stability of the ulnohumeral joint, even if all the ligamentous and dynamic stabilizers of the elbow are intact. Few studies have attempted to evaluate the role of the capitellum in coronal plane elbow stability. Grantham et al Dushuttle et al The findings of the current study are consistent with the conclusions of both Grantham et al With respect to the results in the rotational plane, increased external rotation was seen for the Hahn-Steinthal and both trochlear lesions, although only the excisions involving the trochlea were statistically significant. The difference with excision of the whole trochlea was substantial (in the order of 10° greater than the intact elbows) by demonstrating the important role of the trochlea as a rotational stabilizer of the elbow, an observation which has not been previously reported in the literature. The translation of the radial head with respect to the capitellum increased with progressive excision of distal humeral articular surface. Only one other reported study has examined the translation of the radial head with respect to the capitellum, reporting that the native radial head normally translates anteriorly and laterally with pronation. This study did not evaluate the effect of sequential excision of the anterior distal humeral articular surface on contact stresses or load transfer across the radioulnar and ulnohumeral joints. Although our data have shown that the capitellum does not to contribute to stability of the ulnohumeral joint with other stabilizers intact, there are likely important biomechanical consequences of capitellar excision, similar to that reported for radial head excision. Increased joint contact forces at the remaining ulnohumeral articulation can be predicted, based on the reduction of articular surface area and the redistribution of load from the lateral column of the elbow. Some weaknesses exist in this study. The sample size was small (n = 8), but it was enough to detect major changes in kinematics between excisions. The clinical relevance of any smaller changes in joint kinematics and stability is questionable. In addition, we did not evaluate the role of the capitellum and trochlea in the setting of ligament insufficiency of the elbow. Similar to the radial head, it would be expected that the capitellum likely has a greater role in contributing to elbow stability in the setting of deficiency of the collateral ligaments. This is also an This study has revealed some important findings. The first is that the capitellum does not contribute significant stability to the ulnohumeral joint when all other stabilizers are intact. The second is that the trochlea is needed in its entirety to maintain normal kinematics, even when all other stabilizers are intact. The third is that the pattern of instability that results with loss of the lateral and medial trochlea is a complex pattern consisting of increased valgus angulation and increased ulnar external rotation at the ulnohumeral joint, and displacement of the radial head distally, posteriorly, and medially compared to an intact distal humerus. These findings have important clinical implications for the repair and reconstruction of coronal shear fractures, nonunions, and avascular necrosis of the distal humerus, but need to be corroborated by No author, their immediate family, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.   