We have prepared a novel 3D porous biomaterial combining poly (dl-lactic acid) (PDLLA) and graphene and multi-walled carbon nanotubes oxides (MWCNTO-GO) composite. PDLLA as control and a high loading of PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO (50/50 w/w) bioscaffolds were prepared and functionalized. MWCNTs were exfoliated to form MWCNTO-GO by oxygen plasma etching. The later was also applied to enhance the scaffolds wettability, attaching oxygen-containing groups on their surfaces. This approach produced a porous architecture observed by scanning electron microscopy and semi-quantified by electrochemical analysis. The later also indicated a notable increase on the conductivity of PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffold compared to MWCNTO-GO free PDLLA (about 5 orders of magnitudes at low frequencies). Thermogravimetric analysis showed that the MWCNTO-GO acted protecting the PDLLA matrix, enhancing its thermal stability. The PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds had significant cellular adhesion, did not present cytotoxicity effect, besides reduced bactericidal proliferation and produced mineralized tissues in SBF media. The metallic MWCNTO-GO powder held together by PDLLA polymer opens a whole new branch of applications, including bioelectroanalyses, drug delivery systems and tissue engineering.Poly (lactic acid) (PLA) is an aliphatic polyester that presents outstanding properties over other commons polymers/polyesters Many properties of PLA are governed by both the ratio of Despite the aforementioned qualities of PDLLA, this polyester presents some drawbacks for specific applications for tissue engineering that include high hydrophobicity, lack of conductivity and low mechanical properties. In order to overcome these limitations, combining PDLLA with carbon materials can enhance its wettability, thermal, mechanical and electrical properties The literature often shows MWCNTO or GO loadings ranging from 0.5 to 5 wt% depending on the solvents used ( In the last years, our group has reported on In literature polymeric osteoconductive scaffolds have been prepared by incorporating carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in conductive or non-conductive polymer Different types of scaffolds have been prepared loading up to 5 wt% of these carbon oxides in polymer matrices Undoubtedly, the association of PDLLA and carbon nanoparticles such as MWCNTO and GO surges as an alternative for tissue engineering applications and need more evidence of relationship between physical properties and biological response of them. Here, we present for the first time the production and characterization (thermal, electrical and wettability) of a novel 3D porous scaffold based on PDLLA with a high loading of MWCNTO-GO (50/50 w/w). We produce and exfoliated MWCNT to form MWCNTO-GO composite. The exfoliated and oxidize MWCNT have a high aspect ratio and expose many graphene oxide edges at the tip. The MWCNTO-GO powder is highly dispersible in PDLLA and at high loading creates an interconnect network, which is the main reason for enhancements in the thermal and electrical properties and further biological activity. All chemicals used in this work were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, unless a different source is mentioned. PDLLA [Purasorb PDLLA pellets were dissolved in chloroform (10% w/v) under magnetic stirring for 120 min at room temperature. For PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO preparation, 50% w/w of MWCNTO-GO powder was dispersed in PDLLA (10% w/v in chloroform) solution under ultrasound irradiation of ∼1200 J mL In order to evaluate and monitor the morphology, micrographs were taken using a field emission SEM (JEOL6330 and FEI Inspect F50). The samples were previously coated with a thin gold film to improve analysis. A standard three-electrode cell configuration was set up to evaluate the room temperature electrochemical performance of the electrodes controlled by a potentiostat (Autolab PGSTAT302N). The PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds were characterized by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). An electrical contact with the working electrodes was made at the top of the samples using silver paint and copper wire, which was sealed by epoxy resin carefully to avoid epoxy spreading. High-purity platinum mesh and Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) were employed as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. All electrochemical experiments were carried out exposing a constant geometric area of 0.03 cm A Krüss Easy Drop (DSA 100S) system in sessile drop mode was used to measure the contact angle (CA) using high-purity deionized water and diiodomethane at room temperature, providing information about the wettability of samples. The wettability measurement was performed in triplicate for each sample. After measuring the CA, the surface energy on each sample group was calculated as proposed by Owens and co-workers The interfacial free energy of adhesion is determined by the following equation The thermal behavior of 5–10 mg of each sample was studied by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a DSC Q100 (TA instruments, USA) and by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a STA 449 F1 Jupiter (Netzsch, Germany). The heating was performed from 25 to 200 °C, at 10 °C min From the DSC curves, the crystallinity (%C) was calculated based on the heat of melting using the following equation: From the DSC curves, the amount of residual solvent (when present) was calculated from: Regarding cell culture and adhesion assays, L-929 mouse fibroblasts cells were provided by Cell Line Bank at Rio de Janeiro (CR019). The cells were maintained as sub-confluent monolayers in minimum essential medium with 1.5 mM All the samples (square 5 mm × 5 mm × 1 mm) were sterilized for 1 h under UV irradiation and placed in individual wells of 24-well culture plates. The cells were seeded in each well at a concentration of 5 × 10 After the incubation time, the scaffolds were removed from their respective wells. After this, the cells adhered to the well were incubated with 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) solution (Sigma) for 4 h at 37 °C. The absorbance of the content of each well was measured at 570 nm with a 24-well microplate reader on a spectrophotometer (Spectra Count, Packard). The statistical differences were analyzed using the Anova-Tukey (Origin The PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds samples were placed in individual wells of 24-well culture plates, and seeded the cell in each well at a concentration of 5 × 10 The morphology of the L-929 mouse fibroblasts on the PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO was evaluated by mapping the surface of the samples using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The cells were attached onto the substrate using a 3% glutaraldehyde/0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 1 h and dehydrated in a graded ethanol solution series (30%, 50%, 70%, 95%, and 100%) for 10 min each. A 1:1 solution of ethanol with hexamethyldisilazane at room temperature was used for drying. Finally, samples were coated with a thin gold film to improve the SEM analysis. Results were expressed as mean ± standard deviations. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software version 5.0, San Diego, CA, USA). Statistical comparisons were carried out using Student's t-test. Differences were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05. The bactericidal activity of PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds were determined using Gentamicin (10 mg mL The PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds were immersed in SBF solution ((5×), pH = 6.1) for up to 14 days in order to evaluate the mineralization process  CV and EIS techniques were carried out to identify the electrical conductive behavior of PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds. Further evidence of the electroactive nature of the PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffold is illustrated by the electrochemical impedance spectra. The electrochemistry response presented in  The TG curves [ These TG results clearly confirmed that the MWCNTO-GO acted thermally protecting the PDLLA matrix. While the PDLLA scaffold had a mass loss of 86.2% up to 410 °C, the PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds presented a loss of only 11.3% up to 465 °C. Considering that the nanocomposite is 50% PDLLA, we should have observed a mass loss of roughly ∼40% (up to 410 °C). The small mass loss up to 260 °C for the PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds can be probably attributed to the thermal decomposition of smaller PDLLA chains generated due to the action of the ultrasound irradiation on the polymers chains during the MWCNTO-GO dispersion. Moreover, the presence of metallic residues in CNTs could have been responsible for catalyzing polymer degradation.  The second endothermic peak, which is composed of a main peak at 149.3 °C and a shoulder at 155.1 °C, corresponds to the melting endotherm of PDLLA. Each melting temperature represents a different population of crystals, which in the case of a copolymer can be formed by long sequences of each monomer The increase in T It is well established that crystallinity has a great effect on the degradation rate of aliphatic polyesters since it determines how easily the water molecules can access and cleavage the ester linkages. Thus, the initial degradation of semicrystalline polymers is initiated mostly in the amorphous regions, which are essentially composed of macromolecules segments loosely packed, and therefore easily accessed by water molecules In addition to conductivities, the ability to transfer electrons across the interface scaffold/biological electrolytes also depends on the hydrophilicity of the biomaterials. The hydrophilicity of PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO scaffolds were analyzed in To address the cell viability, L-929 cells were cultivated during 24 h on the top of each scaffold and results are depicted in The cells had organized in a cellular monolayer on PDLLA (  Besides cell viable, the optimal scaffold should inhibit bacterial growth on surface and promoting cell adhesion. In separate assays, we exposed both scaffolds to two different bacteria classes ( Several authors reported the bactericidal activity of graphene nanoparticles For a more complete set of The apatite formations on both samples were evaluated and In agreement with FTIR results, the XRD patterns of both PDLLA and PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO bioscaffolds before and after the 14 days of biomineralization are presented in The mineralization process is accelerated by immersing samples in saturated buffer solution SBF (5×) at pH 7.4 The Ca We have presented a novel approach for producing 3D polymeric porous scaffolds with high loading of composite of graphene and MWCNT oxides (MWCNTO-GO). Our results demonstrated that PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO (50/50 w/w) scaffolds could be successfully prepared and the final material presented improved wettability, enhanced electrical and thermal properties and porous structure. Biological evaluation pointed out cell adhesion while bactericidal assays demonstrated its bactericidal activity. The novel PDLLA/MWCNTO-GO biomaterial was immersed in SBF and showed bioactivity by forming a bioceramic layer after 14 days. An ongoing investigation is focusing on the use of this novel scaffold for The authors would like to thank