A large-scale molecular model for Illinois No. 6 Argonne Premium coal is generated based on an automated construction approach in an effort to move toward capturing the continuum structure. The model contains 50,789atoms within 728 molecules and is the largest, most complex coal representation constructed to-date. The aromatic ring size distribution was based on multiple high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) lattice fringe micrographs and was duplicated with automated construction protocols (Fringe3D) in molecular modeling space. Additional structural data was obtained from the abundant literature assessing this Argonne Premium coal. Organic oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur functionalities were incorporated primarily into the polyaromatic structures according to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and X-ray adsorption near-edge structure spectroscopy data. Aliphatic carbons were in the form of cross-links (bridges and loops) and pendant alkyl groups based on the combination of laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (LDIMS), ruthenium ion catalyzed oxidation, elemental analysis, and NMR data in good agreement with the literature. Bound and bulk water was also included. Construction of the coal molecules was performed by use of Perl scripts developed in Materials Studio to eliminate personal bias and improve the accuracy and the scale of the structure generated. The large-scale model captured a broad and continuous molecular weight distribution in accordance with LDIMS data here ranging from 100 to 2850Da, enabling inclusion of structural diversity to capture a portion of the continuum structure. A theoretical pyridine extraction yield, determined by a group contribution approach, was in agreement with the experimental value. The extract and residue representations were generated from the large-scale Illinois coal model and showed consistency with NMR, elemental analysis and LDIMS trends. The distribution of heteroatomic classes and double bond equivalents was also well-defined experimentally based on electrospray ionization Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. These data further constrain the molecular weight of extractable material and was consistent with limited pyridine extractability and model heteroatom classes. Future work will be well served by staying within the limits established by the approach and increasing the structural diversity (sampling frequency through increased scale) to better capture the complex nature of coal structural diversity, i.e., the continuum.The Argonne Premium coals have been extensively studied since being available in 1985 Advances in analytical techniques, molecular modeling approaches and computational power have permitted construction of improved molecular representations of coal structure. Molecular models provide insightful information at atomistic scales that could contribute to improved structure and behavior relationships for coal. According to Mathews and Chaffee more than 134 structural representations of coal exist Incorporation of structural diversity requires large-scale coal molecular models. The Narkiewicz and Mathews However, all of these previous large-scale models were constructed mostly by-hand (prior to minimization), which limits the scale and severely limits the access of quality coal models for use in the coal research community. Recently, a structure generation approach (Fringe3D) based on HRTEM lattice fringe images has allowed direct inclusion of aromatic stacking and alignment of aromatic moieties in the model space Individual maceral fractions exhibit distinct chemical properties Illinois No. 6 high-volatile bituminous coal is vitrinite-rich (85%, dmmf) with a normalized elemental composition of C  The objective of this work is to implement an automated model construction approach based on analytical data that enables inclusion of structural diversity resulting in making progress toward capturing the continuum of the coal structure and thus better enabling appropriate behavioral observations. The proposed computational protocol is demonstrated with the Illinois No. 6 Argonne Premium coal. Additionally, negative-ion ESI FT-ICR MS was utilized to further characterize the pyridine extract to capture the diversity in heteroatoms, most specifically oxygen-containing species. Direct determination of elemental composition is enabled by accurate mass measurement (100–400 Eighty mL of HPLC grade pyridine Sigma–Aldrich Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO) was added to the contents of an ampoule (4.538 Illinois No. 6 pyridine extracts were analyzed with a custom-built FT-ICR mass spectrometer housed at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, and equipped with a 9.4 Tesla horizontal 220 The construction of the coal molecular model consisted of: (1) HRTEM lattice fringe image analysis, (2) construction of the aromatic clusters (benzene to large PAH molecules), (3) inclusion of heteroatoms and functional groups, (4) addition of aliphatic side chains and generation of a cross-linked network structure, and (5) arrangement of cross-linked clusters into a simulation cell. Implementation of an automated construction protocol via Fringe3D and Perl scripts was necessary due to the great structural diversity of the Illinois No. 6 coal. This procedure enabled simplifying the model construction process, eliminating researcher structural bias and generating large-scale continuum molecular representations with improved accuracy. Image Processing Toolkit HRTEM has been used for structural characterization of coal-derived materials producing structural results in agreement with XRD and The Fringe3D Five-member rings were incorporated into the coal structure via named molecules such as fluorene and indene ( An important structural parameter determined from NMR experiments was the fraction of bridgehead carbons. This parameter is assigned to non-protonated aromatic carbon bonded to other non-protonated aromatic carbon and provides an indication of the portion of aromatic carbons polycondensed. To decrease the bridgehead carbons value to that of experimental NMR data, a trimming procedure was performed on parallelogram-shaped structures of 3 Organic sulfur forms were added to the aromatic structures according to XANES data by George et al. During the model construction process, sulfur, nitrogen and oxygen heteroatoms were incorporated within the aromatic ring structures or as surface functional groups by selecting specific atoms with a random-number generator and then replacing them by the appropriate functionalities. In particular, aromatic hydrogen atoms were randomly replaced by phenolic, carbonyl, carboxyl and aromatic sulfur groups, whereas aromatic carbons in 5- and 6-membered rings were randomly substituted for heteroatoms to generate furanic, thiophenic and pyrrolic type structures, and pyridinic and quaternary nitrogen, respectively. Phenolics were added in excess to account for aromatic ethers created during cross-linking formation, as described in Section The coal model was constructed according to the distribution of pendant alkyl groups obtained by Obeng and Stock Generation of the cross-linked network structure was based on the approach proposed by Mathews et al. To covalently bond aromatic structures in a cross-linked cluster, PAH molecules were minimized and randomly placed in a rectangular cell by use of Materials Studio Amorphous Cell module The cross-linked and non-cross-linked molecules were assembled into 3D molecular model by use of the Theodorou and Suter Several Perl scripts within Material Studio were further developed from previous work The physical evaluation of the coal molecular model comprised determination of simulated helium density, pore size distribution, interlayer spacing, aromatic cluster size, and number of layers per stack. The simulated helium density was calculated from the molar mass and the volume of the coal structure. The latter is the volume not accessible to helium atoms (kinetic radius of 1.29 While earlier modeling efforts are elucidations requiring comparison and reduction of error between model and data, here our construction protocol starts with an aromatic base and simply add the correct type and distribution of heteroatoms and aliphatics. As such we use an approach that far more efficient but lacks the traditional validation approaches that commonly occur in smaller-scale atomistic representations. Validation of the model occurs with evaluation and behavior in multiple aspects of coal science. Hence to permit this approach and to further the range of simulations that can be evaluated the Illinois coal molecular model (pdb format) is available through the During model construction process, elemental composition, NMR parameters, molecular weight distribution and simulated helium density were adjusted to agree with the available experimental data. However, evaluation of the pore size distribution, interlayer spacing, stacking number, pyridine extraction yield, distribution of DBE numbers and heteroatom classes, and van Krevelen diagrams are regarded as a test of the model since these parameters were not controlled during model construction. The aromatic fringe distribution based on the structural assignment is listed in A total of 1589 polyaromatic structures were generated by Fringe3D in a highly automated manner, capturing the distribution of molecular sizes for the aromatic portion of the coal structure. The PAH structures were constructed in order of size in a flat arrangement ( This coal model has components capturing the two-phase model for coal, which consists of a covalently bound cross-linked network (immobile phase) and low molecular weight compounds (mobile phase) physically trapped within macromolecular networks The chemical evaluation of the coal structure comprised elemental analysis, NMR parameters, and molecular weight distribution calculations. The elemental composition, normalized to 100 carbon atoms for the proposed coal model is C The coal model exhibited a broad and continuous molecular weight distribution ranging from 100 to 2850 The physical structure of the coal model was characterized in terms of simulated helium density, pore size distribution and volume shrinkage, as described in Section  Theoretical solvent extraction yield calculations were performed to evaluate the capability of the coal model in predicting behavioral observations. Solubility parameters were used to estimate the mass fraction of the coal model that could be theoretically extracted by a specific solvent. Solubility parameters were computed as described in Section The distribution of heteroatoms and alkyl groups for the coal model and its respective pyridine extract and residue models indicated that the pyridine extract model contained high percentages of pyrrolic nitrogen and phenolic groups. Quaternary nitrogen and long linear alkanes were more prevalent in the pyridine residue model, presumably due to quaternary nitrogen atoms were mainly located in less-soluble, large structural entities, and because the calculated NMR parameters were also calculated for the pyridine extract and residue models and the corresponding results are listed in The molecular weight distributions for the pyridine extract and residue models were also determined, as shown in To further evaluate the current coal model, the elemental composition for each molecule was determined and then used to sort them by compound heteroatom class (numbers of N, O and S atoms) and type (double bond equivalents). The distribution of DBE values for coal model and their respective pyridine extract and residue models are shown in The distribution of the most abundant heteroatomic classes found in the coal model and its pyridine extract and residue models was calculated as shown in  Compositional analyses of Illinois No. 6 coal pyridine extract were performed by negative-ion ESI FT-ICR MS and the results are presented in An automated construction protocol was applied to construct a large-scale model for Illinois No. 6 Argonne Premium coal based on the available structural data. HRTEM lattice fringe micrographs were used to determine the aromatic fringe size distribution. Organic sulfur, oxygen and nitrogen heteroatom types and distributions were added to the aromatic structures according to X-ray adsorption near-edge structure spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy data. Incorporation of aliphatic structures was conducted in the form of cross-links (bridges and loops) and alkyl side chains based on laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (LDIMS), ruthenium ion catalyzed oxidation, bulk elemental analysis, and NMR data. Fringe3D in conjunction with Perl scripts created within Materials Studio were utilized to facilitate the model construction process, remove investigator bias, and generate large-scale representations with improved accuracy and structural diversity. The constructed model exhibited a wide and continuous molecular weight distribution ranging from 100 to 2850 Agreement between model and experimental chemical and physical structural parameters validated the automated model construction protocol. Chemical parameters included elemental composition, NMR parameters, and molecular weight distribution; whereas physical parameters comprised simulated helium density, micropore size distribution, interlayer spacing, average layer length, and average number of layers per stack. Pyridine extract and residue molecular representations constructed from the large-scale Illinois coal model based on theoretical solvent extraction yields were consistent with NMR, elemental analysis, and LDIMS trends. In addition, double bond equivalents distribution and heteroatom class (numbers of N, O, and S atoms) distribution derived from the coal model captured 1% of the structural diversity determined by electrospray ionization Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry. Increasing the model scale should result in improving the molecular weight diversity and structural diversity to better capture the continuum of structural features. Inclusion of macro and mesopores (concurrent with an increase in model scale), maceral groups, and mineral matter will further help generate yet more accurate and realistic structural models. Future modeling efforts should incorporate these factors. This Illinois No. 6 coal model based on various analytical structural data is the first molecular representation that captures a broad range of structural features including aromatic, aliphatic, heteroatom, and moisture components in a 3D cross-linked network. Incorporation of these features and their distribution generates state-of-the-art coal atomistic representations. This approach will better enable the coal model to be used in simulation studies that investigate the structure–property and structure–behavior relationships in coal chemistry processes such as liquefaction, CO This project was funded by the Illinois Clean Coal Institute with funds made available through the Office of Coal Development of the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, NSF Division of Materials Research through DMR-06-54118, and the State of Florida. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 