Mica and talc have wide areas of application as a raw material in a number of industrial branches. Mechanically activated mica has specific applications such as: capacitors, insulators, and pearlescent pigments. Talc is widely used as either a basic raw material or as filler. This paper presents a comparative analysis of mechanically activated samples of mica and talc in ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator “Retsch ZM-1”. The following mechano-activator parameters were variable: number of rotor revolutions (rpm); sieve mesh size (μm); current intensity (A). In addition, the following parameters were monitored: duration of mechanical activation, t (min); circumferential rotor speed, v (m/s); capacity of mechano-activator, Q (kg/h); and specific energy consumption, W
                     e (kWh/t). It was observed that effect of mechanical activation of mica and talc increased with an increase of the load and rotor revolution of ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator. Both mica and talc were successfully treated by mechanical activation procedure. In the processing of mica, mechanical activation is suggested to be applied as a post-treatment, and in the talc processing as a pre-treatment, as the high quality talc is obtained by means of hydrometallurgical concentration method.Mechanically activated mica and talc in the ultra-fine powdery form have wide application spectra as raw materials used in the manufacturing of various industrial products such as capacitors, insulators, plastic fillers and pearlescent pigments. Mica is often used as filler in the synthesis of various materials with the special accent on production of the ‘smart’ materials Grinding, a common industrial procedure, and sonication treatments can change starting characteristics of treated material, however in this research special attention was paid to the comparison and evaluation of the changes occurring during talc and mica processing in ultra-fine grinders (mechano-activators). The mechano-activation treatment might promote: the amorphization of treated material, noticeable change of the microstructure, size and shape of particles, etc. Furthermore, ultra-fine grinding kinetic investigation indicates the mechano-chemical reduction of the original particles of talc/mica which appears to have reached a limit at 30 Even though ultra-fine grinding might appear as an expensive process due to low mill capacity and high energy consumption, there are many studies which prove the benefits of the mechanical activation process on the structural and physico-chemical properties of a material: Baudet et al. The mica (KAl The physico-chemical characteristics for both mica and talc samples were determined by means of the standard laboratory procedures. The following results were achieved: density (according to Standard SRPS EN 725-8:2010 The preparation of mineral samples usually implies the reduction of their particle size, as preparation for the subsequent mechanical activation procedure. However, the mica sample was composed of fine particles, thus it was directly subjected to mechanical activation. On the other hand, the talc sample consisted of coarse particles; therefore the particle reduction was necessary. Comminuting of talc samples was performed by crushing and afterwards grinding to the particle size that could be used as input for mechanical activation procedure. Primary crushing of talc sample was carried out in a jaw crusher with 10 The mica and talc samples particle size distribution used as an input for mechanical activation procedure is shown in Ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator “Retsch ZM-1” was used in the investigation of the mechanical activation and improvement of the material reactivity. The original mica sample and the ground sample of talc were subjected to quantitative characterization. Physical characterizations of both samples were determined by means of the coulter counter: Coulter Electronics-Coulter Multisizer. The differential thermal analysis (DTA) of samples was performed with a Shimadzu DTA-50 apparatus. Approximately 30 The experiments concerning mechanical activation were based on the grinding kinetic model. The obtained results were described by Rosin-Ramler graph – exponential function and equation (Eq. In all of the series of mechanical activation experiments, the following operational parameters of mechano-activator were variable: number of rotor revolutions, (rpm); sieve mesh size, (μm); and current intensity, (A). During mechanical activation the following parameters were monitored: mechanical activation time, In order to achieve high quality talc with low iron content (Fe Mechanical activation by means of ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator was performed on mica and talc samples in four series (mesh size being 80, 120, 200 and 500 The kinetic experiments of mechanical activation were carried out in four series (I–IV), separately for each sample. The assessment of mechanical activation of mica and talc is based on the results given in It was noticed that technological parameters (duration of mechano-activation procedure; circumferential rotor speed, capacity and energy consumption) were changing with the increasing of the mechano-activator load both for mica and talc ( Achieved experimental results of mechanical activation were observed trough the following parameters: The increase of the values of parameter ( The experimental results of the mechanical activation of both mica and talc are explained by parameter ( After comparison of the diagrams given in Following the same calculation, now using results from As in the case of mica samples, the best results of talc mechano-activation are obtained for 80 In order to explain the influence of mechano-activation on the structure and characteristics of mica and talc and to confirm results obtained during mechanical activation, specific analyses were performed before and after activation procedure: differential thermal analysis (DTA); X-ray powder diffraction analysis (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Thermal characteristics of the processes taking place during mica thermal treatment from 20 to 1100 Results of DTA presented in Mineralogical phase changes as well as the variations in crystallinity occurring in mica and talc samples were tracked by means of XRD analysis. In From The results of XRD analyses of talc samples before and after mechanical activation are given in It can be concluded that mechanical activation influences the crystal structure of both minerals – talc and mica, i.e. level of crystallinity decreased with increasing mechano-activation time. Namely, mechanical activation makes the structure disordered and generates crystal lattice defects or other meta-stable forms, as it was also proved by Balaz and Achimovicová In The shape of original talc particles is normally rounded, but slightly elongated as it was shown by Yekeler et al. The SEM analysis of mica and talc samples did not reveal any sign of particle size increase or particles agglomeration, thus it can be concluded that 30 After successfully conducted mechanical activation on the samples of both minerals – mica and talc it was concluded that in the processing of mica mechanical activation should be applied as a post-treatment, while in the talc processing mechanical activation should be conducted as a pre-treatment. Namely, the high quality talc can be obtained only by means of hydrometallurgical concentration method. This, the mechanically activated talc sample was additionally subjected to leaching by hydrochloric acid. The talc sample had the following characteristics: The comparative testing and detailed investigation of the kinetics of mechanical activation procedure by means of ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator applied to the mica and talc samples, as well as the analyses of the characteristics of non-activated and activated samples of both talc and mica led to the following conclusions: In accordance with the Rosin–Ramler diagram and the mathematical equation for the average grain size ( The mechanical activation rate, as the main characteristic of mechano-activation kinetics, increased with increasing sieve mesh size, rate of revolutions and load of the ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator. The best results were obtained with a nominal mechano-activator load and for 80 Reduction of the original particles of both talc and mica conducted by mechanical activation procedure appeared to have reached a limit at approximately 30 The increase of the parameter ( After analyzing DTA curves of both talc and mica samples (before and after activation) it was concluded that signs of melting (apparition of glassy phases) of neither of investigated minerals was not recorded up to the temperature 1100 X-ray analyses of non-activated and activated mica and talc samples confirmed that mechanical activation contributes to the decreasing of crystallinity. The mechano-activation treatment promotes amorphization of mineral, microstructural changes, and changes in size and shape of minerals particles. Activated mica particles are characterized by a pseudo hexagonal crystal form and layered structure as it was proved by scanning electron microscopy. Due to mica starting specific mineralogical and mechanical properties, the particles are easily mechanically activated by ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator, which makes them applicable in a wide variety of industrial advanced materials. Mechanically activated mica is most commonly used as filler in industrial application. Originally rounded and elongated talc particles of various sizes were also easily activated by ultra-centrifugal mechano-activator, giving then angular shape, semi-layered structure and relatively uniform size distribution. As such the talc particles were well-prepared for subsequent leaching treatment applied to ensure the high quality of the material. Mmechano-activation of talc represented an initial step for hydrometallurgical treatment, which together represents a new approach for obtaining high-grade talc concentrate for application as a raw material for the production of various industrial products. The SEM analysis of mica and talc samples did not reveal any sign of particle size increase or particles agglomeration which confirms that 30 Mica and talc were successfully treated by mechanical activation procedure. In the processing of mica minerals, mechanical activation was applied as a post-treatment method, while in the case of talc mineral processing, mechanical activation process was applied as pre-treatment. Even though mechanical activation procedure might appear as an expensive process due to low mill capacity and high energy consumption, activated products have advanced characteristics which open entirely new spectra of their industrial applications. Also, activated minerals significantly improve the performances of standard products in which they are used as raw material. This investigation was supported and funded by the Ministry of Education and the Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia and it was conducted under the Projects: 33007, 34006, 172057 and 45008.