In the last decade, the porous hydroxyapatite (HAP) scaffold has been investigated for the application in tissue engineering owing to its good bioactivity and high biocompatibility. In this work, the dopamine-modified highly porous hydroxyapatite microtube three-dimensional (3-D) networks with efficient near-infrared photothermal effect, enhanced protein adsorption and mineralization performance have been prepared through a facile method. The dopamine-modified highly porous HAP networks exhibit ultrahigh porosity (90.6%), uniform pore distribution, interconnected pore structure and outstanding mechanical properties. After being modified with dopamine, the protein adsorption amount, cell attachment performance, and mineralization ability of the dopamine-modified highly porous HAP network can be greatly improved. In addition, the as-prepared dopamine-modified highly porous HAP networks exhibit good biocompatibility, excellent near-infrared photothermal effect, and good mechanical properties. The experimental results indicate that the dopamine-modified highly porous HAP networks are promising for various applications.Bone tissue engineering has been paid more and more attention in the last decade owing to its successful application in repair and regeneration of bone defects resulting from trauma, tumor and aging, etc. Surface modification has been demonstrated to be an effective way to increase the reactive sites of materials. In recent years, the mussel-inspired surface modification has been one of the hot topics because the modification process is facile and does not need any complex linking agent In this work, the dopamine-modified highly porous hydroxyapatite microtube three-dimensional (3-D) networks with high biocompatibility, efficient near-infrared photothermal effect, enhanced protein adsorption and mineralization performance have been prepared through a facile method. The HAP microtubes play an important role in the fabrication of the highly porous dopamine-modified HAP microtube 3-D networks, the good mechanical properties and tubular structure of HAP microtubes endow the dopamine-modified HAP microtube 3-D networks with high porosity and high stability. The porosity, mechanical properties, protein adsorption, cell attachment, mineralization, biocompatibility and near-infrared photothermal property of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube 3-D networks were investigated. The dopamine-modified highly porous HAP microtube networks exhibit ultrahigh porosity (90.6%), uniform pore distribution, interconnected pore structure and excellent mechanical properties. The as-prepared dopamine-modified highly porous HAP networks have enhanced protein adsorption, cell attachment performance, and mineralization ability. The experimental results indicate that the dopamine-modified highly porous HAP networks are promising for various applications such as bone defect repair. Anhydrous calcium chloride (CaCl HAP microtubes were prepared by the solvothermal method The highly porous HAP microtube 3-D networks were prepared by a combined method of freeze drying and sintering. Typically, 2 The dopamine-modified highly porous HAP microtube 3-D networks were fabricated as follows: 50 The effect of the surface modification by dopamine on the protein adsorption ability of the HAP microtube networks was investigated. Hemoglobin aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving a certain amount of hemoglobin into deionized water, the undissolved hemoglobin was collected and weighed, and the concentration of the hemoglobin aqueous solution was calculated, finally, the original hemoglobin aqueous solution was diluted into different concentrations. Typically, one piece of dopamine-modified HAP microtube network (about 35 The effect of the surface modification by dopamine on the mineralization ability of the HAP microtube network was investigated. The 1.5 The MC-3T3 osteoblast cells were used in the experiments. For the cell attachment tests, the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network was put into 75% ethanol aqueous solution and exposed to ultraviolet light overnight. Each piece of the sterilized dopamine-modified HAP microtube network was put into one well of a 24-well plate, and was washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) two times to remove the residual ethanol. When the PBS solution was removed, 1 The morphology of the MC-3T3 osteoblast cells cultured with the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network for 3 In order to investigate the photothermal performance of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network, one piece of dopamine-modified HAP microtube network was put into one well of a 24-well plate, and 1 Bone sarcoma MG63 cells were cultured in a 24-well plate with dopamine-modified HAP microtube network for 1 We had also evaluated the photothermal cytotoxicity of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network quantitatively. MG63 cells (10 The dopamine-modified HAP microtube networks were characterized using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max 2550 All data were expressed as mean The morphology of the as-prepared HAP microtubes was characterized by SEM and TEM. As shown in Highly porous HAP microtube 3-D networks with ultrahigh porosity, interconnected pores and uniform pore distribution are prepared using HAP microtubes as the building blocks by a combined method of freeze drying and sintering, and then the highly porous dopamine-modified HAP microtube 3-D networks are fabricated by surface modification. The typical preparation process is illustrated in Scheme S1 in the Supporting information. In order to form a uniform layer of polydopamine on the surface of the HAP microtube networks, the surface modification with dopamine for different times were investigated. As shown in The amount of polydopamine formed on the HAP microtube network was analyzed by thermogravimetric (TG) analysis. The TG curves of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube networks and the HAP microtube network without surface modification are shown in  The effects of surface modification process on pore size, pore distribution, porosity, and density of the HAP microtube network are not obvious, as shown in Although the porosity of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network is as high as 90.6%, the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network still has good mechanical properties. As shown in The effect of surface modification by dopamine on the protein adsorption of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube networks was investigated, and the experimental results are shown in Generally, protein adsorption is based on van der Waals, electrostatic interaction, hydrophobic interaction The effect of surface modification on the mineralization ability of the HAP microtube networks was also investigated, and the experimental results are shown in Moreover, the cell attachment performance of the HAP microtube network can also be significantly improved by the surface modification with dopamine. The HAP microtube network and the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network were cultured with MC-3T3 osteoblast cells for different times, and the cells adhered on the HAP microtube network and the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network were characterized by the alamarBlue  Moreover, the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network shows a good photothermal performance, as shown in Due to its excellent photothermal performance, the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network may be used in photothermal therapy to kill cancer cells. In this work, bone sarcoma MG63 cells were used as the model cell to investigate the photothermal cytotoxicity of the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network. MG63 cells were cultured in a 24-well plate with the dopamine-modified HAP microtube network for 1 In this work, ultralight, highly porous, mechanically strong dopamine-modified HAP microtube 3-D network with excellent photothermal effect, uniform pore distribution and highly interconnected pore structure has been fabricated through a facile method. The dopamine-modified HAP microtube network exhibits ultrahigh porosity (90.6%), ultralow density (280.5 The financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: