For a thermally sprayed coating, a strong adhesion between the coating and the substrate is critical for its service performance. Furthermore, the adhesion between the coating and the substrate is mainly controlled by the splat-substrate adhesion. Therefore, enhancing the splat-substrate adhesion is important for the preparation and application of thermally sprayed coating. In the present work, individual cast iron splats were deposited on polished aluminium surfaces by atmospheric plasma spraying technique (APS) with varying plasma arc powers and spray distances. After spraying, the splat-substrate interfacial structure was examined by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). The effects of the arc power and spray distance on the morphology of the splats were studied. It was found that high arc power promoted splat-substrate adhesion by elevating the temperature and velocity of the impinging particles compared to low arc power. Moreover, a short spray distance promoted splat-substrate adhesion due to the heating of the substrate surface by the plasma jet and the high impinging velocity of the particles compared to a long spray distance.To meet the requirements for global energy conservation and emission reduction in the automotive industry, reducing the weight of the car has become the main approach Due to high wear resistance and inexpensive costs in both material and preparation, plasma-sprayed cast iron coatings have been used as a prime candidate for surface protective coatings A thermally sprayed coating is built up by a stream of molten droplets. The individual droplet forms a splat through the processes of impacting, flattening, rapid solidification and cooling. During spraying, the deposition behaviour of a single droplet is nearly independent of the impingement of forthcoming droplets It is well known that a typical mechanical adhesion through the interlocking effect between the splat and the substrate is the main adhesion mode for the coatings deposited on a substrate at room temperature. For these coatings, it was suggested that optimized microstructure and improved properties can be obtained by controlling the state of impacting particles Based on the aforementioned facts, in this work, to examine the effect of spray parameters on splat-substrate adhesion, polished aluminium substrates were used to eliminate the effect of initial substrate roughness. Then, individual cast iron splats were plasma-sprayed on the substrate surfaces kept at room temperature. The effects of both the arc power and the spray distance on the splat-substrate adhesion were investigated. Commercially available Fe-4.1C-1.5Si-1.5B-36.6Cr (all compositions in percentage weight) powder (DG. Fe-05, Chengdu Daguang Thermal Spraying Materials Co., Ltd., China) was used as the starting powder. The powder consists of spherical particles with a size range from 20 to 75 Before spraying, all aluminium disks were mirror-polished until their surface roughness ( During spraying, the pressures of Ar and H After spraying, the surfaces of the splats were covered by epoxy adhesives (E-7, Shanghai Research Institute of Synthetic Resins, Shanghai, China) to avoid the separation of the splat from the substrate during subsequent cross-sectional grinding and polishing of the specimens. The E-7 epoxy covering layer was fabricated using a doctor blade under ambient condition with a mould of ultra-thin aluminium foil (6 Finally, the mounted specimens were ground and polished to obtain cross-sectional specimens for observation. The cross-sectional structures of the splats deposited under different conditions were observed by a commercial FESEM (S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS, EX-250, Horiba, Japan). Furthermore, to study the effect of the plasma jet on the surface geometry of the aluminium substrate during spraying, the surface roughness of the substrates after spraying was also measured by the same roughmeter used before spraying. This measurement was repeated six times at the locations near the deposited splats.  To further characterize the splat-substrate interfacial adhesion state, cross-sectional EDS line scan tests of S3 and S4 were conducted, as shown in The EDS line scan of S3 shows several organic inclusions the splat and the substrate. However, few organic inclusions exist at the splat-substrate interface in S4. In the heating and heat preservation of the hot-mounting process, the compacted phenolic moulding powders become a more compacted bulk through the sintering reaction. During the cooling process, large stresses are produced in the compacted phenolic bulk and the splat-substrate interface due to the shrinkage effect. When the splat-substrate adhesion is extremely weak, the splat will easily be separated from the substrate under shrinkage stresses during the mounting process, as shown in Undoubtedly, the interfacial structure shown in From The temperature and velocity of an impinging particle are two important factors affecting the splat-substrate adhesion. Apparently, the high temperature of an impinging molten particle benefits its spreading. The reason is that the high temperature lowers the kinetic viscosity of the spreading melt, which improves the spreading. Moreover, the high velocity of an impinging molten particle also contributes to its spreading due to the large kinetic energy of the impinging particle. It was suggested that the shape, morphology and splashing behaviour of a single splat deposited on a polished surface were mainly influenced by the in-flight velocity of the impinging particles; in-flight temperature was a secondary factor influencing mainly the extent of splashing of the individual splat Generally, the temperature and velocity of the plasma jet increase with increasing arc power and decreasing spray distance Furthermore, the high velocity of the impact particles, resulting from raised arc power and reduced spray distance, causes a large pressure upon impact and consequently contributes to the perfect particle-substrate contact, which benefits the splat-substrate adhesion. Likewise, elevating the temperature of the impact particle, also resulting from raised arc power and reduced spray distance, increases the interface temperature between the splat and the substrate During the spraying process, there is an inverse relationship between the heating temperature and the residence time of the in-flight particles in the plasma jet, because higher heating temperature causes the higher velocity of the in-flight particles, i.e., shorter residence time. Naturally, it is very difficult to realize a substantial rise in the temperature of the impact particles. Although the high velocity of the impact particles contributes to the splat-substrate adhesion through the increased impact pressure, it may lead to the splashing of the spreading molten particles due to the intensity of the flow. This means that it is difficult to drastically improve the splat-substrate adhesion by changing the in-flight particle states (temperature and velocity). As a matter of fact, the splat-substrate adhesion is determined not only by the state of the impinging particles, but also by the surface state of the substrate, including surface temperature More specifically, excellent splat-substrate adhesion is determined by close contact between the spreading droplet and the substrate surface, which is based on the wettability of the molten droplet on the substrate surface. In the present work, with the increase in arc power and decrease in spray distance, the heating effect imposed by the plasma jet on the substrate surface intensified due to the elevated temperature of the plasma jet Moreover, during deposition, the heating effect of the plasma jet also caused the oxidation of the substrate surface. It is easy to understand that a dense oxidation film will form rapidly on the polished surface of aluminium at ambient temperature due to the high chemical reactivity of aluminium to oxygen. During the rapid heating by the plasma jet, large stresses resulting from the large difference in the thermal expansion coefficients of the oxidation film and aluminium substrate ruptures the oxidation film to expose the clean surface of the aluminium beneath. Therefore, the substrate surface is oxidized again by the plasma jet prior to particle impaction and the oxidation becomes more and more severe with increasing arc power and decreasing spray distance Typically, mechanical interlocking bonds the thermal-sprayed coating with the substrate kept at room temperature. To obtain favourable coating-substrate adhesion through the mechanical interlocking effect, preparing a rough surface of the substrate by grit blasting pre-treatment is necessary The effects of arc power and spray distance on the splat-substrate adhesion for the cast iron-aluminium combination were investigated by depositing splats on polished aluminium substrate surfaces at room temperature. A method of preparing cross-sectional specimens could be employed to qualitatively evaluate the adhesion between the splat and the substrate. Results showed that the splat-substrate adhesion was influenced by the deposition conditions. Due to the raised temperature and velocity of the impact particles and the increased heating effect on the substrate surface, the splat-substrate adhesion was significantly enhanced through an increase in the surface toughness of the substrate, achieved by increasing the arc power from 15 to 30 This work was supported by