A new hydrocyclone was designed with a winged core fixed below the vortex finder in this study. With the winged core, the turbulence structure characteristics inside the hydrocyclone, including time-averaged pressure, pressure fluctuation, relative pressure fluctuation characteristics, and distribution characteristics of the probability density of the turbulence pressure, were all positively controlled. By controlling the turbulence structure, the performance of the new hydrocyclone was improved effectively. Compared with the common hydrocyclone, the new hydrocyclone was featured with lower energy loss coefficient, higher reduced separation efficiency, higher separation sharpness and larger capacity.More and more attention is being paid to hydrocyclones, because of their obvious advantages such as simple structure, low cost, large capacity and small volume. Besides a large amount of applications in mineral processing, hydrocyclone separation technique has been used in an increasing number of applications recently in environmental engineering ( Unfortunately, due to the inherent fluid flow characteristics inside the common hydrocyclone, the separation process in the common hydrocyclone is always accompanied by some inherent disadvantages, such as unsatisfactory separation sharpness and high energy-loss ( The objective of this study is to find an effective way to improve the hydrocyclone performance by controlling the structure of turbulence in the inner helical flow below the vortex finder inside the hydrocyclone. A winged core will be introduced in this study to control the turbulence structure in the hydrocyclone. A common hydrocyclone was designed according to Rietema's optimum geometry for separation ( Although the laser doppler velocimeter (LDV) method is a common and simple way to measure the fluid flow field inside the hydrocyclone ( Liquid used in the experiments was water. The measured points inside the hydrocyclone were a series of netted points. The axial position of the measured points or the axial distance from top was 5, 25, 55, 85, 115, 145, 175, 205, 235, 265, and To investigate the flow pattern inside both the common type and the new type hydrocyclones, the hydrocyclones were made of transparent Perspex and were polished. The flow patterns were observed by injecting a dyeing tracer to different positions inside the hydrocyclones. Solid particles were made of quartz with a density of The mass flow rates and volume flow rates of the feed slurry and underflow of hydrocyclone were measured simultaneously. Samples were simultaneously taken from both the feed and underflow, and then the solid weight concentrations and the particle size distributions of the samples were measured. The comparison of the turbulence structure between the common type and the new type hydrocyclones is shown in    The performance comparisons between the common type hydrocyclone and the new one are given in From the discussion in Because the winged core hinders the inner helical flow from entering the vortex finder by reducing the fluid velocity, the flow split increases. In general applications, for reduced separation efficiency, the larger the value is for separation sharpness and capacity, the better it is; whereas, for energy loss coefficient, the smaller the value, the better it is. For cut size and flow split, the judgment should be made according to the applied technological case. Therefore, generally speaking, the performance of the new hydrocyclone has been effectively improved by positively controlling the turbulence structure inside the hydrocyclone with the winged core. By introducing a winged core, the turbulence structure inside the new hydrocyclone was controlled positively. All the time-averaged pressure characteristics, pressure fluctuation characteristics, relative pressure fluctuation characteristics, and the distribution characteristics of the probability density of the turbulence pressure in the new hydrocyclone are remarkably different from those inside the common hydrocyclone. By controlling the turbulence structure, the performance of the new hydrocyclone was improved effectively. Compared with the common hydrocyclone, the new hydrocyclone was proven to have lower energy loss coefficient, larger reduced separation efficiency, higher separation sharpness and larger capacity. The research was supported by the Doctoral Science Foundation of State Educational Ministry of China and by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation. The hydrocyclone performance indices are defined as follows. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)