The present study shows the effects of the process parameters on the combustion synthesised’ powder properties using a systematic design of experiments. It describes the fabrication of high purity V2O5 powders with the manipulation of fuel types and fuel-to-oxidizer ratios. Additionally, for the first time the mixture of fuels was used to demonstrate clearly the role of the fuel on the powder properties. Flame temperature of the reaction was calculated for each parameter to understand how the reaction kinetics affect the powder properties especially primary particle size and morphology. Correlation between the physical and chemical properties of the powders and the precursor’s condition was successfully built.Transition metal oxide (TMO) has been widely used in the field of electrochemistry due to the better physical properties and high chemical stabilities Besides, SCS also allows for the production of powder with desired properties by the manipulation of process parameters Ammonium meta-vanadate (NH Subsequently, the fuel (citric acid, glycine, starch, and mix fuel) was presented in the mixture (Eq. 2–5) and all precursors were mixed until a homogenous solution was obtained. Moreover T Thermal decomposition of the dried powder was analysed by DTA/TGA in air with the heating rate of 5 °C/min by a Perkin Elmer Diamond TGA instrument. The phase determination was carried out by a PANalytical X'pert PRO X-ray diffractometer using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation. The average crystallite size of the samples was calculated by Scherrer’s equation (Eq. 7); Fuel can change the reduction rate, combustion temperature, and amount of gases generated during the redox reactions. This resulted in the synthesized powders having different structural properties. As each fuel has different decomposition temperature and burning energy, T  The TGA curve reflected nearly 13% of weight loss for each fuel source except mix fuel which lost 40%. Weight loss can be correlated with volatilization of excess water and ethanol up to 100 °C and the decomposition of functional groups up to 400 °C X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out after the calcination as given in SEM images of V V  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.