Gas dispersion is one of the key factors in the mineral flotation process. It can be expressed by many variables such as bubble size, gas holdup, gas superficial velocity and bubble surface area flux (S
                     b). In particular, S
                     b has been found to have a strong correlation with the flotation rate constant (K). Bubble size is important because it is related with the transport capacity and with the flotation probability. It also affects the gas holdup and the bubble surface area flux. In this work bubble sizes are measured using image analysis. An empirical rate constant model is developed to relate K with S
                     b and other dispersion variables. This model is found to be able to predict K for two different batch flotation cells.Separation by flotation is a result of interaction of many variables, usually involving chemical, operational and machine factors. Machine factors, such as impeller speed, air flow rate and cell design do not affect the process performance in isolation, but combined they create the hydrodynamic conditions governing that performance (   Accordingly, this problem was investigated with experimental work in laboratory scale, with the objective of developing a flotation rate constant model as a function of the gas dispersion properties as well as to help in solving the controversial issues. All testing was done in two batch flotation cells: Outokumpu (3.7 The flotation tests were done under conditions as used in Andina’s concentrator. For the first sample, the collector used was Aero To measure bubble size a bubble sampler as shown in Before sampling, the sampler was filled with water containing frother. Closing the bottom of the collecting tube, the sampler was introduced into the flotation cell and then was opened. Bubbles were collected and filmed while passing through the viewing chamber. The air accumulates at the top of the viewing chamber and the chamber becomes cloudy as the particles are released by the bubbles once they leave the liquid phase. The liquid remained clear for imaging purposes for up to 10 After image processing the bubble sizes were determined by image analysis, considering the mean diameter as the bubble size. These sizes had to be corrected due to the pressure difference between the sampling point into the cell and the viewing chamber. The correction was done assuming sphericity and ideal gas behaviour. The corrected sizes were grouped in size classes and the number of bubbles per class were counted. The corresponding size distribution by number ( Besides the bubble size distributions, the gas holdup, The gas superficial velocity, With the two flotation cells and the two samples of copper sulphide ore above mentioned, 39 experimental tests were performed. Impeller peripheral speed (Ns) and air flow rate were varied, the gas superficial velocity was calculated and the gas holdup was measured in each test. The experimental conditions for each test are presented in With the experimental procedure and the conditions above mentioned, the experimental tests were performed. The experimental results in terms of bubble size distributions, for some selected tests, are presented in In As can be seen in With respect to the Labtech-Essa cell, as can be seen in In As can be seen in The flotation kinetic results of the 39 experimental tests were fitted to the first-order rate equation ( As was previously mentioned, one test was repeated three times for each cell, and these are O10, O11 and O12 for the Outokumpu cell and L8, L9 and L10 for the Labtech-Essa cell. The errors were 6% and 3% in As was mentioned, the objective of this work was to develop a flotation rate constant model as a function of the gas dispersion properties. In the case of the bubble size distribution it is necessary to represent it with a model, so that its parameters could be included as possible variables in the flotation rate model. As was mentioned before, since flotation is a superficial phenomena, the size distribution by surface was modelled. To determine the best structure of the model, 24 known equations were tested for goodness-of-fit. These equations have been already used either to represent particle size distributions or classification efficiencies or heavy media partition curves. All models were fitted to the experimental results. The procedure was to minimize the sum of squares of the residuals between modelled and experimental values, for the bubble size distribution by surface expressed as percentage in size The best model found was an empirical equation ( Model parameters and correlation coefficients for all tests are shown in Correlation between the flotation rate constant and the gas dispersion variables was studied, searching for a model linear in the parameters. The model structure was developed with a stepwise regression method ( The candidate components were all the dispersion properties ( As bubble size With this procedure two alternative model structures were found. The first one was determined using the experimental data obtained with the Outokumpu cell for the rougher flotation feed ore, leaving out test O19 for validation purposes. This model is presented as Eq. The second one was determined using the experimental data obtained with the Labtech-ESSA cell for the rougher flotation feed ore, leaving out test L05 for validation purposes. This model is presented as Eq. Ideally, a good model should be able to represent any cell, with different ores, just changing the parameters. To find out if this is true and to select the best model, each model structure was tested for goodness-of-fit considering four data sets. The data set where the model structure was generated (a particular cell using the rougher flotation feed ore), the data set with the same ore but the other cell (cross-validation), and two additional, but limited, data sets using the scavenger–cleaner flotation feed ore. To evaluate the statistical significance of each model in each case, the ratio between the estimated prediction-error deviation ( To compare the quality of both models their fitting results are presented in As can be seen in Considering all the results above mentioned, the first model (Eq. The model quality can be observed in As can be seen in  As can be seen in It was possible to measure bubble sizes using a bubble sampler based on the For the Outokumpu cell, increasingly finer surface bubble size distributions were obtained at higher impeller peripheral speed (Ns). The shape of all distributions were similar, except for the highest speed, which produces a more concentrated distribution around its mean size. Specially, notorious was the effect of the speed on the maximum bubble size, which goes from 1.4 The bubble size distribution by surface was modelled. The best model found ( A flotation rate constant model as a function of the gas dispersion properties was developed, based on experimental work at laboratory scale with samples from a copper sulphide ore. The model structure was developed with a stepwise regression method. With this procedure, the best structure found (Eq. The modelled Finally, it can be concluded that an empirical model of the flotation rate constant was developed, able to predict The research and development leading to this paper has been financed by Chilean National Science and Technology Council (CONICYT), Project FONDECYT 1030807.