The Conjugate Anvil Hammer Mill (CAHM) was identified as a novel energy efficient technology by the Canadian Mining Innovation Council that has the potential to replace conventional crushers and Semi-Autogenous Grinding (SAG) mills. Discrete Element Method (DEM) modelling showed that the CAHM requires significantly less energy in comparison to existing comminution technologies including High Pressure Grinding Rolls (HPGR). However, experimental evidence was required to validate this potential and to address operational questions.
                  In order to evaluate the CAHM, piston-die testing was conducted to represent the comminution conditions in the CAHM for comparison to the HPGR. Three piston-die conditions were tested including low pressure semi-confined compression as generated in the CAHM, low pressure confined compression, and high pressure confined compressions as generated in the HPGR. The particle breakage was investigated and compared in terms of applied force, energy consumption, product particle size reduction and particles’ surface area generation. Results showed that the CAHM test apparatus required a much lower force and produced a finer product particle size distribution and higher surface area when compared to low pressure confined compression. When compared to high pressure confined compression (HPGR), up to 37% and 22% energy savings were achieved by the CAHM for a soft gold ore and a harder copper ore, respectively. The results demonstrated that the CAHM technology has potential to improve energy efficiency in the comminution process.Comminution, particularly grinding, is the largest energy consumer for most mining operations. It accounts for 1.8–2% of total electrical energy generated globally ( The development of more energy efficient comminution technologies has been an important focus of academia and industry. The Conjugate Anvil Hammer Mill (CAHM) is a novel technology that also applies compression breakage. However, the CAHM applies compression in a semi-confined mode such that the broken particles can pass through a slotted opening preventing energy wastage resulting from bed compression ( The inventor, Mr. Lawrence Nordell developed the concept of the CAHM as a by-product of studying SAG mills using DEM ( The CAHM is made of two principle rings. The outer ring, referred to as the anvil, has pockets along its circumference. At the bottom of each pocket is a slotted opening that allows the broken material to exit the mill. The inner ring consists of protruding components, referred to as hammers that mesh with the pockets as the rings rotate in unison. Rocks are fed to the top of the outer ring from one or two sides and then fall into the gap between the anvil and hammer rings, as shown in Comminution first takes place by point loading until the rock breaks to sizes that fit into the pockets, and then a force is applied to break the rock under semi-confined compression. The fractured particles exit the mill by flowing through the slotted openings at the base of the pocket. Modelling indicated that most of the particle breakage occurs due to compression in the highest loading compression zone, which is between the 6 and 8 o’clock positions of the mill, similar to the position of the ‘sweet spot’ in the SAG mill ( While modelling provided evidence of the potential of the CAHM, there is a need to validate its performance through laboratory or pilot scale testing. In this paper, a bench-scale experimental evaluation of CAHM comminution was conducted using piston press testing and energy-breakage modelling approaches. The overall objective of the study was to demonstrate the concept that low pressure semi-confined compression (CAHM) is more energy efficient than confined compression (HPGR). The results of this study validate the DEM modelling work, provide evidence for further advancement of the CAHM design and support the need for larger scale testing and eventually potential industrial application. Several studies have shown that piston-press tests can predict the energy-size reduction relationship for compression breakage ( In this study, the MTS machine, shown in HPGR apparatus: A piston-die apparatus with a circular shape ( CAHM apparatus: A piston-die apparatus with a geometry that is the same as the CAHM hammer and anvil components ( LPCC apparatus: A square piston-die with the same dimensional geometry as the CAHM apparatus ( For the purpose of this investigation, the term CAHM, HPGR and LPCC refer to results using corresponding test apparatus. General procedures developed by In this study the three compression modes were compared in terms of energy usage including: Low pressure semi-confined compression as generated in the CAHM, Low pressure confined compression (LPCC) and High pressure confined compressions as generated in the HPGR. For CAHM semi-confined and LPCC confined compression, set-point forces were applied ranging from 40 to 90 kN at a ramp up rate at 200 kN/min. As will be shown, at these forces, the LPCC product particle size was much coarser than for the CAHM, therefore in order to compare energy usage between the CAHM and LPCC at the same level of the particle size reduction, a test was conducted with the LPCC at a force of 400kN. For the slotted CAHM apparatus, the material flow pattern of compressed materials under different force levels was also investigated. To compare the energy-breakage relationships of the CAHM semi-confined and HPGR confined compression modes, energy-controlled piston-press tests were conducted with target energy input levels ranging from 0.25 to 2.0 kWh/t and with a vertical displacement rate of between 2 and 4 mm/min. For each test, 170 ∼ 180 g of the ore sample was compressed. All LPCC tests were conducted in triplicates due to the material quantity requirement for PSD analysis. For the CAHM and HPGR tests, the products were finer (as shown in the results section) and a smaller quantity was required for the PSD analysis, and therefore one individual test was conducted. Based on 5 repeated tests with the CAHM piston press, the standard deviation was 0.05 which represent a relative error of 8.2%. For the HPGR piston test, an estimated relative error is 5.7% ( Two ore samples of different competencies were prepared for testing; the properties of the ore are summarized in For low pressure semi-confined (CAHM) and confined (LPCC) tests, each sample was pre-crushed using a jaw crusher, and screened into three narrow size ranges of −31.5 + 26.5 mm, −26.5 + 19 mm and −19 + 16 mm. For the HPGR high pressure confined testing, finer sizes of −12.5 + 11.2 mm, −11.2 + 9.5 mm and −9.5 + 8.0 mm ranges were used as per Results of the CAHM and HPGR piston press tests were used to calibrate the “modified” breakage model so that the breakage systems could be compared. As implied, the model is a modified version of the breakage index model that was developed to predict the energy-particle size reduction relationship for SAG mills. In this paper, five energy levels (ranging from 0.25 to 2.0 kWh/t) were applied to each of the three size fractions, resulting in 15 distinct comminution-energy test results. M, f Several well-known laws have been used to assess the energy efficiency of comminution technologies. The oldest is The mass specific surface area of the comminution product, A test program was conducted to compare breakage under conditions of semi-confined compression (CAHM) to breakage under conditions of confined compression (LPCC). The test program involved testing over a range of forces (40–90 kN) on a narrow size fraction (−26.5 + 19.0 mm) for the gold and copper ores. The energy consumption, particle size reduction ratio, particle size distribution and surface area generation from the tests are presented in At the same applied force ranging from 40 to 90 kN, the CAHM product was much finer than that of the confined compression product (LPCC). For the gold ore, the t For CAHM comminution of the gold ore, 70 kN was identified as the optimum operating force, with a particle size reduction ratio of 7.2 and energy utilization of 1.33 kWh/t. Increasing the force further minimally improve the breakage and lead to plugging of the slotted opening. For LPCC compression, a force of up to 400 kN was needed to achieve similar material breakage performance (F The difference between CAHM and LPCC results are mainly attributed to the tapered geometry design of the CAHM hammer that focuses the force onto the tapered anvil. The force will have both normal and shear components that will contribute to particle breakage. The potential benefit of this feature is that the force release and reaction will be faster and tramp metal damage could be mitigated ( More benefits of the semi-confined compression (CAHM) were demonstrated in this study by comparing the particle size distribution and surface area of the test products. As shown in The results of the test program showed that CAHM semi-confined compression breakage required a much lower operating force and was more energy efficient than breakage from LPCC low pressure confined compression. There are two main explanations for the differences relating to the application of a shear force and to the semi-confined compression with the CAHM system. Firstly, with the tapered hammer, the CAHM applies a combination of normal and shear forces. Secondly, for the CAHM, the presence of an exit port on the anvil enables the discharge of fines, thus resulting in reducing compaction of the compressed material. According to To investigate the potential for packing and plugging of the exit port of the anvil, material flow at different operating forces was studied. Locked-cycle tests were conducted by applying the piston (hammer) force to a bed of material in the die (anvil) for a series of three cycles. For the first cycle a fixed mass (170–180 g) of fresh feed material was added to the die. For successive cycles, feed material was added to the compressed material remaining in the die to make up to the fixed mass and the force was reapplied. The test was repeated through three cycles.  A portion of the material was expelled from the port, Some material remained packed at the bottom of the die, and A portion of the matter was unpacked and loosely overlaid the packed material. It is expected that the packed material at the bottom of the anvil would not flow from the die and that for each subsequent cycle a portion of this material would be expelled. Also, the third type of loose product would likely flow back into the mill as the anvil chamber is inverted during rotation of the mill. The amounts of each product type were recorded for each cycle and results are shown in For the gold ore at a force of 90 kN, the amount of material that flowed through the exit port during the first cycle was 5.2%, while only 3.5% and 0.3% of material passed through the exit for the last two cycles. The amount of un-packed material from the first cycle was 31.3% and for the second and third cycles was only 14.9% and 6.1%, respectively. The results show that with each successive cycle, the amount of discharged product decreased. This is due to the formation of a bed of increasingly compacted material following each cycle that prevented flow through the exit port. As the force was increased from 50 kN to 90 kN, the packed fraction of the total product increased from 55.9% to 63.5% for the first cycle. For the harder copper ore, the percentage of packed material increased from 62.3% to 65.1%. The results show that as the force increased, more particles remained in the die and formed a packed bed. This observation was consistent with the trend showing that the energy specific surface area decreased when a higher compression force was applied ( Based on the piston die test results, low pressure semi-confined compression breakage (CAHM) is more energy efficient than low pressure confined compression. The results can be explained by the contribution of breakage under shearing conditions resulting from the tapered geometry and by the semi-confined conditions resulting from the slotted exit port.  The Conjugate Anvil Hammer Mill (CAHM) is a novel comminution technology in the early stages of its development. Benefiting from the design of a tapered hammer and semi-confined anvil, the CAHM offers promising improvements in energy efficiency, as detailed by DEM modelling work. However, further experimental evidence is required in evaluating its potential. Experimental testing was conducted in order to provide the evidence of the energy improvements. Piston-die testing approaches were developed to compare the energy efficiencies of the semi-confined compression (CAHM), low pressure confined compression (LPCC), and high pressure confined compression (HPGR). Testing results concluded that the CAHM was more energy efficient compared to the confined particle breakage and produced higher surface area in a finer product. Another advantage of the CAHM compared to the confined compression was that a much lower force was required to achieve similar material breakage performance while a lower force potentially reduce the metal wear; the application of a shear force in the CAHM may also contribute to wear of the hammer and anvil components. For a soft gold ore at 70 kN, energy specific surface area generation were 1.0 × 10 Based on energy-breakage modelling, CAHM was more energy efficient than the HPGR. Energy savings up to 36.6% and 21.5% were reported for the CAHM system for the tested gold and copper ores, respectively. However, it should also be noted for the more competent copper ore, the CAHM may be less energy efficient than the HPGR for feed materials finer than F In conclusion, the CAHM has significant energy saving potential for the comminution process. However, challenges remain especially relating to the scale-up to production level required for large-scale mining operations. A pilot scale test unit should be constructed that applies the information gained from this study to advance the technology further. Such a unit would allow investigation of mechanical principles and continuous material flow patterns. The Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this work from the Canada Mining Innovation Council (CMIC), Hatch Engineering and Mitacs Accelerate Program (IT NO.08513). The authors are also thankful to the