Acetabular fractures continue to be a subject of great interest to the trauma and hip arthroplasty surgeon CAFD were reported as a result of axial loading the femur in abduction In the recent literature a distinct variation of the separation of articulating surfaces of the femoral head and the acetabulum present as CAFD. The extent of intrapelvic femoral head protrusion ranged from, e.g. total separation with an additional proximal femur fracture An internet search was performed on 22nd July in PubMed, MEDLINE (Ovid), EMBASE (Ovid) and Cochrane library databases using the following search terms in “all fields”: “Acetabulum” or “Acetabular” and “Fracture”. Duplicates and articles written in languages others than English or German were removed. Citations were then scrutinised for the eligibility criteria on the basis of the information provided by the abstract and/or title and then were either excluded or the corresponding full-text articles were obtained for further screening. The bibliographies of identified articles were manually searched for potential eligible reports. Citations which met one or more of the following criteria were excluded: (1) Editorial comment or Letter to the Editor, (2) dislocation or periprosthetic fracture after either partial or total hip joint replacement procedures, (3) insufficiency, occult or pathologic fractures, (4) malunion or nonunion, (5) subacute or chronic presentation, (6) paediatric trauma. Articles dated from 1954 onwards presenting original data in adults regarding acute central acetabular fracture dislocations (CAFD) in order to (1) introduce a novel classification, a modification of an existing classification of CAFD and/or attempts to categorise CAFD by other means and/or (2) to present injuries associated to CAFD such as an impaction of articular surfaces of the femoral head and/or the acetabular roof, an ipsilateral fracture of the proximal femur and/or additional non-orthopaedic trauma (e.g. nerve injuries, abdominal and/or urogenital trauma) were included for qualitative synthesis. The initial internet search yielded 10,144 records identified through database and an additional 99 records were identified through other sources. After duplicates ( Sixteen A description of injuries associated with the CAFD to the acetabular roof or the acetabular roof and the femoral head are included in six Injuries to the articular surface of the hip joint, either at the site of the femoral head or at the site of the acetabular roof, are noted and listed in A further nine Finally, 13 The purpose of an orthopaedic classification should be to support the surgeons in their decision making allowing them to opt for a specific treatment of respective fractures and provide a reasonable and precise estimation of the outcome of the suggested treatment CAFD is a peculiar injury combining the acetabular fracture allowing for intrapelvic protrusion of the femoral head with the actual central dislocation. For an anatomic classification of acetabular fractures by the use of plain films the international accepted standard is the classification system reported by Judet and Letournel By the use of these classifications, specific acetabular fracture patterns allowing for central dislocation of the femoral head were previously identified. According to the Judet and Letournel However, articles identified reporting about CAFD Injuries to the acetabular roof as well as the femoral head were included in four articles Associated injuries to the proximal femur were included in only one classification A limitation of this comprehensive analysis carried out might be that treatment strategies and associated outcomes related to the CAFD classifications were not included. However, a serious comparison of treatment strategies and outcomes of CAFD might be questionable due to the marked variety in the extent of intrapelvic femoral head displacement defined as CAFD as well as differences in trauma mechanisms (e.g. low-energy versus high-energy). Moreover, the variety of reported treatments (e.g. closed versus open reduction, skin versus skeletal traction, axial traction with or without lateral traction, conservative versus joint preserving versus joint replacement surgery, joint replacement surgery as a single or two stage procedure and with or without an additional osteosynthesis, various rehabilitation protocols), outcome measures (e.g. follow up period, clinical and radiographic scoring) or an improvement of surgical approaches or techniques in the reviewed time period might preclude a reliable comparison of treatment strategies and outcomes. In addition, a systematic review using the search terms “Acetabular Fracture” and “Central Hip Dislocation” recently presented different treatment modalities and outcomes The strengths of the methodology carried out include the selection of the search criteria used allowing all relevant articles to be screened in both English and German language. In conclusion, none of the presented CAFD classifications was found to be ideal as none was able to completely describe the extent of intrapelvic displacement of the femoral head, the variety of associated trauma, the reproducibility by intra- and interobserver reliability assessments nor the inclusion of alterations in trauma appearance. In our opinion, existing classifications about CAFD are not reliable, comprehensive or contemporary. A new classification should consider the above-mentioned weaknesses and should aim to predict the feasibility to achieve anatomic reduction based on the extent of intrapelvic femoral head displacement observed on anteroposterior radiographs based on validation.