At present no complete standard methodology is adhered to when utilising biomethane potential (BMP) tests. This can limit the use of results as relationships observed may be confined to each specific BMP test. The purpose of this study was to investigate the specific CH4 yields of a range of grasses and corresponding silages, via cryogenically frozen (−196 °C) and thermal dried (40 °C) sample preparation methods, using two contrasting in vitro batch anaerobic digestion tests. The manual BMP test (MBMP) yields ranged from 180 to 285 and 172–264 L CH4 kg−1 volatile solids (VS) for the cryogenically frozen and thermal dried preparation methods, respectively. The corresponding automated BMP test (AMPTS) yields ranged from 329 to 346 and 287–330 L CH4 kg−1 VS. Overall treatment rankings in the AMPTS did not match the rankings observed in the MBMP. However, within the category of silage the rankings were similar for both tests. Since most of the grassland biomass intended for anaerobic digestion is likely to be stored as silage, it is preferable to use cryogenically frozen and milled samples, rather than thermal dried and milled samples when assessing methane potential of silage in a small-scale BMP test.The biogas and specific methane (CH An alternative, relatively inexpensive preparation technology is to solidify samples in liquid nitrogen, thereby permitting the retention of volatile organic components and the embrittlement of the feedstock, prior to comminution and the production of relatively homogenous samples Furthermore, few studies have compared such treatment effects utilising different Grass was subjected to two contrasting wilting treatments prior to precision-chop harvesting and, together with the corresponding silages, provided a range of different feedstocks. These feedstocks were then subjected to two contrasting sample preparation methods, and specific CH Perennial ryegrass ( Herbage 1 (i.e. non-wilted herbage) was managed with standard rates of inorganic fertilizer applied at least 6 weeks pre-harvest. It was ensiled without wilting within 30 min of mowing. This produced silage with a low pH and high lactic acid content. Herbage 2 (i.e. wilted herbage) was initially managed similarly to Herbage 1, however, swards were wilted for 24 h with frequent tedding before ensiling. This was to promote restricted silage fermentation with lower amounts of fermentation products such as lactic acid, alcohol and volatile fatty acids (VFAs). Herbages were harvested using a Haldrup forage plot harvester (J. Haldrup, Løgstor, Denmark) cutting to a 5 cm stubble height, precision-chopped (Pottinger Mex VI; Grieskirchen, Austria) and a representative sample of grass was obtained from each plot, prior to ensiling in laboratory silos Samples were prepared for Total solids (TS) contents of grass and silage were determined in a ventilated oven with forced-air circulation at 98 °C and 85 °C for 16 h and 18 h, respectively. Silage TS values were corrected for the loss of volatile organic compounds according to Porter and Murray These were undertaken at Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), FI-31600 Jokioinen, Finland. The specific CH The inoculum was sourced from an on-farm anaerobic digester treating dairy cattle manure and grass silage at the Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke) in Maaninka, Finland. The inoculum was filtered through a 2 mm sieve prior to determination of pH, TS and VS as described above (results in A pressure transducer (Tracker 220, Gems Sensors and Controls, Basingstoke, UK) and needle lubricated with Vaseline As a direct comparison and to eliminate procedural confounding effects, sub-samples of the same feedstocks and inoculum used in the MBMP system were simultaneously and adjacently analysed using a prominent The average decay constant or Means and standard deviations (s.d.) were calculated for chemical composition. Methane production from analytical replicates was averaged to give a single value for each of the four experimental replicate samples per treatment. Data were analysed using repeated measures, as a split-split-split plot design using the MIXED procedure in SAS, Version 9.3 with herbage type (i.e. non-wilted or wilted) as the main plot, herbage state (i.e. grass or silage) as the sub plot, herbage preparation method (i.e. cryo-frozen or thermal dried) as the sub–sub plot and batch digestion system (MBMP or AMPTS system) as the sub-sub-sub plot. The Tukey adjustment for multiple comparisons was used in testing the differences between the means. The chemical composition of the feedstock was reported in Nolan et al. In the MBMP system, the specific CH Specific CH Preparation methods had opposing effects on specific CH In the present experiment, treatments were selected from a previous study by Nolan et al. The opposite rankings were observed for the corresponding silages that had a lower specific CH The specific CH The thermal dried non-wilted silage had a lower CH In comparison to the MBMP system, the specific CH Rather than solely comparing the absolute outputs of CH Preparation method had opposing effects for grass and silage in the MBMP system. The ranking of specific CH The relative ranking of treatments found in the MBMP system was not the same in the AMPTS system. However, within the category of silage types the rankings were the same in the two systems. Due to the effects of preparation methods found in the MBMP being maintained in the AMPTS system, it is concluded that the cryo-frozen and subsequent milling preparation method is more suitable than drying and subsequent milling, particularly for fermented feedstocks in small-scale The authors thank B. Weldon, J. Larkin, J. Grant, D. Wall and the contributions of the farm and laboratory staff at Teagasc Grange. The authors also thank Natural Resource Institute Finland (Luke) for the use of facilities, particularly to S. Ervasti and E. Tampio (Luke, FI-31600 Jokioinen), and V. Pyykkönen (Luke, FI-71750 Maaninka). Funding for this research was provided through Teagasc Walsh Fellowship Programme and a Teagasc Short-Term Overseas Training Award.