Introduction
                  The incidence of distal radius fractures (DRFs) is increasing as the number of people in recreational or sporting activities rises, due to a combination of increased leisure time and greater public awareness of the health-related benefits of sports. Despite the increases in sports-related distal radius fractures (SR-DRFs), there are limited studies regarding the characteristics of treatment and recovery.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  There are characteristics specific to SR-DRF treated with conservative or operative management.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Retrospective review was carried out between January 2010 and December 2017. Overall, 1706 patients were included in the study analysis. Among them, 317 patients were injured during sports activity (18.6%) and 1389 were injured during non-sports activity (81.4%). Demographic data were compared between the two groups. The type of sports was investigated in SR-DRF. Also, we compared surgically treated DRF patients to describe differences in patient characteristics, fracture characteristics, and postoperative complications.
               
                  Results
                  The mean age of patients with SR-DRFs was significantly younger (28 vs. 52 years). The proportion of men was also significantly higher in SR-DRF group compared to NSR-DRF group (62.8 vs. 33.8%). We identified 27 kinds of sports associated with DRFs and the 5 sports topping the list associated were soccer (22.7%), cycling (17.7%), snowboarding (11.0%), ice-skating (9.1%), and mountain hiking (9.1%). There was no difference in terms of the treatment method. However, SR-DRF group had higher proportion of AO/OTA type A fracture (32.6 vs. 13.7%), and NSR-DRF group had higher proportion of type C fracture (79.5 vs. 64.2%). Postoperative complications showed no significant differences, except higher implant removal rate in SR-DRF.
               
                  Discussion
                  Patients with SR-DRF were significantly younger and had higher proportion of men. Proportion of AO/OTA type A was higher in SR-DRF group and proportion of AO/OTA type C was higher in NSR-DRF group. Proportion of surgical treatment was similar in two groups. Given the growing population participating in sports activity worldwide, SR-DRFs are predicted to increase and further study is required.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III; retrospective, epidemiological study.Distal radius fractures (DRF) are the most commonly encountered upper extremity fracture in emergency rooms. They account for 17% of all fractures in adults, a percentage that has been steadily increasing over the past 40 years A previous reported 12% of adult fractures occurred from sports accident and the most frequent fracture was DRF Despite increases in sports-related DRF (SR-DRF), there are limited studies regarding the characteristics of treatment and recovery Therefore, this study aimed to investigate characteristics specific to SR-DRF treated with conservative or operative management. Secondarily, SR-DRF characteristics were compared to other non-sports related DRF (NSR-DRF) in a clinical setting to understand and describe differences to support clinical decision-making regarding treatment management. This single-site retrospective study was carried out between January 2010 and December 2017 under the approval of the appropriate Institutional Review Board. Patient consent was waived due to the retrospective nature of the study. We found 1835 patients with DRFs from a single orthopedic unit. Medical and radiologic records were assessed by 2 separate orthopedic surgeons. We excluded patients with incomplete information, including undiagnosed mode of injury ( We documented the type of sport played at the time of injury, age, sex, the fractured arm (right, left, or bilateral), treatment method (operative or conservative), presence of open fracture (yes or no), and presence of distal ulnar fracture (yes or no). We investigated the fracture pattern using initial X-ray and CT radiograms to determine the AO Foundation and Orthopedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification (types A–C) . In patients with bilateral wrist DRFs, we selected the classification presenting the higher grade. Overall, patients were treated with conservative or operative methods. In patients of conservative management, different times and types of immobilisation were applied considering patient's age and cognition, fracture pattern, and patient's request, using fibre splint, cast, and brace with length of short arm or long arm. In patients of operative management, closed or open method were used with following modalities; volar open reduction and locking plate fixation (469, 81.3%), closed reduction and percutaneous screw or Kirschner wire (K-wire) fixation (79, 13.7%), dorsal open reduction and screw or plate fixation (6, 1.0%), external fixator with or without K-wire fixation (3, 0.5%), and using of multiple methods (20, 3.5%). For subgroup analysis, we compared surgically treated DRF patients by SR- and NSR-DRFs to describe differences in patient characteristics, fracture characteristics (fractured arm, AO/OTA classification, open fractures, and distal ulnar fractures), and postoperative complications (superficial or deep infection, flexor or extensor tendon injury, compartment syndrome, delay or non-union of fracture, complex regional pain syndrome, and implant removal). We surveyed the number of patients who underwent removal of inserted any implant, which were mainly from volar locking plates and K-wires. The Pearson Chi The mean age of patients with SR-DRFs was 28 years, which was significantly different compared to patients with NSR-DRF (52 years; The number of SR-DRFs and NSR-DRFs by year distribution between 2010 and 2017 for entire study duration is shown in The number of SR-DRFs and NSR-DRFs by age distribution is shown in Overall, 27 different sports were associated with SR-DRFs. These activities were divided into four categories: ball sports; strength and combat sports; track and endurance sports; and water, snow, and ice sports ( In cases of SR-DRFs and NSR-DRFs, 95 (30.0%) and 482 (34.7%) patients, respectively, were treated with operations totalling 577 patients ( According to AO/OTA classification, the most prevalent type of DRF was C, with 444 out of 577 cases (76.9%). Only 36 patients, 3 from the SR-DRF group and 33 of the NSR-DRF group, were identified with type B fracture with a statically significant difference between groups ( Analysis of postoperative complications related to DRFs showed no significant differences between SR-DRF and NSR-DRF groups, except in relation to implant removal rate ( This study aimed to investigate patient and injury characteristics specific to SR-DRFs and NSR-DRFs, as well as patient outcomes when treated with conservative or operative methods. We confirmed that the prevalence of SR-DRFs was highest among young men. Three main sports activities causing DRF were soccer, cycling, and snowboarding. When comparing surgically treated DRFs, the patients with SR-DRFs tended to undergo implant removal at a significantly higher rate, but the post-surgery complications were not different between groups. The present study showed that 18.6% patients with DRFs were injured during sports activities, a rate much higher than the 8% reported in a previous single-centre study The present results align with previous studies that report a bimodally distributed incidence of DRFs. In our study outcome, the peak incidences were in men aged 6 to 15 years old and a second peak in women ages 50 to 70 years old ( One study reported only 5.8% left-hand dominance in 2437 Koreans In addition, type A injuries based on AO/OTA classification were more common in SR-DRF. This can be explained by the large number of patients under 15 years in the SR-DRF group. The majority of fractures in this group are extra-articular (i.e. Torus fracture), which are inherently stable and can be treated conservatively with cast immobilisation We identified 27 kinds of sports associated with DRFs and divided them into four high categories to summarise the results. The 3 sports topping the list associated with SR-DRFs were soccer (22.7%), cycling (17.7%), and snowboarding (11.0%), which are high-impact and more common among young men When conducting subgroup analysis on operatively treated DRFs between sports- and non-sports related fractures, the age gap was reduced while still having statistical significance. In addition, the men with SR-DRFs reduced overall from 62% to 55%, but there remained a statistical difference owing to the high proportion (68%) of women operatively treated in the NSR-DRF group. According to the AO/OTA classification, there are no specific fracture patterns associated with sports injuries There were several limitations to our study. We did not divide patients by the frequency of their participation in sports activities, limiting the descriptive characteristics of the patients. In addition, we did not factor in the patterns of fractures which vary between countries and even regions within a country, depending on the local climate, seasonal change, culture, and leisure-time activities since the study was limited to a single-site Patients with SR-DRF were significantly younger and had higher proportion of men. Proportion of AO/OTA type A was higher in SR-DRF group and proportion of AO/OTA type C was higher in NSR-DRF group. Proportion of surgical treatment was similar in two groups. Given the growing population participating in sports activity worldwide, SR-DRFs are predicted to increase and further study is required. The Medical Ethical Committee at CHA Bundang Medical Centre approved the execution of this study (CHAMC 2019-10-045-002). The authors declare that they have no competing interest. No sources of funding to declare. JKL and ITH wrote the protocol; CSH, SMJ, and PWW contributed to data entry, checking, recoding, analysis; JKL, to statistical guidance; ITH, to interpretation of statistical findings; CSH wrote the first draft of the manuscript; and JKL & SHH commented on and revised the manuscript draft for critical content and approved the final version. We would like to thank Editage (