The influences of Ag, Bi, Sb and Zn impurities on the electrochemical adsorption of butyl xanthate on a galena surface were investigated. The impurity-doped and pure galena samples were synthesised by chemical precipitation and tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses. The flotation results suggest that the Ag and Bi impurities can promote the flotation of galena, while the Zn and Sb inhibit it. Both the lead- and impurity-xanthate are observed on the galena surface by infrared spectra, which suggests that the impurities on galena surface also interact with xanthate. However, Ag-xanthate and Bi-xanthate at the galena surface doped Ag or Bi may need to be further verified. The cyclic voltammetric measurements on galena microelectrodes reveal two oxidation peaks for both the pure and impurity-doped PbS, while no obvious reduction peaks are observed. It is found that the presence of Ag and Bi enhances the oxidation of xanthate on the galena surface, while the Zn and Sb impurities inhibit the oxidation of xanthate on the galena surface. The amount of electrochemically adsorbed xanthate on the galena surface varies based on the type of impurity and has a positive correlation with the flotation recovery of galena.Galena is the primary source of lead, which has good floatability and floats easily with xanthate. Natural galena usually contains impurities, such as silver, copper, zinc, arsenic, stibium, bismuth, cadmium, thallium, indium and other elements. Among these impurities, the Ag impurities associated with galena are the major source for silver output. The lattice impurities have a great influence on the flotation behaviour of galena ( Electrochemical studies have demonstrated that xanthate could produce lead salts after oxidation on a galena surface with a concomitant reduction of oxygen ( The electrochemical behaviour and reactions occurring on the mineral electrode surface might be measured through cyclic voltammetry ( In this paper, galena microelectrodes bearing Ag, Bi, Sb and Zn impurities are prepared, and the electrochemical behaviours of the galena microelectrodes bearing impurities in the presence of butyl xanthate were investigated through cyclic voltammetry. In addition, the surface products of the interactions between the butyl xanthate and the galena with impurities were detected using infrared spectrometry. Lead acetate trihydrate (Pb(CH Natural samples will have mixtures of impurities or contain inclusions of different phases. The natural galena sample containing a single impurity is difficult to be collected. Therefore, chemical precipitation method was used to prepare the synthetic galena samples with different impurities. The pure galena was synthesised using sodium sulphide as the sulphur source and lead acetate as the lead source. The theoretical molar ratio of these two compounds in a completed reaction is 1:1. To precipitate the Pb The impure galena was prepared by reacting sodium sulphide with lead acetate and metal X salts, which act as impurities; X refers to Ag, Zn, Bi, or Sb. First, the lead acetate trihydrate and metal X salts were dissolved in deionised water, and, subsequently, a sodium sulphide solution was added. The resultant mixture was stirred for 12 During this test, saturated calomel, platinum and glassy carbon electrodes are used as the reference, counter and working electrodes, respectively. In this study, the PbS microelectrodes with particle sizes below 320 meshes and their preparation are key for the cyclic voltammetry tests. The process for preparing the working electrode is as follows: first, 0.5 An inflatable hanging slot flotation machine (XFGC-80) with a usable capacity of 40 All of the ore sample used in infrared spectrometry (IR) measurement is synthesised by chemical precipitation. One gram of pure or impurity-bearing PbS sample and 20 The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were on a CHI660D-type electrochemical workstation. A 0.01 K The XRD patterns of the natural and synthetic impurity-doped galena are shown in XRD tests also suggested that the synthetic galena samples contained a small amount of additional phases. The lattice constant of the impurity-doped galena can be obtained using the MDI Jade program based on the XRD patterns. The measured lattice constants of the impurity-doped galena shown in The effects of the xanthate on the flotation recovery of the synthetic galena containing impurities are shown in  These observations are related to the magnitude of the activity product (  Three types of products including electrochemically adsorbed xanthate (X The cyclic voltammetric measurements were also conducted on the impurity-doped PbS electrodes, and the results are shown in  The transfer electron number ( Consequently, the two oxidation peaks (peaks 1 and 2, as shown in  The presence of impurities changes the electronic structure and conductivity of the galena surface, affecting reaction The presence of impurities also affects reaction The electric quantity (  The major products of the reaction between xanthate and a pure galena surface are the electrochemically adsorbed xanthate (X Two oxidation peaks are found on the cyclic voltammetry curves for the pure and impure PbS, and their reduction peaks are not obvious. The Ag and Bi enhance the X This research was funded by the