Structural equation modeling (SEM) is a statistical technique for testing and estimating causal relations using a combination of statistical data and qualitative causal assumptions. It can be considered as an extended statistical hypotheses testing with pre-defined structural model. However, when the SEM is applied as an exploratory technique in data mining, the traditional model depicts a fundamental limitation of incapacity of generating and refining structural model. A new SEM method is proposed in this paper, which combines the principles of cluster and regression analysis. Thus, the new mathematical model can not only generate factors to form model structure but also ensure the optimum relationship to the objective variables. The method is applied to a data set of lake sediment geochemical compositions for identifying gold mineralization associated factors in Southern Nova Scotia, Canada. A SEM model consisting of three measurement sub-models and one structural sub-model is created on the basis of the concentration values of 16 elements from 671 lake sediment samples. The calculated results show that the factors obtained by the new SEM model represent three geochemical factors that are associated with As and dominated by Cu, Zn and W, respectively.A structural equation model (SEM) is a class of multivariate statistical models that allow complex modeling of relational structures between independent and dependent variables. Although the SEM theory and methods are well developed, they are mainly scattered throughout several research fields, particularly education, psychology, sociology, and econometrics ( There are two main approaches for parameter estimation in SEM ( The case study deals with the identification of geochemical factors in regression to gold mineralization endogenous variables in the southwestern Nova Scotia, Canada. The geological map of the study area is given in In order to use the geochemical dataset we should understand the basic statistical property of the variables. The histogram and boxplots of raw concentration values of element The constitution of structural equation modeling with latent variables usually embodies two models: measurement model and structural model, which can be expressed by the following two equations ( Measurement model associating the latent exogenous variables (Ξ) and measurement variables (X): Measurement model associating the latent endogenous variables (Η) and measurement variables Y: Further, the general structural equation model can be expressed as follows: Herewith, X represents the vector of independent observed variables and Y represents the dependent observed variables. Ξ and H are latent variables involved in the two measurement models respectively corresponding to the factors from interdependent variables in X and dependent variables in Y. The (q A simple structure model can be further expressed in the flowchart shown in Since the ordinary SEM mainly focuses on a confirmatory analysis, a predefined structural model is needed for parameter estimation and hypothesis examination. However, for exploratory analysis and data mining purpose, a structural model needs to be generated from the data in order to implement SEM. The challenge is that there is no existing mathematical method for model construction in the current SEM. In this paper, a new method has been proposed to assist the model construction in SEM that involves one level measurement and structural models. This method uses a random sampling technology to classify the measurement variables x According to the classification method (Eq. In order to form a structure model for SEM, only one representative variable from each group will be used as the characteristic variables to define the latent variables to be included in the structure model. The characteristic variables will be embodied exclusively in only one latent variable. For example, the variable in each group with the largest regression coefficient with respect to target variable y Regarding the case study of extraction of factors in characterization of gold mineralization in the study area, all 15 geochemical elements were chosen as inputting variables for the classification with From As discussed in previous section, there are two approaches existed for SEM parameter estimation: CB-SEM and PLS-SEM. CB-SEM is usually used for confirmatory analysis but not for exploratory analysis, so we adopted a PLS-based algorithm for current model. The iterative procedure for PLS-SEM parameter estimation developed by Given the structure model defined with three latent variables each consisting of 13 elements, there are 13 loadings and one regression coefficient associated to each latent variable, in total 42 parameters are to be determined. By adjusting the value of the 42 values to minimum (Eq. The values obtained for all 39 parameters involved in the SEM model that include 3 regression coefficients and 36 loadings on the three latent variables (Var1, Var2 and Var3) are shown in In order to compare the results of SEM with other relevant methods we will further implement the MLR and FA to the same data as follows. The MLR was performed in a regression model between the dependent variable ( In order to compare the results obtained from SEM with those from FA, the FA was applied to the same data of all 15 elements (without As shown in the loading in The paper provides the first attempt to use the SEM technique to extract mineralization associated geochemical factors and has proposed a solution for SEM to be used as exploratory tool in geochemical data processing. With the new method, an initial model can be created by a new cluster analysis under the constraint of an objective variable. Then, a more general SEM model can be constructed and the regression coefficients involved in SEM can be estimated. A case study was introduced to validate the method by using the concentration values of 16 geochemical elements from 671 lake sediment samples. Three latent variables or factors were obtained to characterize gold mineralization in the study area. The three latent variables are characterized by three groups of elements ( The author thanks the editor and the two reviewers for their critical reviews of the manuscript and constructive comments. This research has been jointly supported by a research project on “Quantitative models for prediction of strategic mineral resources in China” (