An analytical method is presented for the calculation of the stability of a two-dimensional symmetric rock wedge which is formed in the roof of an underground circular opening within an inclined biaxial stress field. The stability of the wedge is evaluated using a two-stage relaxation procedure. In the first stage, the forces acting on the joint faces of the wedge are calculated analytically from the elastic stress distribution around the opening. Thus, formulae are provided that calculate the horizontal and vertical force components on the wedge faces exerted by the surrounding rock mass. In the second stage, a steadily increasing pull out force is applied to the wedge which strains its joints. Failure is assumed to occur due to simultaneous yield along the face of one of the joints. The stability of the wedge, which is expressed by its pull out resistance, is calculated from limit equilibrium equations at failure. Finally, analytically calculated values of the pull out resistance of the wedge are compared with numerically obtained ones using a discrete element code.The stability of a two-dimensional rock block formed in the roof or the walls of an underground opening depends on the orientation and size of the joints delineating the block, their strength and elastic properties, the deformability of the block and that of the surrounding rock mass and the stress field within the rock mass. When analyzing the stability of such a rock block with any kinematical method, such as those proposed by Goodman and Shi Bray Sofianos Elsworth Let us consider the case of In order to calculate the forces acting on the wedge at this stage we consider the equilibrium of the wedge with respect to the horizontal and vertical axis of the opening. Considering the equilibrium of the wedge in the horizontal direction we have The equilibrium of the wedge along vertical direction gives Let us now consider half wedge ABD, which again is in a state of equilibrium ( The force The force Let us consider the case of In If the wedge is in the roof of a circular tunnel in an arbitrary inclined natural stress field ( Using these forces the normal and shear forces acting on the joint faces of the wedge ( For the calculation of the carrying capacity of the wedge we consider an arbitrary displacement Let us suppose that during the movement of the wedge joint face 2 yields first, while face 1 remains elastic. Solving the equations of elasticity, equilibrium, kinematic compatibility and yield, the values for The lower value of Confinement of the wedge will be lost in face 2 when For the numerical simulation of the wedge the computer program UDEC Three series of models are prepared in the UDEC code: horizontal roof with straight free wedge face, horizontal roof with curved free wedge face and full-scale numerical models. In the first model series a symmetric wedge with semi-apical angle Modeling the wedge stability problem with UDEC involves two stages in the same manner as in the analytical procedure. In the first stage the joints are assumed infinitely stiff while the only force acting on the wedge is a horizontal confining force Ho, which is applied through an initial compressive uniform horizontal stress  The normalized pull out resistance of the wedge as calculated by the UDEC program is given in As it is observed from In the second model series the same wedge is placed in the roof of a circular opening with radius  For these model series a symmetric wedge with semi-apical angle In As it is observed from An analytical method is presented for the stability analysis of two-dimensional rock wedges in the roof of a circular tunnel excavated in an inclined natural stress field. Initially, forces acting on the wedge joint faces are evaluated analytically from the elastic stress distribution around the opening given by the Kirsch solution. Thus, formulae are provided for the calculation of the horizontal and vertical force components on the wedge faces exerted by the surrounding rock mass for the case of inclined natural stress field. These forces determine the confinement state of the wedge and the joint face that would yield first. The former depends mainly on the sign of the horizontal force component, however, a more complete formula that takes account of the apex angle is derived. The face that yields first depends on the sign of the vertical force components acting on the joints of the wedge. The pull out resistance of the wedge is then evaluated from formulae based on the limiting equilibrium conditions due to the yielding of one of the joint faces. In order to derive the latter formulae, a constant shear to normal force ratio along each joint face is assumed. Thus, by increasing the pull out force, the latter ratio reaches its maximum value equal to the friction coefficient, Validation of the analytical procedure is obtained with UDEC code, which provides an implementation of the Distinct Element Method in two dimensions. When the assumptions made in the analytical procedure are valid, the analytically calculated values for the pull out resistance of the wedge are computed to be identical with the numerically obtained ones. Deviation of analytic and numerical solutions comes when the ratio of shear to normal stress is not constant along the joint faces of the wedge. At this case progressive shear failure of joint faces is observed, starting from any point along the joint. This reduces the final joint shear forces and consequently the carrying capacity of the wedge. Thus, for many cases, the pull out resistance of the wedge is overestimated by the analytical solution. Numerical models show that the real carrying capacity of the wedge could be even half of that analytically calculated. Comparison between the UDEC analysis and the limit equilibrium analysis is helpful in that it indicates the limitations of the latter. It provides some idea of the magnitude of Factor of Safety that is needed in practice in applying the simple solution. Consequently, the accuracy of the analytical method depends on the simultaneous mobilization of shear strength along the joint face. Such may be the case where the direction of stress trajectories, along the joint face of the wedge, is not significantly varied. In a non-inclined stress field this would be the case of roof wedges with steep joints or small ratios of wedge height to tunnel radius. Despite these shortcomings of the model, which is a first-order approximation of the actual behavior, and which in some cases overestimates the carrying capacity of the wedge, the analysis is still useful for parametric evaluation of wedge stability, as it contains main features of the response of the wedge. Part of this research was funded from the State Scholarships Foundation of Greece through scholarship to the first of the authors for his Ph.D. studies.