The aim of the present study was to characterize the enzymatic deinking of various types of waste paper. Studies on the optimization of enzymatic deinking have been performed previously using commercially available enzyme preparations containing cellulase and hemicellulase. The enzymatic deinking of different types of waste paper demonstrated a high efficiency of 86.6% on laser-printed paper, but a low deinking efficiency of 12.9% was obtained with newspaper. All enzymatic treatments significantly improved the drainage rate of the deinked waste paper. Enzymatic deinking increased the tensile index of magazine paper but reduced the tensile index of bubble jet-printed paper, photocopy paper and newspaper. Enzymatic hydrolysis caused a 21.1% reduction in the tear index for bubble jet-printed paper, but a 3.1% increase in the tear index was obtained for laser-printed paper relative to respective blank. In addition, enzymatic hydrolysis increased the burst index by 4.7% relative to blank for laser-printed paper. However, photocopy paper showed the highest reduction (8.3%) in the burst index relative to blank. Taken together, these results suggest that enzymatic hydrolysis is both advantageous and detrimental to the mechanical properties of deinked paper. Thus, the proper regulation of enzymatic hydrolysis is crucial to improve the quality of recycled paper.Paper, as one of the largest solid waste materials, is relatively easy and inexpensive to recycle. The recycling of waste papers diminishes environmental pollution by reducing the flow of waste papers to landfills. Recycled and reused waste papers are important low-cost fiber resources (raw materials) for the pulp and paper industry. With increasing amounts of recycled and reused resources, waste papers constitute 95% of the raw materials in Malaysian paper mills Although Malaysia has extensive forest resources, with forests covering close to 60% of its land area, this country remains a major importer of paper. The Malaysian pulp and paper industry, including pulp/paper mills, paper converters and producers of paper containers/corrugated carton boxes, comprises more than 300 crowded and highly fragmented companies. In 2010 (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2011), the local production was estimated at a total capacity of more than 1.6 million metric tons per annum. However, this amount of production did not meet the total consumption of more than 4.2 million metric tons per annum. Thus, Malaysia imports pulp, newsprint, printing/writing papers and industrial papers, importing an estimated 0.98 million metric tons of printing/writing paper per year. Paper importing is inevitable, as only one mill in Malaysia (Sabah Forest) produces printing/writing paper, with a capacity of 165,000 metric tons per year Mixed office waste paper is a fast growing source of materials for recycling and the most difficult raw material for deinking Due to the significant number of disadvantages of conventional chemical methods, the development of an alternative method for deinking is required. The use of enzymes has been reported as a potentially efficient solution to overcome the problems encountered with traditional deinking techniques In addition, the used of cellulases and hemicellulase mixtures has been described to be able to deink high quality waste paper such as mixed office waste papers (MOW), which is the most difficult raw materials to be deinked by conventional deinking process. Thus, better brightness and cleanliness of the pulp can be obtained Currently, there are few studies on the effect of enzymes on deinking in Malaysia. Therefore, the use of enzymes for deinking must be given priority in the Malaysian paper industry as an environmentally friendly approach to recycling waste paper. Increasing the efficiency of waste paper recycling will lead to self-sufficiency, reduce imports and encourage foreign capital investment in the Malaysian pulp and paper industry. Therefore, the aim of this study was to characterize various types of enzymatically deinked waste paper, including laser-printed paper, photocopy paper, bubble jet-printed paper, newspaper and magazine paper, to provide further insight into the effects of enzymatic activity on various types of waste paper and develop an enzymatic deinking process that can improve the quality of recycled paper. The commercially available enzymes, cellulase A “Amano”3 (C) and hemicellulase “Amano”90 (H) were obtained from Amano Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd. (Nagoya, Japan). Both enzymes are produced by The waste paper used in this study was obtained from the Universiti Sains Malaysia (USM) campus. The waste papers were manually sorted to remove non-paper objects. The sorted waste papers were stored in a room away from sunlight and high moisture prior to use. The waste papers were shredded into small pieces and pre-treated with 0.25 For laser-printed paper, A4 size paper with a basis weight per area of 70–80 The deinking process was performed according to Lee et al. The handsheets were prepared according to the methods of the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI), TAPPI Test Method T205; forming handsheet for physical test of pulp. The prepared handsheets were conditioned under controlled conditions as described in TAPPI test method TAPPI T402 (standard conditioning and testing atmosphere for paper, board, pulp handsheets and related products) before evaluation. After enzymatic deinking, the paper was examined for optical (brightness), mechanical (tensile, tear and burst) and pulp (drainage rate) properties. The brightness was measured as described in TAPPI T452 (Brightness of Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard; Directional Reflectance at 457 After enzymatic hydrolysis, 10 All the experiments were performed in triplicate. The results are presented as the means of the triplicate experiments. The significance of differences between test variables was determined using a one-way ANOVA and the Least Significant Difference test with SPSS version 11.5 software. The evaluation of statistical significance was performed with a confidence interval of 95%.  The lowest deinking efficiency of 12.9% was obtained using newspaper, with a 50% final brightness (5 unit increase compared with blank paper) ( The ink vehicle used for printing influences the simplicity of ink removal from printed-paper through enzymatic hydrolysis The total amount of reducing sugar produced from the hydrolysis of waste paper differed for the different types of waste paper ( Moreover, different types of paper might be coated with different types of sizing agent. The sizing agent might inhibit enzyme activity through increased fiber hydrophobicity, physically shielding fiber surfaces from enzyme attachment or preventing access to fibers The drainage rate refers to the rate at which water is drained when a standard sheet weighing 60 Notably, the determined brightness and calculated drainage times of the deinked paper alone did yield an adequate pulp quality. Therefore, the brightness does not represent the overall deinked paper quality. Other parameters of the paper, such as burst strength, tensile strength and tear resistance, are also important. Therefore, further experiments were conducted to evaluate the quality of the deinked paper in term of its physical strength. The tensile index refers to tensile strength in N/m divided by the grammage. The tensile strength is the maximum tensile stress developed in a test specimen before rupture. It is a measure of the force required to tear the paper when pulled at opposite ends and in opposite directions. Cellulase and hemicellulase enzymes improve the tensile index of magazine paper ( Gubitz et al. Tearing resistance/strength refers to the ability of the paper to withstand the application of tearing forces measured in mN (milliNewtons). The tear index is calculated as the tearing strength divided by the grammage. Enzymatic hydrolysis improved the tear strength of laser-printed (3.1%) and magazine paper (2.8%) but reduced the tear strength of bubble jet-printed paper, newspaper and photocopy paper ( A numbers of studies have examined the effects of enzymes on the tearing strength of deinked paper. Whereas some studies have obtained positive effects, other studies have demonstrated deteriorating effects. Morkbak and Zimmermann In addition, for mild enzymatic hydrolysis, the reduction in pulp water interactions improves the drainage rate of the pulp without affecting the mechanical properties of the paper The burst strength refers to the hydrostatic pressure, measured in kilopascals (kPa) or pounds per square inch (psi), that is required to rupture the material when the pressure is increased at a controlled constant rate through a rubber diaphragm into a circular area with a 30.5 A slight improvement in the burst index (1.8%) was also detected after the enzymatic hydrolysis of newspaper. These results were consistent with Lee et al. In contrast, a significant drop ( The highest deinking efficiency was observed with laser-printed paper, but the lowest efficiency was obtained with newspaper. The enzymatic deinking process significantly improved the drainage rate of the deinked paper. However, the enzymatic process resulted in both positive and deleterious effects on the mechanical properties of deinked paper. Different papers are produced using different raw materials with various chemical compositions. In addition, different printing techniques and inks are used during the printing process. These differences might directly affect the efficiency of deinking, thereby resulting in mixed effects on the mechanical properties of deinked papers. This work was financially supported by a research grant from the