 Fractures that remain unstable or exhibit loss of reduction after successful closed reduction Shaft fractures, including transverse, spiral, and oblique patterns, can be treated with this procedure. Increased fracture comminution makes this procedure more difficult.  Symptoms and signs of trauma (swelling, tenderness, ecchymosis, open wounds) should be noted. Open wounds may indicate the presence of an open fracture, which will need vigorous debridement of the bone ( Digits with phalangeal fractures will have decreased mobility; this can make it difficult to detect malalignment. Passive wrist motion, resulting in tenodesis of the fingers, can be helpful in some patients. Significant fracture displacement or collapse can lead to digital shortening. This can be detected on examination by carefully assessing the length of each digit and comparing to the contralateral, uninjured hand. Malrotation can be evaluated by examining the finger posture relative to the adjacent digits, especially in mild flexion. Digits should normally converge slightly and point toward the scaphoid tuberosity.  Most phalangeal fractures can be evaluated by anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique plain radiographs ( Computed tomography (CT) is usually unnecessary for extraarticular fractures.  Both the extensor and flexor tendons insert on the base of the distal phalanx. Because there are few deforming forces crossing the fracture line, extraarticular fractures of the distal phalanx do not typically exhibit much displacement. The nail plate can function as a splint for nondisplaced fractures; however, displaced fractures typically disrupt the nail matrix, and should be treated as open fractures when this occurs.  Fractures of the middle phalanx typically displace in characteristic patterns, based on the location of the fracture. Specifically, displacement depends on the fracture location relative to the pull of the various extensor and flexor tendons. In a fracture of the distal third of the middle phalanx, the flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) pulls the proximal fragment into flexion, creating an apex-volar angular deformity ( In a fracture of the proximal third of the middle phalanx, the FDS pulls the distal fragment into flexion, and the central slip pulls the proximal fragment into extension, creating an apex-dorsal deformity (  The interosseous muscles insert onto the base of the proximal phalanx, tending to pull the proximal fragment into flexion. The central slip attachment at the base of the middle phalanx tends to extend the distal fragment. This mechanism typically causes an apex-volar deformity for most proximal phalangeal fractures.  Reduction is performed with gentle manipulation. If the fracture is open, debridement of the fracture site may be required, along with nail bed repair.  Retrograde insertion of the Kirschner wire (K-wire) is the most common method applied. The wire is inserted in the tuft of the bone distally and advanced across the fracture site while the fracture is held in reduction manually. In most cases, the wire should be advanced until it abuts the cortical bone at the base of the distal phalanx. For added stability, the wire can be advanced across the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint with minimal additional morbidity ( To prevent rotational displacement of the fracture around a single wire, a second wire can be placed across the fracture, ideally at a slightly divergent angle relative to the first wire. The tuft of the distal phalanx is immediately beneath the nail matrix. The entry point for a retrograde K-wire should be quite dorsal relative to the pulp of the finger, entering just volar to the hyponychium in most cases. When placing a second K-wire across the fracture site, be sure not to accidentally distract the fracture and disturb the reduction.  The distal end of the K-wire can be cut and buried beneath the skin, or it can be left protruding for easier removal later. A protective pin cap is used in the latter case, unless the wire is bent over on itself to obscure the sharp end. Wires left buried present less risk of infection during the postoperative period, but typically require a small incision under local anesthesia to remove the wire later.  Reduction is obtained by manipulation of the digit, incorporating traction or other maneuvers as indicated. Complex fractures may require a combination of these techniques. Simple transverse fractures with apex-volar angulation ( Long oblique or spiral fractures ( If final reduction can be obtained with the finger in flexion, it is convenient to compare the posture of the finger to its neighboring digits to easily detect malrotation. The finger can then be pinned while in that position, avoiding concerns of unwanted scissoring. Residual apex-volar deformity in proximal phalangeal fractures is easily overlooked, because the other digits may obscure the fracture in the lateral view. Confirm reduction of the fracture in multiple directions using intraoperative fluoroscopy.  K-wires of 0.045 in (1.1 mm) diameter are used in most adult phalangeal fractures. K-wires of 0.035 in (0.9 mm) or smaller diameter may be used in pediatric cases or in fractures with smaller, more delicate bone fragments. Ideal entry points and trajectory for K-wires are identified under fluoroscopic control. Insert K-wires antegrade or retrograde while holding the fracture reduced. For stable fixation, a minimum of two K-wires is recommended; often, additional wires are required to prevent the fracture from displacing. Each wire should be carefully placed with a purpose in mind, whether that is to prevent shortening, angulation, or rotation of the fracture ( For middle phalanx transverse fractures, retrograde transarticular pinning across the DIP joint should be considered. Pinning the DIP joint for a short period of time results in minimal morbidity. Pins can enter from the tuft of the distal phalanx or from the side of the fingertip, depending on fracture characteristics ( For proximal phalanx transverse fractures, two longitudinal or crossed K-wires are used to resist bending or rotation of the fracture during healing. These can often be placed with an extraarticular antegrade approach, entering from the radial and ulnar aspects of the proximal phalanx base, avoiding pins across the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint ( For oblique or spiral fractures, K-wires should be placed in multiple directions to stabilize the fracture against shortening, bending, and rotation (  Sometimes it is difficult to insert a K-wire into cortical bone at the acute angle desired because of the wire “glancing off” the bone, rather than engaging the cortex and advancing properly. In these cases, it is helpful to begin at a more obtuse angle first, then, once the wire has “engaged” but before it has fully advanced across the first cortex, the angle of approach can be altered by slowly adjusting the angle of the K-wire while the driver is spinning at a fast speed. This allows the sharp tip of the wire to gently carve a more acute starting point in the cortex. It can then be advanced in the desired direction without being deflected. This only works if the pressure applied on the driver is Remember that the purpose of K-wire fixation is to hold the fracture fragments stable for a few weeks (enough for early bony healing); however, care should be taken so that they do not interfere with early rehabilitation during that time. If possible, K-wire entry points should be chosen so they will not lead to unwanted skin irritation or tendon skewering with early motion.  The insertion points of K-wires should be selected so that wires do not transfix tendons in areas where tendon excursion is important. This will limit postoperative motion and may lead to tendon adhesions or tendon damage. Whenever possible, the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and MCP joints should be left free to participate in gentle early motion, even with the K-wires in place. Although transarticular pinning of the DIP for short periods of time is relatively safe, pinning other joints may lead to joint contractures with significant morbidity. Once the leading end of a K-wire has passed through cortical bone, its trajectory within the bone cannot be altered by simply changing the angle of the K-wire driver (drill). The wire must be withdrawn and reinserted to change its trajectory. Avoid making multiple passes back and forth with any given K-wire because this will make the bone channel larger around the wire and decrease that wire’s effectiveness.  After checking the alignment of the finger with visual inspection, and checking reduction of the fracture with fluoroscopy, K-wires are trimmed and/or bent, and protective pin caps are applied. A protective splint is typically fashioned to protect the hand during the early postoperative period. This is typically applied in an intrinsic plus position, or a position of function.  To prevent K-wire migration, it is helpful for the leading end of the K-wire to be abutting cortical bone whenever possible. Alternatively, the exposed (trailing) end of the wire can be bent into an angle that will discourage inward migration of the wire. Make sure the splint is designed with enough padding around the wires, and make sure it extends beyond any distally protruding wires, so that the patient will not bump or catch exposed wires on their surroundings postoperatively. As K-wires are bent and/or protective caps applied, be sure the position of the wire is protected to avoid dislodging the wire or displacing the fracture. One can prevent this by grasping the wire with a heavy needle driver at the point where it exits the skin and firmly immobilizing the wire while these manipulations are performed.  Depending on the fracture pattern, it is usually best to have the patient return to clinic within a week to begin hand therapy. At the first postoperative visit, the bulky operative dressing is removed and the patient is fitted with a custom orthosis to protect against fracture displacement and to protect the pins from accidental manipulation or trauma. The orthosis is removed for hand therapy exercises and pin care. Uninjured fingers can begin therapy immediately to avoid unwanted stiffness. Even with wires in place, the injured digit can typically participate in gentle active range of motion, so long as the fixation is relatively stable. Because K-wires do not offer the same stability as plates and screws, an experienced hand therapist should supervise early motion activities, and exercises should be carefully individualized to the patient. Pins are usually removed in 3 to 4 weeks. This is usually enough time for early bone healing to have stabilized the fracture. The best clinical test for fracture healing is the resolution of fracture pain with palpation. Radiographs take much longer to show bony union and therefore should not be used to guide the timing of pin removal. Earlier pin removal can be considered in children because healing is typically faster. Following pin removal, the orthosis is still used for protection for an additional 3 to 4 weeks. After 6 to 8 weeks, fractures are typically healed enough to discontinue protection with an orthosis. There is an 80% to 90% chance that acute phalangeal fractures treated with this procedure will achieve excellent or good outcomes ( Once pins are removed, buddy-taping or strapping of the injured digit to an adjacent, uninjured digit can facilitate improvements in functional motion while maintaining alignment during final fracture healing. Delaying pin removal until 5 or 6 weeks is not generally recommended, especially if pins are interfering with motion of the MCP and/or PIP joints. This will lead to joint contractures that may be impossible to overcome, even with appropriate hand therapy. 