The Acheson process still remains the method of choice for the industrial production of silicon carbide. The furnace operates in an unsteady thermal regime thus making it difficult to determine the kinetics of the process. In the present study, FactSage Software was used to get an insight and verify the dominant reactions occurring during operation. Moreover, the effect of impurities on the overall process efficiency and product quality is also discussed. The study is intended to clarify the effect of varying the SiO2/C ratio on the composition of the reactants taking part in the SiC formation reaction. Further, a deeper understanding of the formation process is developed and verified.Silicon carbide (SiC) has gained industrial importance over the years owing to its attractive properties such as low density, good creep resistance, high hardness and wear resistance, high temperature stability, high thermal conductivity and high elastic modulus and strength. A large portion of SiC produced in South Africa is medium grade (82–88%SiC) and therefore is extensively used as a reductant and deoxidant in the iron and steel making industry [ The furnace construction consists of a central electrode in the form of a graphite core surrounded by a mixture of raw materials consisting of mainly a carbon source, silica sand and in some instances additives such as sawdust and sodium chloride (NaCl) are included [ However due to the existence of a variety of impurities in coal, it would be of interest to understand the behaviour of some of the most prominent impurities found in coal and their impact on the process efficiency and the quality of SiC produced. The formation of SiC is dominated by gas/solid sub reactions at temperatures in excess of 2000 °C. The issue of gas transport mechanisms has not been properly addressed in earlier literature and there is controversy over the role of the liquid product, SiO in the formation of SiC. The thermodynamics of SiC formation has been covered quite extensively in earlier studies The FACTSage There are different models in open literature that describe the thermodynamic and kinetics of the Acheson process. In the literature before 1970 mostly only simple reactions were taken into account and not a complete minimisation of free energy was used for the explanation of the process [ In open literature, the generally accepted mechanism of SiC formation is through the gas/solid interactions which involves the SiO gaseous species as shown in reactions (1), (2) and (3) below. To further elaborate on this, a simple model was developed to give an insight on the reactions occurring at the particle surfaces as follows: The reaction in The reaction in At temperatures below SiO It must be noted that the decomposition of SiO  The calculations were extended over a higher temperature range (1600–2400 °C) with the stoichiometric SiO A further calculation was carried out to show the effect of varying the SiO Thermodynamic calculations show that several gaseous products exist. The gaseous species identified in the calculated plots above are Si, CO  The behaviour of alumina is shown in the calculated vapour pressures over the stoichiometric composition of SiO Alumina is stable up to 1900 °C, nevertheless Al The partial pressures increase strongly with increasing temperature up to the complete decomposition of Al The FeO reduces at lower temperatures ∼1500 °C and the partial pressure of Fe increases at higher temperatures ( The calculations have reconfirmed that the formation of Silicon Carbide in the Acheson process is dominated by solid-gas reactions. The dominant gas phases taking part in the process are SiO and CO. The CO formed is more stable in the hotter zone whereas other gas components are more stable in the cooler regions. CO is the major component of the gas atmosphere. The temperature at which the SiC is formed in a CO atmosphere is strongly depended on the gas pressure. A high CO partial pressure enables the reaction between CO and SiC to produce SiO required for the formation of new SiC crystals. The existence of a liquid phase SiO suggested in earlier studies is not substantiated in the present study. The impurities CaO and MgO have been shown to evaporate as Ca(g) and Mg(g) at temperatures below 2000 °C. These tend to enrich in the outer zone of the furnace and these impurities are least expected in the inner core zone. Alumina undergoes a reduction reaction to form gaseous Al and Al A SiO W. R. Matizamhuka: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.