The purpose of this study is the preparation and characterization of highly oriented collagen/hydroxyapatite (COLL/HA) composite materials, through a self-assembling method, starting from collagen gel and hydroxyapatite precursors by an in vitro modified mineralization method. Briefly, this method can be descript as follow: collagen gel (containing 3.21% collagen) is firstly let 24h in contact with Ca(OH)2 suspension in order that Ca2+ neutralize the COOH groups than, in the second stage, the corresponding NaH2PO4 is added, in order to form HA. The synthesis of COLL/HA nanocomposite is performed under controlled experimental conditions: 37°C, pH=9 and air drying. The morphology of the composite material is strongly influenced by the drying method, especially due to the drying time. If the freeze drying method is used the obtained material is highly porous, but no orientation can be observed. In air, the drying is slow enough so that the wet composite material can reorganize and become uniaxial oriented. Our results prove that in certain conditions, oriented COLL/HA nanocomposites materials can be obtained, starting from collagen and hydroxyapatite precursors, through a very simple and accessible method. It is quite difficult to quantify the orientation degree of the composite, but, most of the fibres are uniaxialy oriented, the average orientation degree being 97.46%. The resulted composite materials were characterized by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Differential Thermal Analysis coupled with Thermal Gravimetry Analysis (DTA-TG), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM).On the US medical devices market the orthopaedics (24%) play a very important role, being advanced only by the cardiovascular sector Collagen and hydroxyapatite are the main components of the bone tissue There are two fundamental types of bony tissue: trabecular and cortical. The cortical bone is composed by osteons which are mineralized collagen fibres, disposed parallel each to other. Even if the two types of bony tissue are compositionally similar, due to the different hierarchical structuring the properties are very different. In order to obtain bone-like COLL/HA composite materials, having similar properties with the trabecular bone, the collagen fibres have to be unidirectionally orientated Even for the same composition, the bones’ properties can vary very much with morphology. The most important parameters which influence the properties of bone substitutes prepared in the collagen/HA system are: orientation of collagen molecules, fibrils and fibres that influences the hydroxyapatite structure and orientation; the porosity; the nature and quantity of cross-linking agent and processing methods Murugan and Ramakrishna In this paper we proposed to improve the COLL/HA composite materials from the third generation by self-assembling. The novelty of this paper mainly consists in the synthesis of the COLL/HA composite materials which had structural and compositional similitude to natural bone. This work presents some points of novelty, the most important being: the synthesis, the methodology of determination of the orientation degree and the mechanism of formation of the COLL/HA composite materials with uniaxial orientation of the constitutive fibres. The self-assembling of the uniaxial oriented mineralized collagen fibrils and fibres is relieved at micrometric (based on SEM images) but also at nanometric level (especially based on TEM and SAED). The mechanism of synthesis of the composite materials with uniaxial orientation of the constitutive fibres was proposed based on the literature data and the obtained experimental results. The collagen gel (M.W. Hydroxyapatite was obtained in situ, in the presence of the collagen gel. The precursors used for HA synthesis were calcium hydroxide (p.a.) and orthophosphoric acid (p.a.), both purchased from FLUKA. The mineralization process of collagen gel consists of two successive stages. In the first stage, the collagen gel is treated with the desired amount of Ca(OH) pH 9 was choose based on two characteristics of the collagen molecules: at pH the fibrillogenesis is increasing in the range of 6.6–9.2. The main processes which occur during the synthesis are represented in Function of the mineralization pH, we can obtain different morphologies ( After synthesis and drying, the composite material was analysed by: X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Differential Thermal Analysis coupled with Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (DTA-TGA). X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a Shimadzu XRD 6000 diffractometer at room temperature, using Cu Kα radiation. The samples were scanned in the Bragg angle, 2 SEM analyses were performed on a HITACHI S2600N electron microscope with EDAX, on samples covered with silver layer. The transmission electron images were obtained on finely powdered samples using a Tecnai™ G For IR measurements, Brucker—VERTEX V70 spectrophotometer was used. The spectra were recorded over the wave number range of 400–4000 The differential thermal analysis (DTA) coupled with thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a Shimadzu DTG-TA-50H, at a heating rate of 10 XRD was used to evidentiate the mineralization process. The XRD spectrum, in In the case of COLL/HA composite obtained by self-assembly comparing with the HA obtained by precipitation, the X-ray diffraction pattern is evidenciating a much higher intensity for the 2 The self-assembling structure of collagen molecules and hydroxyapatite particles can be proved by Scanning Electron Microscopy ( Whatever the analysis section, the recorded SEM images show the formation of collagen fibrils and fibres, which are mineralized with HA. The SEM image presented in At high magnification from SEM image, it can be seen that the dimensions of the HA crystals are in the nanometric range (4–40 The SEM images obtained at different magnification, in the rupture, on parallel and perpendicular direction of collagen fibres, are showing a homogenous microstructure, with fibres organized in layers, with high orientation. Taking also in consideration the way in which the rupture took place, and also the fact that we have a high concentration of HA grains in the rupture points we might conclude that the COLL/HA composite material synthesized has a very similar structure with that of the natural long bone, that have been obtained through auto-assembling process. Obviously the orientation is difficult to quantify and only a few methods permit this kind of measurements (and usually these are indirect methods); the orientation will be quantify based on the SEM images. In order to quantify the orientation, we choose the “ if 90 if 180 if 270 if 0 Based on the above mentioned and the SEM image presented in It is worthy to note that because of the preparation of the sample collagen fibres are destroyed and only the collagen molecules and fibrils will be possible to visualize by TEM ( HR-TEM analysis is done in order to study the interaction between the collagen fibrils and the HA nanoparticles. The HA particle has an average dimension of a few nanometers and can be identified on the collagen fibrils (molecules) but also at the end of them. Based on these images it can be assert that collagen and hydroxyapatite lead to a composite material with a good similarity with the natural bone as described by Cui et al. Based on the work published by Kikuchi et al. The two main processes which occur upon thermal treatment are evidentiated by DTA and TG (DTG) curves ( It is worthy to mention that the temperature of the two-step decomposition process of the composite studied here are very close to those reported by Lozano et al. The infrared spectra ( The characteristic peaks of hydroxyapatite were determined by deconvolution: For collagen, the characteristic peaks are: 1650 The wide peak at 3000–3500 The integrity of the collagen from the composite material was proved based on the method described by Silva et al. The obtained results have proved the formation of a COLL/HA composite materials, with a highly oriented structure, that can be due to auto-assembling process, which took place during synthesis. Many research studies are dedicated to self-assembling of different materials, many of them involving proteins Hydrogen bond occurs inside the collagen molecule (between the three constituents polypeptides), between collagen molecules (as shown in Electrostatic interaction occurs especially between Ca If we accept that the self-assembling of collagen fibrils and fibres and HA particle are the same as in collagen molecules and HA, the schematic representation of collagen–HA assembling presented in The obtained composite structure is in good agreement with the structure proposed by Hellmich et al. The purpose of this study was to obtain and characterize the COLL/HA composite materials, which mimic the natural long bone. Hydroxyapatite was obtained by co-precipitation in the presence of collagen gel. In fact, starting from collagen gel and hydroxyapatite precursors, in certain conditions, due to the interactions between collagen, hydroxyapatite and water it was obtained self-assembled, highly oriented composite materials. It can note that, many authors published a lot of papers dealing with COLL/HA composite materials which start from collagen gel and calcium hydroxide and ortophosphoric acid as precursors, but due to the inadequate processing conditions they do not obtained the uniaxial orientation of the constitutive fibres. In aqueous solution the collagen molecules and hydroxyapatite precursors have the capacity to induce synthetic bone formation by self-assembling. The obtained composite material is more similar with compact bones morphology; the recorded analysis being very similar with these bones. Very important is that we also propose a new way to estimate the average deviation of fibres and we determined it, assuming a 2D model. The average deviation is ∼2.54 The area of knowledge in the field of COLL/HA composites materials orientation was improved by assisted self-assembling. This work was partially supported by Romanian National Authority for Scientific Research through projects: 206/1.10.2007 and 71_147/14.09.2007.