Non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel was synthesized by mechanical alloying (MA) followed by spark plasma sintering (SPS). The effect of MA with milling time on phase formation and microstructural evolution was analyzed by X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The dissolution of the elemental peaks with milling time and formation of the solid solution phase was followed systematically. The formation of a metastable BCC phase (a = 2.91 ± 0.02 Å) was observed after 40 h of milling. The average particle size of the 40 h milled powder was varying in the range of ∼ 8–10 μm. SPS of the 40 h milled powder at 1000 °C showed the phase transformation. The single-phase BCC structure was transformed into the FCC (austenite type) (cF4) (a = 3.58 ± 0.01 Å), B2 (cP2) (a = 2.87 ± 0.02 Å), Cr3Si (cP8) (a = 4.54 ± 0.04 Å) and Cr23C6 (cF116) (a = 10.62 ± 0.03 Å) phases. The spark plasma sintered sample had shown the density of 6.8 g/cm3. Hardness and wear properties of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy alloy was determined by Vickers hardness and pin-on-disk system respectively. The alloy had shown the hardness of 596 HV with wear loss (rate) of 1.7 × 10−8 mm3/m. This high entropy alloy steel requires more investigation to classify them as a wear-resistant material.The development of conventional alloys for engineering applications relies on the property and explicit microstructure of alloys designed with one or two elements as major components (solvent) with or without addition of other minor elements as a solute. The addition of these minor elements depends upon the property required for specific applications. Based on the major metallic element in the alloy, they are referred by its major metallic element e.g., Al-, Ni-, Fe-, Ti-based alloys [ Sometimes the single-phase equiatomic first-generation HEAs have certain limitations leading the way for recent advancement in the HEA design concepts based upon significant composition modification with near or non-equiatomic fraction of alloying elements. These second-generation near or non-equiatomic HEAs mainly refer to a class of HEAs containing more than four prinicpal elements with a multiphase structure [ The fabrication routes other than ingot metallurgy routes (i.e.,vacuum arc melting or induction melting) [ Our motivation is to develop a low density high strength steel by modifying the quinary Fe–Mn–Al–Si-C high entropy steels and a novel Fe The elemental powders of Fe, Mn, Ni, Cr, Al, Si, C with particle size less than 200 mesh and purity ≥ 99% were weighed in non-equiatomic proportion having nominal chemical composition of Fe The structural and microstructural analysis of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel powder was done by X-ray diffraction (Rigaku mini flex-600, Cu-k The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel powder at different milling hours are shown in    Hardness under a load of 20 N of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel sintered at 1000 °C (1273 K) and 50 MPa was found to be ∼ 596 HV. The non-equiatomic high entropy steel has FCC, B2-type phase, Cr Wear tester machine is used to determine the wear rate under a load of 20 N. The average wear rate of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel sintered at 1000 °C (1273 K) and 50 MPa is found to be 1.7 × 10 The phase evolution of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel during mechanical alloying was also explained based on the thermodynamic parameters. For the phase prediction of high entropy alloys, several parameters are proposed. It is known that the high configurational entropy of HEAs is not the only factor to dominate the formation of phases in these systems. Lower diffusivity (kinetics) also helps to forms a solid solution. Some useful criteria for phase formation for high entropy alloys are understood to be high mixing enthalpy (ΔH For the formation of a single-phase HEA solid solution Ω ≥ 1 and δ ≤ 6.6%. Average valence electron concentration (VEC) is also important for the formation of BCC, FCC, and BCC + FCC phases. When VEC≥8 single FCC phase solid solution forms. For VEC≤6.87 and 6.87 ≤ VEC≤8, BCC and BCC + FCC phases form respectively. These predictions support previous HEA compositions for solid solution phase formation. All the parameters calculated for the non-equiatomic composition of present work are shown in The sequence of phase evolution during mechanical alloying of non-equiatomic high entropy steel may be described as follows: (i) at 0 h pre-mixed elemental powders of Fe, Mn, Ni, Cr, Al, Si, and C; (ii) after 5 h the minor peaks of all the elemental elements disappear and the peaks of C disappear completely; (iii) after 10 h the significant broadening of Fe, Mn, Ni, Cr, Si, elemental peaks and the peaks of Al disappear completely; (iv) after 20 h the significant broadening of Fe, Cr, Ni, Mn and peaks of Si disappear; (v) after 30 h the BCC phase forms (close to Fe) and Mn completely disappears; (vi) after 35 h the BCC phase exhibits the reduction in crystallite size and increase in strain; (vii) after 40 h BCC phase (close to Fe) only exit. The peak intensity decreases along with increase in broadening may be due to the decrease in crystallite size and increasing in lattice strain in course of millings. After 30 h of milling the alloy forms single phase solid solution. The milling was further continued till 40 h to investigate any phase transformation of single BCC phase formed after 30h of MA. However no such changes were observed even after prolonged duration of milling. The experimental results clearly show the single BCC phase (close to Fe) structure after the 40 h of mechanical milling. The phase evolution is also dependent on the physical parameters (shown in The SEM micrographs is consolidated by SPS. High magnified image ( The hardness may be attributed to the grain refinement during MA and the presence of hard B2 phase, solid solution strengthening, and precipitation of intermetallics. In the present investigation, the high hardness of non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel is possibly due to the formation of the ordered B2 phase and the formation of Cr According to the Archard equation, In the present study, non-equiatomic FeMnNiCrAlSi–C high entropy steel after MA for 40 h has led to the formation of a metastable single-phase of BCC (a = 2.91  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to thank Profs. Om Prakash and R K Mandal for stimulating discussion. Authors also would like to thank the International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials (ARCI), Hyderabad for extending facilities of ARCI. The help and support of Dr. Rampada Manna, Coordinator, Advanced Research Centre for Iron and Steel (ARCIS) for extending facilities of ARCIS is thankfully acknowledged. The support of Central Instrument Facility (CIF), IIT (BHU), Varanasi is appreciated. Authors would like to thank the Department of Science and Technology (DST) for infrastructural support under the scheme “Funds for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure (FIST)” Level-II. One of the author (HJ) acknowledges the support extended by Dr. Abhishek Dwivedi and Mr. Ankit Singh for image processing. Authors (YS) and (HJ) are grateful to Mr. Lalit Kumar Singh for timely help in conducting SEM-EDS experiments.