Heterojunction solar cells (a-Si:H/c-Si) are interface dominated devices and hence suppression of charge carrier recombination at the a-Si:H/c-Si interface is a very important aspect. Till now, all efforts and results have been obtained on mono-crystalline silicon. It would be very important from the technological point of view if similar high efficiency devices are realized on cheaper mc-Si wafers. The aim of this work is to study the passivation effect on mc-Si wafer by i-a-Si:H thin layer. The i-a-Si:H thin passivation layer is deposited on mc-Si wafer by Hot-Wire CVD at various filament temperature and silane flow rates. The passivation effect has been studied by effective carrier lifetime measurement and implied open circuit voltage.Silicon wafer based solar cells still dominate the photovoltaic industry. The undesirable high processing temperature step in conventional p–n junction solar cell now has been removed by the introduction of heterojunction with intrinsic thin layer (HIT) solar cells. These can be fabricated below 200 The hot-wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) is a deposition technique in which a precursor gas gets dissociated over a resistively heated filament (usually tungsten or tantalum) to obtain the required species to be deposited on the substrate. The distance between the filament and the substrate which plays a very important role in film forming species, was kept constant during this study at 6.7 Effective charge carrier lifetime (τ In the case of n-type wafer we have n Filament temperature plays a very important role in the structural properties of the film since its value decides the decomposition efficiency per silane molecule and the nature of released radicals after the catalytic reaction. The concentration of atomic hydrogen (H) near the growing surface has been identified as a critical parameter for the passivation of c-Si wafer and since in hot-wire CVD, the filament itself acts as a very effective source of atomic hydrogen one should take this fact into consideration. In this study, a series of samples was grown at T The silane gas flow rate was varied from 10 The passivation of mc-Si wafer by i-a-Si:H layer has done at various filament temperatures and gas flows by HWCVD technique. The effective charge carrier lifetime and implied Voc are measured by QSSPC. The effective carrier lifetime of mc-Si wafers is increased about eight times as compared to the as received wafers. The implied Voc shows a maximum of 635 One of the authors (M. Agarwal) acknowledges