In this paper, a series of novel flexible phase-change smart lines were fabricated by double encapsulating paraffin into polypropylene hollow fiber membranes (PPHFMs) and expanded graphite (EG) to overcome liquid leakage during phase transition and enhance thermal conductivity of paraffin. An available theoretical calculation method was developed to predict and evaluate the encapsulation ability of PPHFM. PPHFM after stretching 50% (PPHFM50) exhibited a considerable paraffin encapsulation capacity about 70.23 wt% (PP50-CPCM), and showed minimal impact on the phase change behavior of paraffin. PP50-CPCM was hence selected for injecting paraffin/expanded graphite to prepare phase-change smart lines (PEP-CPCMs) aiming at the high thermal conductivity and higher paraffin encapsulation capacity. The results indicated that the thermal conductivity of PEP-CPCMs with 2.08 wt% EG was obviously improved by 75%, and the maximum paraffin encapsulation capacity was 85.31 wt%. Moreover, the excellent thermal stability, thermal reliability and chemical compatibility of PEP-CPCMs were also confirmed. Interestingly, PEP-CPCMs were employed to twine the water cup (smart temperature adjustment cup). The results indicated that the flexible phase-change smart lines showed great potential in thermal energy storage applications.Paraffin as a member of phase change materials (PCMs) for energy storage exhibits the advantages of non-toxicity, chemically inert, plasticity and low cost [ Polypropylene hollow fiber membrane (PPHFM) is important in membrane separation technology and has been widely used in the field of membrane separation application[ However, polypropylene as a supporting material usually results in CPCMs with lower thermal conductivity [ In this work, the paraffin was double encapsulated by TIPS-prepared PPHFMs and EG to overcome liquid leakage during phase transition and enhance thermal conductivity of paraffin. Meanwhile, an available theoretical calculation method was developed to predict and evaluate the encapsulation ability of PPHFM. The effects of pore size on the phase change behavior of paraffin was investigated. The PPHFM with the best stretching ratio was selected for encapsulating paraffin/EG composites (PE-CPCMs) with high thermal conductivity to prepare phase-change smart lines (PEP-CPCMs). The thermal conductivity of PEP-CPCMs was evaluated using calculation method. The phase change behavior, microstructure morphology, chemical compatibility and thermal reliability of PEP-CPCMs were respectively evaluated in detail. Moreover, the prepared phase-change smart lines were applied to a smart temperature adjustment cup for testing to evaluate the energy storage performance. Polypropylene (T30s) was supplied by Lanzhou Petrochemical Co., Ltd., China. Dioctyl phthalate (DOP) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP) with content of 99.5% were purchased from Jinan Xinruiyuan Chemical Co., Ltd., China. Paraffin was purchased from Shanghai Huayong Paraffin Wax Co., Ltd., China. The melting point of paraffin obtained by differential scanning calorimetry was 166 °C. Expandable graphite with particle size of 200 mesh was supplied by Beijing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. PPHFMs were prepared by TIPS in four steps. Firstly, 20 wt% of PP and 80 wt% of DOP and DBP (the mass ratio is 2:1) mixed solvent were stirred at 195 °C for 3 h in a nitrogen atmosphere to form a uniform cast membrane solution. Secondly, cast membrane solution with flow rate of 45 CC/min was extruded from a single-hole tube-in orifice spinneret to form hollow fiber membrane at 180 °C. DOP as a core liquid, the temperature and flow rate were 70 °C and 30 CC/min, respectively. The hollow fiber membrane was completely cooled in water at 23 °C after passing through a 10 mm air gap and wound on a winder. Thirdly, the hollow fiber membrane was immersed in absolute ethanol for 36 h to extract the solvent remaining in the pores of membrane. The membrane was dried in oven at 110 °C for 30 min to obtain PPHFM. Fourthly, the PPHFMs were respectively stretched by 50%, 100% and 150% at 25 °C. The PPHFMs with different stretching ratios were heat set at 110 °C for 1 h. For the preparation of PEP-CPCMs, EG was obtained by treating expandable graphite at 800 °C for 10 min. PPHFMs and EG were respectively immersed in molted paraffin for 2 h and sonicated for 15 min to prepare PP-CPCMs and PE-CPCMs ( The microstructure of PPHFMs, PP-CPCMs and PEP-CPCMs were observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Quanta FEG250). An electronic universal tensile machine (MTS CMT6104) was used to test tensile strength of PPHFMs. Mercury porosimeter (Micromeritics AutoPore IV 9510) was employed to measure porosity and average pore size of PPHFMs. Heat storage behavior and thermal reliability of samples were measured by differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, TA Q10). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR, Nicolet NEXUS 570) was used to characterize the chemical compatibility between components in samples. Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA, TA Q50) was used to analysis the thermal stability of samples. The thermal conductivity (λ) of samples was calculated from the thermal diffusivity, specific heat capacity and density of samples [ The property of smart temperature adjustment cup was tested at 20 °C. The weight of PE0P50-CPCM and PE5P50-CPCM were 8.3 g and 8.5 g, respectively. The initial temperature and volume of water were 90 °C and 50 ml, respectively. The test was conducted from 90 °C to 30 °C and the temperature recording interval was 10 s. The supporting materials used to encapsulate the PCMs were generally required to exhibit high porosity and good mechanical properties. Therefore, the stretching process was implemented to increase the porosity and strength of the PPHFM, which will facilitate the improvement of paraffin absorption capacity and the application of PCMs. PPHFMs with four stretching ratios were prepared for encapsulating paraffin ( The absorption capacity of PCMs is one of the issues that must be considered when selecting a supporting material. Typically, the actual absorption capacity of PCMs packaged in supporting material was calculated by the following equations [ Therefore, Eq. The Eq. Four types of PP-CPCMs were prepared to investigate the effects of stretching ratios on absorption capacity. The paraffin absorption capacity of PP0-CPCM, PP50-CPCM, PP100-CPCM and PP150-CPCM reached 61.11 wt%, 70.23 wt%, 71.04 wt% and 71.81 wt%, respectively. Obviously, with the increased of the stretching ratios of PPHFMs, the paraffin absorption capacity of PP-CPCMs did not showed a significant increase. The phenomenon may be caused by the fact that the porosity of the PPHFMs did not significantly increase during the stretching process. The cross-section images of PP-CPCMs are shown in In order to select the PPHFM with the best stretching ratio for paraffin encapsulation, the effects of pore sizes of PPHFMs on phase change behavior of PP-CPCMs was investigated. It was obvious from The peak temperature and phase change latent heat of the paraffin during the melting process were 54.10 °C and 140.00 J/g, respectively. The peak temperature and latent heat of paraffin during the solidifying process were 48.72 °C and 145.01 J/g, respectively. However, compared with paraffin, the melting and crystallizing peaks of PP-CPCMs moved toward low temperature and high temperature, respectively. Meanwhile, the temperature of the crystallizing peaks of PP-CPCMs except for PP50-CPCM decreased as the PPHFMs stretching ratio increased. These phenomena may be caused by the network-like pore structures in the PPHFMs. According to reports in the literature [ In summary, PPHFM50 exhibited the high porosity and considerable micropore structure, which showed the least effects on the phase change behavior of paraffin. The corresponding PP50-CPCM showed the maximum latent heat and considerable paraffin absorption capacity. Therefore, PPHFM50 was used as supporting material to prepare five types of PEP-CPCMs with paraffin/EG CPCMs (PE-CPCMs) ( The microstructure and photograph of PEP-CPCMs are shown in The chemical compatibility of the components in PEP-CPCMs was studied by FT-IR spectra ( The high thermal conductivity could effectively increase the charge/discharge rate of the PCMs. The thermal conductivity of paraffin decreased from 0.23 W/m K to 0.20 W/m K after being encapsulated in PPHFM50 due to the low thermal conductivity of PP ( In practical applications, CPCMs are required to perform multiple charging and discharging processes. In this work, 200 heating-cooling cycles were performed for the PE5P50-CPCM to investigate the thermal reliability of the PE5P50-CPCM. From Thermal stability was also one of the important indicators for testing materials. The TGA and DTG curves of paraffin, PPHFM50 and PEP-CPCMs are presented in The property of the smart temperature adjustment cup was carried out in a constant temperature room at 20 °C. The water temperature dropped from 90 °C to 30 °C. The temperature versus time curves were produced by monitoring the water temperature change in the cup ( In this work, the liquid leakage during phase transition and low thermal conductivity of paraffin were solved by double encapsulating paraffin into polypropylene hollow fiber membranes (PPHFMs) and expanded graphite (EG). A series of novel flexible phase-change smart lines were fabricated. An available theoretical calculation method was developed to predict and evaluate the encapsulation ability of PPHFM. The predicted values were consistent with experimental results. PPHFM with stretching ratio of 50% (PPHFM50) had the best stretching ratio and pore size, which showed the least effects on the phase change behavior of paraffin. Five phase-change smart lines (PEP-CPCMs) containing 0, 0.97 wt%, 1.34 wt%, 1.76 wt% and 2.08 wt% of EG were successfully prepared by injecting PE-CPCMs with high thermal conductivity in the cylindrical cavity of PP50-CPCM (paraffin impregnated PPHFM50). The paraffin encapsulation capacity of PEP-CPCMs decreased as the weight ratio of EG increased, while the thermal conductivity of PEP-CPCMs increased as the weight ratio of EG increased. The PE0P50-CPCM and PE5P50-CPCM exhibited maximum paraffin encapsulation capacity (85.31 wt%) and the highest thermal conductivity (0.35 W/m K), respectively. The PE5P50-CPCM with 80.12 wt% of paraffin could maintain its phase change after 200 heating-cooling cycles. Finally, PEP-CPCMs were applied to a smart temperature adjustment cup. The results indicated that the PEP-CPCMs were able to properly adjust the water temperature in the cup. The novel flexible phase-change smart lines shows high flexibility, high paraffin encapsulation capacity, high thermal conductivity, good thermal stability and excellent chemical compatibility, indicating that it has great potential in thermal energy storage applications. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at