The ligands catechol, citrate, EDTA, oxalate and tiron were investigated for their ability to improve the dissolution of serpentine in ultramafic nickel ores at neutral to alkaline pH to enhance mineral carbon sequestration. It is desirable to leach magnesium from serpentine in ores at neutral to alkaline pH so that leaching and carbonation can be conducted at the same pH value, and ultimately so that the reagent requirements of mineral carbon sequestration can be reduced. Both solution modeling and experimental work were conducted. The solution modeling revealed that each of the ligands studied is able to enhance the solubility of magnesium at the desired pH, with the order of effectiveness being EDTA>tiron>citrate>catechol>oxalate. Experimentally it was shown that the ligands studied could improve both the total amount and rate of magnesium leaching from ultramafic nickel ores. The order of ligand effectiveness based on the experimental work for the Pipe ore was EDTA⩾tiron>catechol>oxalate⩾citrate. For the OK ore, the order was tiron>EDTA=catechol>oxalate>citrate. Overall, the ligands studied in this work, particularly EDTA, tiron, and catechol, appear promising for enhancing the dissolution of serpentine in ultramafic nickel ores at neutral to alkaline pH.The rate limiting step during aqueous mineral carbon sequestration (MCS) is the dissolution of the silicate mineral ( Although indirect aqueous MCS processes utilizing proton-promoted dissolution can achieve high carbonate conversions under relatively mild processing conditions, the chemical reagent requirements can be prohibitively high as chemicals must be added both for the extraction of the reactive component, and for pH adjustment after leaching for carbonate precipitation ( Recently, interest in developing a chemically-enhanced direct aqueous MCS process has arisen ( Ligands, or chelating agents, aid in mineral dissolution by specifically adsorbing on mineral surfaces and forming highly soluble complexes with metal ions (e.g. magnesium in serpentine). The formation of ligand–metal complexes at the mineral surface shifts the electron density toward the metal ion, which destabilizes the Me–O lattice bonds and facilitates the detachment of metal ions into solution ( A number of ligands have been shown to improve the dissolution of silicates in nature, including oxalate, citrate, diphenols, and hydroxycarboxylic acids ( The objective of this paper is to investigate the effectiveness of five different ligands for improving the leaching of magnesium from serpentine in ultramafic nickel ores at neutral to alkaline pH and room temperature. Solution modeling was used to determine the capacity of the ligands to enhance the solubility of Mg across the pH range. The ability of the ligands to enhance the dissolution of Mg from ultramafic ores was examined experimentally at pH 7 and 10. The effect of ligand concentration on total Mg leached was also examined. Subsequently, the effect of the ligands on Mg leaching rates was investigated at several ligand concentrations, again at pH 7 and pH 10. The ligands tested include catechol (C The percent speciation for magnesium and ligands in water was calculated iteratively across the pH range from 0 to 14 in Microsoft Excel using the equilibrium constants given in Two ultramafic nickel ores were used in this study, the OK ore from Washington State, USA, and the Pipe ore from Manitoba, Canada. Both ores were high in MgO (45.8% for OK ore, 39.5% for Pipe ore) and SiO 1 X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy (Orbis PC Micro-EDXRF Elemental Analyzer, EDAX, Mahwah, NJ, USA) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Perkin Elmer Elan 6000, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) were used to determine the elemental composition of the ores. ICP-MS was also used to determine the magnesium content of supernatant collected during the leaching tests. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) (Varian 220 FS, Palo Alto, California, USA) was applied to a selected number of supernatant samples to determine the silicon content. To determine the mineralogical composition of the ores, quantitative XRD analysis was performed by PMET Inc. of New Brighton, PA using the Rietveld refinement technique. An automated Autosorb-1 gas sorption analyzer (Quantachrome Instruments, Boynton Beach, FL, USA) was used to determine the surface area of selected samples by the multi-point Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. To determine leaching rates, the leaching curves (magnesium concentration in solution versus time) were differentiated and normalized by the sample BET surface area, liquid volume and solid mass using the following expression: The distribution of magnesium species in water at 25 The effect of ligand concentration on the solubility of magnesium ions was investigated by modeling over the range of ligand to magnesium molar ratios of 0.01–2. At pH 7, no effect was observed as magnesium was 100% soluble at all ligand to magnesium molar ratios. At pH 10, however, the ligand concentration had a pronounced effect on the solubility of magnesium ( The total magnesium leached at pH 7 and 10 over 24 The experimental leaching results differed in several ways from what was predicted by the solution chemistry model. The first major difference was that the experimental results showed that not all of the Mg present in the system was soluble at pH 7 and that the ligands were not equally effective in leaching Mg from the ores at this pH value. This difference was to be expected as the modeling study was done on a simplified magnesium hydroxide-in-water system whereas, in the experimental study, Mg was leached primarily from magnesium silicate minerals. The second major difference between the modeling and experimental study was in the relative order of effectiveness of the different leaching agents. Whereas the experimentally-determined order of ligand effectiveness for solubilizing Mg from the Pipe ore was in accordance with the relative strength of the stability constants (i.e., EDTA The kinetics of leaching Mg at pH 7 and 10 from ultramafic nickel ores with ligands was studied at room temperature as a function of ligand concentration (0.01 After 4–6 Leaching rate curves were obtained by differentiating and normalizing the leaching curves (by sample BET surface area, liquid volume and solid mass). As an example, leaching rate curves for Pipe ore in Tiron solutions are shown in The initial ( More often than not, increasing the ligand concentration and reducing the pH increased leaching rates. For the Pipe ore, the initial and final leaching rate upgrade ratios tended to be higher at pH 7 than pH 10. This was generally true for the OK ore initial leaching rate upgrade ratio as well. However, the OK ore final leaching rate upgrade ratio was often higher at pH 10 than at pH 7, indicating the ligands were more effective at improving the leaching rate of the OK ore at alkaline pH than neutral pH. The order of effectiveness of the ligands for improving the leaching rates of the Pipe and OK ores on the basis of the final leaching rate upgrade ratios ( The objective of this study was to determine if ligands can be used to improve the leaching of magnesium from serpentine in ultramafic ores at neutral to alkaline pH and room temperature, with the ultimate goal of developing an alternative MCS process. For such a process to be successful, a significant quantity of magnesium must be leached in an industrially-acceptable timeframe. Thus far it has been shown that the total Mg leached from ultramafic nickel ores, as well as the rate of leaching, is improved in ligand solutions compared to in water under the same conditions. To further evaluate the degree of success achieved, the results from this study were compared with those published in the literature. Since the examination of the ligand-promoted dissolution of serpentine in ultramafic nickel ores at neutral to alkaline pH is unique, few studies exist with which to directly compare this work. As a result, the total Mg leached and leaching rates determined in this study were compared with values determined for serpentine and a similar mineral, olivine, at low pH, with and without ligands. Also, since steady-state leaching rates are most often given in published material, the final leaching rates ( Published values for total Mg leached from serpentine and olivine are given in Published values for Mg leaching rates from serpentine and olivine are given in The improvement in leaching rates and total Mg leached in catechol, EDTA and tiron solutions over that observed for the ores in water, as well as compared to that published for olivine in dilute ligand solutions at low pH, is promising. While these values were lower than that achieved by others under acidic to neutral conditions at high temperature and in strong ligand solutions, the ability to enhance the rate limiting step of aqueous mineral carbonation at alkaline pH means that (1) no pH swing for carbonate precipitation is required after leaching and reagent requirements may be reduced and (2) that the enhancement of Mg leaching and carbonate precipitation may be conducted in a single step. The total Mg leached, and Mg leaching rates, achieved in this study may be further improved by conducting leaching with strong ligand solutions (i.e. 0.1 The ligands catechol, citrate, EDTA, oxalate and tiron were investigated for their effectiveness in leaching magnesium from two ultramafic nickel ores at neutral to alkaline pH. The speciation of the ligand complexes was first modeled in a magnesium hydroxide-in-water system to determine if the ligands could increase the solubility of magnesium at the desired pH values. The modeling revealed that while magnesium is quite soluble at pH 7, the solubility decreases with increasing pH and only 25% of the magnesium present in the system is soluble under the modeled conditions at pH 10. The modeling suggested that the addition of ligands should increase magnesium solubility at pH 10 and the order of effectiveness of the ligands should be: EDTA Experimentally, it was shown that the addition of ligands to the ultramafic ore-in-water system generally improved the total solubility and leaching rates of magnesium from the ores. For both the Pipe and OK ores, the total magnesium leached was greater at pH 7 compared to pH 10 and increased with increasing ligand concentration, with the 0.1 This research was supported by