Seawater flotation has been applied to mineral processing in areas located far from fresh water resources. However, as seawater has a detrimental effect on molybdenite floatability under alkaline conditions (pH>9.5), its application in the conventional copper and molybdenum (Cu-Mo) flotation circuit is hindered. A fundamental study of the effect of two divalent cations in seawater, Mg2+ and Ca2+, on the floatability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite is presented in this paper. Floatability tests showed that both MgCl2 and CaCl2 solutions depress the floatability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite at pH values higher than 9. Furthermore, Mg2+ exerts a stronger effect than Ca2+ owing to the adsorption of Mg(OH)2 precipitates on the mineral surfaces, as indicated by dynamic force microscopy images. The floatability of chalcopyrite was significantly depressed compared with that of molybdenite in a 10−2
                     MMgCl2 aqueous solution at pH 11. This phenomenon is likely due to the adsorption of hydrophilic complexes on the mineral surface, which reduces the surface hydrophobicity. A reversal of the zeta potential of chalcopyrite in MgCl2 and CaCl2 solutions at pH 11 and 8, respectively, indicated the adsorption of precipitates onto the surface. In contrast, the zeta potential of molybdenite decreased continuously under the same conditions. The floatability test of chalcopyrite and molybdenite in mixed systems showed that selective separation of both minerals should be possible with the addition of emulsified kerosene to a 10−2
                     MMgCl2 solution at pH 11. A mechanism is proposed to explain this phenomenon.Flotation is a water-intensive process; however, due to the scarcity of fresh water resources, increasing social demand for fresh water access, and stringent regulation of industrial water use, flotation units need to use groundwater, recycled water, or seawater, which have high electrolyte concentrations ( Flotation is a physicochemical mineral separation process that utilizes the differences in the surface properties of valuable minerals and unwanted gangue minerals ( However, the presence of some inorganic salts (e.g., KCl, NaCl, Na Several sulfide minerals are processed in flotation plants using saline water and seawater ( In addition, seawater has been used to separate copper minerals (e.g., chalcopyrite) from molybdenum minerals (e.g., molybdenite) in copper-molybdenum (Cu-Mo) flotation units. Sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS) is employed to depress chalcopyrite in this process, allowing molybdenite to be collected in the froth layer ( In the absence of chalcopyrite depressants, molybdenite exhibits poor floatability in seawater at high pH values, whereas chalcopyrite recovery is slightly lower under the same conditions ( On the other hand, the floatability of molybdenite significantly increases with increasing NaCl concentration due to the effect of inorganic electrolytes on the compression of electrical double layers. Thus, the zeta potentials of the bubbles and particles are reduced, and repulsive interactions are decreased ( The enhancement of mineral floatability may be associated with the effect of salt on destabilizing the hydration layer on the mineral surface and improving the surface hydrophobicity ( Seawater contains cations (e.g., Na In the flotation process, collectors physically adsorb on mineral surfaces and alter the surface hydrophobicity. However, collectors and inorganic ions may compete for adsorption sites on mineral surfaces, affecting the flotation recovery in seawater or electrolyte solutions. This effect can be seen in corundum flotation using sodium dodecyl sulfate as a collector in sodium chloride and sodium sulfate solutions. In the present work, the effect of divalent cations in seawater (Ca Chalcopyrite from Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan, and molybdenite from Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia, were used in this study. CaCl For surface characterization using dynamic force microscopy (DFM) and contact angle measurements, the chalcopyrite was cut to provide a flat surface and polished using 400- to 4000-grit emery papers, followed by 3- and 1-μm diamond sprays on DP-Mol (Struers, Germany) cloth and a DP-Nap (Struers, Germany) fine polishing cloth mounted on a polishing machine plate (Doctor Lap ML 182, Maruto, Japan). To prepare the molybdenite samples, the molybdenite was cut, and the cleaved surface was exposed and polished consecutively with 3-, 1-, and ¼-μm diamond spray on cotton. Following polishing, each mineral surface was rinsed with ethanol and dried with nitrogen gas; these steps were repeated 5 times. The surface was then rinsed with ultra-pure water and dried with nitrogen gas; these steps were repeated 5 times. The chalcopyrite sample was ground using an agate mortar and pestle and then dry-screened. In the case of chalcopyrite, particle size fractions of +75−106 Scanning DFM was conducted to obtain the surface topography and phase images continuously. The measurements were conducted under ambient conditions of 27.7 Mineral floatability tests were conducted using a Hallimond tube. Mineral powder (∼0.5 The contact angles of various mineral samples were measured using a goniometer (Dropmaster 300, Kyowa Interface Science Co., Ltd.). The captive bubble method was used in these measurements. After immersing the mineral sample in the treatment solution, a 0.1-μL air bubble was generated and attached to the mineral surface using a microsyringe. The contact angle was measured automatically for 50 Samples of each mineral powder (0.1 Species diagrams were constructed for calcium and magnesium to describe the chemical species that may be present over the entire range of experimental conditions. The following reactions were used to construct the calcium species diagram. The equilibrium constants for calcium and carbonate compiled by The equilibrium constants for reactions The effect of CaCl This decrease in the floatability of chalcopyrite at pH values higher than 9 contradicts several studies reporting that chalcopyrite floatability is not sensitive to pH in seawater solutions ( The different behaviors observed may also be the result of the presence of other electrolytes in seawater (e.g., NaCl) that mitigate the detrimental effect of MgCl In addition, Similar trends were observed for the effects of CaCl As shown in The effect of solution concentration on mineral floatability can be explained using magnesium and calcium species diagrams ( In the magnesium species diagrams ( To understand the wettability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite, contact angle measurements were conducted. The results are shown in In contrast, The observed contact angles ( The zeta potentials of chalcopyrite and molybdenite as a function of MgCl The poor floatability of chalcopyrite at high pH values is likely caused by an improvement of the surface wettability owing to the adsorption of hydrophilic complexes on the chalcopyrite surface, as indicated by the reversal of the zeta potential of chalcopyrite in 10 The flotation results ( The zeta potentials of molybdenite, chalcopyrite, and kerosene in a 10 On the other hand, the magnitude of the zeta potential of molybdenite increased with the addition of emulsified kerosene in a 10 DFM measurements confirm this phenomenon by showing that more precipitates are deposited on the chalcopyrite surfaces ( From the zeta potential results and the surface characterization using DFM, the following mechanism can be proposed. First, precipitates of Mg(OH) The effect of Ca This work was supported by a