This paper presents a new approach for modelling and simulation of flotation circuits, which addresses the potential to increase metallurgical performance, selecting the best choice of cell size, number of cells per bank, cell design and operating conditions. For this purpose, a flotation simulator was built and calibrated using data from industrial sampling campaigns carried out in Chilean concentrators, using modern and large mechanical flotation cells.
                  The simulator allowed for evaluating and comparing the metallurgical performance of different flotation circuits. For this purpose, alternative scenarios were analysed for a selected industrial circuit, where different cells arrangement (number and size of cells), launder designs (represented by the mean froth transport distance) and operating conditions (pulp residence time and froth depth) were evaluated.
                  This new approach showed to be a useful and practical tool to evaluate metallurgical performance in large industrial flotation banks, being able to show the effect of different flotation process characteristics such as froth transport distances and operating conditions.In recent years, flotation cells incorporated in industrial circuits have shown a significant increase in size with time. In this context, while mechanical flotation cells of 300 m The increase in flotation cell size has shown several advantages such as lower specific energy, more efficient control systems, simpler layouts and fewer cells necessary to obtain same residence time in a flotation circuit. However, the appearance of larger flotation cells has led to new challenges related to cell design, operational conditions and control strategies to improve the metallurgical performance in industrial circuits. In this context, some research has been carried out on cell design characteristics, flotation cell characterization and scale-up of flotation equipment. For instance, the works developed by Additionally, important efforts have been made to characterize industrial flotation circuits in order to obtain a more realistic description of the process for simulation purposes. Thus, several approaches for evaluation and simulation of the flotation process as well as for control and optimization purposes have been presented in literature ( The main objective of this work is to present a practical tool for evaluation and comparison of large industrial flotation cells, including different froth transport systems and circuits arrangements. In this sense, alternative flotation circuits were evaluated using a new industrial simulator to study the effect of operating conditions, cell arrangements and launder design on metallurgical performance. An industrial simulator to evaluate metallurgical performance in flotation cells was developed and then calibrated and tested using an extended database from industrial sampling campaigns carried out in Chilean concentrators over the last ten years. Afterwards, the potential and predictability of the simulator was evaluated by analysing different scenarios, studying the effect of launder design, cell arrangement and operating conditions (pulp residence time and froth depth) in a flotation row on metallurgical performance. The new flotation bank simulator allows for the calculation of the metallurgical behaviour of each cell along a flotation row in terms of the operating conditions, flotation cell design and feed mineral characteristics ( The flotation simulator considers the sequential calculation of each single cell in series, assuming a two-zone system: collection and froth ( The collection zone was characterised using a perfect mixing plus by-pass flow model and a kinetic model considering a single rate constant (k) and a maximum recovery (R The froth zone recovery was described as a function of the solids flowrate entering the froth by true flotation (S The average residence time of gas in the froth (τ The froth recovery model was built using a wide database from industrial plants, considering different operating conditions, metallurgical performances, cell size and launder design. Froth recoveries from 40% to 90% were observed and used to calibrate the model. The gangue recovery by entrainment in each cell was estimated in terms of water recovery and the entrainment factor described by Based on the models and structure of the simulator, this tool is able to represent the effect of both operating conditions and cell design characteristics on recovery and concentrate grade. Thus, specific variables such as launder design were included in the simulator, which is an innovative topic in this type of tools and allows for studying the effect of the transport distance to the discharge lip in industrial cells. The flotation simulator was calibrated and tested using three industrial data sets from concentrator plants in Chile (Circuits 1, 2 and 3), as shown in The fitting procedure considered the characterization of the mineral feed in three particle size classes and three liberation classes (3x3 matrix). Then, a rate constant and a maximum recovery were associated to each size-by-liberation class and were fitted considering data on recovery and concentrate grade per size class (data from mass balances in each cell along circuits). Thus, for example, 54 data from mass balance were used to fit the 18 kinetic parameters (nine k and nine R It should be noted that the circuits are not comparable to each other, because the validation was performed for each circuit separately. As an example, The simulator was able to represent the concentrate grade profiles, whose irregular shape is due to the different operating condition in each cell. In the simulator, the Cu grade in each cell is determined by the valuable mineral, collected and transported in the froth, and the gangue entrainment, which is calculated as a function of froth depth and air flowrate, among other variables. This makes the simulator flexible enough to represent different concentrate grade profiles. Rate constant (k) and maximum recovery (R Different scenarios were simulated to evaluate the metallurgical performance of selected flotation rows. In this analysis, the simulator was able to show the effect of changes in launder design, cells arrangement and operating conditions on recovery and concentrate grade. Four scenarios were evaluated, using the feed characteristics and fitting parameters (k and R     For simulation purposes, froth depths of 20 cm and superficial gas rate of 1 cm/s (at the froth overflow level) were considered in all cells of the circuits for the different scenarios, based on operating conditions observed in industrial operations. The solids feed flowrate was 1375 t/h with a solid percentage of 34.1%. Three simulations were carried out to evaluate the effect of using a different number of cells in a flotation circuit (for similar residence times and total volume of the row) on Cu recovery and concentrate grade. The three simulated circuits called A, B and C are presented in It must be noticed that although the operating conditions may be different depending on the cell size, froth depths and superficial gas rates were kept constant in all cells to avoid confounding effects. In addition, from a quantitative point of view, the results shown in   It was observed that for minerals with fast kinetics (intermediate size and liberated particles), a less significant change in recovery by decreasing the number of cells was observed. However, the final recovery decreased more strongly for coarse and occluded particles (slow kinetics) when the number of cells was less than five (three cells in this analysis). Therefore, the effect of by-pass flow becomes significant for a circuit provided with less than five cells, under the testing conditions. From It is important to notice that any optimization of a rougher circuit in an industrial flotation plant may be subject to constraints, e.g. capacity limitations (bottleneck) of the downstream stages such as regrinding or cleaning stages. Four simulations were carried out to evaluate the effect of launder design on the metallurgical performance of an industrial cell of 300 m A set of traditional and alternative launder designs is shown in The different launder designs affect the froth recovery and hence the overall cell recovery. Additionally, the concentrate grade is also affected, because these design characteristics change the water recovery and consequently the gangue entrainment.  It should be noted that the collection recovery slightly decreases when the froth recovery increases. This effect occurs due to the decrease in the drop-back to the collection zone, which changes the feed grade in this zone. Therefore, the mineral (fresh feed + drop-back) entering the collection zone has different characteristics. The decrease in the collection recovery is small, because the drop-back flowrate is significantly lower than the feed flowrate. Similar to the previous analysis (point 1 of this section), froth depth and superficial gas rate were kept constant in all cases to avoid confounding effects in the analysis. This involves a reduction in the air fed to the flotation cell when the froth area is reduced in order to keep the superficial gas rate. In this context, the study presented by On the other hand, the results on the effect of type of launder on metallurgical performance are subject to the operating conditions and the feed characteristics considered in this analysis. However, it is expected to obtain similar trends under other conditions, because of the positive effect of reducing the froth area on froth recovery, as presented by   Two flotation rows (Lines 1 and 2) consisting of four cells of 300 m    The effect of operational conditions such as residence time and froth depth profiles along a row on the metallurgical performance was studied. In this case, cell design characteristics and arrangement of Circuit 1 was considered for simulation purposes. In order to evaluate the effect of the residence time of a flotation circuit on the Cu recovery and concentrate Cu grade, simulations were carried out by testing different feed flow rates.  A higher effect of the residence time (1.3–4.3 min) on the final concentrate grade was observed, which decreased by 7.0% ( The metallurgical performance of a flotation circuit with different froth depth profiles along the row was evaluated. Three cases were simulated, considering uniform (20 cm in every cell), increasing (from 10 to 35 cm along the row) and decreasing (from 35 to 10 cm along the row) profiles. The final Cu recovery did not present significant differences ( The highest concentrate grade was obtained for the uniform condition at the intermediate size class. In the case of a decreasing profile, a higher froth depth in the first cell will determine a high grade in the concentrate of this cell. However, if the froth depth decreases along the row, the concentrate grade significantly decreases, because of the entrainment of non-valuable particles, which is a critical factor in the last cells of the row. On the other hand, a lower froth depth in the first cells (increasing profile) will affect the final concentrate grade directly, because it will not be improved along the row. From A new flotation simulator was built, tested and calibrated using a wide industrial database, including modern and large mechanical flotation cells. This new approach showed to be a useful tool to evaluate cell design characteristics and operating conditions, such as froth depth, gas rate and mean residence time, to enhance metallurgical performances in large industrial flotation banks. The simulator allowed for evaluating the metallurgical performance of circuits with different number of cells, keeping the total volume of the row, subject to the selected feed characteristics and operating conditions. The results showed that the final recovery and concentrate grade of a flotation row decreased when less cells of larger size were used. The loss in recovery become stronger when less than five cells were used, particularly related to the loss of coarser and low floatable particles. This analysis becomes useful to evaluate the best trade-off between economic advantages of using larger cells versus hydrodynamic limitations to achieve the metallurgical target. In addition, the simulator was able to represent the effect of launder design on the metallurgical performance in industrial cells and circuits, by modifying the froth cross sectional area, the discharge lip length and consequently the mean froth transport distance to the concentrate overflow. For example, the comparison between two flotation rows with different launder design showed a 3.8% difference in the final recovery, for the selected industrial conditions. The new launder design, which allows for shorter froth transport distances, favoured the froth recovery, and therefore the overall recovery, but decreased the final concentrate grade by 3.4%. Other benefit observed by improving the launder design is that it may reduce blower air requirements for a given mass recovery. Finally, the simulator allowed for evaluating different froth depth profiles and pulp mean residence times on metallurgical performance. The results showed no significant differences in recovery for the evaluated froth depth profiles (uniform, increasing and decreasing). However, the concentrate grade was more significantly affected. On the other hand, the results showed a decrease in recovery and an increase in concentrate grade when the residence time decreased.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo (ANID),