Biomass gasification shows great potential to displace fossil fuels. This paper states the steady state simulation for the gasification of palm oil empty fruit brunch (EFB) in pilot plant downdraft reactor and modelled using Aspen Plus®. The biomass was characterized to evaluate the degree of feedstock's structural order. The effect of reactor temperature and pressure on syngas production of downdraft gasification of EFB at the constant steam flow rate of 186.37mol/h were investigated. The results revealed the concentration of hydrogen and CO increased from 12 to 17.5mol% and 55–60.6mol% respectively, but the CO2 concentration decreased from 30 to 19.4mol% with increasing temperature (875–975°C) and pressure (25–35bar). The results indicated that the product gas from co-gasification with charcoal has higher H2 and CO concentrations in comparison with the EFB gasification. Therefore, co-gasification of the feedstock has a significant potential to overcome the problem of disrupted feedstock supply in gasification.The biomass is considered as EFB and contains only C, H, O Charcoal contains only C-graphite Co-gasification of EFB and charcoal Co-gasification process is isothermal and steady state EFB and charcoal devolatilization is instantaneously and volatile matter remains H Gases are considered ideal Temperature and pressure is uniformly distributed within the reactor Tar and higher hydrocarbons are not considered Air supply in the oxidation zone was considered only oxygen (O Energy consumption increases exponentially with the rapid increments of the global population, urbanization and industrial expansion. World's energy is facing a critical situation due to the depletion of limited fossil fuels. >80% of the world's energy demand is covered by non-renewable energy resources (oil, gas, coal etc.), whereas renewable energy resources cover only 10–15% ( Lignocellulosic biomasses are composed of three main macromolecules: cellulose (40–50 At present, Malaysia is the world's largest producer and exporter of palm oil and produces about 47% of the world's supply of palm oil ( A state-of-the-art research of co-gasification of EFB in a downdraft reactor in a pilot scale approach is to optimize syngas production from co-gasification of EFB using Aspen plus simulator a software. Process optimization refers to a holistic approach that should be taken into account in order to search suitable parameters and thereby minimization of overall processing cost. Few papers have been published on this subject. Syngas production from biomass have been reported by some researchers ( In this study, palm oil empty fruits branch (EFB) and charcoal were selected as a feedstock for the co-gasification process. Feedstock required some essential step to avoid any disruption to the reactor and also to produce high quality of gas product that imposed the raw sample in preparation for the pre-gasification process. EFB was collected from a palm oil mill industry (LKPP Corporation Sdn Bhd, Kilang Sawit, Lepar, Lebuhraya Tun Razak, Gambang, Pahang) and charcoal was collected from previous gasification. EFB was kept under the sun for two weeks to maintain its freshness. The dried sample was immediately placed in a sample bag to avoid its contamination. The average dimension of feedstocks ware 20 Proximate analysis of EFB and charcoal were carried out by thermogravimetric (TGA) and derivative thermogravimetry (DTG) (Mettler Toledo TGA/DSC1) analyzer. This technique usually used for the determination of relative percentage of MC, VM, FC and AC in the biomass materials ( The FTIR analysis was used to determine the particular functional groups existed within the feedstocks. All spectra were identified with a Perkin–Elmer, 670 FTIR spectrometer in a transmission mode and scanned over the range between 400 and 4000 The measurement of wide-angle X-ray diffraction of EFB and charcoal samples were made on a XRD-6000, Shimadzu X-ray diffractometer system. Cu-Kαradiation (wave length: λ The morphological structure (size, shape, regularity and agglomeration of nanoparticles and cellulose) of EFB and charcoal were observed by TEM analysis. TEM images were obtained on a transmission electron microscope (Brand: FEI, Model: Tecnai–G2–20–Twin), operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 The ultimate analysis was carried out by CHNS elemental analyzer (EQPCL 200 Elementar, Germany, Vario Macro Cube) to determine the element (C, H, N, S) based chemical composition of EFB and charcoal. The O was calculated by the subtraction method. Approximately, 2 Heating value is one of the most important fuel property of biomass which indicates the energy content of fuel for thermochemical conversion. The higher heating value (HHV) of feedstocks were measured using the Eq. HHV The lower heating value (also called net calorific value) is determined by subtracting the heat of vaporization of water vapor (generated during combustion of feedstock) from the higher heating value was calculated using the Eq. LHV The reactor was made of mild steel (MS) sheet having the thickness of 10 The reactor was used for the experiment of EFB gasification and co-gasification (EFB and charcoal) are shown in Based on the produced gas composition, Lower heating value (LHV), Higher heating value (HHV), cold gas efficiency ( The thermal degradation profile of EFB and charcoal was observed within the temperature ranges from 25 By increasing the temperature, EFB and charcoal took place with an associated heat release (100/min) shown in the DTG curves ( During the gasification process, it was involved many complex chemical reactions, which was difficult to assess their energy potentialities. However, it can be assumed from TGA and DTG analyses which signifies the mass loss with increasing temperature and their heating rate ( The moisture content (dry basis) of both samples was <10%, which indicated the potential usage of the selected biomass for gasification ( The elemental composition of EFB and charcoal are presented in The HHV of EFB and charcoal were calculated using Eq. The HHV of charcoal was higher than the EFB and the bioenergy effect between them would happen as the addition of charcoal could promote gasification. Similar effects were observed on the performance of co-gasification of low-rank coal and biomass ( The three elemental phase ratios (C, H and O) of EFB and charcoal measured from elemental analysis represented by ternary diagrams ( The H/C ratio for EFB and charcoal were 0.12 and 0.02, respectively and O/C ratio were 1.20, and 0.77, respectively (E-supplementary data for this work can be found in e-version of this paper online). Therefore, the values of atomic ratios of O/C was more than H/C shown to be similar trend of both EFB and charcoal alike in the literature ( The functional group of biomass and charcoal samples was analyzed under certain pyrolysis condition using FTIR, and individual infrared (E-supplementary data for this work can be found in e-version of this paper online). It is generally known that the distinctive components of biomass are cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, consequently, their functional groups and spectral bands are also similar ( The most prominent peaks in the FTIR spectra for EFB and charcoal showed adsorption bands at 3437.11and 3435.04 The X-ray diffractogram shows that the peaks at 44.02 The TEM images of EFB and charcoal can be seen that the cellulosic structure and aggregated nanoparticles were clearly observed in the EFB biomass (E-supplementary data for this work can be found in e-version of this paper online). A sphere-shaped particle was identified which was the length of 14.37 To obtain insights into the distribution of C and O functionalities in the EFB and charcoal, the carbonaceous materials were also characterized by XPS. This characterization helps us to understand more about the chemical existence of elements such as binding energy, type of bond and oxidation state in the feedstocks. The C1s peak in the EFB sample was deconvoluted into two different peaks, where binding energies of 285.52 Deconvolution of the C1s peak of charcoal corresponds to the different carbon-based functional groups as shown in supplementary data (E-supplementary data for this work can be found in e-version of this paper online). The presence of deconvoluted C1s peaks at two different binding energies of 292.94 The simulation of biomass gasification by using Aspen Plus® has been reported by many researchers (  Simulation results ( Based on the characterization and simulation results, optimized temperature and pressure were used for the gasification of EFB and co-gasification of EFB with charcoal. Temperature is the most important variable that affects the EFB gasification or EFB with charcoal co-gasification process. The temperature ranges in the drying, pyrolysis, oxidation and reduction zone was theoretically 200–300 Compared with the average theoretical temperature, the average experimental temperature both gasification and co-gasification for oxidizing was lower than 28% and 9.09%, respectively. The plausible reason of this phenomenon could be due to the hot flue gases produced from many reactions with high temperature in the drying and pyrolysis zone.  The gases are available in the reactor in drying, pyrolysis and devolatization processes, which implies that CO and H2 increased (Eqs. Another reaction was taken place that limits the quantity of CO Admission of a small fraction into the process (in our case, only the combustible moisture), at bed temperatures at 975 Further the HHV and LHV at 975 Furthermore, an economic analysis was performed in this study using aspen plus simulator. For the sake of optimized temperature and pressure for co-gasification of EFB with charcoal in a downdraft reactor, it is of persistence to reduce the syngas production cost, reducing feedstock cost, enhancing the gasification rate and finally to valid its suitability for commercialization. The economic analysis depends on several factors, mainly the capital costs of the equipment (i.e. downdraft reactor, air blower, cyclone separator, heat exchanger, civil works and suitable local distribution network) and maintenance cost. The feedstocks price was also another variable factor that influence the syngas cost. In this study, aspen plus simulator was used to evaluate the optimum profit using FORTRAN CODE considering produced syngas of CO and H A rigorous model for coal gasification of an entrained flow configuration has been developed. The simulation model was found to be in good agreement with the experimental data of downdraft reactor. With increasing the reactor temperature and pressure led to the production of more CO and H The authors acknowledge the financial support of the