This paper presents a new classification system called the Rock Penetrability index (RPi). An evaluation model based on the fuzzy Delphi analytic hierarchy process (FDAHP) has been used for estimation of penetrability and drillability of rocks. For this purpose, five parameters of the rock material, including uniaxial compressive strength, Schimazek's F-abrasivity, mean Moh's hardness, texture and grain size and Young's modulus have been investigated and rated. In the RPi system, a number from 10.25 to 100 can be assigned to each rock, with higher values corresponding to greater ease of drilling and penetration into rock. Based on the RPi classification, rocks are classified into five modes from the view point of penetrability: very poor, poor, medium, good and very good.“Penetrability” and “drillability” of rocks are terms used to describe the simultaneous influence of physical, mechanical and textural parameters on the penetration rate of the drilling systems In the drilling process, many parameters of rock have a specific effect that has a different intensity from the effects of other parameters. Therefore, for evaluating each rock from the view point of its penetrability, the effects of the most important parameters should be recognized. For this purpose it is very important to know the qualitative and quantitative effects of each parameter. Considering the simultaneous effect of various factors relating to rock material in the drilling process, testing of the effect of one factor on penetrability of rock samples may be encountered with many errors. Therefore, the best method for surveying the rock penetrability is using a classification system based on the most important rock characteristics. Since in rock classifications the weight and rating of each parameter is related to that of the others, the output of the classification can be trusted and applicable for evaluation of rock penetrability only if it uses all effective parameters. Definitely, this evaluation will have positive effects on the improvement of drilling efficiency, and will decrease operating costs and tool wear time. Until now, no comprehensive classification scheme has been developed for evaluation of rock drillability. The main objective of this paper is to present a new system for evaluating the effective factors on rock penetrability using the fuzzy Delphi analytic hierarchy process (FDAHP). This research considers the rock classification as a group decision problem and applies fuzzy logic theory as the tool for weighting calculations. Finally, a new classification system named “Rock Penetrability index (RPi)” is presented and described. Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is a multi attribute decision-making (MADM) technique that was first developed in 1980 by Thomas Saaty This methodology has been applied to numerous decision problems such as software selection, sourcing decisions, energy policy, supplier selection, project selection, measuring business performance, and evaluation of advanced manufacturing technology. The main advantage of AHP is its ability to handle complex and ill-structured problems which cannot be usually handled by rigorous mathematical models. AHP incorporates the evaluations of all decision makers into a final decision, without having to elicit their utility functions on subjective and objective criteria, by pair-wise comparisons of the alternatives It is known that group decision-making is a very important and powerful tool to accelerate the consensus of various opinions from experts who are experienced in practices The FDM is a methodology in which subjective data of experts are transformed into quasi-objective data using statistical analysis and fuzzy operations The major steps for developing a new classification for assessing of rock penetrability are as follows: Since 1960, many researchers have studied on drillability of rocks and some relationships between drilling rate and various mechanical and physical rock properties have been presented. In this paper the most famous and important studies and researches that have been presented until now have been reviewed. As shown in this table, there are many physical, mechanical and mineralogical rock parameters influence the rock penetrability and drillability. Many of them are basic rock characteristics that widely have been studied in rock mechanics. But some experimental indexes such as coefficient of rock strength (CRS), drilling rate index (DRI), specific energy (SE), impact hardness number and Protodyakonov index (PI) have been suggested for special applications such as rock drillability evaluation. These indexes are not independent parameter but are based on some basic characteristics of rocks. Some rock properties such as cohesion strength, matrix type and cementation quality and weathering are important in rock drillability but in previous studies have not been mentioned and studied truly. General speaking, important characteristics which influence the rock drillability can be classified into three major categories named them refer to After literature review and recognition of effective parameters, some technical questionnaires prepared and sent to drilling experts in various countries. It was asked from experts to mark the importance of each parameter in questionnaires in a very simple way. In order to use the questionnaires data in FDAHP method, for each importance level an intensity number from 1 to 9 has been assigned based on Saaty's method Experts’ opinion histograms (rates) about each parameter are illustrated in In order to establish the main pair-wise comparison matrix using FDAHP method, it is essential to have comparison matrix of parameters based on each expert's opinion. For this purpose, according to the questionnaires, a comparison matrix is established for each expert. Let For establishing of major pair-wise comparison matrix in the fuzzy Delphi method and calculation of the relative fuzzy weights of the decision elements, three steps should be done as follows (a) Computation of triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs); (b) Following the above outlines, a fuzzy positive reciprocal matrix (c) Calculation of relative fuzzy weights of the evaluation factors: In this research, a major pair-wise comparison matrix (as shown in In rock engineering, in order to develop a classification system, selection of most effective parameters and combination of them in a unique structure are the most important issues. In rock classifications, as a very important and basic rule, the number of parameters that are used should be small. Therefore, using all of twelve mentioned parameters in the RPi classification is inconvenient from the practical and engineering point of view. Also, some of the parameters such as weathering and matrix type have no comprehensive and quantitative laboratory tests (scale). Thus, in the RPi classification system, for selecting the final major parameters (tests), the two assumptions have been considered: (a) the number of parameters that are used should be small, and (b) equivalent parameters should be avoided. Considering these two assumption, five parameters (standard tests) that have been chosen for assessing the RPi are as follows: uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Schimazek's UCS is one of the most important engineering properties of rocks. Rock material strength is used as an important parameter in many rock classification systems. UCS is influenced by many characteristics of rocks such as constitutive minerals and their spatial positions, weathering or alteration rate, micro-cracks and internal fractures, density and porosity Since in Beniawski's classification Abrasiveness influences the tool wear and drilling rate seriously. Until now many methods have been presented for evaluating of rock abrasivity. Abrasiveness is mainly affected by various factors such as mineral composition, the hardness of mineral constituents and grain characteristics such as size, shape and angularity Schimazek's It is clear that tool wear is predominantly a result of the mineral content harder than steel (Mohs hardness ca. 5.5), especially quartz (Mohs hardness of 7). To include all minerals of a rock sample, the equivalent quartz content has been determined in thin sections by modal analysis—meaning the entire mineral content referring to the abrasiveness or hardness of quartz (Eq. Regarding the rock parameters which are used in questionnaires, in the RPi classification, summation of the weights of abrasiveness, tensile strength and equivalent quartz content is considered as weight of Schimazek's Hardness is defined as a mineral or rock's resistance to tool penetration. Rock hardness is the first strength that has to overcome during drilling Mohs scale is the most famous and applicable method for evaluating and classification of rock hardness because this method is related to mineralogical characteristic Thus, this scale is a favorite method in drillability studies. Schmidt hammer rebound value is a very simple way to estimate the rock hardness. Because of test condition and tool error (hammer calibration), this method has some practical errors. Thus, Schmidt hammer cannot be used for comprehensive drillability studies. According to all above explanations, in the RPi classification, mean Mohs hardness was selected for using in rating system. Mean hardness of each rock is calculated based on the hardness of contained minerals using the following equation: Regarding the questionnaires, summation of the weights of Mohs hardness and Schmidt hammer rebound value was considered as total weight of mean Mohs hardness. The weight of this factor is 18.5. Rating of rock based upon Mohs hardness is shown in Textural characteristics have great influence on engineering behaviors of rocks especially on rock penetrability. Grain size, grain shape, degree of grain orientation, packing, relative proportion of grains, texture coefficient, mineral content, matrix material and type, cement type and degree of cementation, grain boundary or grain contact relationships and bonding structure are classified into category of textural characteristics of rocks For exact analysis of rock texture, thin sections of rock specimens should be examined and studied under a polarizing microscope. Using these sections, textural characteristics of rocks specially texture type, grain size and grain shape should be described completely There are many qualitative methods and quantitative indexes to describe the rock texture and its granularity specifications. The most favorite qualitative method is using the texture classifications. In drilling, as a very common classification, all rocks are classified into four categories based on grain size and grain shape Granular texture is the most distinguished and common texture type in rocks especially in igneous rocks. This texture is divided into five sub-classes as follows In 1982, Wilbur classified the texture type into five classes as follow: (a) porous, (b) fragmental (semi-dense), (c) granitoid, (d) porphyritic and (e) dense Another classification of mineral size was presented by Norwegian Rock Mechanics Group in 1985 Until now only one comprehensive method (formula) named the “texture coefficient (TC)” has been suggested. Texture coefficient was originally devised to assess the rock fabric for means of rock mechanics Previous researchers emphasized that “texture coefficient” is a very useful and exact method for evaluating the texture characteristics of rocks For the reasons mentioned above, TC has not been used in the RPi classification. For classifying and rating of rocks from the view point of texture, a combination of qualitative texture classifications that were explained above has been used. Regarding the questionnaires, summation of the weights of texture type and grain size is considered as the total weight of texture. Total weight of this factor is 14.5. Rating to rock texture in RPi is shown in According to rock behavior during the fracture process, especially in drilling, the way that rocks reach the failure point has a great influence on drillability. The best scale for rock elasticity is Young's modulus. All previous researchers concluded that with increasing of Young's modulus the rock penetrability and drilling rate decreases Based on ISRM suggested methods After rating and evaluating of each parameter in classification, the new proposed system (RPi) is presented in As seen above, by assessing the RPi parameters, one can achieve valuable information about rock material and evaluate its penetrability and drillability in a simple way. Exact testing of parameters and calculation of RPi may take a few days. In order to study the practical ability of the suggested classification system (RPi), experimental studies were done on rock samples collected from seven mines and one highway slope in northwest Iran ( For doing laboratory test various block samples were transferred to the rock laboratory. These samples were studied based on the parameters of the RPi classification. At first, a typical thin section belonging to each rock type was prepared for petrographic analyzes and determination of textural rock characteristics. Primary and secondary minerals and texture type were identified and their mean grain sizes were evaluated. According to mineralogical analyzes, mean Mohs hardness and equivalent quartz content of each rock were calculated. The uniaxial compressive strength tests were carried out on testing machine with a capacity of 2000 After laboratory studying and classifying the studied rocks, in order to study the relationship between RPi and net penetration rate of drilling in rock material, drilling tests were done on intact rock samples. For this purpose, one massive sample with average dimensions 30 A pneumatic top hammer drill machine with 35 Information of Drilling, as the initial stage of the exploitation operation, has a significant role in the other stages. Considering high operation costs as well as the expense of the machinery, full recognition of the parameters involved in drilling, would be desirable. Drilling has a direct and close relationship with the rock properties. Therefore, recognition of rock characteristics would be of great help in choosing the appropriate type of drilling system, prediction of drilling rate, assigning the number of drill machines and the mine production rate. In this paper a new classification has been developed based on fuzzy Delphi analytic hierarchy process (FDAHP) technique and by using the uniaxial compressive strength, Schimazek's The result of laboratory and drilling tests show that RPi has a good correlation with penetration rate of percussive drilling. For future investigation of the RPi applications, the relationships between other drilling methods and RPi must be studied. Finally, some of the suggested applications of this index are presented in Grateful thanks are recorded to Prof. Summers (USA), Prof. A. Bruland (Norway), Prof. T.N. Singh (India), Prof. C. Karpuz (Turkey) and Dr. H. Aghababaie (Iran) for their kind help and guidance in this research.