Cyanidation is one of the most common methods for the extraction of precious metals. In this process, effluents frequently contain relatively high concentrations of copper, which may react with cyanide to form cuprocyanide complexes adversely affecting the process.
                  In this preliminary work, the use of solvent extraction to remove the copper–cyanide species from a synthetic solution similar to that of gold mill effluents was studied in order to permit the recycling of the solution into the process. For the extraction of these anions, the quaternary ammonium salts Quartamin TPR, Adogen 464 and Aliquat 336 were studied as extractants. The experimental results showed that for a synthetic solution of 710mg/L copper and 1100mg/L cyanide, it is possible to obtain a copper extraction of 99% when using 0.033mol/L of the extractant Adogen 464 (organic/aqueous volume ratio (O/A)=1) in the range of pH of 9–11. Up to 99% of the copper can be stripped from the organic solution after three contact times (5min each) with 50mL of sodium hydroxide 0.5M (O/A=1).In Mexico, as in most countries, cyanide is used to extract gold and silver from their ores. In this process the precious metals are leached by an alkaline dilute cyanide solution. Some ores and concentrates require higher cyanide concentrations due to the presence of copper soluble species as azurite (2CuCO Several techniques have been developed attempting to overcome the negative consequences of the presence of copper in the cyanidation solutions, notably: acidification–volatilization–regeneration “AVR” ( In the precious metals production by cyanidation, the solvent extraction method was proposed originally to concentrate aurocyanide complexes from dilute solutions. This method employs organic extractants (quaternary ammonium salts, among others) to remove gold–cyanide from aqueous solutions ( According to the above, the main purpose of this work is to explore the feasibility of employing these quaternary ammonium salts to extract the copper–cyanide anions from the aqueous solution in order to recycle a solution practically free of copper back to the process. As these amines could react also with gold and silver, the solvent extraction should be performed after the precious metals recovery. Tests were performed with a synthetic solution similar to that of a gold mill effluent containing high copper concentration: 1100 Type and concentration of extractant. Three quaternary ammonium salts were evaluated: tallow trimethyl ammonium chloride (Quartamin TPR), tricaprylyl methyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat 336), and methyl trialkyl (C Effect of pH and extraction time on copper removal. Stripping of cuprocyanide complexes from the organic solution using sodium hydroxide 0.5 In the presence of cyanide, copper is in its reduced form (Cu The equilibrium between copper cyanide and their complexes is given by the following reactions:  At high pH values there is not CuCN solid present in the system. By performing the calculations from pH By expressing the concentrations of HCN and copper–cyanide complexes (Eqs. Solving system for each pH value, the molar concentration of the copper cyanide complexes, CN In order to calculate the activity coefficients, the ionic strength of the solution was calculated (Eq. Since the Debye–Hückel equation for the activity coefficients requires parameters that are not available for the copper–cyanide complexes, the approach proposed by Davies was used (Eq. From the data of this diagram, the amount of each species in equilibrium can be obtained for each pH value. It can be seen, for instance, that for the solution employed in these tests, the copper cyanide (CuCN The reaction of the extraction/stripping of the copper cyanide complexes with the amine extractant (R Considering both copper–cyanide complexes present in solution: The aqueous solution used in this work simulates the composition of a cyanidation solution of relatively high copper concentration. It was prepared adjusting the pH to 12 with CaO. For further pH variations sulfuric acid was used. Chemical analysis of the solution reported 710 The organic solution (extractant The removal of copper–cyanide complexes was carried out in a 300 Copper in solution was analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Varian Mod. AA24OFS). All the standards for the analysis were prepared with a matrix similar to that of the samples (pH alkaline and containing cyanide). Total cyanide was analyzed by distillation and free cyanide by titration with silver nitrate (Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, The copper–cyanide solution used in all the tests was 710  The effect of pH and extractant concentration for these two quaternary ammonium salts (Adogen 464 and Aliquat 336) was explored. Since the maximum copper extraction can be obtained with 5 The efficiency of the copper–cyanide extraction with Aliquat 336 and Adogen 464 at five pH values and three extractant concentrations was evaluated. The results presented in As it was already stated, from the thermodynamic data of The extraction isotherm for cuprocyanide species with Adogen 464 was generated at 22  The recovery of the copper from the organic solution was evaluated using the loaded organic solution obtained with tests performed at 0.033 Three quaternary ammonium salts were evaluated as extractants for the removal of copper present in cyanidation solutions by solvent extraction: Quartamin TPR, Aliquat 336 and Adogen 464. The solvent was octane and the modifier nonylphenol (in a molar ratio extractant/modifier Speciation diagrams for the copper–cyanide system were made. As the ion concentrations were high, activity coefficients were calculated by using the Davies Equation. This diagram permits to estimate the amount of each species in equilibrium for any pH value. It was found that Quartamin TPR can remove up to 70% of the copper, but the formation of an emulsion-like phase makes difficult the separation of the phases, which implies that the eventual use of these extractant at the industrial scale may cause problems. When the extraction is performed with Aliquat 336 and Adogen 464 as extractants, up to 95% of the copper can be removed. The best copper extraction was obtained with Adogen 464: 99% in the pH range of 9.5–11 when using an extractant concentration of 0.033 The stripping of the copper–cyanide complexes can be accomplished using a strong alkaline solution (0.5 The authors thank CONACYT for the financial support received (Project CB-2005-1-48826 and doctoral scholarship). M.C. Omero Alonso González thanks the Hydrometallurgy Group of the Department of Materials Engineering at the University of British Columbia, Canada, for the facilities provided, and Dr. Berend Wassink for his technical assistance.