Various patterns of ankle fractures that are not accounted for by common classification systems have been the subject of case reports. The first difficulty with these variant patterns is recognizing all associated pathology, followed by the successful application of stable fixation. The purpose of this study was to describe the common morphologic features and ligamentous injuries of a unique variant fracture pattern, as well as the surgical treatment technique and the short-term functional and radiographic outcomes. Of 121 consecutive unstable ankle fractures over a 2-year period, 7 patients were found to have a similar constellation of injuries around the ankle. A vertical shear fracture of the posteromedial tibial rim was the main feature. Six of the 7 also had a fracture of the posterior malleolus. On magnetic resonance imaging, the deltoid and posterior tibiofibular ligaments were intact in all cases. Fractures were treated with open anatomic reduction of the posteromedial and posterior fragments with antiglide plate fixation. All fractures healed at 2 months without loss of reduction, fixation failure, or surgical complications. The average American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons lower extremity score was 79 at an average of 8 months’ follow-up. The common radiographic and morphologic features associated with this posteromedial fracture indicate that it likely occurs through a common mechanism that involves hyperplantarflexion. The characteristics of this fracture pattern have not been fully described previously, but this ankle fracture variant may occur in up to 6% of cases. Unstable ankle fractures should be evaluated carefully for evidence of posteromedial involvement so appropriate treatment may proceed.The first decision to make when treating ankle fractures is whether surgical reduction and fixation are necessary. The most important underlying factor in this decision is whether the ankle is stable or unstable. Long-term studies have demonstrated that stable fractures are successfully treated with conservative care, and, conversely, unstable fractures require internal fixation to maintain a reduced ankle joint until healing occurs ( Several classification systems have been implemented for ankle fractures, of which the Lauge-Hansen is most commonly used ( We have identified an ankle fracture pattern in a cohort of patients that is not described by the Lauge-Hansen or other classification systems. This fracture appears to have a common pattern of injuries around the ankle, which likely result from a common mechanism of injury. The purpose of this study was to comprehensively describe the bony and ligamentous injuries of this ankle injury, the radiographic findings, and the short-term functional outcomes associated with management of this heretofore uncategorized ankle fracture pattern. Beginning in September 2004, all complex ankle fractures at our institution were evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess the status of the ankle ligaments and to precisely visualize fracture fragments in multiple planes. These patients were followed up prospectively. During this time, 121 unstable ankle fractures were treated surgically, 7 of which had common fracture pattern features that were unclassifiable with current classification systems. The main criterion used for inclusion was the presence of a fracture of the posteromedial lip of the tibia. After approval from the institutional review board, the radiographic and clinical outcomes of these patients were evaluated retrospectively from the prospective database. The median patient age was 45 years (range, 26–84 years), and 3 of the 7 patients were men. All patients sustained a low-energy, twisting injury, such as stumbling off a step or curb. Patients were initially seen in the emergency department, and closed reduction and splinting were performed. A standard radiographic ankle series was obtained, and all views were analyzed for fracture fragment morphology by a fellowship-trained orthopaedic traumatologist. Subsequently, all patients underwent MRI on a 1.5 Tesla unit (Signa Horizon LX; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) with a dedicated extremity coil. The patients were placed supine, and the ankle was placed in a neutral position. The MRI sequences consisted of an axial T2-weighted fast-spin-echo, sagittal T1-weighted spin-echo, fast inversion recovery, and coronal fast-spin-echo images. The axial images were used to evaluate the integrity of the syndesmotic and deltoid ligaments, the axial fracture pattern, and articular surface impaction. An experienced musculoskeletal magnetic resonance radiologist interpreted the MRIs, and ligaments were judged as being intact or torn based on standard criteria of ligament injury, including disruption of ligamentous fibers or wavy-appearing fibers with interstitial edema ( Five of the 7 patients underwent bilateral computed tomography scanning immediately postoperatively to evaluate the reconstruction of the fibular incisura and reduction of the syndesmosis. At regular follow-up intervals, functional outcomes were assessed with the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons (AAOS) Lower Limb Questionnaire ( Patients were placed prone on the operating room table. A pneumatic tourniquet was placed on the thigh but was not routinely inflated. The surgical approaches were based on facilitating fragment-specific fixation based on preoperative planning with the axial imaging and radiographs. A posterolateral incision was made initially, and a posterolateral fibular plate was placed. If a separate posterolateral or posterior tibial lip fragment existed, a posterolateral approach to the tibia was performed between the lateral and posterior compartments with the same incision. The fragment was reduced, using the fracture cortical apex as a key to the reduction, and a small fragment antiglide plate was placed. After this, a posteromedial approach was made to the tibia, retracting the neurovascular bundle anteriorly when necessary. The posteromedial fragment was reduced in similar fashion with Kirschner wires, dental picks, and elevators, and an antiglide plate was placed at the apex of the fracture. Fluoroscopy was used to verify articular reduction. After fixation of the bony injuries, the ankle was stressed in external rotation to assess the syndesmosis, and the fluoroscopic stability of the mortise along with the preoperative MRI data were used to determine the necessity for syndesmotic stabilization. A layered closured was performed over suction drains. Postoperatively, patients were placed in plaster splint immobilization. This was changed to a removable, hard plastic boot several days later to allow early active motion, but weightbearing was restricted for 8 weeks postoperatively. In 6 of the 7 patients, 2 large fragments were present, 1 posteriorly and 1 posteromedially, with a sagittal plane split separating them. Two plates were used posteriorly in these 6 cases ( On MRI examination, the posterior inferior tibiofibular (PITFL) was intact in all patients, and the anterior inferior tibiofibular was intact in 4 and torn in 3. The interosseous membrane was intact in 6 patients, and was torn in 1 case. Both the superficial deltoid and the deep deltoid ligaments were intact in all patients ( Postoperative bilateral CT scans were analyzed in 5 patients to determine the adequacy of the incisura reduction. In all cases, the incisura was symmetric to the contralateral side within 2 mm, and no malreductions or missed injuries of the syndesmosis were found. Postoperatively, all fractures healed by 2 months, without any loss of reduction of the individual fragments or the position of the talus in the mortise. All patients recovered a full range of motion. One patient complained of mild pain at night, which was controlled with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medication, and 1 complained of activity-related swelling. Three hardware removal procedures were performed: the 2 syndesmotic screws were removed empirically, and 1 posteromedial plate was removed secondary to local soft tissue irritation. No infections or other complications occurred. At short-term follow-up (8 months), the median AAOS lower extremity score was 84 (range, 51–94). A typical coronal plane fracture of the posterior malleolus most often occurs from a rotational injury mechanism, as the PITFL avulses its bony attachment off the lateral distal tibia. This has been confirmed by a recent study, in which all posterior malleolar fractures were attached to an intact PITFL ( Other authors have partially described features of this ankle fracture variant. Weber ( The ideal fixation for this unique pattern has not been definitively demonstrated. Disruption of the posterior bony and ligamentous structures of the ankle may cause significant posterior instability ( The constellation of ligamentous injuries has not been described in this variant, and appears to be relatively consistent. In 6 of the 7 patients, the interosseous membrane was intact, and the single patient with a syndesmosis disruption was treated with a supplemental syndesmotic screw and had an excellent outcome score of 94 at 3 months postinjury. The superficial and deep deltoid ligaments were intact in all patients, indicating that stable osseous fixation of the posteromedial fragment, which contains the posterior colliculus, should stabilize the medial malleolus complex. In addition, the PITFL was intact in all patients and attached to the posterolateral fragment, again suggesting that stabilization of this fragment should recreate the integrity of the posterior malleolar complex. The most notable limitation of this study is the small number of patients and the short follow-up. When reporting on specific and relatively rare fracture patterns, it is difficult to assemble a large cohort of patients, and future multicenter studies may address this. Although the short length of follow-up in this study does not allow us to definitively comment on the long-term functional results, the short-term radiographic and functional measurements do suggest that the surgical approach we used in these patients was sufficient to allow for mechanical stability and maintenance of fragment position with a concentric mortise until fracture healing. The value of this study is the comprehensive description of this hyperplantarflexion ankle fracture variant, which may help to increase the awareness of its existence of this fracture type and to report a successful treatment technique.