Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) nanosuspensions from naproxen (Nap) and itraconazole (Itra) stabilized with Kollidon®VA64 (KVA) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were produced in two different size classes each by wet media milling. These API nanosuspensions were spray dried with lactose, trehalose and sucrose as matrix formers in different proportions and at different drying temperatures (Toutlet). Toutlet as well as the API content significantly influenced the redispersibility of the API nanoparticles. It could be shown that these two parameters are related to each other, with an increasing API content leading to a decreasing maximum applicable Toutlet (Tcritical). Drying above Tcritical always led to an alteration of the size characteristics of the API nanoparticles and thus to a non-redispersible product with respect to the defined quality criteria. For each proportion of API to matrix former, a Tcritical could be found. Tcritical showed a linear relation to the API content. The linear regression of this relation was defined as process boundary. The y-intercept of the process boundary correlated well with the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the pure matrix former used for spray drying. The two APIs under investigation led to virtually identical behaviour if other parameters were kept constant. The particle size of the initial nanosuspension had an important influence. Nanosuspensions with comparatively small particle sizes led to a significantly stronger decrease of the process boundaries compared to the use of larger particle sizes. The maximum API content that leads to a redispersible product is thus decisively determined by Toulet of the spray dryer, Tg as well as the proportion of the matrix former and by the particle size of the API nanoparticles used.The deeper understanding of pathogenesis and thus the improved identification of possible targets in combination with progress in the field of drug discovery have led to a steadily increasing number of drug candidates with increased selectivity and thus enhanced effects One possibility to transfer these theoretical considerations into practical application is the formulation of API nanosuspensions. These are aqueous dispersions of submicron API particles stabilized by at least one suitable stabilizer. There are several methodologies to produce API nanosuspensions of which wet-media milling is one of the most frequently used technologies in the pharmaceutical industry In order to circumvent these stability issues, the conversion of API nanosuspensions into solid products (powders, granules, tablets, capsules etc.) can be a reasonable step within the production chain of nanosuspension formulations A widely known solidification process is spray drying. In this process, a feed from a liquid stock is atomized into a temperature-controlled gas flow, inducing evaporation of the moisture from the droplets. As consequence, solid particles form which can subsequently be separated by means of a cyclone Despite the large number of investigations Micronized naproxen (Nap) and itraconazole (Itra) were kindly provided by Novartis Pharma AG (Basel, Switzerland). Lactose monohydrate (GranuLac® 200) (lactose) was a gift from Meggle Group, BG Excipients & Technology (Wasserburg, Germany). D(+)-trehalose dihydrate (trehalose), D(+)-saccharose (sucrose), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were commercially obtained (Carl Roth GmbH + Co.KG, Karlsruhe, Germany). Kollidon® VA64 (KVA) was kindly provided by BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Water was produced in an in-house process with bidistille type 2102 (GFL, Burgwedel, Germany) or by an Astacus KVA and SDS were weighed in a beaker and filled up with water in order to achieve a concentration of 2.5 w% KVA and 0.25 w% SDS in the final nanosuspension. After complete dissolution, API was added to yield a final concentration of 10 w% and subsequently dispersed by means of magnetic stirring. The pre-suspension was poured in a stirred media mill MiniCer (Netzsch Feinmahltechnik GmbH, Selb, Germany) or a planetary ball mill PM400 (Retsch GmbH, Haan, Germany) modified after Juhnke et al. An excess of required API was added to water and stirred for at least 72 h. The resulting dispersions were filtered through a 0.22 µm PES Rotilabo® syringe filter (Carl Roth GmbH + Co.KG, Karlsruhe, Germany). The first 5 ml of filtrate were discarded to ensure that the filter surface was fully saturated with API before obtaining the saturated solution for the experiments. 10 w% of matrix former (lactose, trehalose, sucrose) was completely dissolved in saturated API solution. Subsequently, the required amount of matrix former solution (also filtered as described in Spray drying experiments were performed using a Büchi B-191 (Büchi AG, Flawil, Switzerland) in a co-current air flow mode. The feed stock was transferred to a two-fluid nozzle (0.7 mm orifice diameter) via a peristaltic pump with a feed rate of 2 ml/min. The nozzle was temperature conditioned with water of 15 °C by a water-cooling system. The atomization pressure was set to 1.9 bar, controlled by an ECO 1 pressure gauge (Keller AG, Winterthur, Switzerland). The product discharge was conducted by using a high-performance cyclone with an aspiration pressure of −50 to −60 mbar. The air flow rate was adjusted to 650 m Directly after drying, 30–50 mg of dried product was weighed into a glass vial, mixed with 3 g of saturated API solution and stirred on a magnetic stirrer at 600 rpm for 15 min. Preliminary experiments did not reveal an influence of the amount of saturated API solution and of the stirring speed (data not shown). Stirring time was set in order to ensure complete dissolution of the applied matrix former even if this process should be much faster. The resulting dispersion was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy ( A drying/redispersion process was considered successful when both of the following quality criteria were met: a) The resulting RdI was ≤ 1.1 which means that an alteration at maximum of 10% of the hydrodynamic diameter compared to the original nanosuspension was allowed. b) Just a moderate change in the polydispersity index (PdI) (to a value of at maximum 0.2) was observed. By applying these quality criteria (RdI and PdI), the assessment of a successful drying and redispersion process was based on two different parameters which are connected to each other and represent ”the quality attributes” with regard to the present study. The standard deviations for the particle size and the PdI were also considered when assessing the redispersibility. If a single sample showed a very high standard deviation in relation to the other samples of the test series, it was evaluated as “non-redispersible”. Particle size measurements were performed via photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) with a ZetaSizer nano ZS from Malvern Panalytical Ltd. (Worcestershire, United Kingdom). All measurements were performed in a polystyrene single-use cuvette DTS0012 (Sarstedt AG & Co., Nümbrecht, Germany) at 25 °C with a measurement angle of 173°. The z-average diameter (z-Ave) was used as representative for the hydrodynamic diameter, the polydispersity index (PdI) to express the width of the particle size distribution. The means and standard deviations of these two parameters were calculated from three measurements whereby a single measurement run duration was set to 180 s. To guarantee a proper temperature conditioning, the equilibration time prior to measurement was set to 300 s. Samples were diluted with saturated API solution to achieve an attenuator in between 4 and 8. Prerequisites for proper PCS measurements are the selection of correct refractive indices (RI) and dynamic viscosities. Therefore, the RI of the applied dispersion medium was measured in an Abbemat Refractometer (Anton Paar GmbH, Graz, Austria) at 25 °C with a wavelength of 589.3 nm. The sample volume was 500 µl. The RI of the dispersed particles were measured in the same device following Saveyn’s multiple solvent approach Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed with a DSC 3+ system with an FRS6+ sensor and an intracooler or with a DSC 1 with MultiSTAR FRS5 sensor and an intracooler (both: Mettler Toledo GmbH, Gießen, Germany). Data were analysed by applying the thermal analysis software STARe by Mettler Toledeo. Calibration was conducted using indium as a reference material. All measurements were performed under nitrogen purge. The determination of the glass transition temperature (T Density measurements of the dried samples were performed with a helium pycnometer Ultrapycnometer 1000 T (Quantachrome GmbH & Co. KG, Odelzhausen, Germany). Sample quantity was at least 4 g of powder. Each sample was analysed in triplicate. The wet media milling processes of the micronized APIs Nap and Itra in the presence of the stabilizer combination KVA and SDS were successful in producing API nanosuspensions which met the quality attributes of z-Ave < 250 nm, PdI < 0.2 ( For a better understanding of the whole set-up and the conclusions which were drawn from the experimental results, processing of the formulation Nap-KVASDS (165 nm) with the matrix former lactose will be presented in more detail. Later, the considerations will be extended to further matrix formers and API nanosuspensions by just focusing on the condensed results. In order to investigate the influence of the drying temperature in combination with formulation aspects several feed stocks differing in their proportion of Nap to lactose as shown in In order to test whether the observations made upon spray drying with lactose can also be seen for other matrix formers, additional spray drying experiments with the two sugars sucrose and trehalose were performed. As reported in the literature, lactose, trehalose and sucrose obtain an amorphous state upon spray drying The above-mentioned results were obtained with only one specific type of API nanosuspension made from Nap stabilized with KVA and SDS. Therefore, it was investigated whether the phenomena observed would also occur when using nanoparticles made from a different API, stabilized with KVA and SDS, too. For this purpose, an Itra-KVASDS nanosuspension was manufactured which was nearly identical to Nap-KVASDS (165 nm) in terms of API and stabilizer content as well as particle size. Spray drying experiments for Itra-KVASDS (165 nm) with lactose, sucrose and trehalose were performed in the same manner as for Nap-KVASDS (165 nm). The results obtained are in good analogy ( In the course of our investigations it was observed that the particle size may influence the spray drying and redispersion results to some extent. Therefore, this influence was studied also by performing experiments with Nap and Itra nanosuspensions with smaller particle sizes (~140 and 135 nm, respectively, When setting up spray drying procedures for API nanosuspensions with the aim of obtaining completely redispersible products with virtually unaltered nanoparticle properties, several process and material specific dependencies need to be considered. If the T Upon spray drying of API nanosuspensions there is, however, not only an upper but also a lower temperature limit for the drying temperature. First of all, a certain drying temperature is the prerequisite for obtaining a dry powder. Moreover, the T The use of “high-melting“ APIs with regard to the applied T The particle size of the respective API nanosuspensions plays a major role for the course of the process boundary. A small particle size leads to a considerably stronger decrease with increasing API concentration compared to a large particle size, which negatively affects the achievable API content in the product. This relationship is very important for the downstreaming of API nanosuspensions, as a decisive reason for the manufacturing of API nanosuspensions lies in the small particle size. The particle size reduction and the resulting surface enlargement are intended to increase the dissolution rate The influence of particle size on the process boundary as well as the general decrease of the process boundary with increasing drug content require further investigations in order to clarify the causes of these phenomena. A starting point could be the particle number in the respective product, which increases with higher drug content as well as with decreasing particle size (for a given drug content) which may promote agglomeration before the API nanoparticles are fixed within the droplet. It is conceivable that there is a certain particle concentration in a dried product at which the relative distance of the particles to each other falls below a critical value, so that the particles interact with each other. Another consideration in the same context is that there is a critical matrix former content which is necessary to protect the API nanoparticles by providing an adequate matrix former shell thickness and by that a sufficient particle distance. This critical content is, however, connected to the size of the API particles and by that most likely to the specific surface area. Therefore, quantities below the critical matrix former content would lead to an alteration of the API’s particle size characteristics during drying, most likely caused by agglomeration. The increasing API particle concentration during the drying process may simultaneously increase the agglomeration tendency. As shown in the study, the redispersibility and thus the preservation of the particle size characteristics can be positively influenced by increasing the matrix former content, using larger API nanoparticles and applying lower drying temperatures. The actual circumstances and connections are still unclear at present and require further investigations and calculations in order to corroborate the hypotheses described. The aim of this study was to improve the knowledge regarding spray drying of API nanosuspensions by deriving general correlations which are important for a rational formulation and process design. The following correlations or recommendations can be derived from the results obtained which may help to achieve successful formulations: Each API nanosuspension/matrix former combination has a temperature-dependent process boundary - described by T The application of matrix formers with a high T The particle size of the API nanosuspension strongly affects the process boundary. A smaller particle size is more challenging for achieving high API loads. Addressing that, formulators need to find a compromise between high dissolution rate and high API content. Financial support by This study received financial support by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: