Aqueous solutions of high molecular weight polyacrylamides used to flocculate mineral slurries undergo time-based changes in their properties. Previous studies of the impact of ageing on flocculation performance have focused on time-scales of weeks or months, which has little relevance to industrial practice. In this study, ageing times from 1 h to 6 days were examined. Flocculation was achieved continuously in a Couette mixing device (stationary outer cylinder, rotating inner cylinder). The extent of aggregation was assessed from batch settling tests and in situ size characterisation with a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probe. The polyacrylamide dosages required to achieve measurable flocculation decreased as the flocculant age was increased, with optimal performance attained at 72 h. Flocculation using a 1-h-old flocculant solution consumed 75% more polymer than with an optimally prepared stock solution. The relationship between hindered settling rate and FBRM chord length measurements was found to be independent of flocculant age, but was sensitive to shifts in aggregate density caused by variations in mixing intensity. It is proposed that the early stages of flocculant dissolution involved the release of discrete polymer chains from highly agglomerated species, the former dominating flocculation activity. Optimal ageing maximised the discrete polymer concentration available for flocculation, leading to a significant increase in the aggregate size distribution but did not appear to impact upon the aggregate packing structure (density).The efficient solid–liquid separation of mineral suspensions is of critical importance to most hydrometallurgical processing operations. A variety of reagents may be added to slurries to enhance sedimentation by inducing aggregation. Salts of multivalent cations that effectively reduce the surface charge of the solids are termed The most frequently used flocculants are polymers derived from the acrylamide monomer The performance of a flocculant in any application (measured in terms of settling rate, clarity, sediment volume or flocculant consumption) is decided by the complex interplay between a number of factors, many of which have been reviewed in detail Slurry properties such as particle size, surface area, surface charge, solution composition, pH and ionic strength. Physical properties of the flocculant, such as molecular weight, charge density and functionality. Dynamic aspects of aggregate rupture and formation under applied shear. The flocculation process is strongly influenced by the solution properties of the polymer molecules. Flocculant adsorption and the bridging process depend not only upon the functional interactions with the surface, but also the solution dimensions of the polymer chain. The latter is determined by both the molecular weight of the polymer and the conformation it takes in a particular electrolyte solution. The application of excessive shear to long chain high molecular weight polymers during make-up or flocculation can lead to chain rupture, substantially reducing the capacity for bridging The change in polymer properties as a function of aqueous solution age is also an important consideration. Although such changes may be far less dramatic than those achieved as a consequence of shear degradation, they may still lead to significant reductions in flocculation performance and increased flocculant dosages. The ageing of polyacrylamide solutions was first reported as a change in solution viscosity over a period of weeks or months.  Studies into the instability of polyacrylamide solutions have either detected no ageing Almost all of the above studies have focused on long-term ageing over periods of up to 100 days. Changes over such periods are of no practical interest in hydrometallurgical applications, where the residence time for a flocculant before dosing is rarely more than a day, and in some instances, may be less than an hour.  Hindered settling rates, measured from the rate of descent of a mudline, provide a qualitative indication of the aggregate dimensions, and serve as a guide to the throughput of gravity thickeners. They are normally obtained from cylinder tests, where dilute polymer is dosed into a standard cylinder of slurry and mixed, either by inversion or with plungers. While such tests are simple and convenient, they suffer from ill-defined mixing. The poor mixing can leave polymer-rich and polymer-poor regions, resulting in irreproducible flocculation   This paper describes investigations into the effect of flocculant solution ageing on the resultant flocculation performance with a standard substrate. Continuous flocculation was achieved in a Shear Vessel fitted with an FBRM probe, using hindered settling rates and chord length distributions as measures of performance. Flocculant solution ages ranged from 1 h to several days, representing the time period of greatest relevance to most mineral processing operations.  Kaolin (12.5 kg, density 2.68 g cm The kaolin size achieved by this method was still greater than that expected for fully dispersed primary particles ( A commercial high molecular weight nonionic polyacrylamide, well known in mineral processing applications, was used in this study. No evidence of acrylate moieties could be detected by FTIR, Kinematic viscosities were determined using an Ubbelohde-type capillary viscometer #0C-C96 with a calibration constant of 0.002882 cSt s The particle and aggregate dimensions of suspensions at different stages of flocculation were examined in situ by FBRM. All such measurements were carried out with an M500 field unit fitted with a laboratory probe (Lasentec®, Redmond, WA, USA). The probe had a 12-mm-diameter flat window located at the base of the probe body (318 mm long, 25 mm diameter). The probe body joins to a larger casing that contains the electric motor for the scanning drive, which is connected to the controlling electronics in the field unit by a 10-m fibre optic cable. In all experiments, the focal point of the laser was set to be at the surface of the probe window. Using version 6.0 acquisition software, scans (10 s duration) were continuously measured over the full range of chord lengths (1–1000 μm), split into 90 channels in a logarithmic progression. The unweighted chord length distribution is a Applying a length square-weighting (i.e. volume weighting) to the chord length distribution accentuates the larger particles within the slurry. The mean square-weighted chord length was also calculated. The Shear Vessel Flocculant inlets (Ports 1–4) are positioned on one side of the outer cylinder, while the slurry inlet port is positioned on the opposite side. Introducing the flocculant through different ports alters the “residence time” of the flocculant/feed contact, that is, the duration that the flocculant is mixed with the suspension (this correlates in a general sense with the residence time of the feed suspension within a feedwell). A column is fitted to the base of the cylinders to allow the through-flow of the suspension, but it is isolated (through the closure of two valves) for analysis of settling rates and turbidity. Slurry was pumped from the feed tank to the Shear Vessel using a peristaltic pump (“Feed slurry pump”, Masterflex® 7550-62 L/S: Tygon tubing size 16) at a constant delivery rate of 200 ml min The agitation conditions experienced by the suspension in the annular gap are controlled by the rotation of the inner cylinder, the agitation intensity being directly proportional to the rotation speed. The Shear Vessel was used at a range of rotation speeds from 75 to 400 rpm. Hindered settling rates were determined by measuring the rate of fall of the mudline of a sample isolated in the Shear Vessel's analysis column. The residual turbidity (in units of NTU) of the isolated sample after set time periods was measured with an Analite nephelometer. The FBRM probe was inserted at an angle of 70° to the flow, allowing material to be suitably presented to the probe window but preventing any solid build-up. The flocculation characteristics of the 45 g l Aggregate density is one of the most important properties to be determined in the evaluation of flocculation performance The floc density analyser (FDA) is a device developed for determining microscopic properties of individual aggregates, such as size, shape, settling velocity and density, without removing them from their process liquor. Details of the procedure have been described previously by Kaolin was flocculated in the Shear Vessel at 100 and 200 rpm with flocculant aged for 72 h at dosages that gave bulk settling rates of 1.7 m h Kinematic viscosity measurements were conducted at 40 °C using 1.2 μm filtered flocculant solutions that had been aged from 1 to 144 h At 3 h, there is a rapid increase in the viscosity followed by a sharp decrease to 5 h. At 3 h ageing, the dissolved polymer is expected to be highly tangled producing “agglomerated polymer”; as the agglomerates are disentangled, more discrete polymer chains are observed leading to a decrease in the viscosity. A further slight decrease in viscosity is observed up to 7 h after which only minimal changes in viscosity occur up to the last measurement time of 144 h. After 7 h, it is most likely that only subtle conformational changes of individual polymer chains occur which do not affect the overall solution viscosity but may very well have a large effect on flocculant activity. In addition to the viscosity measurements shown in From The settling rate diminished rapidly up to an agitation intensity of 200 rpm. At this point, the settling rate was low, typically in the range 2–3 m h The distinct change in behaviour between 100 and 200 rpm is considered indicative of a low aggregate strength. A clearer picture of the impact of agitation intensity may be obtained from examination of the FBRM chord length distributions from flocculation at both 100 and 200 rpm for the same dosages applied in At 200 rpm, the total counts were higher, a consequence of smaller aggregates being formed This general behaviour described in Increasing the ageing period up to 24 h substantially enhanced the effective flocculant activity, greatly reducing the dosages required to achieve acceptable settling rates. A slight reduction in flocculation performance was observed with stock aged for 144 h Similar trends were also observed with the chord length distributions after flocculation Bimodal character was observed at 100 rpm for flocculant ages of 5 h and over, but not for the 1- and 3-h-old solutions A series of experiments was conducted to establish the full dosage response for each flocculant age at agitation intensities of 100 and 200 rpm. In view of the large volume of kaolin slurry and time required for Shear Vessel testing, it was not possible to examine dosage effects concurrently with the agitation studies described in the previous section. A separate set of aged flocculants was therefore examined, using another batch of kaolin slurry. Slightly higher dosages were required for this slurry, reflecting a reduced degree of natural aggregation  Even under the more intense mixing at 200 rpm, fast settling rates could be achieved at the expense of higher flocculant dosages It can be seen from The application of a length square-weighting to the FBRM chord length distribution effectively represents a volume-based weighting, emphasising the contribution of the larger chords, which in this system are associated with aggregation. In the initial study of in situ FBRM detection of aggregates formed within the Shear Vessel,  In contrast to the linear fits applied by The data for both agitation intensities are plotted together in This was confirmed by density measurements with the FDA method. Using a 72-h-old stock solution, samples of flocculated kaolin were prepared at 100 and 200 rpm, with the dosages adjusted to give hindered settling rates of 1.7 m h As expected, aggregate density was consistently higher at 200 rpm across the measured range of sizes. For average 100-μm aggregates at 100 and 200 rpm, the densities were 1.028 and 1.040 g cm Recent studies have demonstrated that aqueous solutions of polyacrylamides, even after several days of ageing, are unlikely to consist of fully dispersed polymer chains. From the results presented above, a general mechanism can be proposed to explain the time-based changes in aqueous flocculant solution activity. This may be described schematically by the four stages shown in At Stage (b), the ageing process has progressed to the point that gel lumps are no longer visible, although the polymer chains may be far from fully dispersed. The solution dimensions of species consisting of several entangled chains may be slightly larger than that for an individual chain, but this is unlikely to compensate for the reduced number of chains available for particle bridging. A similar argument may be applied to any supramicron agglomerates. Stage (c) represents the optimal ageing time for a flocculant solution—dispersion of the polymer chains is either complete or at the maximum level expected for the solvent and the required dosage for flocculation is at a minimum. In the present study, this was achieved after ageing for 72 h. Extended ageing, as shown in (d), follows the behaviour expected from previous studies of flocculant ageing. Once dispersion is complete, the dominant solution process is likely to be slow chain reconformation, with solvation of intra-polymer hydrogen bonds resulting in the initial extended conformation changing to a more stable, tighter coil It should be emphasised that in this study, the first step in the preparation of all flocculant stock solutions involved the “wetting” of polymer powder with ethanol. This step prevents the powder particles sticking together after water addition, thereby ensuring a more homogeneous dissolution process. In extreme cases, poor wetting of flocculant powders can lead to the formation of gels that cannot be dispersed. Many other procedures exist for achieving this initial wetting and dispersion of powder particles, often depending on the scale of preparation. For example, the use of a wetting agent may be avoided by carefully adding powder into the vortex formed in the aqueous phase by a suitable impellor rotating at high speed for a strictly limited period. The choice of wetting procedure may influence the initial phase of dissolution, that is, Stage (a) in For laboratory-based studies into the comparative flocculation behaviour of mineral slurries, it is clearly necessary to apply a set ageing period for flocculant stock solutions to ensure stable and reproducible behaviour. Of potentially greater significance are the implications for industrial thickening operations. We have observed at a number of mineral processing sites that the time-scale from powder flocculant make-up to addition can be less than 24 h, and in some instances, less than 1 h. Invariably, the argument against longer ageing is the limited storage capacity available for the stock flocculant solution, although the increase in required dosages for short ageing in part makes this a self-fulfilling arrangement. Continuous flocculation within the Shear Vessel with FBRM detection provides controlled mixing conditions and detailed characterisation of aggregate properties. In particular, the relationship between the measured hindered settling rate and mean square-weighted chord length under controlled mixing may be used as a convenient indication of relative aggregate density, avoiding the complications associated with off-line measurements on diluted samples. The dissolution of the powdered polyacrylamide flocculant was found to be a slow process. The dosages required to achieve measurable flocculation decreased as the flocculant age was increased up to 72 h, reflecting the release of discrete polymer chains from highly agglomerated solution species. Despite the much higher consumption of flocculant after short ageing times, under almost all conditions studied, the duration of ageing did not significantly impact upon the density of the aggregates formed, indicating that only the discrete polymer chains influenced the flocculation process. This research has been supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy. This support is gratefully acknowledged.