In this study, desilication, decomposition, and acidolysis were used to recycle rare earth elements (REEs) from real waste trichromatic phosphors containing glass at laboratory and pilot plant scales. The effects of pre-sintering temperature, sieving, alkaline leaching conditions and alkaline fusion temperature on removal of glass and recovery of REEs were investigated. About 88% of glass fragments in the original matrix were removed after dry sieving through a 0.05 mm mesh sieve and leaching by 5 mol/L NaOH solution at 90 °C for 4 h at the appropriate 5:1 liquid-solid ratio. The blue and green phosphors were decomposed by alkaline fusion at 600 °C for 2 h. Y, Eu, Ce and Tb-rich solutions were respectively obtained by the two-steps acidolysis. The total leaching rate of REEs reached 94%, while the rates of Y, Eu, Ce, and Tb were 96%, 99%, 81%, and 92%, respectively. Furthermore, in the ton level industrial pilot, the successful application of this approach increased the recovery of the REEs up to 90% compared with the existing technology. Except for the fixed capital investments and taxes, this approach showed positive economic feasibility, since the savings are 1115 €/ton. Therefore, recycling of REEs from waste phosphors is one of the cleaner and economical ways to balance the demand and supply of REEs outside of China.The rare earth elements (REEs), especially Tb and Eu, are considered the most critical materials by the European Union ( Many studies have been conducted on recycling REEs from waste, with a particular focus on lamp phosphors ( Hydrometallurgy is a traditionally established and easy method for the recovery of REEs from waste phosphors, and pyrometallurgical pretreatments are used to aid REEs leaching. Some of the 2014–2019 representative studies and the corresponding achieved results are presented in Multiple literature reports dealt with the laboratory-scale research of REEs recycling from waste phosphor powders or pure phosphors. Processes for waste phosphor powders with glass, such as alkaline fusion and mechano-chemical-assisted leaching, have a relatively high energy consumption due to high calcination temperature or high milling speed, including desilication, decomposition, and acidolysis. It should be noted that alkaline fusion leads to the formation of silicates due to the presence of fine glass particles, which is seldom discussed by researchers. During the following leaching, SiO Isolated Ludox particles and aggregates made of silica particles are bound to the polypeptide chain via the Si–O In order to increase the recovery of REEs from real waste trichromatic phosphors containing glass, and reduce the cost, improved processes, including desilication, decomposition and acidolysis were synthetically investigated during REEs recycling from real waste trichromatic phosphors at the laboratory (g and kg sample size) and pilot plant (metric ton sample size) scales in this paper. Economic assessment and technical feasibility, along with the ecological aspects are briefly discussed. Real waste trichromatic phosphors (WTP) used in experiments were supplied by the Xinli Co. Ltd from Guangzhou, China. The chemical composition always varies between different batches of waste phosphors. The waste phosphors used in the laboratory and pilot plant scale experiments were from the same batch. They have been processed by the homogenization treatment and packed. For the laboratory experiment, ten samples were collected from ten packs (25 kg/pack) in different layers, respectively, by random sampling, 500 g each. Then the samples were manually blended. The WTP mainly contains fine trichromatic phosphors (YOX, BAM, and CTMA), glass fragments and flocculent organics (possibly from the package). The process to recover REEs from WTP follows the flowchart shown in Burn off flocculent organics. The WTP was calcinated at 200–600 °C for 2 h, since flocculent organics were detrimental to separate the glass fragments by sieving. Remove large size glass fragments. Waste samples were dry sieved (38 μm, 50 μm, 74 μm, and 150 μm mesh sizes, respectively) and the particle size distribution was determined by weighing the collected sieved fractions. Selective leaching of red phosphors (YOX) was carried out with HCl at 60 °C for 4 h at the optimized conditions: 4M HCl and 3:1 liquid-solid ratio, as described in the previous study ( Remove fine glass. Leaching of fine glass was carried out with NaOH solution (1.25 M, 2.5 M, 3.75 M, 5 M, and 6.25 M) at 90 °C for 4 h. After filtration, residue 2 was dried at 100 °C. Decomposition of BAM and CTMA. Residue 2 and NaOH were mixed with 1:1 wt ratio. The mixture was placed into 100 ml iron crucibles. Sintering was performed in a furnace at 200–900 °C for 2 h. In order to remove NaAlO Leaching of REEs from washed fusion products. The washed products were leached by 5M HCl at 60 °C for 2 h ( To reduce the possibility of REEs loss, extra deionized water was used to clean the samples during filtration. In the end, two mixed REEs oxides were prepared by precipitating with oxalic acid, followed by thermal treatment of oxalates at 800 °C. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using Philips APD-10 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation, 40 kV voltage and 150 mA current at 10°/min scanning rate and 10–70° 2θ range. The morphology, aspect ratio and mean particle size were observed in the scanning electron microscope (Zeiss EVO-18, German). Chemical composition of solids was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Shimadzu XRF-1800, Japan). XRF provides semiquantitative analysis with the ±5% uncertainty. Chemical composition of the solution was analyzed by the inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, PerkinElmer OPTIMA 7000DV, USA). Five WTP samples (100 g for each) were calcined at 200 °C, 300 °C, 400 °C, 500°, and 600 °C, respectively, for 2 h and the calcination experiment was repeated three times. The calcination temperature shows a positive effect on the removal of the organics in The chemical composition of the WTP after pre-calcination is presented in XRD pattern of the WTP after pre-calcination at 400 °C is shown in The WTP after pre-calcination were dry sieved (38 μm, 50 μm, 74 μm, and 150 μm mesh size, respectively). Sieving results based on the size gradation and cumulative percentage passing by weight are presented in The XRD and SEM results of different size particles are shown in Red phosphor (YOX) is the REEs oxide, which can be easily leached by HCl (4 mol/L) with the 3:1 liquid-solid ratio for 4 h with 250 rpm stirring at 60 °C ( The weight loss was ∼45%, and the chemical composition of the residue 1 tested by XRF is listed in The fine glass remained in the residue 1 was dissolved in hot alkaline solution and the main chemical reaction is: The experiments were carried out at 90 °C and the effects of NaOH concentration and liquid-solid ratio on the weight loss are shown in The XRD patterns of samples (residues 1 and 2) before and after hot alkaline leaching are shown in In the previous study, CTMA and BAM were decomposed to acid-soluble oxides following reactions (6) and (7). However, the residual fine SiO Therefore, in order to decompose BAM and CTMA, but avoid generating complicated aluminosilicate, the residue 1 and NaOH were mixed at the 1:1 mass ratio. Sintering was performed at 600 °C for 2 h. The product was washed by deionized water several times to remove excess NaOH, NaAlO After filtration, the filtrate 3 (Tb–Ce chloride concentrate) was obtained. Y–Eu and Ce–Tb oxides are then treated with oxalic acid at 70–80 °C and 1.8–2.1 pH to precipitate REE oxalates, which are subsequently thermally treated at 800 °C to obtain oxides. The final product obtained with the described process was a mixture of REEs oxides, which could be further treated to selectively recover the solo REE by solvent extraction. Under the above appropriate conditions, 200 g of waste phosphors after pre-calcination were used as the raw materials. Since the uncertainty of XRF is ±5%, the REEs content of the filtrate 1 (Y–Eu rich solution) and 3 (Tb–Ce rich solution) tested by ICP-AES were used to calculate the leaching rates in The existing process of recycling waste phosphors in Chinese factories includes three steps. (1) Remove large glass fragments, but ignore the fine glass. (2) Decompose the phosphors by alkaline fusion at about 800 °C. (3) Remove excessive alkali and NaAlO In the industrial trial, 1000 kg trichromatic phosphors containing glass was used as raw material. The statistics of the cost of auxiliary materials and energy recorded from pilot plant research are listed in The economic assessment provides the operating costs (including raw materials, utilities, maintenance, labor, fixed and general, overhead and capital depreciation) and revenues for one-ton waste phosphors in China ( China is by far the world's largest producer and consumer of rare earth elements, supplying around 80% of the globe's rare earth needs. Due to the socio-environmental issues and the health impact, the Chinese government has drastically cut back on domestic production of rare earth minerals ( The desilication, decomposition, and acidolysis were used to recycle rare earth elements from real waste trichromatic phosphors containing glass at laboratory and pilot plant scales. The effects of sieving, alkaline leaching conditions and alkaline fusion temperature on removal of glass and recycling of REEs were investigated. 88% of glass fragments were removed after dry sieving through a 0.05 mm mesh sieve and leaching by 5 mol/L NaOH solution at 90 °C for 4 h with the appropriate 5:1 liquid-solid ratio. The total leaching rate of rare earth elements reached 94%, while the rates of yttrium, europium, cerium, and terbium were 96%, 99%, 81%, and 92%, respectively. Compared with the existing technology in China, the application of this approach increased the recovery of REEs from 50% to 90%. Except for the fixed capital investments and taxes, it shows a positive value for this approach, which implies economic feasibility, since the benefit is 1115 €/ton. Therefore, the recycling of REEs from waste phosphors is one of the cleaner and economical way to balance the supply and demand of REEs outside of China. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support provided by the