The CO2 capture capacity and the extent of particle attrition during simulated calcium looping cycles in a fluidized bed were studied, with a focus on the influence of SO2 in the flue gas. Five calcination/carbonation cycles (calcination at 850°C and 20% CO2, carbonation at 700°C and 16% CO2) were carried out with a reference limestone using different SO2 concentrations during carbonation (110 and 1800ppm). Attrition phenomena were characterized by following the modifications of bed sorbent particle size distribution and the elutriation rates of fines throughout conversion over repeated cycles.
                  Results showed that the CO2 capture capacity decreased with the cycles, as expected. The presence of SO2 had a detrimental effect, but the SO2 concentration affected the capacity less than anticipated. In-bed particle fragmentation was always limited, while the attrition rate decreased with the number of cycles, and was only moderately affected by the presence of SO2.A promising way for reducing CO It is generally recognized that the CO Sorbent particles in a FB reactor are also subjected to attrition/fragmentation phenomena which lead to the change of the particle size distribution of the sorbent. Several studies on limestone attrition during calcination and sulphation in fluidized beds were reported in the literature In a recent work attrition of a limestone was studied during calcium looping cycles in a lab-scale fluidized bed under alternating calcination/carbonation conditions The aim of this work was to study CO The raw sorbent used in the tests was an Italian high-calcium limestone (Massicci) whose properties are given in Five calcination/carbonation cycles were carried out in all the experiments using an initial amount of 20 Before each test the reactor was charged with the silica sand and heated up to the desired temperature (850 The procedure described before was repeated for all the cycles. The same duration of the first calcination stage was used for the subsequent calcination stages, and the same criterion was applied for the duration of the carbonation stages. It must be noted that, because of the above procedure, the limestone particles underwent a more severe thermal shock than that occurring in a real calcium looping process, where the particles are not cooled down to ambient temperature. This implies that sorbent attrition rates measured in this investigation are likely to somewhat overestimate particle attrition under realistic conditions. During the experiments the rates of fines generation were determined by measuring the amount of fines carried over by the fluidizing gas and elutriated from the reactor. Elutriated fines were collected by means of the two-exit head by letting the flue gas flow alternately through sequences of filters for definite time periods. The difference between the weight of filters after and before operation, divided by the time interval during which the filter was in operation, gave the average fines elutriation rate ( Particle size distribution (PSD) of the sorbent was determined by sieving the bed material, after each calcination and carbonation stage. The sieving operation was carried out gently to avoid further comminution of the particles, but rapidly, because of the propensity of the calcined sorbent to absorb moisture when in contact with ambient air. The CO     The CO Results obtained with 1800 This work has been carried out in the framework of the European Commission – Research Fund for Coal and Steel Contract no. RFCR-CT-2010-00013 (CAL-MOD). This work was also supported by the “MSE-CNR Accordo di Programma per l’Attività di Ricerca di Sistema, project: Carbone Pulito-CO