The extraction of Hg(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions has been investigated using Cyanex 471X in xylene as an extractant. The results demonstrate that Hg(II) is extracted into xylene as HgCl2·4L (L represents the extractant). The effect of the nature of the diluent on the extraction of Hg(II) with Cyanex 471X has been studied and correlated with the dielectric constant. The loading capacity of the extractant was also determined. IR spectral studies of the extracted complex were used to further clarify the nature of the extracted complex. The potential of the extractant for decontaminating mercury from the brine sludge of a Chlor-Alkali plant has been assessed.For many years, the Chlor-Alkali industry all over the world has been a matter of grave concern because of the potential pollution hazards due to the presence of mercury in the waste streams. Mercury and its compounds, especially methylmercury, whose target organ is the brain in humans, disrupt the blood–brain barrier upsetting the metabolism of the nervous system. Inorganic mercury, especially soluble mercury species, can be transformed into methylmercury by the action of microorganisms under aerobic conditions. Conventional mercury treatment techniques include sulfate or hydrazine precipitation Solvent extraction of mercury has been investigated using various extractants such as trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) The present paper reports on the extraction behaviour of Hg(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions using Cyanex 471X as an extractant and the stoichiometry of the extracted complex. This paper also reports on the selective extraction of mercury from the brine sludge of the Chlor-Alkali industry. A tracer solution of A well-type NaI(Tl) scintillation counter supplied by Nucleonix Systems, India was used for the measurement of gamma activity of Equal volumes of the aqueous phase containing mercury(II) (0.1 mM) labeled with Mercury concentration in the brine sludge of a Chlor-Alkali plant was analysed spectrophotometrically using Rhodamine 6G The mercury–Cyanex 471X complex was prepared by following the general procedure as described below: the loading of Cyanex 471X with mercury(II) was carried out by repeated contacts with fresh portions of metal solutions for 30 min. The loaded organic phase was then separated. The Nicolet Impact 400D IR spectrometer using KBr(Neat) was used to obtain the IR spectra of the loaded organic phase. The KBr(Neat) containing a film of metal complex solution was put under an IR lamp to evaporate xylene completely. For comparison, the IR spectra of pure Cyanex 471X was also taken. The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration (0.4–3 M) on the extraction of mercury(II) has been investigated by keeping the metal concentration constant (0.1 mM) using 0.05 M Cyanex 471X in xylene as an extractant and the results are shown in The effect of Cyanex 471X concentration (0.01–0.04 M) on the extraction of mercury(II) has been studied at constant metal ion (0.1 mM) and hydrochloric acid (1 M) concentrations and the results are shown in The effect of metal ion concentration (0.001–1 mM) on the extraction process has been investigated using 0.02 M Cyanex 471X in xylene with 1 M HCl in the aqueous phase. The log–log plot From the preceding studies, the extraction equilibrium of Hg(II) when extracted from HCl solutions with Cyanex 471X can be written as The extraction of mercury(II) from 1 M HCl solutions using 0.02 M Cyanex 471X in various diluents has been investigated and the results are shown in The IR spectra of mercury–Cyanex 471X complex shows a shift of the PS stretching from 705 to 695 cm Aliquots of 10 mL of 0.05 M Cyanex 471X in xylene were repeatedly extracted at 303±1 K for 30 min with the same volume of aqueous solutions containing 0.05 mM of mercury and 0.1 M HCl. After reaching equilibrium, the phases were disengaged and aqueous phases were analysed for mercury(II) content. The amount of mercury transferred into the organic phase in each contact was calculated by difference and the cumulative concentration of mercury in the organic phase after each stage of contact was determined. The plot of cumulative [Hg(II)] Mercury stripping from a loaded organic solvent system consisting of 0.05 M Cyanex 471X in xylene (containing 0.1 mM Hg(II)) has been investigated using various stripping agents of different concentrations and the results are shown in The developed solvent extraction procedure was applied for the removal and recovery of mercury from the brine sludge of a Chlor-Alkali industry. One gram of the brine sludge in 10 mL of 0.5 M HCl was chlorinated for 15 min for converting mercury into highly soluble mercuric chloride complexes. The chlorinated sludge was then subjected to solid–liquid separation and the filtrate was analysed spectrophotometrically using Rhodamine 6G. The mercury content was found to be 146 μg/g of the brine sludge. The extraction process of mercury from the brine sludge comprises the steps of (1) chlorination of the brine sludge, (2) solid–liquid separation, (3) bringing the aqueous liquor (filtrate) containing the mercury into contact with a substantially immiscible extractant phase which comprises Cyanex 471X in xylene, whereupon, mercuric chloride to be separated selectively, reversibly, transfers into extractant phase, (4) back-washing the extractant phase with an aqueous system containing sodium thiosulfate or ammonium chloride or sodium chloride to recover all mercury into the extractant phase. A schematic flow diagram of the above process is shown in The extraction equilibrium of mercury(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions has been investigated using Cyanex 471X in xylene as an extractant. The extracted metal species was found to be HgCl This work was supported by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. The authors wish to thank Dr. G.D. Surender, Head, Mineral Process Engineering Division and Dr. G. Vijay Nair, Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Trivandrum for their constant encouragement. Thanks are also due to Cytec Canada for the supply of Cyanex 471X.