Highly hydrophobic rutile TiO2 nanocomposites modified by silica (SiO2) and silane coupling agent KH570 were synthesized. The chemical structure and morphology of TiO2 nanopowders before and after modification were investigated by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and transmission electron microscope techniques. The results revealed that a continuous and dense SiO2 coating layers was formed on TiO2 surfaces via Si–O–Ti bonds first, acting as a barrier that separates TiO2 particles from the medium. Then after modification by KH570, the composite powder had obvious hydrophobic property. The amount of silane coupling agent had an important influence on the achieved properties. TiO2@SiO2 nanocomposites modified with 0.3 ml KH570 exhibited the best excellent hydrophobicity with water contact angle of 141°, highlighting its potential application as a pigment in exterior wall coatings.In the past decades, the utilization of self-cleaning materials with superhydrophobic surfaces provides an effective strategy to solve energy and environmental issues, such as application for coatings TiO On the other hand, to achieve hydrophobic properties, TiO In our work, we developed a facile, low-cost hydrolysis approach to synthesize highly hydrophobic rutile-TiO Analytical grade and commercially materials were used. Rutile TiO In a typical sample preparation procedure, a solution of 75 ml with 0.05 g (NaPO TiO The phase identification of different samples was identified by X-ray diffraction using X-ray diffraction (XRD); Rigaku, D/max-RB12 whose 2θ angle range was from 10° to 90° in 0.02° increments. Morphology images were observed by SU8020 scanning electron microscope and Tecnai G The water contact angle (CA) measurements was characterized by an optical contact angle meter, OCA 35, Dataphysics, Germany. The static CA measurements were performed onto thin films deposited by drop casting using isopropanol as a solvent.  Typical FESEM images provide insight into the structures and morphology of the synthesized powders. It can be seen from The N In this work, the dispersion stability of modified particles was investigated by zeta potential test. It can be seen from the To give a clearer understanding of the modified samples, TEM is used to analyze the morphology. Although various analytical methods above demonstrate that we have successfully improved the dispersibility of the particles of TiO X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy verified the characteristic of the Ti, Si and O bond between TiO In addition, we also intuitively evaluate the wettability conversion of the inorganic powder by water contact angle (WCA) measurements, as shown in As described above, it is necessary to discuss the influence factors for the modification mechanism: First, in the silicon coating experiment, Si(OH) As we know, nano-SiO On the other hand, the amount of silane coupling agent has an important influence on the achieved properties. When the content of KH570 is small, the groups available for reaction and bonding are limited. KH570 can only cover a small part of the surface of SiO In summary, the untreated rutile titanium dioxide was first coated with silica and then modified with a silane coupling agent KH570. As was evidenced, the appearance of Si-O-Ti bond indicated that the modification process was a chemical reaction and TiO This work was financially supported by the