In high-shear wet granulation, breakage and attrition play an important role but are the least understood among all rate processes. To understand these phenomena, experiments were performed in a breakage-only granulator using pre-made granules. Non-granulating wet sand was used as the shearing medium in the granulator. A size analysis of the granules was done before and after the experiment for each trial in order to get a rough estimate of the size range of the granules after the breakage experiment. The number of granules broken and the granules mass change (before and after the experiment) were recorded after each experiment, in order to measure the extent of granule breakage in a granulator. Experimental results showed that formulation properties and operating parameters significantly influence the breakage behaviour. Population balance simulations were performed for breakage-only granulation and the simulation results were found to be in reasonable agreement with the experimental results.Granulation is the process of aggregating particles by creating bonds between them. In a wet granulation process, a liquid binder is distributed over the bed in a tumbling drum, a fluidised bed, a high-shear mixer or the like, in order to initiate granule formation Manipulating the operating parameters and formulation properties to control the breakage process can help to improve the properties of granular products In wet granulation, all the rate processes such as nucleation, growth and breakage occur simultaneously which makes it difficult to study the breakage phenomenon separately. To address this issue, Liu Liu Although Smith The population balance approach has been used previously for understanding and predicting the wet granulation processes Two different size ranges of glass ballotini powders, similar to those used in other studies A solution of Sodium silicate (Na A high-shear mixer granulator (Hobart) was used as the breakage-only granulator. This is an identical model to the breakage only granulator previously used by Liu Drop-nucleated granules were prepared before each experiment. Glass ballotini powder was first sieved into a petri dish. Once the petri dish was filled, the powder bed was flattened using a knife. Single drops, each with a specified volume of sodium silicate binder solution were dispensed from a height of 2 cm onto the powder bed, with a sufficient horizontal separation between them, using a syringe and a needle. The bed was left undisturbed for a specified time duration. After a set time period, the granules that formed were sieved out from the powder bed using a 2 mm sieve. Prepared wet sand was transferred into the breakage-only granulator. For all the experiments performed, the bevelled blade impeller was operated at 1500 rpm. The wet sand mixture was pre-mixed for about 15 s with the impeller to get a consistent flow pattern before six pre-made granules were placed evenly in the granulator. Mixing was then carried out for a fixed shear time between 15 and 105 s. The granulator was then kept undisturbed for a few minutes to ensure that the granules and granule fragments attained sufficient strength, to ensure that there was no breakage during the separation of the granules and granule fragments from the wet sand. The contents of the granulator were then hand-sieved using a 2 mm sieve, in order to separate the remaining whole granules and any granule fragments larger than 2 mm from the wet sand. Under each experimental condition, experiments were repeated for a minimum of three times. Granules were considered to be unbroken if their size and shape were largely retained. Otherwise, they were considered to be broken. At the end of each experiment, the number of granule survivors (unbroken granules) was recorded. Also, the mass of the granules and granule fragments above 2 mm in size was measured. Here, separating the lss than 2 mm size granule fragments from the wet sand is difficult. Hence, we chose to measure the mass of the granules and granule fragments of sizes above 2 mm. The breakage fraction and the mass percentage of granule fragments of sizes of <2 mm were calculated for all the experiments. The breakage fraction is defined as Images of the granules and granule fragments larger than 2 mm were taken with a Nikon D 3200 camera after each experiment. These images were analysed using Image analysis in order to measure the average size of each granule and the granule fragment. From the average granule size data, the granule size distribution ( In this section, we propose a population model for breakage-only granulation based on empirical breakage functions. Predictions of the model are compared with the breakage-only granulator experimental results to validate the selected breakage functions. The objective is to obtain an insight into the breakage process in the granulator. We consider the breakage of granules, initially all of diameter We consider next the conditions on and must be conserved. Integrating both sides of equation For conservation of mass This is satisfied if, Thus, we can use any function for Normalization yields, For the breakage rate, we used the semi-empirical breakage kernel which was used previously in the works of Chaudhury We solve equation Experiments were performed at three different shear times, 15 s, 60 s and 105 s, in order to study the effect of shear time on granule breakage. Glass ballotini (150–200 µm) and original sodium silicate solution were used in all the experiments. The kinetics of the breakage process is important for understanding wet granulation phenomena. All granules will break very quickly if the breakage takes place throughout the cohesive powder bed. However, the breakage here is not instantaneous, and granules circulate around the bed many times before they break. This indicates that the breakage may take place in a high-shear zone near the impeller or on impact with the impeller, and that the granules may take some time to enter this high-shear zone where they can break To study the effect of binder concentration on granule breakage, experiments were performed in a breakage-only granulator using glass ballotini (150–200 µm) and various concentrations (100%, 95%, 90%, 80%, and 60%) of a solution of sodium silicate. Experiments were performed at two different shear times of 15 s and 60 s.    To study the effect of the medium wetting fluid viscosity on granule breakage, experiments were performed at two different silicone oil viscosities, 0.1 Pa s and 1 Pa s. The shear time was fixed at 15 s for all the experiments. Experiments were performed with different concentration binder (i.e. different granule binder viscosities) for each oil-sand medium. With 1 Pa s medium, To study the effect of primary particle size on granule breakage, experiments were performed using two different sizes, 45–90 µm and 150–200 µm, of glass ballotini powders. The shear time was fixed at 15 s for all the experiments.  The population balance model is described in the Comparison of breakage-only granulator experimental results of effect of shear time on granule breakage with the simulation results of effect of shear time on granule breakage is shown in   The effect of medium viscosity, binder concentration, shear time and the initial particle size on granule breakage was studied in a breakage-only granulator. The breakage fraction and the mass percentage of granules of <2 mm decreased with an increase in the viscosity of the binder, a decrease in primary particle size, and a decrease in the shear time. Also, the breakage fraction and mass percentage of granules of <2 mm increase with the increase in the viscosity of the medium. A size analysis of the granules before and after the experiment for each trial was performed to get a rough estimate of the size range of the granules after the breakage experiment. The population balance simulations with a simple breakage function for the breakage-only granulation showed a reasonable agreement with the breakage-only granulator experimental results of effect of binder viscosity, primary particle size and shear time on granule breakage. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Prime Minister's Fellowship Scheme for Doctoral Research, India, and