In this study, the hydrometallurgical processing of electric arc furnace (EAF) steelmaking dust is investigated on a laboratory scale under normal temperature and pressure conditions. The behaviour of zinc and iron under the influence of sulphuric acid as the leaching agent is discussed. The dependence between the temperature and acid concentration is investigated. The main aim is the transfer of zinc into the solution while iron ought to remain as a solid residue.
                  The hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from EAF dust is feasible with relatively high recovery yield, while iron mostly remains in the solid phase. It results from the use of sulphuric acid in low concentration. This way, it is possible to set up the conditions for the EAF dust leaching, adjusting sulphuric acid concentration in order to achieve an optimum zinc yield to the solution without iron dissolution. However, the problem is that the chemical and mineralogical composition of each steelmaking dust is individual.During the production of steel from scrap in electric arc furnaces, a considerable degree of dust is recovered in gas cleaning units. Iron oxides are the main component of this dust. By smelting of scrap, also considerable amounts of volatile components are transferred into the dust. These are zinc, lead, cadmium and other metallic compounds. Zinc and iron contents in EAF dust is in wide range according to various authors as shown in The content of other components in EAF steelmaking dust is shown in Such amounts of admixtures are unacceptable for simple recycling to iron or steel production and at the same time these amounts of heavy metals define the EAF dust as hazardous waste. That is why it is necessary to submit this material to further treatment. Zinc is present in EAF dust as franklinite, ZnFe There are three possible processes to manage EAF dust: hydrometallurgical, pyrometallurgical and hybrid in nature. They consist in extraction of nonferrous metals, such as zinc or lead, in order to recycle dust in steelmaking industry. Pyrometallurgical methods require some reducing agents and relatively high temperatures to produce raw zinc oxide of low commercial value. Most of these installations are based on rotary Waelz kiln technology The treating of EAF dust, directly in the primary hydrometallurgical zinc production, has the advantage of low energy consumption, which has led to various process developments An excellent overview of present status of EAF dust treatment is reported by Zunkel The form how zinc is found is the biggest problem of its release. The ZnO does not cause any problems to neither alkaline nor acid leaching. However, the majority of zinc is present as zinc ferrite (franklinite) and it is considerably refractory against leaching. Alkaline leaching seems to be advantageous because heavy metals are leached whereas iron is inert. These methods, however, require relatively concentrated leaching medium, regardless of the fact that zinc present in franklinite is hardly accessible to leaching and that is why an intermediate thermal treatment is requested. Acid leaching needs not so concentrated solution as the alkaline one, but iron is partially transferred into solution in this case. The franklinite is considerably refractory in this case, too. Except of operational cost, used leaching medium also decides what method of acid leaching will be suitable – relatively cheap acetic acid Dissolved metals from leaching medium are obtained from what is a relatively cheap process, when the sulphuric acid is used for the leaching. The chloride solutions treatment is fairly complicated. The additional cost from iron removal is on record in both cases. Obtained solid product can be dumped as harmless waste or it can be recycled into primary iron or steel production. The most suitable is, however, the process in which the heavy non-ferrous metals would be transferred into solution by a cheap method, whereas the iron remains in solid rest. These metals should be obtained from the leaching solution by simple method. The purged solution would be recycled in a leaching step. Such idea is also the aim of this work. The EAF dust sample that was used was given by Gerdau SA (Siderúrgica Riograndense), Brazil, and is originated from smelting of carbon steel scrap. The following values of the chemical analysis for some elements ( The amount of 3.7% of soluble components was recorded in the sample. Particle size distribution made by CILAS 1180 Particle Size Analyzer was as given in The sample of EAF dust is also examined by an X-ray diffraction qualitative phase analysis ( Leaching experiments were performed in the apparatus and the project is shown in The leaching experiments were performed in a glass reactor of 800 The samples for the chemical analysis were taken according to a fixed-schedule after 2, 10, 15, 30, 45 and 60 The chemical analysis, carried out in order to determine Zn and Fe, was made by means of AAS method. No other compounds in the rest solutions were traced as well as no chemical analysis of solid leaching rests were made. All results were recalculated because of the change of the pulp volume due to the sampling and evaporation. The reactions of the main species occurring in the sample and their stoichiometry can be stated as follows: Reaction This assumption can be seen at a thermodynamic study using E-pH diagrams There is an area of stability of The thermodynamic study shows the possibility of transfer of zinc into solution, whereas iron remains in the solid rest by pH control. Of course, also other components of EAF dust will react, but for rough estimation the following consideration could be used. Forty grams of EAF sample containing 13.2 It follows from the thermodynamic presumption, that the acid will react preferentially with zinc and that is why the iron will precipitate from the solution.  It follows that the leaching process is very fast and practically immediately after starting all amount of zinc from EAF dust is leached at the given conditions. Even though the amount of extracted zinc slightly reduced with time, what is probably related to the effort of the system to achieve the dynamical equilibrium as follows from the thermodynamic study. The concentration of acid influences the leaching of zinc preferentially, whereas the temperature only marginally affects the process. It can be seen, however, that the increase of temperature at the individual concentrations reduces the amount of leached zinc. The differences are rather small, although by using 1   Practically, no iron is transferred into solution by leaching in 0.1 From leaching kinetic curves of iron and zinc it is also possible to estimate the mechanism of this process. Initially the iron amount in the solution arises, but later it decreases. Also zinc amount is slightly decreased with leaching time. This is related to the theoretical assumption of precipitation of ZnFe The change of L:S ratio towards higher values, using a lower sample charge in the same leaching solution volume, will cause a shift on the absolute amount of zinc and iron leaching due to the fact that there will be a bigger amount of free acid available. The opposite situation is also true. This situation can be seen in  From the experimental study of leaching of carbon steel EAF dust (Gerdau S.A.) the following conclusions could be derived: the leaching of zinc from steel EAF dust in water solution of sulphuric acid is a very fast process (minutes); the leaching of zinc depends on sulphuric acid concentration. The maximum extraction (around 75%) was achieved by using concentrations higher than 0.5 the leaching of zinc is relatively independent on temperature, but at individual sulphuric acid concentrations, the maximum extractions of zinc were achieved at lower temperatures; no iron from EAF dust is leached at low sulphuric acid concentrations as follows also from thermodynamic study; the amount of extracted iron is increased with the increase of sulphuric acid concentration; the amount of extracted iron at the individual sulphuric acid concentrations depends on the temperature used; the optimal conditions for zinc removal from used EAF dust at the minimal iron extraction are: temperature 70–90 the decrease of L:S ratio causes also a decrease on the relative amount of leached zinc. The authors wish to thank CNPq/Brazil, Gerdau S.A., Brazil, and VEGA Ministry of Education, Slovakia, Grant no. 1/2643/05 and 1/0397/03 for the financial support of this work.