In this paper a comprehensive study on the influence of heating rate on thermosensitive flocculation is presented. Experimental investigation was performed using a laboratory setup consisting of thermostated mixing tank with four baffles agitated by a mechanical propeller. PSD and the resulting mean aggregate size of a model suspension system consisting of calcium carbonate and a p(NIPAM-co-DADMAC) copolymer in RO water was measured with a modified laser particle sizer. It is found that in the studied range of heating rate (from 0.29K/min–3.73K/min) the final state of the system is almost identical regardless the heating rate. A semiempirical floc growth kinetics model was proposed and verified. In order to respect the effect of heating regime a parameter named the heating regime efficiency K
                     HR was introduced. The dependence of the model parameters on dimensionless flocculant dosage D
                     F
                     *, heating rate HR and heating regime efficiency K
                     HR was described by a power-law dependence. The experimental data and model predictions were found to be in a very good agreement.floc size shift coefficient; model parameter, Eq. power-law constant for given model parameter (P), Eq. impeller diameter (M) floc size (μm) maximum floc size (μm) dimensionless maximum floc size; model parameter, Eq. initial particle size (μm) tank diameter (M) dimensionless flocculant dosage (mg/g) heating rate (K/min) coefficient of multiple correlation (dimensionless) heating regime efficiency, Eq. low critical solution temperature (°C) impeller rotational speed (Rpm) dimensionless flocculation time (dimensionless) dimensionless flocculation time in which ( process time (min) process time when flocculation starts (min) flocculation time (min) total flocculation time (min) final flocculation temperature (°C) variable (dimensionless) variable (dimensionless) power-law exponent for given model parameter (P), Eq. power-law exponent for given model parameter (P), Eq. relative error (%) power-law exponent for given model parameter (P), Eq. Average Maximum Thermosensitive polymers are known to act as effective flocculants when a certain temperature threshold is exceeded ( For a given suspension the flocculation process depends on the polymer type, dose, its molecular mass and molecular mass distribution as well as mixing conditions and presence of other chemicals in the system ( Aggregation kinetics determines the Particle Size Distribution (PSD) not only during the process but also at the steady state of the system ( Authors of this work are not aware of any study in which the influence of heating rate on thermosensitive flocculation is tackled apart from our previous work in which an extreme case of local heating by hot water injection followed by quick mixing was tested ( The aims of this study were to: Perform thermosensitive floc growth kinetics measurements analogous to the standard measurements for flocculants (e.g. based on polyacrylamide); propose the floc growth kinetics model for thermosensitive flocculation; verify the developed model using experimental data. The thermosensitive floc growth kinetics model is based on conventional aggregation kinetics model ( A general relation for floc size Šulc and Svačina ( For thermosensitive flocculation the following general relation for floc size According to Eq. The flocculation time A question arises: how to quantify the effect of heating regime on the floc growth kinetics? Firstly, the temperature increase enhances flocculant hydrophobic interactions. As a result polymer dosage at temperature The polymer was synthesized in a free radical polymerization with redox initiating system–ammonium persulfate (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), and Tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED) (Sigma-Aldrich). The copolymer is constituted of N-isopropylacrylamide (Acros Organics, Avantor Performance Materials) with cationic comonomer (diallyldimethylammonium chloride, DADMAC, Sigma-Aldrich – 1% mole) introduced to produce charged polymer. Monomers were used as received. The reaction mixture was purged with an inert gas for one hour before addition of TEMED. Reaction products were separated by thermoprecipitation – the reaction mixture was heated to induce polymer separation from low molecular weight reagents and water. The procedure was repeated twice, and the polymers were then dried to constant mass at 378 The flocculation process was carried out in a thermostated cylindrical mixing tank equipped with four baffles and a propeller which was working with rotational speed equal to 400 RPM. It was chosen instead of a Rushton turbine in order to reduce shear stresses influencing the size of created aggregates. In the result, the effect of number of circulation loops of flocs through the impeller zone on the flocculation course is taken into account by the dimensionless time In the preliminary research behavior of calcium carbonate particles suspended in RO water at different temperature was investigated. The measurement procedure was as follows. Firstly, an appropriate amount of calcium carbonate was weighted using the analytical balance and slurry was created by the addition of small portion of RO water. Then the slurry was transferred to the mixing tank in order to obtain 12 In the preliminary flocculation research the initial procedure was repeated. Dense slurry was created and transferred to the mixing tank. Next, the suspension was mixed for 10 When the steady state of the system was achieved after polymer injection, the temperature control program was activated and the process time was measured. At elevated temperatures the samples of flocculated suspension were taken by a preheated plastic pipette with a wide tip and at random time periods, however no more than five samples were taken during one experiment. Three different heating rates were investigated, namely 3.73 The goal of these experiments was to verify the impact of the heating rate on the rate of polymer conformation change and the resulting particles aggregation kinetics. In the authors’ opinion this research complementary to previous papers presented by Burdukova and co-workers ( The change of suspension temperature during thermosensitive flocculation can be expected to influence the aggregation process kinetics. These changes result not only from the rising attraction forces between hydrophobic surfaces but also from the decrease of suspension viscosity. Therefore higher heating rates should lead to faster aggregation and as a result bigger but more fragile aggregates. The change of mean Sauter diameters during the flocculation process is presented in One may notice a considerable similarity of change in time of the mean particle size between thermosensitive aggregation and the aggregation with the use of standard flocculants. It is particularly visible in the case of higher polymer doses. The mean particle size of aggregates starts to grow rapidly achieving a certain maximum and then slowly decreases until a steady state is obtained. Similar results were presented in other publications ( The aggregation kinetics also influences this phenomenon. For example, in the case of lower heating rates one may notice a significant difference in the mean particle size at 309 In At the present moment the mechanism of thermosensitive aggregation is well known ( The key feature of thermosensitive aggregation is the lack of polymer destabilization properties below LCST. This effect may be achieved by flocculant overdose resulting in steric stabilization. Moreover, this approach provides the full reversibility of the process ( In authors opinion, the reason that the heating rate had no impact on the PSD at the steady state is the aggregation mechanism which is similar to the one occurring during coagulation. The key issue is that at the beginning of the process the attractive forces start to act in a close proximity to the particles. The higher the temperature is the stronger attractive forces become resulting in larger aggregates. Therefore, in the case of identical final temperature, the system should achieved the same steady state for the same polymer dosage regardless of heating rate. This parameter will only affect the course of aggregation between the steady state below LCST and the steady state above LCST. On the contrary, in the case of standard flocculation the rate of aggregation depends directly on the polymer dose. Simultaneously, polymer dose influences aggregate properties like associated water content or porosity ( The measured dependences between the Sauter diameter d When the heating rate of flocculation increased, the time in which maximum floc size was reached decreased. It was found that the effect of flocculant dosage on dimensionless flocculation time can be neglected. The maximum floc size depends both on flocculant dosage and heating rate. The lowest maximum floc size was observed at highest heating rate for the two lowest flocculant dosages. On the other hand, in the case of 0.75 Subsequently, the parameters It was found that the dependence of model parameters The appropriateness/fitness of the proposed empirical power-law correlation was tested by the reverse calculation. Using evaluated power-law parameters the model parameters In this paper a comprehensive study on the influence of heating rate on thermosensitive flocculation is presented. A semi-empirical mathematical model of this phenomenon was proposed and verified. On the basis of obtained results the following conclusions can be derived: The heating rate influences floc growth kinetics and particle size distribution to a small extent. Of course, the increase of heating rate decreases the flocculation time in which maximum floc size is reached. However there are only slight differences between maximal floc size for different heating rates in the case of the same dosage. The heating rate had almost no influence on the final particle size distribution of flocculated suspension and resulting mean diameter. The course of the process was found very similar to standard flocculation. It is possible to describe the thermosensitive aggregation process using modified growth kinetics model of standard flocculation process. The calculated model kinetics courses were found to be in a good agreement with the experimental results. A new parameter named heating regime efficiency This research was supported by the