In order to understand the effects of increasing temperature and confining pressure on the fracture toughness of clay bearing rock, fracture toughness experiments were carried out at temperatures elevated from room temperature up to 200°C using single edge-notched round bar in bending (SENRBB) and semi-circular bend (SCB) specimens of Kimachi sandstone and Tage tuff. This paper describes the methodology for evaluating level 1 fracture toughness and the crack growth resistance curve. The crack growth resistance curve is shown to yield true fracture toughness even when under-sized specimens are employed. The under-sized specimens refer to those which are too small to produce valid fracture toughness value using the standard methods.
                  The fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone did not vary significantly with temperature up to 125°C, but above that point, it increased with temperature. SENRBB tests showed that the level 1 fracture toughness increased by approximately 40% at 200°C over its value at room temperature. The fracture toughness of sandstone and tuff was found to be significantly affected by increasing confining pressure. For example, in the arrester orientation, the fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone increased by approximately 470% at 9MPa confinement over its value at atmospheric pressure. A quite similar variation of fracture toughness is caused by the combined effects of temperature and confining pressure. For example, under a confining pressure of 7MPa, the fracture toughness of sandstone decreased with temperature up to 75°C, and then increased between 75°C and 100°C.Fracture mechanics is becoming increasingly important in problems relating to rock strength in rock engineering. For example, fracture mechanics is utilized in the analysis of surface and underground mine structures. Determination of the strength and stability of rock structures is particularly important for nuclear waste containment in proposed underground repositories. For the long-term use of an underground rock mass structure, the design must satisfy a high degree of structural integrity. For such an application, both creep behavior and stress corrosion must be considered in addition to strength. Microcracks usually exist in a rock mass, and they can grow in response to underground environmental conditions and in situ stress. As a consequence, the stability of a rock mass structure can be expected to change over time. Therefore, it is desirable to investigate the fracture toughness, which is an important rock property that characterizes the resistance of fracture initiation and propagation. In this investigation, the fracture toughness of two rock types was determined under different pressures and temperatures. A number of test specimen configurations and methods have been suggested to determine the fracture toughness of rock materials. The International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) has incorporated the chevron-notched bend specimen Most rock fracture toughness tests have been performed under ambient temperatures and pressures. However, it is essential that the measurements be carried out at elevated temperatures and pressures to simulate in situ conditions The tests were carried out mainly using the SENRBB specimen configuration. However, the SCB specimen was also used for comparison and verification of some of the results. Both specimens were core based and were therefore easy to prepare. The testing program involved the following: (a) The effect of elevated temperature was measured using a custom-built testing machine that facilitated loading the specimens in a three-point bending test while they were immersed in an oil bath. The oil bath could be heated to a desired temperature of up to 200°C and raised to a pressure of up to 30 (b) The effect of confining pressure on fracture toughness was measured using the same test rig described in (a). The test specimen was immersed in a jacketed oil bath and subjected to confining pressures of up to 9 (c) The combined effects of temperature and pressure on fracture toughness were measured using the same test rig. The oil bath containing the test sample was subjected to confining pressures of 2, 5, and 7 The materials used for the tests were Kimachi sandstone and Tage tuff. Both rock materials are commonly available in Japan and a number of studies have been performed to determine their fracture characteristics The test apparatus could accommodate a number of different types of specimen, including the SENRBB and SCB specimen shown in The tests were carried out using the custom-built test apparatus described earlier ( The fracture toughness, For the SCB specimen, the fracture toughness may be given as In this method, several unloading–reloading cycles were recorded during the test. A typical load–displacement curve for the SENRBB test is shown in The specimens used in this study were covered with silicone resin. Prior to determining the fracture toughness under in situ conditions, two tests were carried out to determine the effects of the loading rate and notch length on the fracture toughness. In order to examine the effect of the loading rate on the fracture toughness, tests were carried out at loading rates ranging from 1.67*10 In order to examine the effect of notch length on the fracture toughness, the notch length to diameter ratio    The fracture toughness using SENRBB samples derived from the The level 1 fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone and the fracture toughness determined by the As mentioned in For both Kimachi sandstone and Tage tuff, the birth of microcracks that lower the fracture toughness and the dry-caking of clay material that increases the fracture toughness occur simultaneously. In the case of Kimachi sandstone, the effect of the dry-caking of clay material on the fracture toughness is the more dominant factor causing a net increase of fracture toughness. On the other hand, in the case of Tage tuff, the birth of microcracks is the dominant factor at low temperatures. However, when the temperature is greater than 100∼125°C, this trend reverses and follows that of Kimachi sandstone. As mentioned in The fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone under confining pressure decreases with temperature from 25°C to 50°C, and then increases from 75°C to 100°C. This trend is quite different from the behaviour observed under atmospheric pressure for Kimachi sandstone. The variation of fracture toughness could be caused by the combined effects of temperature and pressure. The confining pressure causes the closure of pre-existing microcracks, and the rock specimen becomes more intact and tougher. As a result, the fracture toughness rises. However, Kimachi sandstone expands with increasing temperature up to 100°C ( In order to understand the combined effects of temperature and confining pressure on the fracture toughness of clay bearing rocks, fracture toughness experiments were carried out at temperatures up to 200°C, pressures of up to 9 The main results of this work are summarized as follows: The fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone did not vary significantly at temperatures up to 125°C. The fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone increased with temperature above 125°C. The fracture toughness increased by approximately 40% at 200°C when compared to the value at room temperature. Good agreement was found between fracture toughness values determined using the SENRBB and SCB test specimens. The fracture toughness of Tage tuff decreased when the temperature increased from room temperature to 75°C. The fracture toughness of Tage tuff increased with temperature above 75°C. The fracture toughness of sandstone and tuff was found to be significantly affected by increasing confining pressure. For example, for the arrester orientation, and at ambient temperature the fracture toughness of Kimachi sandstone increased by approximately 470% at 9 The variation of fracture toughness is caused by the combined effects of temperature and confining pressure. For example, under a confining pressure of 7 The authors wish to thank Dr. Graham Baird for reading this manuscript and for his suggestions.