Froth behaviour has a major impact on the overall performance of flotation cells, with the froth controlling the water recovery and entrainment, as well as having a significant impact on the recovery. Froth stability, including bubble coalescence and the bursting of the bubbles at the froth surface, are the key drivers of froth performance. Even though the froth stability is hard to directly control, it is important to understand how this stability impacts froth performance parameters such as the water recovery. In this paper it is shown how a theoretical understanding of froth behaviour based on foam physics can be used to link stability to performance. The extent to which these simplified theoretical relationships can describe the complex behaviour seen in real flotation systems at both the laboratory and industrial scale are explored. The paper shows how bursting flux depends upon gas flux and how this influences the relationship between the gas flux and the water recovery.The performance of a flotation cells is the result of the complex interaction between phenomena in both the pulp and froth phases. The froth phase has a crucial role to play as it controls the amount of water recovered, and thus the amount of entrainment, as well as having a significant impact on the overall recovery. This is because the same coalescence and bursting of the bubbles that restricts the amount of water reporting to the concentrate, thus improving the grade, also allows particles to become detached from the bubbles, a portion of which will fall out of the froth and thus reduce the overall recovery of the cell via its impact on the froth recovery. Understanding the link between froth stability and flotation performance is thus a key to being able to predict both the grade and recovery from these cells. In previous papers, models for various aspects of froth performance based on the fundamentals of foam physics have been introduced ( This paper will thus take a brief look at some of the theory related to the stability of these films, mainly to illustrate some of the complexity involved in the theoretical prediction of froth stability. While theory is enough to give clues as to the type of stability relationships to be expected, the relationship between mineralogy, particle size, reagent dosage and the stability of the films and, ultimately, the macroscopic stability of froth, is currently not well enough understood for theoretical predictions to be made. This paper will thus take a semi-empirical approach in which the effect of gas rate on the stability parameters is obtained from laboratory, pilot and industrial scale cells. These will then be combined with the theoretical froth performance models to predict how the changes in stability influence the trends in overall behaviour, with these predictions being compared to the actual experimental results. Despite the importance of froth stability on the performance of flotation froths ( The theoretical predictions of the performance of flotation froths are based on the fact that they share much of the same physics as that of two-phase foams, the main difference being that the films in flotation froths are, to a large extent, particle stabilised rather than being directly surfactant stabilised. Structurally these froths consist of bubbles separated by films, or lamellae, with these films meeting in threes at Plateau borders. As the interfaces of the Plateau borders curve sharply compared to any curvature of the films, capillarity will cause liquid to be sucked out of the films and into the Plateau borders until the films are thin enough that forces between the two film interfaces are able to counteract this suction. In two-phase systems this will be due to either electric double layer interactions or even direct steric interaction between the surfactant molecules, while in flotation froths the steric interaction between the particles loaded onto the films will provide much of the counteracting force. This suction of the liquid out of the films means that most of the liquid in a froth is to be found in the Plateau borders. These Plateau borders, in turn, meet at 4-fold vertices to form a network of interconnected channels. This means that, while the films are where most of the attached particles are located, the Plateau borders are where most of the liquid and unattached particles are to be found and are thus the focus of most of the modelling ( In previous papers the modelling of liquid drainage in flotation froths has been described in detail (  The liquid content, The pre-factor in this relationship, The foam drainage equation can be solved for the case of an overflowing foam (a schematic of which can be seen in  This is reflected in the equations for the amount of water recovered, which follows different relationships depending on whether the air recovery is above or below 50%. It has been demonstrated in previous papers ( In When looking at flotation data it does not, at first glance, appear to follow the same relationship when liquid flux is plotted against the gas flux, with the relationship being closer to linear with an offset on the gas flux axis (see The air recovery is, of course, intimately related to the rate at which bubbles burst at the surface of the froth, Note that these equations assume that the cross-sectional area used to characterise the gas flux, The film stability of the bubbles at the surface is thus a crucial factor in the air recovery and thus also the water recovery. Flotation films typically have a critical pressure that needs to be exceeded before they can drain to failure. This critical pressure will depend on factors such as the particle loading on the interface and the contact angle and shape of the particles involved ( For froths with an air recovery less than 50% (which is typical of most flotation froths), the Plateau border area will be relatively constant with respect to height near the froth surface (this can be clearly observed in This implies that at lower air recoveries the pressure exerted on the film is directly related to the bursting flux: Since the films in a flotation froth are comparatively thick (they are stabilised by particles and thus must be of the order of the particle size thick) compared to the very thin films encountered in 2 phase systems (these films typically need to have thinned to tens of nanometres thick before electric double layer interactions are strong enough to stabilise them), they drain quickly and therefore the average pressure exerted on them at the bursting surface of the froth is likely to be close to the critical pressure required for failure. Since this critical pressure depends on loading, it is complex to predict as loading will vary not only with the attachment in the pulp phase, but also with the extent of coalescence that has occurred over the depth of the froth. This is because coalescence results in only a portion of the particles attached to the failing film becoming detached ( As the prediction or even direct measurement of the critical pressure required for failure is very complex, it is thus desirable to approach this problem from the other side; if we can measure the bursting flux of the bubbles we can infer their stability behaviour and thus obtain insights into how this stability varies with operating parameters such as the gas rate. Attempts have been made to directly measure the bursting flux by measuring the size and frequency of film failures at the surface ( The main source of uncertainty in this method for measuring the bursting rate is usually in the measurement of the gas rate into the cell. This is not an issue in laboratory and pilot scale cells, where accurate rotameter based gas rate measurements are available, but in industrial measurements it can be an issue as the online gas rate measurements are often not very well calibrated. The alternative on plant is to directly measure gas fluxes, but this is not only time consuming, as the flux will vary spatially, requiring multiple measurements for a good average to be obtained, but is also often not feasible due to the a lack of suitable access at the top of the cells for the flux measurement columns to be inserted. This is less of an issue in the measurement of air recovery trends, where a constant percentage error in the measured gas rate would preserve the trend but cause errors in the quantitative values, but is potentially a serious issue in the measurement of the bursting flux as this involves calculating the difference between two values and thus an error in one will not only influence the values obtained, but also the trends observed. For this reason, the trends in the bursting flux will first be investigated at the laboratory and pilot scale, where there is confidence in the values measured, before investigating them in industrial cells. In The discussion in the previous section shows that the bursting flux is directly related to the inherent stability of the films. This implies that for both the laboratory and industrial froths the inherent film stability decreases with increasing gas flux, doing so in a well behaved, monotonic fashion (albeit with a degree of scatter, especially in some of the industrial measurements). The main reason for this decrease is likely to be that the loading on the bubbles will decrease with increasing gas rate. The total amount of material floated will increase with increasing gas flux but will do so at a slower rate than the flux of surface area, thus resulting in a decrease in the loading per surface area, which, together with the composition and size of the particles, is the important consideration in froth flotation. The relationship between water flux, gas flux and bursting flux can be predicted by combining Eqs. A constant bursting flux would imply that the air recovery would asymptote towards one as the gas flux into the cell is increased (see Eq. Most of the trends in bursting flux, at least to a first order approximation, show a background bursting flux, This still does not imply an air recovery that goes through a maximum. Instead it would result in an air recovery that asymptotes towards a value of If the bursting flux increases linearly with gas flux according to Eq. There is thus once again an intercept on the gas flux axis that is associated with the bursting flux being equal to the gas flux ( Even though the linear increase in bursting is close to what is observed experimentally, the implied trend in the air recovery is not. In virtually all the flotation systems that we have studied, at both laboratory and industrial scale, air recovery goes through a maximum rather than asymptoting towards a constant value ( The pre-factor for the second order term can either be expressed in terms of a characteristic flux, Even though substituting Eq. In The air recoveries can also be calculated based on the bursting fluxes and as these are simply a different way of presenting the same data, both the linear and 2nd order models again provide plausible fits to the data (see Unlike the calculation of the air recovery based on the bursting flux, the calculation of the water recovery is actually a prediction as it assumes that the form of the model is correct. As the laboratory experiments presented above were not intended for the study of the effect of froth stability on water recovery, the water flux was not recorded for all the experiments. For all those experiments for which it was recorded, the results are plotted against the trends predicted from the models based on different bursting behaviours (see In order to make the predictions of the water recovery based on Eq. This paper demonstrates how the bursting rate of bubbles in a flotation froth depends upon the gas rate and the impact that this has on the recovery of liquid from the cell. In particular, it demonstrates why there is typically a near linear increase in the water recovery with gas rate, with an intercept on the gas rate axis. This paper has not addressed the influence of the overflowing bubble size on the water recovery, which is the other important stability related impact. While the theoretical models can account for this impact, actually predicting the overflowing bubble size is hard, with the relationship to gas rate, froth depth and other operating parameters being far more system dependent than the froth surface bursting behaviour. The data used in this work comes from a variety of sources collected over many years, for which we would like to acknowledge contributions from Rio Tinto and Anglo Platinum.