The developments of energy efficient, low cost titanium metal production processes have challenged the metallurgical industry and research community around the world for several decades. The strong affinity of titanium to oxygen dictates that the conventional Ti metal production processes are energy-intensive. In this paper, a new approach that is designed to minimize energy consumption and overall cost for Ti production is presented. The overall approach is based on a chemical pathway that synergistically integrating a series of low cost unit processes to produce Ti that can match the quality of the product produced by the Kroll process commercially to date. The key steps include production of purified TiO2 with controlled sizes and morphologies, Mg reduction in the presence of hydrogen to form porous TiH2, heat treatment to close the pores, and Ca de-oxygenation to reduce oxygen content to less than 0.15wt%. The results show that this approach can indeed produce Ti metal powder that has high purity, low oxygen, and meets the specifications by ASTM for general purpose Ti sponge, directly from upgraded titanium slag (UGS) without the high temperature chlorination step.Titanium metal is a highly coveted material that has been widely used in aerospace, chemical processing, and biomedical industries. However, relative to its potential, Ti is highly underutilized due to the inherent high cost of production of Ti primary metal as well as its alloys, despite the fact that it is the ninth most abundant element and the fourth most abundant metal in the earth’s crust Ti primary metal is primarily produced commercially using the Kroll process today. In the Kroll process, titanium tetrachloride (TiCl There are two general approaches for Ti metal production: electrochemical methods and thermochemical methods. A typical example of the electrochemical approach is the FFC or Cambridge process Thermochemical production of Ti involves the reduction of a precursor with a reductant. There are two main precursors: TiCl Based on the Ellingham diagrams for metals’ reaction with oxygen and chlorine, there are three possible reductants, namely Mg, Na and Ca, for reduction of either TiO Due to its extreme chemical affinity to O, Ca metal, rather than Mg, is frequently employed to reduce TiO Compared to Ca, Na is chemically inert to TiO Although Mg is not as strong as Ca or Na for reduction purposes, it is still effective for reduction of both TiO Recently, a new process was proposed by Fang et al. that produces Ti by direct reduction of upgraded Ti slag (UGS) using Mg under a hydrogen atmosphere In short, the energy consumption and cost of Ti metal production from Ti slag depend on several key factors, including the selection of precursor and reductant, the processes for purification, the processes for removing byproducts, and the processes for reclaiming the reductant and other chemical reagents. In this paper, a new chemical pathway is designed to produce pure Ti from UGS without the energy intensive high temperature chlorination step and without the post-reduction high temperature vacuum distillation step as in the Kroll process. The new chemical pathway integrates a series of low cost purification and reduction processes synergistically to produce Ti with high purity and low oxygen. The aim of this paper is to present the concept and the design of the overall process, and report experimental results of key intermediate steps. The results show that highly purified Ti metal with low oxygen content can be achieved using this new approach. The new process design is shown in The first step of the overall process is the thermal alkaline roasting of UGS with NaOH and subsequent washing with water. There are two objectives for alkaline roasting. One is to transform all metal components into sodium metallate, especially amorphous sodium titanate, which is insoluble in water, but can be readily dissolved in dilute HCl acid solution. The titanic acid will subsequently be selectively precipitated and calcined to produce TiO Transition metals such as iron (Fe) and Ti, however, do not dissolve in water or the alkaline solution. Thus the next step of the process is designed to dissolve Fe along with titanate (TiO The second part of the overall process is to reduce the purified TiO After Mg reduction in H After the reduction and subsequent leaching, TiH Commercial specifications require the oxygen content of Ti sponge to be less than 0.15%. The oxygen content of Mg reduced TiO In short, the process for production of Ti metal from UGS involves making purified TiO Up-graded Ti-slag (UGS), assaying 94.5% TiO Other chemicals involved in this study include NaOH, concentrated HCl solution, Mg metal, MgH Through the whole process, the chemical compositions and interstitial element contents of the solid and liquid intermediates and final product were monitored. Solid samples were totally dissolved by 6 A Philips 1140 diffractometer (Cu Kα) X-ray diffraction (XRD) unit, was used to determine the phase compositions of the precursor, intermediates, and final products. The morphologies and the particle size of the solid samples were examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI NovaNano 630). Particle size and size distributions were determined using a Shimadzu particle size analyzer. The specific surface area was evaluated by using a BET analyzer (TriStar II). The density of the powder was measured using AccuPyc II 1340 Series Pycnometers. As described earlier, alkaline roasting is the first step of the process to produce purified TiO With the aim to digest the titanium feed stocks, including ilmenite, titania slag or upgraded titania slag, typical hydrometallurgical methods, such as the sulfate process Alkaline roasting: Water washing: Experimental investigation of the NaOH roasting process was conducted at 500 It should be noted that oxidation is a necessary step during roasting because some of the impurities including V, Mn and Cr in the original UGS are in their reduced states of V After the roasting process described above, the transition metal species such as Fe are still in the residue of water-washed alkaline roasted product, which is a mud-like intermediate (referred to as “mud” hereafter). These impurities have to be further separated from metatitanic acid. The only plausible pathway to achieve that is through total dissolution of the mud and re-precipitation of titanium dioxide from the Ti-bearing acid solution. As the result of the alkaline roasting, the chemically stable rutile in the original UGS has been transformed into extremely active metatitanic acid, which can be readily dissolved in diluted acid solutions (HCl or H After the dissolution, the leachate was filtered to remove insoluble particles and a transparent Ti-bearing solution was obtained in preparation for the hydrolysis step. The typical composition of the solution before hydrolysis is shown in The reason for 6 Hydrolysis is a process of selective and spontaneous precipitation of Ti species from the Ti-bearing acid solution in the form of titanic acid. Various titanic acids with a general formula of TiO In this study, the liquid after dissolution of wet mud is a TiCl The product of hydrolysis was solid titanic acid particles, with particle sizes ranging from approximately 10–50 microns using the above parameters. The morphology and particle size distribution are shown in After the hydrolysis, the titanic acid precipitate was subjected to calcination by heating up gradually to dehydrate the precipitate particles and to obtain rutile at 900 There are two critical issues during hydrolysis: purifying the material, especially the removal of iron, and controlling size and morphology of the particles. The purity of TiO Theoretically, commercial pigment grade TiO First, commercial TiO Second, the oxygen content of Ti metal powder is a direct function of the particle size due to the formation of TiO Third, for pigment production, iron is one of the detrimental impurities Mg is one of the reductants that can form more stable oxides than TiO To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the reduction of TiO In this work, the same general approach for reduction is adopted. Purified TiO Additionally, magnesiothermic reduction generates a large amount of exothermic heat, which could lead to a system temperature as high as 1600 In order to understand the effect of salt, TGA-DSC analysis techniques were used. Furthermore, the TGA-DSC technique is also used to screen salt with different compositions. The DSC curves of salt mixtures with different ratios of MgCl The effects of the compositions of salts are also compared by measuring the oxygen content after reduction. The reduction was conducted by holding the sample for 6 It should be noted here that although the positive effects of salt on the kinetics of the reduction of TiO The DSC analysis showed that the reduction temperature with MgCl The effect of temperature is evaluated by measuring the titanium contents in the powder after MgO is leached, as shown in Additionally, the Mg contents were found to be high in samples that were reduced at lower temperatures. This is attributed to the formation of magnesium titanate that is insoluble in the acid solutions. Based on the above results, 750 As mentioned earlier, the Mg reduction is conducted in hydrogen atmosphere in this work. The effect of hydrogen is shown in Furthermore, as described in the process design, the process is deliberately designed to form TiH The remaining oxygen in the reduced product will need to be removed through a deoxygenation process using Ca which will be discussed in the next section. As mentioned earlier, one of the reasons that Mg was chosen as the redutant for this process is that it is less costly than Ca. Needless to say that the lower the oxygen content in the powder prior to the deoxygenation process, the less Ca will be needed, thus the lower the cost. Based on the understanding of the effects of key parameters above, the reduction of TiO After reduction, the reduced powder was pulped by high-purity water first, and then leached by concentrated HCl using a peristaltic pump controlled dripping technique to remove MgO and unreacted Mg metal. The slurry was stirred for 30 As indicated above, the oxygen content of the TiH As shown earlier, the TiH To further reduce the oxygen content of the Ti particles, a de-oxygenation step was applied to the powder after the heat treatment. As mentioned earlier, Ca de-oxygenation is widely reported in literatures. However, in order to avoid using high temperatures above 900 The morphology of final Ti metal powder is shown in A new chemical pathway for producing high purity low oxygen Ti metal powder directly from UGS is demonstrated. The new process is based on integrating synergistically a series of unit processes that are designed to accomplish the tasks of purification, reduction, and deoxygenation sequentially. The overall process includes three key steps: production of purified TiO This work was financially supported by the