Solar thermochemical reactors offer good potential for production of heat for residential space heating and cooling and domestic hot water. The materials able to store solar energy are called thermochemical materials which are based on reversible chemical reactions, focusing here on solid–gas ones. These materials are capable to store solar thermal energy in one direction and to release it in the other, whenever is needed, with almost no heat losses. In the literature several materials have been successfully analyzed and tested at lab scale, but the expected heat storage capacity, or yield, of the reactor implementing these materials is not achieved. This paper shows that in order to reach the calculated operation conditions, a detailed and proper characterization of solid materials involved is needed (including solubility of the reactants and products, and evaluation of the crystallographic structure changes). Furthermore, a reliable kinetic model should be obtained to predict further behavior and to design the suitable reactor. The main goal of this paper is to provide a correct pathway to obtain the reliable kinetic model regarding important solid features that should be considered when working on thermochemical energy storage.Thermal energy storage (TES) research for seasonal storage is going towards thermochemical materials (TCM). At the present, storing solar thermal energy by means of sensible and latent heat has been widely studied at lab and real scale ( Other advantages that thermochemical energy storage provides are the wide range of operation temperatures, from −40 to 200 TES systems can provide short-term storage for balancing energy demand and supply as well as long-term (seasonal) storage. Owing to the feasible reaction control and the minimum heat loses when storing, TCM are suitable for long-term thermal storage ( Focusing on materials, development and characterization of chemical reactions is now one of the areas under research. Different systems have been studied so far, with applications in different climates ( For these considered reactions, several features regarding the solid should be taken into account when characterizing the system. Nevertheless, a complete study on solid reactants and products is missing when designing a technology based on TCM which could lead to an unexpected, lower, reactor yield. Characteristics of the reactant/product (e.g., liquid vs. solid, amorphous vs. crystalline, shape of crystals and distribution of their sizes, etc.) must be taken into account when identifying kinetic models ( Usually a porous support is needed when working with salt hydrates leading to a composite material. When the rate of the reaction and the power delivered is not sufficient for practical use, the material needs to be dispersed over a larger exchange surface ( The main goal of this paper is to propose a pathway to obtain a reliable kinetic model regarding important solid features that should be considered when working on thermochemical energy storage. Therefore, three aspects from bibliographic data to be followed when performing kinetic computations are presented; first the solid characterization, second the quality kinetic data analysis, and finally the evaluation of experimental data. Six different materials, widely tested as TCM (  Hydroxide to oxide:  Hydrated form to another: sulphates and chlorides ( Vapour pressure–temperature diagram of the selected TCM couple and water system are needed to describe the absorption–desorption cycle of a TCM reactor, as shown in When working with TCM, whenever the solar thermochemical reactor design is needed, a reliable kinetic model should be obtained. When the TCM belong to reversible solid-state reactions, as the ones under study, the kinetic study should not be avoided even if experimental data is available in other studies. Hence, several important steps may be carefully followed and performed for each material and application. Once solar thermochemical reactor is designed following the present considerations, long-term performance of the solar thermal system can be more accurately evaluated ( However, several published papers related to thermochemical energy storage take data from other studies which may not be in the same experimental conditions and/or reactant characteristics e.g. morphology, reactivity, particle size, etc. ( Solid-state kinetics evolved from homogenous kinetic principles. However, applications of these kinetic principles are different because of the differences between solids, solutions, and gases. For example, particle size, interface advance, and geometric shape are variables unique to heterogeneous reactions and have no equivalent in homogenous reactions ( The crystal structure changes and the coordination of water molecule with the involved compound were studied. These features are related to the enthalpy value of the reaction which is directly related to the storage capacity of the technology implementing TCM. When the oxides, MgO and CaO, react with water vapor, their crystalline structure changes from cubic to hexagonal ( A key factor that may influence energetic values is the water molecule stability within the crystalline solid structure ( From the analysis of bibliographic data a common pattern is found when considering hydrated salts. This pattern is stated regarding two relations; the first is between the cation and oxygen contained in water and the second on the relation between the anion/hydrogen of water, being the first one the dominant one. This relation is based on the constant value of bond lengths by Van der Waals forces between the cation and the oxygen of the water molecule, meanwhile the bond lengths between cation and anion is increasing when the hydration number increases. The oxygen atom of the water molecule is coordinated with the cation placed in the center of the molecule while the hydrogen atoms are placed in the outer crystalline following the more stable structure in coordination with the anion ( On the other hand, when regarding the first group of materials, calcium and magnesium oxides, the covalent bond is the dominant influence on the enthalpy values. Therefore, this group of TCM should be distinguished from the ones that change from a hydrated form to another, as this last one is strong influenced by water molecule stability within the crystalline solid structure. Kinetic steps may change depending on solid state features (crystal structure, particle morphology, etc.) and also on the reaction conditions (pH, rate of mixing, temperature, pressure, etc.) ( Moreover, SEM images of solids participating in the reaction should also be taken after reacting to obtain more information. If nucleation, growth, or gas diffusion take place and their effects are observable at microscopic scale, such an observation can support the kinetic model when evaluating experimental data. Another important parameter to be studied is the solubility of the solids in the present fluid, at the operation conditions. Usually, the technology implementing TCM works in a cyclic way, therefore durability of those systems has been studied although never related to solubility (  According to The rate of reaction is found by measuring some properties of a reactant or a product at different times after the start of the reaction; following the change in amount of reactant and/or product by titration, determining the volume of gas formed, following the change in mass, etc. The decision of accepting the direct relation between the physical parameter (mass, heat flow, etc.) and the product formation or reactant disappearance should be thought carefully as intermediates may be appearing or phase change could take place. Solid characterization at microscopic scale should be done to support this acceptance. In order to achieve meaningful kinetic conclusions, data must be based on several heating rates ( In actual storage units where solid–gas reactions take place, it is important to determine the step which offers the highest resistance and therefore controls the overall rate, in given reaction conditions. The governing processes are external mass transfer controlled, pore diffusion controlled, chemical reaction controlled, or, occasionally, heat transfer controlled ( Once data are accurately obtained, in order to evaluate kinetic parameters, such as activation energy, a variety of simple models with different characteristics are available from the literature ( Isoconversional methods allow the evaluation of the activation energy without determining the reaction model whenever the process can be approximated as single-step kinetics. If this condition cannot be satisfied, model-fitting methods should be used ( In order to design the reactor in which the solid-state reaction will take place, a reliable kinetic model should be obtained. Kinetic experts alert researchers of the complexity of the reactions when obtaining kinetic data from thermal analysis of solid–gas reactions ( Different concepts when choosing a suitable thermochemical material have been presented. Specific systems were chosen in order to analyze their changes in crystallographic structure before and after reaction with water, the effect of the solubility in water, and the kinetics of the reaction involved. Systems here mentioned concerned to solid-state reactions. When characterizing a chemical reaction involving solid product and/or reactant, crucial solid-state features should be taken into account. For instance, crystallographic structure change, water stability within crystal structure, particle size, impurities, etc. This could be assessed by microscopy, crystallography, spectra, etc. If a proper characterization is achieved, the reliability of the suggested kinetic model will increase. Within solid characterization, solubility is a key factor to be considered in selecting a thermochemical material for a solar thermochemical storage system. It is important to be studied in the working conditions, as it is temperature and pressure dependent. Usually, the technology implementing these materials is a closed system and work in a cyclic way. The present water circulating in gas state could condensate and the solid can dissolve in it. Thus, the storage capacity would decrease. The less soluble is the solid involved, the higher the probability of achieving the expected reactor yield. Furthermore, several steps are necessary to be followed when a kinetic model is aimed. In this paper, the pathway is shown and illustrated with a specific example from the bibliography. Basically, solid characterization, appropriate experimental data acquisition and accurate interpretation of obtained results. Several materials have been widely discussed in terms of solar thermal storage media, but few of them are based on the characterization presented here. It is important not to assume that reversible reactions that could be used as thermal storage media would behave in this application as in another found in the literature. Each reversible reaction which is wanted to perform in a reactor must be first properly characterized in the specific operations conditions. The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (ENE2011-28269-C03-02 and ENE2011-22722). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research groups GREA (2009 SGR 534) and research group DIOPMA (2009 SGR 645). Aran Solé would like to thank University of Lleida for her research fellowship.