Clavicular fractures account for roughly 2.6% of all fractures. Eighty percent of clavicular fractures are mid diaphyseal, and 70% of these fractures are displaced. This report discusses a patient in whom a brachial plexopathy developed after open reduction and internal fixation of a displaced, comminuted, and shortened mid-diaphyseal clavicular fracture. The neurologic deficit completely resolved with removal of hardware and restoration of preoperative clavicular length. Only a single previous case series describes brachial plexopathy after operative treatment of 3 clavicular fractures with an intramedullary device. The patient is a 78-year-old, female, right hand–dominant retiree with a medical history of hypertension, osteoporosis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease, who fell onto her right shoulder with immediate pain and deformity. She was initially seen by an outside orthopaedist who diagnosed her with a middle-third clavicular shaft fracture and recommended nonoperative treatment with sling immobilization. Three weeks after the injury, the patient presented to our office for a second opinion. At that time, she noted severe functional limitations and continued pain localized to the proximal humerus and clavicle. On examination, she had obvious deformity of the clavicle but no signs of skin compromise. The patient showed guarding with passive shoulder range of motion but did have active external rotation, forward flexion, and abduction in the plane of the scapula. She was entirely neurovascularly intact within the right upper extremity with 5/5 strength of the muscles within the distributions of the anterior interosseous, posterior interosseous, median, radial, ulnar, musculocutaneous, and axillary nerves. Radiographs obtained at the time of presentation showed a displaced mid-diaphyseal clavicular fracture with significant shortening and comminution ( Nonoperative treatment with continued sling immobilization and observation was recommended. One week later, the patient returned with similar complaints of pain, in addition to new-onset skin irritation at the site of the fracture. Physical examination showed tenting of the skin, and impending skin compromise was of concern. The patient was subsequently consented for open reduction and internal fixation of the clavicular fracture. The risks and benefits of surgical intervention were explained, including the low risk of neurovascular compromise given the close proximity of these structures to the clavicle, and the patient elected to proceed with surgery. The surgery was performed 5 weeks from the date of injury. Intraoperatively, the patient was positioned in the modified beach-chair position. General anesthesia was administered without complication. No regional blockade with injected local anesthetic was given. The incision was centered over the inferior portion of the mid clavicle. Immediately on opening of the subcutaneous tissue, the medial fragment was encountered subcutaneously, buttonholed through the deltotrapezial fascia. We used a combination of electrocautery and a Freer elevator to dissect the pieces. A rongeur and a curette were used to expose the edges of the bone. The butterfly fragment was reduced to the lateral fragment with a K-wire. The medial and lateral fragments were then reduced, and a clavicle-specific locking plate was placed on the clavicle superiorly. The medial and lateral fragments were fixated with locking and non-locking screws, and the butterfly fragment was stabilized to the plate with FiberWire sutures (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA). Care was taken to ensure that screws of proper length were used and prominent hardware was avoided. After re-establishment of clavicular length, allograft cancellous chips were packed into the resultant defect. The wound was thoroughly irrigated and closed in the standard fashion ( On the patient’s initial routine postoperative check that evening, she was noted to have 5/5 strength in the hand interossei, finger and wrist extensors, and finger flexors. The next morning (postoperative day 1), the patient was noted to be neurovascularly unchanged. However, several hours later, approximately 24 hours after surgery, she began to complain of hand weakness and difficulty with certain movements of her right upper extremity. Physical examination showed significant muscular weakness with the following strength measurements: deltoid, 2/5; hand interossei, 3/5; extensor indicis proprius, extensor pollicis longus, and wrist extensors, 0/5; triceps, 3/5; and biceps, 3/5. Sensation was intact to light touch through the upper extremity with 2-point discrimination of 5 mm in the distributions of the median and ulnar nerves. The patient had a 2+ radial pulse with brisk capillary refill distally. Her sensory and vascular examination remained unchanged throughout her course. A computed tomographic angiogram was obtained in the evening of the same day and failed to show any significant pathology or signs of compressive hematoma. The vascular surgery team was consulted and did not find any evidence of an arterial or venous lesion or a compressive hematoma. A hand surgeon with training in microsurgery and neurologic repair, reconstruction, and decompression was consulted. The patient was given a working diagnosis of acute brachial plexopathy of unknown etiology with acute onset 24 hours after clavicular open reduction and internal fixation. Intravenous dexamethasone was subsequently administered. The next morning, the patient’s neurologic status continued to deteriorate with increased weakness with elbow, wrist, and hand motion. On postoperative day 2, less than 12 hours after acute onset of neurologic symptoms, the patient returned to the operating room for wound exploration and hardware removal. Intraoperatively, there was no significant hematoma and no sign of deep penetrating injury. The plate was removed, allowing for collapse of the lateral to the medial fragment. Osseous fragments and bone graft material were also removed from the fracture site so as to re-establish the shortened preoperative clavicular length. Over the next 24 hours, the patient was noted to have progressively improved strength to all tested muscle groups: elbow extension; hand intrinsic strength; and anterior interosseous nerve–, median nerve–, and ulnar nerve–innervated muscles strength. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. Two weeks postoperatively, the patient had improved elbow flexion and extension, finger extension, and hand intrinsics. An electromyogram obtained 1 month after the hospital stay showed evidence of axonotmesis localized to the middle trunk of the brachial plexus, predominantly involving the posterior cord. The patient’s strength continued to improve with serial examinations. At 8 months postoperatively, she was pleased with her overall upper extremity function. The patient had 5/5 strength within the wrist extensors, finger flexors, intrinsics, biceps, and triceps. Radiographs showed a nonunion of the clavicle with a significant gap and resorption at the fracture ends ( Retrospectively, clavicular length was measured from the most inferomedial aspect to the most superolateral aspect of the clavicle on serial anteroposterior views. Immediately after the injury and in the intervening weeks of nonoperative treatment, the patient had significant clavicular shortening. Immediately after open reduction and internal fixation, she had significant clavicular lengthening of 27 mm. With removal of hardware, osseous fragments, and bone graft material, she had subsequent clavicular shortening of 29 mm, within 2 mm of her postinjury clavicular length ( Recently released level I evidence lends support to operative treatment of displaced mid-shaft clavicular fractures. A meta-analysis of 2144 mid-shaft clavicular fractures showed that operative fixation was associated with an 86% reduction in the relative risk of nonunion in displaced fractures as compared with nonoperative treatment (2.2% vs 15.2%). Previous authors have reported that complications of nonoperative treatment include malunion, nonunion, skin compromise, brachial plexus injuries, chronic pain, and functional deficits. In this report, we describe a previously unreported complication, brachial plexopathy, after open reduction and internal fixation of a mid-shaft clavicular fracture, followed by resolution of symptoms after a return to the operating room for plate removal and clavicular shortening. Risk factors for the development of our patient’s complication include fracture displacement with significant shortening (approximately 27 mm), delayed reduction and fixation, and advanced patient age. Other possible causes of neurologic deficit, including compressive hematoma and vascular insult, were excluded with diagnostic imaging and expert consultation. In the face of deteriorating neurologic function and known acute clavicular lengthening after a prolonged period of clavicular displacement and shortening, this case was treated with wound exploration, hardware removal, and removal of osseous fragments and bone graft material to effectively shorten the clavicle. The described method of treatment is in contrast to that reported by Ring and Holovacs. Although the exact etiology of the complication presented in this report is unknown, we believe that this complication, at least in part, resulted from acute lengthening of the brachial plexus. With post-injury clavicular fragmentation and shortening, cords within the brachial plexus can become contracted as an adaptive response to decreased infraclavicular space. This may have been more pronounced with the posterior soft tissue, and thus, the posterior cord was more affected by the lengthening. With fracture reduction and restoration of clavicular length, these cords can suffer a stretch injury and a traction neuropathy can result. Although the deficits resulting from such an injury may resolve spontaneously, this complication is sufficiently devastating to warrant a trial of acute removal of hardware and clavicular shortening. Another possible contribution to the plexopathy is that the soft tissue was not adequately released upon initial surgical dissection. An under-release of the soft tissue may have caused excessive traction on the surrounding posterior cord. However, this is unlikely given that we did not find reduction of the fragments difficult once we performed some soft-tissue dissection. In this case, clavicular shortening resulted in almost immediate recovery of the strength of the distal musculature. Of note, 2 of the 3 cases presented by Ring and Holovacs Other potential causes of brachial plexopathy, such as patient positioning or a violation of the plexus with instrumentation or bony fragments, appear to be less likely in our case. No regional anesthesia was used, and thus, this potential cause of the neurologic complication is not contributory. Interestingly, one aspect of the case not well explained is the delay in presentation. One potential theory for the delay is a “second hit” phenomenon. In addition to the neurapraxia due to acute lengthening, subsequent postoperative edema may have combined to create a second hit, leading to delayed clinical neurologic dysfunction starting at 24 hours postoperatively. However, other unknown factors may also play a role and require further investigation with future cases. Although nonoperative treatment has traditionally been advocated for most clavicular fractures, a growing body of evidence suggests that operative treatment may improve outcomes in displaced fractures. We reported a delayed clavicular open reduction and internal fixation procedure due to impending skin compromise with restoration of clavicular length complicated by an acute brachial plexopathy. There was a complete resolution of neurologic deficits after acute removal of hardware, osseous fragments, and bone graft material with effective clavicular shortening. Brachial plexopathy after clavicular open reduction and internal fixation has been reported only once in the literature, and treatment with removal of hardware and clavicular shortening has not been reported previously. This case report serves to make both the surgeon and patient aware that an acute neurapraxia injury can occur with plate fixation of the clavicle, particularly with delayed fixation of displaced and shortened fractures. Given the increasing prevalence of operative fixation of mid-shaft clavicular fractures, surgeons must be acquainted with methods of evaluation and treatment of this complication. In all currently reported cases, compete neurologic functional recovery has occurred within 6 months, and thus, patients with a similar complication may be reassured that their neurologic dysfunction is likely transient. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.