The scrubbing of impurities from tantalum-loaded MIBK was investigated using dilute sulfuric acid as scrubbing agent in a cross-current system. The effects of various scrubbing parameters such as sulfuric acid concentration and scrubbing time have been investigated. Stripping studies of tantalum from the scrubbed tantalum-loaded MIBK were carried out using distilled water as stripping agent in a cross-current system. The elimination of emulsification was investigated using ultrasound in the scrubbing and stripping processes. The effect of ultrasonic power on demulsification was studied. After a six-stage cross-current scrubbing with 5mol/L dilute sulfuric acid and single-stage cross-current stripping, pure tantalum-loaded MIBK can be obtained that yields 99.6% tantalum oxide after precipitation, filtration and roasting. The overall recovery of tantalum was 96.21%. Ultrasound technology can be used for demulsification with the optimal output power range being from 0.44 to 0.56W/mL.World tantalum resources are scarce and of low-grade and tantalum is therefore classed as a rare metal ( During the metallurgical processing of tantalumniobium ores, raw materials are roasted under atmospheric conditions to transform tantalum and niobium into high valence (+ Recently, a new method for the separation of tantalum and niobium has been proposed where tantalum and niobium are separated from the pulp using MIBK with reduced fluorine pollution ( In this work, the scrubbing of impurities from tantalum-loaded MIBK and the stripping of tantalum from scrubbed tantalum-loaded MIBK were investigated in a cross-current system. The effects of different parameters on tantalum and impurity concentrations in the aqueous phase were studied in the scrubbing and stripping process. The elimination of emulsification was investigated using ultrasound technology in the scrubbing and stripping processes. The effect of ultrasonic power on demulsification was studied. A stock organic phase (composition in The tantalum content in the aqueous phase after contact was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy. The niobium and content of other impurities was analyzed by mass spectrometry. Micrographs were obtained by cold field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM). X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra were obtained using a multi-function X-ray diffractometer. During the experiments, the pH was measured using a Mettler Toledo 320 pH meter. The concentration of tantalum in the organic phase was calculated by mass balance. A plastic (PTFE) extraction funnel (Beijing Beihua Fine Chemical Co. Ltd) and high frequency ultrasonic cleaner with digital control (Kunshan Hechuang Ultrasonic Instrument Co., Ltd) were used. To remove impurities such as silicon, tin, sodium and niobium from the tantalum-loaded MIBK, multistage cross-current scrubbing was carried out using dilute sulfuric acid at room temperature. The stripping of tantalum from the scrubbed tantalum-loaded MIBK was carried out using distilled water as stripping agent at room temperature. To reduce tantalum losses in the tantalum-loaded MIBK by scrubbing, the tantalum content in the aqueous phase was measured at different sulfuric acid concentrations, with results summarized in The tin concentration was highest among the impurities. A McCabe–Thiele diagram was constructed for the scrubbing of tin using dilute sulfuric acid at room temperature. The recoveries of tantalum at different sulfuric acid concentrations are given in To remove impurities completely, cross-current scrubbing stages were investigated with results summarized in Stripping of tantalum from the scrubbed tantalum-loaded MIBK was carried out using distilled water at room temperature at a constant aqueous/organic phase ratio (A/O) of 1:1. After stripping, tantalum was extracted from the organic solvent into the aqueous solution, which was then hydrolyzed with aqueous ammonia at a pH of 8–9 to form a precipitate of tantalum hydroxide. The precipitate was recovered by filtration using a 0.22-μm membrane and calcined in air at 1023 Compared with the traditional method, using a low acid concentration in the new proposed method leads to emulsification in the scrubbing and stripping processes. In this work, the elimination of emulsification by ultrasound was studied. The principal mechanism of demulsification via ultrasonic irradiation is the displacement effect. Under ultrasonic irradiation, water and oil particles in the emulsion can move to wave loops or wave nodes, gather and collide, increase in size and then be separated by gravity. Sound energy can also be absorbed and changed into heat energy when ultrasonic waves are transmitted in emulsions. This heating effect can increase the emulsion temperature and consequently lead to a reduction in viscosity and coalescence (  After six-stage cross-current scrubbing with 5 Ultrasound technology can be used for demulsification. The best ultrasonic output power range is from 0.44 to 0.56 This work was financially supported by Doctor Initial Funding Project of the