Tungsten-based coatings without TiC addition (TiC-free) and with 1.5 wt% TiC addition (TiC-doped) were fabricated by supersonic atmospheric plasma spraying (SAPS) technique, respectively. The as-sprayed coatings were then irradiated by laser. The results showed that the as-sprayed coatings were mainly composed of lamellar structure. TiC phase located mainly at lamellar gaps of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating with a morphology of strip filled the gaps. The as-sprayed TiC-doped coating exhibited dense structure, lower porosity, reduced oxygen content and higher thermal conductivity as compared with the as-sprayed TiC-free coating. The as-irradiated coatings could be divided into remelted zone, un-remelted zone and/or mixing zone. Cracks were more easily formed in the as-irradiated TiC-free coating than in the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating. The stripped TiC phase in the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating changed into quasi-spherical/spherical ones in the remelted zone of the irradiated coating and distributed along the tungsten grain boundaries. The averaged tungsten grain size in the remelted zone of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating was about 5.4 μm and that of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating was about 14.8 μm. There were about 96 wt% α(W) and about 4 wt% γ(W) existed in the remelted zone near the surface of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating. Only α(W) could be received in the remelted zone far from the surface of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating and the remelted zone of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating. There were no obvious diffraction peaks for γ(W) could be indexed from the XRD patterns for the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating. The ability of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating to resist laser irradiation was greater than the as-sprayed TiC-free coating, mainly attributing to the higher thermal conductivity of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating and the refinement effect of TiC particles in the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating.Tungsten has been recommended as candiate armor material for plasma-facing component (PFCs) of nuclear fusion devices because of its high melting point and other excellent characteristics [ Another factor limiting the successful application of tungsten in nuclear fusion devices is its poor microstructrue stablity when expose to irradiation [ In the present work, as a supplement to our recent work, the effect of TiC on the microstructure and irradiation characteristics of the tungsten-based coating fabricated by SAPS technique were studied and compared in details. Commercially available pure tungsten powders (purity > 99.9%, TiC-free) with a size of 10–20 μm and tungsten-based composited powders (TiC-doped) with 1.5 wt% TiC powders (purity > 99.9%) with a size of 2–10 μm were sprayed on reduced activation steel substrates to prepare coatings using a supersonic atmospheric plasma spraying system (SAPS, HEPJet-II, China). A schematic diagram of the present SAPS system is illustrated in In the SAPS process, argon and hydrogen were used as primary gas to form plasma arc and second gas to condense the plasma arc to form extended plasma arc, respectively. Argon was selected as carrier gas to deliver powders. The SAPS conditions being the same with our previous work were rearranged in Irradiation experiments were performed using a transverse flow CO The microstructure and element distribution of the powders and the coatings before and after laser irradiation treatments were studied using optical microscope (OM, Leica, DM4000M, Germany), scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-6490 and SU-8020, Japan) operated at power of 5 kV and 20 kV and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS, Oxford, Japan) performed by about 5 min for a selected figure. The existence of the quasi-spherical/spherical particles in the remelted zone of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating was verified using X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS, Escalab250Xi, Thermo Scientific, USA). The Al Kα was used for X-ray source. Both chambers were evacuated to <10 The methods to measure and evaluate the density (  As can be seen in  A similar coating structure can also be observed in the TiC-doped coating, as shown in It can be seen from During SAPS process, tungsten would solidify first when the obtained droplets including [W], [Ti] and [C] were impinged on the substrate because of the higher melting point of tungsten as compared with TiC [ The formation of TiC phase at the lamellae gaps of the TiC-doped coating, having a filling effect as be obtained in a W-Cu coating [ In addition, it can also be seen from The surface morphologies of the as-irradiated TiC-free and TiC-doped coatings as revealed by a digital camera images are shown in The pseudo-3D images for The surface macroscopic characteristics of the irradiated coatings are present in It can also be seen from In order to clarify the above-mentioned result, the microstructure characteristics of the as-sprayed TiC-free and TiC-doped coatings after laser irradiation treatment were studied, as shown in following figures and table. To the TiC-doped coating, a similar cross-section characteristic could be obtained as illustrated in It can also be seen from the magnified microstructure of the remelted and resolidified TiC-doped coating shown in As proposed above, the higher thermal conductivity of the TiC-doped coating was helpful to increase the solidification rate of the remelted TiC-doped tungsten-based melt, increasing its undercooling and contributing to forming finer microstructure as compared with the as-sprayed TiC-free coating with a smaller thermal conductivity. Additionally, it can be seen from It can also be seen from   In comparison, only α(W) could be obtained in the remelted zone near or far from the surface of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating, and the obvious diffraction peaks for γ(W) could not be indexed, as shown in As a supplement to the results of the EDS mapping analysis shown in One kinds of carbide whose melting point was lower than that of pure W, TiC powder was introduced into a pure tungsten (TiC-free) powder by weight percentage of 1.5% (TiC-doped) and sprayed by a supersonic atmospheric plasma spraying (SAPS) machine to form coatings. The obtained coatings were then irradiated by laser beams. The microstructure and laser irradiation characteristics of the coatings before and after laser irradiation were studied and compared. The following results were obtained: The as-sprayed TiC-free and TiC-doped coatings were mainly composed of lamellar structure. TiC phase, which mainly distributed at lamellar gaps of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating with morphology of a strip, had a filling effect on the gaps. The as-sprayed TiC-doped coating exhibited dense structure, lower porosity, reduced oxygen content and higher thermal conductivity as compared with the as-sprayed TiC-free coating. Under the effect of laser irradiation treatment, only a part of the as-sprayed coatings was remelted and resolidified along the direction of the coating thickness and the weld beads in the as-irradiated coatings were divided into remelted zone, un-remelted zone and/or mixed zone. Cracks were more easily formed in the as-irradiated TiC-free coating than in the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating, indicating that the ability of the as-sprayed TiC-free coating to resist laser irradiation was worse than that of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating. TiC with a morphology of strip that was mainly distributed at lamellar gaps of the as-sprayed TiC-doped coating was changed into quasi-spherical/spherical particles in the remelted zone of the weld bead of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating. The remelted and resolidified TiC particles distributed mainly along the W grain boundaries, helping to refine the W grain of the remelted zone of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating. Weight percentage of about 96% α(W) and weight percentage of about 4% γ(W) could be obtained in the remelted zone near the surface of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating. Weight percentage of about 100% α(W) could be received in the remelted zone far from the surface of the as-irradiated TiC-free coating. Only α(W) could be obtained in the remelted zone of the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating, and there were no obvious diffraction peaks for γ(W) could be indexed in the as-irradiated TiC-doped coating. This work was supported by the