Steatite/cordierite ceramics were fabricated by using a combined method of high-energy ball milling, cold pressing and sintering. Steatite and cordierite powders were separately synthesized from natural raw materials such as kaolinite and talc. The powder blends containing different amounts of cordierite (5, 10 and 20wt.%) were wet-milled for 1h in a vibratory ball-mill (Fritsch™ Pulverisette 7 Premium Line), using zirconia vial and balls. After drying, powders were compacted to cylindrical preforms with a diameter of 12.7mm by uniaxial pressing at 300MPa. The green compacts were sintered at 1200–1350°C for 2h under air. Phase, microstructural and thermal characterizations of the sintered materials were carried out by using X-ray diffraction technique (XRD), thermogravimetry/differential thermal analyzer (TG/DTA) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). Densities, open porosity and water absorption values of sintered bodies were measured by Archimedes method. Thermal expansion coefficient (CTE) measurements were conducted by a dilatometer.Steatite ceramics and cordierite ceramics are metasilicates which form the major components of the MgO–Al Steatite ceramics are widely used in high temperature applications and electronics as tips for gas burners, heating element holders, halogen bulb holders, casings for thermostats, electric switchboards, stand off insulators, interlocking insulating beads, split bush insulators and regulator parts, due to their low dielectric losses, high temperature resistance and high mechanical strength. Moreover, they have been attracted considerable interest in dental applications. Cordierite ceramics contain MgO:Al This study reports the fabrication of steatite/cordierite ceramics by using a combined method of high-energy ball milling, cold pressing and sintering. Steatite and cordierite powders were separately synthesized from natural raw materials such as kaolinite and talc. The effects of cordierite content (wt.%) and sintering temperature on the compositional, thermal, physical and microstructural features of the steatite/cordierite ceramics were evaluated. The starting materials (steatite and cordierite) of this study were synthesized from natural raw materials. First of all, natural raw materials (talc and kaolinite) were calcined at 1000 The phase compositions of the raw materials and sintered bodies were performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using a Bruker™ D8 Advanced Series powder diffractometer with Cu Kα (1.54060 The XRD patterns of the steatite and cordierite powders annealed at 1320     Based on the results of the present study, the following conclusions can be drawn: Clinoenstatite, protoenstatite, cordierite and forsterite phases in addition to very small amount of SiO The relative density values of all sintered samples increase as sintering temperature increases. Cordierite addition has a negative effect on the relative densities of the steatite-based ceramics until its content reaches to 20 The highest relative density and so the lowest porosity and water absorption values were obtained in SC20 sample at 1350 SEM images prove that porous bodies of the steatite/cordierite ceramics become denser as sintering temperature increases. CTE values of steatite/cordierite ceramics decrease as cordierite content (wt.%) increases, for all sintering temperatures. The lowest CTE value was obtained in SC20 ceramic in the range of 7.25 This study is one of the outcomes of a research project entitled “Development of Al–Cu Based Metal Matrix Composites via Powder Metallurgy Techniques” funded by State Planning Organization (DPT) with the project number 90189. Further, we would like to express our gratitude to State Planning Organization (DPT) for funding the project entitled “Advanced Technologies in Engineering” with the project number 2001K120750 out of which the main infrastructure of the Particulate Materials Laboratories was founded.