A natural peptide motif in the first helix of osteocalcin (OCN) is used to promote nucleation and crystallization of hydroxyapatite (HA) in hard tissue. The capability of osteocalcin mimetic peptides to induce osteogenic activity of osteoblast cells leading to in-vitro mineralization is demonstrated. An osteocalcin-derived peptide consisting of thirteen amino acids is synthesized in both acidic (OSC) and amidic (OSN) forms and added into the human osteoblast-like cells (MG63) culture. The viability, proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity, HA deposition and osteogenic gene expression by osteoblast cells are evaluated. It is revealed that the addition of 100 μg/ml of peptides enhances the proliferation rate and total protein content of osteoblast cells. Alkaline phosphatase activity is significantly higher in the presence of peptides which in turn stimulated RNA expression of collagen type I and osteopontin in a phosphate-dependent manner. Alizarin red staining and calcium content measurement show that mineral deposition is considerably increased. Ultrastructural characterization of MG63 cultures confirms the crystalline nature and chemical composition of HA mineral formation in the presence of peptides. It is confirmed that the osteocalcin-derived peptide, particularly in amidic form (OSN), is able to act as a bioactive inducer of mineralization process and hence accelerating bone tissue regeneration.Enhancement of osteogenesis is the goal of all regenerative approaches. Many studies are being conducted to find biological agents that reduce the healing time and increase the quality of regenerated bone [ Osteocalcin (OCN) is the most prominent non-collagenous protein that constitutes 1.5% of organic matrix of bone tissue. OCN is synthesized and secreted exclusively by mature osteoblasts and osteocytes during the late phases of bone formation. [ The crystal structure of OCN has clearly shown a negatively charged protein surface that coordinates five calcium ions in a spatial orientation, which is complementary to calcium ions in hydroxyapatite crystal lattice. [ The sequence of 13 amino acids in the first helix of osteocalcin is synthesized in two forms of amidated C-terminal (Lue-…-Asn-Pro-Asp-NH The mean particle size of the assembled peptides in various concentrations (1, 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 mg/ml) was determined by dynamic light scattering using photon correlation spectroscopy. Briefly, peptides from stock solutions (2 mg/ml in water) were diluted with deionized water at pH = 7.4 to a desired concentration and were allowed to form a stable aggregate. The measurements were performed using a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Malvern, Worcestershire, UK) equipped with a helium-neon laser at 25 °C and a scattering angle of 173°. Additionally, the zeta potential of the peptides was measured with the same instrument at 25 °C by electrophoretic mobility. Human osteoblast-like MG63 cell line obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) was used in this study. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Invitrogen, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100U/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO The 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was performed to evaluate the viability of MG63 cells. Cells were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 The osteogenic activity of osteoblasts was evaluated by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity after 5, 10, and 15 days of incubation by addition of peptides. The ALP activity was assessed using alkaline phosphatase assay kit (Colorimetric) (Abcam, USA, ab83369) according to manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, cells were grown on 24-well culture plates with a density of 10 To assess mineralization process after 5, 10 and 15 days of adding peptides to culture media calcium content measurement and alizarin red S staining were performed. The calcium content was measured using a QuantiChrom calcium assay kit (Gentaur, Voortstraat, Belgium), which is based on the formation of very stable blue coloured complexes in particular with free calcium. The colour intensity was measured at 612 nm using Thermo Scientific™ Multiskan™ GO Microplate spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific™, USA) which is directly proportional to the calcium concentration in each sample. The ability of osteoblasts to form mineralized nodules in the presence of the peptides was evaluated by alizarin red S staining. Briefly, cells were grown in 24-well culture plate with a density of 10 For ultrastructural characterization by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), MG63 cultures at various time points (5 and 10 days) were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) and dehydrated through a series of graded ethanol dilutions. Samples were embedded in epoxy resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Ultrathin sections (80-nm-thick) cut with a Leica EM UC6 ultra- microtome (Leica) were placed on formvar-coated nickel grids (Electron Microscopy Sciences) and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate (Electron Microscopy Sciences) for viewing by TEM. A field-emission FEI Tecnai 12 BioTwin TEM (FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA) was used to examine the sections at 120 kV. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was performed on SEM equipped with an INCA mi- croanalytical system (Oxford Instruments, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, UK). The expression level of osteogenic genes (i.e., ALP, Runx2, Col 1, OCN and OPN) was evaluated after 5, 10 and 15 days of adding peptides to the cell culture media. Total RNA was extracted from cells using RNAasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, 74,004) as previously described [ The presence of osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN), the two main proteins of extracellular matrix, were analyzed by immunofluorescence technique. The osteoblast cells were cultured in 24 well plates with density of 10 All data are presented as the mean ± SD of at least three experiments. Statistics was calculated with GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) using a Two-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. In all experiments * was used for The results of surface charge analysis of peptides showed a surface charge of 6.6 ± 1.22 mV and 18.2 ± 0.98 mV for OSC and OSN at concentration of 1 mg/ml, respectively, revealing that OSN is more positive than OSC in their assembled forms. The zeta potential values were changed with peptide concentration. However, the surface charge of OSN remains more positive than OSC in all concentrations. The mean particle size for 1 mg/ml concentration of OSN and OSC was 851.7 ± 19.48 nm and 830 ± 15.50 nm, respectively. The particle size is also varied as a function of peptide concentration ( The viability of MG63 cells was examined in the presence of various concentrations of OSC and OSN after 1, 3 and 7 days ( Total protein content is also considered as an indirect measure for the number of growing cells in the culture. Total protein content (TPC) was time-dependent with a maximum amount at day 15 ( As an early marker for differentiation of osteoblast-like cells, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was measured after 5, 10, and 15 days of incubation in presence of peptides ( The calcium deposition was quantified to evaluate matrix mineralization of MG63 osteoblast-like cells. Alizarin red S staining performed on MG63 cells in the presence of OSC and OSN after 5, 10, and 15 days. As shown in The epoxy-embedded mineralized MG63 cell cultures after 5 and 10 days was also characterized to confirm the formation of HA crystals (Supplementary To determine the effect of osteocalcin mimetic peptides on osteogenic activity of MG63 osteoblast cells and the extent of osteogenesis in the presence of the peptides, the expression level of specific genes including Runx2, ALP, Col I, OCN, and OPN was analysed using qRT-PCR. As shown in As for the late markers of differentiation, osteocalcin (OCN) and osteopontin (OPN) expression levels were evaluated by immunofluorescence after 5 and 10 days in presence of OSC and OSN. A similar degree of OCN expression was detected among all samples at day 5 ( The synthesis of functionalized peptides that are capable of inducing template-mediated hydroxyapatite formation and promote bone regeneration has progressed within the last decade [ MTT assay showed that osteoblast cells proliferate more significantly in the presence of the peptides particularly OSN while no evidence of any major deleterious or cytotoxic responses was observed. It has been reported that hydroxyapatite (HA) can stimulate cellular responses such as osteoblast proliferation. [ Bone-like nodule formation is an evidence for osteoblast mineralization. Alizarin red which preferentially stains calcium containing matrix has been widely used to identify the mineral deposition. [ According to the current results, the amount of mineralized nodules was significantly increased when osteoblasts were cultured in the presence of peptides. The formation of mineralized nodules was started during the first week of cell culture with peptides, although the number of mineralized nodules was more significant in the presence of OSN rather than OSC. The appearance of crystals in the presence of both peptides particularly OSN is indicative of enhanced osteogenic activity of osteoblast cells. The observed mineral deposition detected by alizarin red S staining and calcium content consistent with ALP activity was confirmed the stimulating effect of peptides on the extracellular matrix mineralization. To precisely address the mineral formed in MG63 cell culture are HA, we characterized the epoxy-embedded mineralized cell cultures using TEM images. We observed needle-like apatite crystals in both OSC and OSN groups. A previous study showed this needle-like morphology of HA in MC3T3 cell culture and native bone. [ In order to partly elucidate the molecular mechanism involved in the mineralization process induced by peptides, the expression level of the related genes was assessed. Osteopontin (OPN) is a highly phosphorylated glycoprotein in the extracellular matrix that is secreted by osteoblasts during bone development. Although the precise role of OPN in bone tissue formation is not clear, OPN is thought to be a mediator of mineralization process. [ Runx2 is an essential transcription factor for osteoblastic differentiation, which regulates the expression of major bone matrix genes. The results of qRT-PCR revealed no significant changes in the expression level of Runx2 in both peptide containing samples and control group. It has been reported that proliferation and early differentiation of pre-osteoblasts is tightly regulated by Runx2 not the late differentiation stage. [ Collagen type I is the major extracellular matrix (ECM) molecule of bone tissue that constitutes 90–95 % of organic matrix. Upregulation of Col I was detected in the presence of the peptides which confirms that they have the ability to induce ECM formation in the early time point. It is known that collagen content could be increased as a consequence of elevation in the phosphate values. [ To further explore the effect of synthesized peptide on mineralization of MG63 cells, osteocalcin (OCN) expression, the marker of late-term osteoblast maturation was analyzed. The results of OCN gene expression level revealed no significant difference at mRNA level among the samples. In contrast, immunofluorescence (IF) data showed a dramatic increase in OCN protein level at the presence of OSN. According to data in literature, mRNA levels cannot reflect the level of corresponding proteins. [ It should be pointed out that bone formation consist of three basic steps that includes synthesis of organic phase of extracellular matrix (osteoid), matrix mineralization and remodeling of bone. The first step depends on osteoblasts which synthesize and secrete bone specific extracellular matrix protein such as osteopontin and collagen type I which are responsible for matrix deposition and mineralization. Therefore, these results suggest that osteocalcin mimetic peptides has an impact on mineralization through increasing ECM proteins most probably by triggering a cellular cascade events in a phosphate-dependent manner which leads to matrix deposition and mineralization ( It is suggested that apatite crystal formation is accelerated in the presence of OSN as a HA-promoting peptide by decreasing the activation energy. Our previous study confirmed that enhanced biomineralization activity of OSN compared to OSC attributed to its C-terminal amidation which affect its conformational state and led to improved interaction with both calcium and phosphate ions [ Our study evaluated the impact of osteocalcin-derived peptide on osteogenic activity of MG63 osteoblast cells. The proliferation and extracellular matrix mineralization of osteoblast cells increased in the presence of synthesized peptides particularly OSN. These differences in osteoblast responses between OSC and OSN are attributed to C-terminal amidation that increase the peptide bioactivity compared to acidic one. Since C-terminal amidated peptide mimic natural peptides and is more stable against aminopeptidase, amidic osteocalcin derived peptide could be a good candidate in bone regeneration and has the potential to be used as a bioactive factor for biomedical applications. This work was supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: