The analysis of the daily electricity consumption profile of a building and its correlation with environmental factors makes it possible to examine and estimate its electricity demand. As an alternative to the traditional correlation analysis, a new approach is proposed to provide a detailed and visual analysis of the correlations between consumption and environmental variables. Since consumption profiles can be characterized by many components, the input space is high dimensional. For that reason, it is necessary to apply dimensionality reduction techniques that enable a projection of these data onto an easily interpretable 2D space. In this paper, several dimensionality reduction techniques are tested in order to determine the most appropriate one for the stated purpose. Later, the proposed approach uses the chosen algorithm to analyze the influence of the environmental variables on the electricity consumption in public buildings located at the University of León. Finally, electricity profiles from all buildings are compared with regard to two aspects, the magnitude and dynamics of the consumption.The search of energy efficiency in buildings, particularly in public buildings, is a mandatory step to ensure a sustainable development. It is essential to define strategies that reduce electricity consumption. In this sense, the first step should be carrying out an analysis of the daily electricity consumption profiles. The analysis of electricity consumption in a building is quite important to determine the time dependence of that consumption ( In order to understand the consumption of a building, it is useful to analyze its daily consumption curve, i.e., the 24-hour curve which constitutes the consumption profile. Since the profile is composed of a large number of components, the input space is high dimensional and therefore its visualization is difficult. For that reason, the application of a dimensionality reduction technique can be useful to project onto a 2D visualization representation which preserves most of the structure and patterns of the input space. Many algorithms have been exposed for this purpose. A review of the most important ones is presented in Among these techniques, the MDS (  On the other hand, the SNE ( In short, each of the algorithms presented above has different advantages and disadvantages. For that reason, it is necessary to select the dimensionality reduction technique that is more suitable for the purpose of this work, which is to project consumption profiles in a low-dimensional representation that allows us to visualize the dependences of electricity on buildings. This approach is tested on buildings at the University of León (Spain), which are subject to different usages and therefore exhibit distinct consumption profiles and correlations. The proposed approach to define consumption profiles, select the dimensionality reduction algorithm, visualize dependences with respect to environmental variables and compare buildings is presented in Consumption profiles are useful to determine how a building is used during a particular day. Profile analysis enables the study of the correlation between the electricity consumption and the hour of the day. This is useful for detecting deviations in consumption or anomalous patterns and, also, for estimating electricity consumption in a simple way. In this work, the consumption profiles use the active power. Therefore, a vector is defined as On the other hand, a vector with the average environmental data measured for a certain day can be associated to each consumption curve: Therefore, the input data set to our approach comprises a set of vectors that contain the hourly power consumption and the mean values of the environmental variables for each day. So the vector is defined as The interesting environmental variables ( As exposed in The desired projection technique needs to provide good interpretability and preservation of proximities. For this reason, the selection method used in this work relies on both visual analysis and two quantitative metrics: trustworthiness and continuity. These metrics were introduced in A projection is considered In case of ties when sorting data, all compatible rank orders are considered equally. Since the initialization of the dimensionality reduction techniques is random and some techniques require a neighborhood parameter The method proposed to visualize the consumption profile data is shown in Several authors have proposed interpolated extensions to dimensionality reduction algorithms ( Dimensionality reduction methods are generally nonparametric, so they only provide a mapping for the given training data. Therefore, it is necessary to rerun the algorithm to project new samples that have not been fed during training. This is undesirable, because a new training is likely to change the output position of already projected points and the process is time consuming. For that reason, an extension based on the general regression neural network (GRNN) is used ( The GRNN is a neural network based on the Nadaraya–Watson kernel estimator ( Once the GRNN is applied, it is possible to estimate the distribution in the output space and visualize it through contour lines (see Once the dimensionality reduction technique has been selected, all the data from the buildings are used to project them simultaneously onto a low-dimensional space so that they can be compared. This approach is based on the assumption that buildings with a similar profile will be projected near in the output space. Therefore, the similarity of the consumption profiles is studied with regard to the closeness of the data. Two feature scaling approaches can be used to lead to different comparisons:   The University of León has a data acquisition system for electricity consumption which covers all its buildings. This acquisition system is based on a three-tier architecture which allows the data acquisition and storage of electrical data of each building and weather-related data. These data provide insight into the status of the environmental variables at each time step. The campus of the University of León contains 30 buildings which can be classified in three different groups according to their purpose:     The data acquisition system uses the Modbus protocol to collect data from the electrical meters and the meteorological station. The meters installed in each buildings measure more than 50 electrical variables such as voltages, currents, power, power factor, energies, harmonics, etc. The meteorological station provides common weather-related variables such as temperature, solar radiation, etc. Considering a sampling period of 1 The dimensionality reduction technique will be selected among all the techniques presented briefly in  These maps show that the LLE cannot find a satisfactory solution in the resulting projection because all the points are mixed. The remaining projections manage to spread the data reasonably and gather the days with a low power consumption, while high consumption points are mapped far from them. All the projections sort data according to two major directions or curves. In general, the first direction corresponds to the magnitude of power consumption throughout the day. The points of low consumption are in one end whereas the high consumption points are in the opposite side. The second direction corresponds to the shape of the consumption profile for days with similar consumption magnitude. The shape of the profile depends on the value of the peak consumption, the number of peaks and the time at which they occur. Some techniques tend to group the data more densely, which is preferred, while the other techniques spread them more. The metrics of trustworthiness and continuity are calculated to choose, along with visual analysis, the most appropriate dimensionality reduction technique (see  According to these results, the chosen technique has been SNE because it provides a good visualization and achieves high trustworthiness and continuity for intermediate and high values of The analysis of power consumption profiles allows us to monitor the consumption profiles of a building and the influence of environmental variables. In this case, the SNE projection was applied to two different data sets, one corresponding to a building of the group of school and administrative buildings (G1) and another one from the group of special purpose buildings (G3). The chosen buildings are School of Arts (B6) as representative of group G1 and Animal Facilities (B15) for group G3. A power profile with peaks shows a dependence with the time of the day, i.e., the consumption level depends on the activity of the building. On the other hand, some buildings do not have a strong dependence on the activity and present a flat power profile with similar consumption levels during the whole day or occasional random peaks. Therefore, the difference in the shape of the projection gives an insight of the consumption behavior in the buildings. In the projection of the G1 building, which has a power profile with peaks, the main direction in the distribution of the points presents a linear shape (see On the other hand, the G3 building has a flat power profile, so its consumption stays approximately the same regardless of the time. For that reason, the main direction in the map presents a rounded shape (see Since the size of the points represents the value of the environmental variable under analysis, correlations between it and the electricity consumption can also be studied. For the G1 building, it can be seen that days with low solar radiation and temperature match with the points of high power consumption. The activity index shows clearly a direct correlation with the electricity consumption. On the contrary, the points corresponding to high consumption in the G3 building do not match with low values of solar radiation and temperature (small-sized points) or high activity indexes (large-sized points). Indeed, for some points, specifically those corresponding to weekends, these low values of the activity index are associated with very low consumption. The aim of comparison of the electricity profiles is to visually determine similarities or differences in the electrical behavior of the buildings. The projection of the electricity profiles facilitates the building analysis taking into account two aspects, the electricity consumption magnitudes and the dynamics. It is possible to compare buildings with each other or to examine several days corresponding to the same building or even different buildings. In this case, the data set used for the SNE projection contains 10,950 samples corresponding to 30 buildings during 1 year. The input vector is 27-dimensional and is built according to Eq.   This paper presents a visual approach for the analysis of daily electricity consumption profiles in public buildings. Since the consumption profiles are defined as vectors whose components are the hourly consumptions, they are high dimensional. A dimensionality reduction step is needed in order to enable a visual analysis. The projection technique is selected among nine different dimensionality reduction algorithms according to a compromise between visual analysis and quantitative metrics of performance. The most appropriate one for the proposed problem was found to be the SNE. The consumption profiles projected by means of the SNE, along with associated information from environmental variables that influence the consumption (temperature, solar radiation and activity index), are used to produce different visualizations. On the one hand, the proposed approach allows to jointly display the daily profiles and an associated environmental variable for a certain period of time. Thus, insight about the consumption behavior of a building can be obtained and correlations between consumption and environmental variables can be analyzed. On the other hand, it enables the comparison of several buildings according to both the magnitude and the dynamics of their consumption profiles. The proposed approach has been evaluated on data acquired from 30 buildings of the University of León campus in a whole year. It allowed to extract valuable knowledge about the consumption profiles of these buildings, as well as their dependence on environmental variables. The building comparison makes it possible to identify buildings with similar consumption behavior. This work was supported in part by