The hydrodynamic theory of particle movement in non-Newtonian fluids is addressed from a rheological perspective. The shear rate due to particle-to-fluid relative movement, the particle Reynolds number in non-Newtonian fluids, and a general form of Stokes’ equation for non-Newtonian fluids are proposed. It is concluded that the fluid drag on a sphere moving in a yield-shear thinning or Bingham plastic fluid is jointly determined by the yield stress and viscosity. For fine particles, the influence of the yield stress becomes dominant. From this conclusion it can be deducted that the dense medium separation of fine and/or near density particles is most affected by the medium yield stress.In the dense media separation (DMS) process, the relative movement of mineral particles to medium is determined by the particle size and density and also by the rheological properties of the medium. Dense media exhibit non-Newtonian rheological properties, which are characterised by two or more rheological parameters ( The hydrodynamics of particle movement in Newtonian fluids is well established and the theory is widely applied in mineral processing. With non-Newtonian dense medium, however, the drag coefficient–Reynolds number relationship ( Other researchers have suggested a different view on the possible influence of yield stress on dense medium separation ( The fluid drag on a moving particle is the sum of two components: the viscous drag due to viscous friction and the form drag due to boundary layer separation in the wake of the particle movement. The fluid drag is expressed by the drag coefficient defined as In dealing with particle movement in non-Newtonian fluids, the particle Reynolds number must be modified to reflect the non-Newtonian nature of the fluids. In this way, problems of particle settling in non-Newtonian fluids can be solved in a similar manner to those in Newtonian systems. The first dimensionless term, Different forms of modified particle Reynolds numbers, The apparent viscosity is defined as the slope of a line from the origin that intercepts the flow curve at a specific shear rate. For a Bingham fluid the apparent viscosity is expressed as Thus, from a rheological perspective, the denominator of From this expression for Reynolds number, the particle Reynolds number in fluids of any rheological type can be formulated, provided that an appropriate mathematical model can be obtained to describe the flow curves of the non-Newtonian fluid in question. For magnetite dense medium, the flow curves can be described by the Casson equation ( The corresponding apparent viscosity is Thus, the Reynolds number for particles moving in magnetite suspensions can be obtained by substituting Since The same approach can be applied to any other fluid. The developed modified Reynolds number can be verified using Dedegil's data (1987). Dedegil found that the experimental data points for spheres settling in Bingham fluids are severely scattered in the To relate rheological parameters to From the modified Reynolds numbers proposed by The calculation of the shear rate constant is complicated and beyond the scope of this paper ( For practical purposes, In a Newtonian fluid, the viscous drag exerted on a sphere by the fluid in the laminar flow regime is given by The corresponding Stokes’ equation is The viscous drag equation in laminar flow regime can be obtained directly from the linear portion of the For Bingham plastic fluids, the apparent viscosity is expressed as shown in Under the gravitational force, the terminal velocity of a spherical particle in a non-Newtonian fluid can be derived by equating the gravitational and buoyant force For magnetite suspensions, the Casson equation ( For fluids obeying Casson equation ( As the yield stress approaches zero, the flow behaviour becomes Newtonian, and The above discussion is based on the particle movement in the laminar flow regime, where no boundary layer separation occurs, the fluid drag is equal to viscous drag, and When there is no relative movement between a particle and the fluid (i.e. This is the threshold drag for a particle to overcome before it can start moving relative to the medium. Apparently, the threshold drag is determined only by the yield stress and is independent of fluid viscosity. At a given density difference between particle and medium ( In using According to Due to the effect of yield stress, the terminal velocity in a yield shear thinning fluid according to Six different samples of magnetite were used in the tests ( Magnetite #1 provided by Craigmont Mines, British Columbia is a commercial magnetite used as a dense medium in coal preparation plants. Magnetite #2 was obtained by grinding Magnetite #1 in a ball mill. Magnetites #4 and #5 are micronized-magnetites, Rheological tests were carried out using a HAAKE Rotovisco RV20 rheometer. A special sensor system designed for rapidly settling suspensions was employed ( As indicated ( Two types of dense medium separators are commonly utilized to clean coal; while the dense medium bath is used for coarse coal fractions, the dense medium cyclone is used to clean finer coal fractions. The latter case is used here to illustrate the effect of the magnetite medium properties on the separation results. In centrifugal flow, such as in dense medium cyclones, the acceleration is dominated by centrifugal acceleration, The relationship can be used to indicate the effective shear rate experienced by a particle at a given size or density. At a density of separation of 1.45, a typical separation density for cleaning coal in dense medium separators, the values of Casson viscosity and Casson yield stress were obtained for four different grades of medium (  The shear rates,  Based on the above discussion, the DMS of fine particles, which requires the use of fine magnetite dense medium characterised by a high yield stress, is more closely related to the medium yield stress than to the medium viscosity. This has been confirmed in the dense medium cyclone separation tests conducted by It is interesting to analyse some empirical equations that are available in literature. These equations have been put forward to describe the effect of medium rheology on separation efficiency (  In order to describe the movement of solid particles in non-Newtonian fluids, the viscosity term in the general form of the Reynolds number equation was replaced by an apparent viscosity term ( The derived equations demonstrate that the fluid drag acting on a particle in a yield-shear thinning (or plastic) fluid are functions of both the yield stress and viscosity terms. Not only does the yield stress determine the threshold drag on particles before particle-to-fluid relative movement commences, but it also determines the viscous drag during the particle-to-fluid relative movement. This leads to the modified form of the equation for the particle terminal velocity in non-Newtonian fluids ( The derived equations can be used to interpret the empirical formulae that were used to describe the separation results in a dense medium cyclone (