The replacement of natural coarse aggregate (NCA) by oil palm shell (OPS) in concrete mixture offers various advantages such as conservation of natural resources, reduction of CO2 emission, and cost saving. However, mechanical properties of OPS concrete are different from natural aggregate concrete (NAC) due to inferior properties of OPS compared with NCA. Therefore, accurate evaluation of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of OPS concrete is of vital importance before construction. To this end, a hybrid artificial intelligence (AI) model based on random forest (RF) was proposed to predict UCS of OPS concrete. The hyperparameters of RF were tuned using beetle antennae search (BAS) algorithm modified by Levy flight and self-adaptive inertia weight. The RF model was trained on a dataset collected from published literature. The obtained AI model has high prediction accuracy with correlation coefficient of 0.9588 on the test set. The proposed method is powerful and efficient in prediction of UCS of OPS concrete and therefore paves the way to intelligent construction.Due to rapid depletion of natural coarse aggregates (NCA), such as granite and gravel, concrete industry has been seeking alternative aggregates from solid waste or industrial by-products [ Previous literature has proved that NCA in concrete can be replaced by OPS to produce structural lightweight concrete with UCS of grade 35 or less and a density reduction of 20%–25% in comparison with normal weight concrete [ Currently, linear or nonlinear regression methods are used to predict properties of concrete [ AI models have been used to predict properties of mineral coarse aggregate concrete, organic coarse aggregate concrete, lightweight concrete and normal weight concrete [ Among many AI models, the random forest (RF) algorithm is prioritized over other models [ To tune hyperparameters of RF, metaheuristic optimization algorithms can be used because they can solve complicated engineering problems with simple codes and high computational efficiency [ It firstly applied AI models to evaluate UCS of OPS concrete. This method is more accurate and efficient compared with the laboratory-based approaches. By incorporating the self-adaptive inertia weight and Levy flight methods, the searching efficiency of BAS is significantly improved; The modified BAS algorithm is firstly utilized to tune hyperparameters of RF; The remainder of this paper will describe the compiled dataset in section It is known that the basic four components of concrete are cement, water, fine aggregate and coarse aggregate (OPS in this study) [ The correlation between any two variables can be calculated using Pearson correlation coefficient: In regression tree (RT), the feature space is divided into a set of areas and in each area a simple model is fitted. Assuming To predict UCS of OPS concrete, assume the regression problem is represented by In the training procedure of random forest (RF), a large number of de-correlated regression trees are generated. Each tree is grown in a randomly split subset from the training set The BAS algorithm is a recently proposed meta-heuristic optimization algorithm. The development of the BAS algorithm is inspired by the searching behaviour of beetles [ The searching behaviour of the beetle can be defined as follows: The detecting behaviour of the beetle is described by: To avoid BAS falling into local minima trap, this study introduces Levy flight and self-adaptive inertia weight to modify BAS (MBAS). Levy flight Levy flight has been used in many optimization algorithms and the results are promising [ When the difference between the adjacent two fitness values ( Self-adaptive inertia weight The self-adaptive inertia weight is defined by The following performance measures are applied to evaluating the predictive performance of the proposed model: Root-mean-square error (RMSE) RMSE measures the difference between predicted and observed values using the following function [ Correlation coefficient (  The In RF, two hyperparameters need to be tuned: the minimum number of samples required to be at a leaf node (min_samples_leaf) and the total number of the trees (tree_num) in the forest [ In this study, six benchmark functions are used to test the MBAS algorithm [ Here, we take As stated before, two hyperparameters (min_samples_leaf and tree_num) are tuned using MBAS and 10-fold CV. After ten folds, ten sets of hyperparameters are obtained, as shown in  This study uses RF to predict UCS of OPS concrete. The hyperparameters of RF algorithm is tuned using the MBAS algorithm. Several conclusions are summarized as follows. Incorporating Levy flight and self-adaptive inertia weight into the BAS algorithm can avoid the premature convergence to local optima, and therefore the searching efficiency of traditional BAS algorithm is improved; MBAS is efficient in searching for hyperparameters of RF, indicated by rapid convergence speed and significant decrease in RMSE; The MBAS-RF model achieves high prediction accuracy on the test set for UCS prediction of OPS concrete. In the future work, the authors will collect a continuously-updated highly-accessible and multinational database to increase the generalizability of the proposed model. Data samples incorporating more input variables such as supplementary cementing materials (fly ash, slag, silica fume, etc.), manufactured sand, mineral coarse aggregate and fibres will be included in the database. Advanced data pre-processing techniques such as missing data imputation and semisupervised learning will be introduced to replace the input and output missing values in the database. In addition, the performance of other AI models (e.g. neural networks, support vector regression and boosted regression trees) will be compared in predicting UCS of OPS concrete. Finally, the proposed intelligent model will be incorporated into construction systems to facilitate production of OPS concrete.  The authors claim no conflicts of interest. The first author is supported by 