Spherical oil agglomeration of bituminous coal fines was carried out using diesel oil as a bridging liquid. The effects of parameters, such as the dosage of bridging liquid, the solid content of slurry, the agitation time and rate, the pH and surface active agent on the agglomeration performance, were investigated. When the bridging oil loading increased from 5 to 30 wt.%, the values of grade and recovery increased gradually. The grade increased from 0.62 to 0.79 and the recovery increased from 0.91 to 0.98. Under the test conditions reported, agitation time and rate did not significantly affect the grade and recovery values. When the solid content in the slurry increased from 5 to 25, the grade values decreased from 0.75 to 0.6 and the recovery increased from 0.95 to 0.99. Laser particle size analyses of the agglomerate and tailing fractions showed that the agglomerates and tailings contained coarser and finer particles than the particles of the corresponding feed. However, the amounts of particles under 0.8 μm in the agglomerate fractions were higher than that of the tailing fractions. Variation of the pH of the slurry changed the agglomeration performance. The grade values were 0.78 and 0.72 for the pHs of 3.1 and 11 respectively. The addition of surface active agent (Triton X-100) caused a decrease in the recovery. However, the Triton X-100 in the slurry did not significantly change the grade of the final product.Coal cleaning is the process of removing inert noncombustible mineral matter from the raw coal. There are several coal cleaning techniques including froth flotation, gravity-based separation and spherical oil agglomeration. In the froth flotation, the hydrophobic coal particles are removed selectively from suspension in water by attachment to rising gas bubbles In the oil agglomeration or selective oil agglomeration technique, addition of an immiscible liquid to the coal water mixture causes adhesion of the coal particles by capillary interfacial forces. The oil agglomeration process depends on difference between the surface properties of organic and inorganic particles. The carbonaceous constituent of fine coals can be agglomerated from the mixture in the presence of immiscible oils known as collecting or bridgings liquids. Mineral-rich matter normally remains in the mixture and is rejected Several studies have been performed to determine the effects of various parameters on spherical oil agglomeration performance. Major factors controlling the agglomeration process were the particle wetting characteristics, the dosage and type of bridging oils, the type of coal and particle size of the solids Some workers carried out studies to determine the effects of surfactants and air on the agglomeration performance. Higher combustible recovery values were obtained from agglomerates using surfactants This work is part of an on-going programme to remove mineral matter from coal and lignites using different separation techniques. Zonguldak bituminous coal with high ash content was agglomerated to examine the factors affecting the separation of mineral matter from the coal. The factors affecting the performance were the dosage of bridging oil, the solid content of slurry, the agitation rate and time, pH of the slurry and surface active agent. Particle size distributions of some solid fractions: feed coal, agglomerates and tailings were determined to find out the effect of the particle size on the separation performance. Dense medium separation of the same coal was also performed. A Turkish bituminous coal with high ash content from Zonguldak colliery was chosen for the study. The lump coal (run of mine, ROM) was first crushed to less than 5-mm diameter in a crusher. A ball mill was used to achieve further particle size reduction. The milled sample taken from the ball mill was sieved and particles of less than 53-μm diameter were collected and stored in sealed plastic bags. Milling, screening and storing of the coal were dry processes. Proximate analysis of the coal was determined according to the ASTM standards (D 3172-89); the results are given in The particle size distributions of the solid samples were determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Hydro 2000 MU) particle analyser, which is based on the principle of laser ensemble light scattering. The particles were dispersed in a standard laboratory beaker having sufficient amount of distillated water. An ultrasonic probe was used to help disperse samples for 30 s. The particles are introduced to the analyser beam in a sample presentation cell in the optical unit. Diesel oil was used as the bridging agent. Surface active agent used was Triton X-100 (polyethylene glycol A heavy medium mixture with specific gravity of 1.4 g cm Agglomeration tests were carried out in a stainless steel cylindrical vessel (inside diameter: 95 mm and height: 180 mm) with four removable vertical baffles, each being projected 10 mm out of the wall. The agitation vessel was equipped with a high-speed turbine impeller agitator, which was provided agitation with three vertical flat blades on a central vertical shaft. The diameter of the impeller was 50 mm. The distance between the bottom of the mixing vessel and turbine impeller was 12 mm. As a standard experiment, firstly, 270 g of distilled water was poured into the agglomeration vessel to prevent the dry coal feed sticking to the bottom and walls of the vessel. Water in the vessel was agitated at low agitation speed (≈1200 rpm) by the impeller. The 30-g dry coal sample to be agglomerated was added to the agglomeration vessel using a beaker while the water was being agitated. This operation was performed over a short time period, but was mixed well at 3000 rpm for 1 min to wet the surfaces of the particles. The desired amount of diesel oil was then added in a single dose to the slurry; agitation was continued for a further 3 min. At the end of experiment, the agitator shaft with impeller and the baffles were removed from the vessel and washed with distilled water. It was observed that the agglomerates collected on the surface of the water and the tailings settled to the bottom of the vessel. The agglomerates and tailings in the vessel were poured over a 150-μm sieve to separate agglomerates from water and tailings. A stainless steel cylindrical vessel (inside diameter: 60 mm and height: 100 mm) with a perforated bottom (hole diameter: 0.8 mm, number of holes: 50) was used to wash the agglomerates spread on the sieve. A substantial amount of distilled water (500 ml) was poured to the vessel and passed through the holes to wash the agglomerates, which meant that some mineral matter on the surfaces of the agglomerates were removed to obtain a cleaner product. The agglomerates were transferred to a clean surface and allowed to dry in air for 24 h. The water was finally evaporated to recover the mineral-rich material. Both the agglomerates and mineral-rich material were washed with toluene (20 ml of solvent per gram of solid) to remove diesel oil at room temperature. The oil-free materials, coal and mineral-rich materials, were dried in a vacuum oven at 80±5 °C overnight. The ash contents of the agglomerates and tailings were determined separately to obtain the recovery and grade of the final product and check the ash balances. The grade ( As reported in  A number of agglomeration tests were performed using Zonguldak bituminous coal to investigate the effects of bridging oil dosage, the solid content of slurry, the agitation time and rate, the pH and surface active agent (Triton X-100) on the agglomeration performance. As bridging agent, diesel oil was used to determine the agglomeration performance. The grade and recovery values for the tests performed are shown in Five agglomeration tests were conducted to determine the influence of solid content in the slurry. The agglomeration performance results for the coal are shown in The changes in the grade and recovery may be due to the number of particles in unit volume of slurry. The distance between particles at low solid content is greater than that of higher solid content. Therefore, selectivity increased as solid content decreased. It may be suggested that the number of mineral particles trapped in the spherical agglomerates is lower for low solid content and higher for high solid content. Particle size distributions of the feed coal, the agglomerates and tailings for runs 7 and 11 are shown in This is attributed to ultrafine mineral particles that may be agglomerated with the hydrophobic carbonaceous particles. It is most probable that a considerable amount of the mineral particles less than 0.8 μm size may have been entrapped in the agglomerates. To determine the effects of agitation time and rate on the agglomeration performance of Zonguldak bituminous coal, a number of tests were performed. The tests for the agitation time were conducted in the range of 0.5–10 min. The variation of time in the chosen range did not cause significant changes in the grade and the recovery. The effect of agitation rate on the agglomeration performance was investigated in the range of 1550–3700 rpm. Gradual increases in the agitation rates caused very little changes in both the grade and recovery values. However, The results from a number of tests at different slurries pHs are shown in Particle size distributions of the agglomerates (oil free) for these experiments (runs 24 and 29) were determined. The results are shown in The bulk solid particles consist of fully liberated coal and mineral particles. In addition, partly liberated particles, which contain both coal and mineral portions, might also be in the bulk. The surface charge density of fully liberated coal, mineral and partly liberated particles may be different due to different chemical structures. The particles become more negatively charged with increasing pH of solution The pH of the coal water mixture is a principal parameter controlling the value of the surface charge of the particles Several experiments were conducted to investigate the effect of surface active agent on the agglomeration performance. Triton X-100 (0.005 M) was chosen as the surface active agent. The effect of reagent in the slurry on the agglomeration performance of the coal can be seen from the agglomeration test results presented in In the absence of the reagent, the grade and recovery with 15% diesel oil were 0.69 and 0.98, respectively. The addition of the reagent (0.25 mg/g coal) to the slurry slightly increased the grade. Further reagent addition did not improve the grade of the final product. In terms of recovery, the values decreased from 0.98 to 0.91. The recovery values obtained from this study are different from the results reported in the literature Mineral particles may physically or electrically bind to pure coal particles. The reagent, Triton X-100, helps the liberation of the bound particles. The decrease in the recovery is due to changes in the surface characteristics of the particles. The adsorption of Triton X-100 on the particles may cause to reduce in the hydrophobic character of some particles. It is rather difficult to agglomerate the particles having hydrophilic surface character. Therefore, less hydrophobic particles may have passed to the tailing fractions therefore reducing the recovery. The amount of initial bridging oil is an important factor for the agglomeration performance of Zonguldak bituminous coal. The increase in the dosage of bridging oil, from 5% to 30%, increased the grade values from 0.62 to 0.79 and the recovery values from 0.91 to 0.98, respectively. The increase in the solid content in the coal–water mixture adversely affected the grade of the final product. The decrease in the grade was attributed to large number of particles per unit volume of slurry resulting in the process becoming less selective. The agitation time and rate did not considerably affect the agglomeration performance of the coal. The pH of the slurry changed the grade and recovery values. As the pH of the slurry decreased from 11 to 3.1, the grade increased from 0.72 to 0.78. The selectivity increased with the decrease in the pH of the slurry. The performance of the agglomeration process depends on the pH of the slurry as well as on the other factors. Triton X-100 used as a surface active agent did not practically change the grade of the final product, whereas it decreased the recovery. The decrease in the recovery was attributed the adsorption of the reagent on the solid particles changing the surface properties of the particles. The author gratefully acknowledges that this study was supported by the State Planning Organisation (DPT), Turkey.