Fractures of the tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal are the most common type of fifth metatarsal fractures. This particular fracture usually produces low morbidity and low rates of nonunion when treated nonoperatively. However, on occasion, significant displacement, comminution, or significant intra-articular involvement may warrant operative intervention. Multiple techniques have been described for the operative care of this fracture. We present a somewhat simplified fixation method for displaced fifth metatarsal fractures in a small set of patients who were all followed up to final healing of the fracture.Fractures of the base of the fifth metatarsal are divided into 3 zones. Zone 1 fractures are tuberosity fractures and comprise approximately 93% of the proximal fifth metatarsal fractures. Zone 2 fractures are at the area of the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction and are true Jones fractures. Zone 2 fractures constitute about 4% of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures. Zone 3 fractures are diaphyseal fractures and amount to about 3% of proximal fifth metatarsal fractures. Most tuberosity or base fractures are minimally displaced and are either extra-articular or have limited intra-articular involvement. They are thought to be the result of the pull from either the peroneal brevis or lateral band of the plantar fascia After exemption by the institutional review board, the medical records of the senior author's (J.L.T.) practice were reviewed from February 2008 to March 2011 to find patients who had undergone ORIF of a fifth metatarsal base fracture using 3 0.045-in. Kirschner wires (K-wires; Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) for fixation. Eight patients with 8 fractures were identified. All fractures demonstrated at least 3 mm of displacement. Three fractures demonstrated more than 1 fracture fragment. There were 5 males and 3 females; their age range was 19 to 45 years, with an average of 28.1 years. The interval to surgery ranged from 2 to 14 (average 7.5) days after injury. The follow-up for these patients was 4 to 18 months (average 5.5). Surgery in all patients was performed with the patient in the supine position with the use of a thigh tourniquet and general anesthesia. A 2- to 3-cm incision over the lateral aspect of the base of the fifth metatarsal was used in all patients. The sural nerve or at least 1 of its branches was visualized and properly protected in all patients. Minimal dissection of the peroneus brevis insertion site was performed. The fracture sites were mobilized and irrigated, and the hematoma/clot was removed. A 0.045-in. K-wire was inserted into the main fracture fragment, and, using the K-wire as a “joystick” with the foot everted, the fracture was reduced and the K-wire then advanced into the far cortex of the fifth metatarsal. The use of bone reduction forceps was not necessary. If the fracture demonstrated more than 1 fracture fragment, the larger of the fragments was reduced and fixated first in a similar fashion followed by reduction and fixation of the smaller fragments. Regardless of the fracture pattern, 3 K-wires were used in a crossing pattern. Reduction was confirmed fluoroscopically, as was the proper positioning and length of the K-wires. The K-wires were then cut short below skin level, with care taken to ensure no impingement by the K-wires occurred on the sural nerve or its branches. The patients were immobilized for 1 week of non–weight-bearing in an AO splint, followed by partial weight-bearing in a walking boot for 5 additional weeks. The pins were removed through 1 or 2 percutaneous incisions with the patient under local anesthesia 6 weeks postoperatively. The patients were then allowed full weight-bearing in a rigid-soled shoe for 2 weeks followed by a return to normal shoe wear. Complete fracture healing was seen in all 8 patients by 9 (range 6 to 9) weeks postoperatively. Fracture healing was determined to have occurred when the fracture revealed complete osseous bridging on all 3 radiographic foot views (anteroposterior, medial oblique, and lateral). To date, no refractures have occurred in any of the patients. No postoperative infections developed. One patient complained of pin irritation 4 weeks postoperatively but did not require early pin removal ( Fractures of the fifth metatarsal are frequently seen, with base fractures the most common fracture location. The vast majority of fifth metatarsal base fractures can be treated nonoperatively with predictable satisfactory results. Open reduction and internal fixation is recommended for fractures displaced more than 2 mm or that involve more than 30% of the cuboidal joint Many different forms of fixation have been described when performing ORIF of these fractures. Some methods of fixation, such as plating, can require significant dissection and exposure for hardware introduction and might require eventual hardware removal in an operating room setting The reports of treatment of tuberosity fractures of the fifth metatarsal have mainly focused on conservative treatment. A union rate of 98.8% and high patient satisfaction have been reported. Patients reportedly return to their previous level of function; however, recovery periods of up to 6 months have been noted We present an ORIF technique to treat fifth metatarsal base fractures using 3 crossed 0.045-in. K-wires. This technique has resulted in less surgical dissection of the insertion of the peroneal brevis tendon and less dissection in the area of the sural nerve and its branches than that required with some other fixation methods. This technique also allows for the removal of the hardware in the office or clinical setting. All fractures reported in the present series healed radiographically after this technique, although no computed tomography confirmation was available for any of the fractures. One of the limitations of our study was that it was retrospective with a small number of patients. The surgeon performing the surgery also determined the presence or absence of radiographic healing. Another limitation was that computed tomography was not used to confirm complete fracture healing postoperatively. From our experience in this case series, our technique of ORIF using 3 crossed K-wires achieved complete osseous bridging and thus appears to be a viable treatment option for fifth metatarsal base fractures. This technique could be studied further in a prospective, randomized, controlled study for comparison with other treatment methods.