Human skin is exposed to a large variety of cosmetic allergens. Most allergic contact dermatitis occurs after exposure to fragrance, preservatives, and hair dyes. Such reactions can often be occult. As a result, a high index of suspicion is needed in assessing the patient with facial or cosmetic dermatitis. This contribution looks at why such a large number of chemicals are in everyday usage, at how dermatologists monitor trends in allergy to cosmetics, and at a number of new and emerging allergens to consider in the assessment of suspected cosmetic allergy.Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a T-cell–mediated delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction that occurs upon a specific hapten challenge in previously sensitized individuals. The inflammatory response in classical ACD requires an initial sensitization phase as a result of hapten penetration of the epidermal skin barrier. This is followed by an elicitation phase that is responsible for the recruitment and activation of specific T cells at the site of the hapten skin challenge. The importance of the stratum corneum barrier function, as well as the signalling pathways that allow keratinocyte proliferation and generation of proinflammatory factors, is increasingly recognized. The clinical appearance of ACD can be very similar if not identical to other types of dermatitis. Redness, scaling, and vesiculation can be present, with only the distribution giving a clue to an allergic etiology. Some allergens regularly produce clinically atypical reactions: acute facial swelling due to type IV hypersensitivity to the black hair dye paraphenylenediamine (PPD) is one of the most dramatic illustrations of how facial swelling may not always be a type I reaction. Human skin is exposed to a large variety of cosmetic allergens. Most ACD reactions occur after exposure to fragrance, preservatives, and hair dyes. Such reactions can often be occult. As a result, a high index of suspicion is needed in assessing the patient with facial or cosmetic dermatitis. To improve usability for the consumer, cosmetics often have high water content. This leaves the preparation at a risk of being contaminated by pathogenic microorganisms such as By collating patch test databases, dermatologists can track changes in the incidence of ACD to specific cosmetic allergens. Legislation in Europe or the US restricting or outlawing the use of specific allergens occurs as a consequence of this data; however, it takes some time for these allergies to clinically manifest, so there is a lag period after the introduction of a new preservative and the clinical assessment of the resultant ACD. As the use of a new agent increases, subsequent reports of allergy increase, legislation again decreases its use, and allergy decreases. This process is then repeated all over again for the replacement allergenic cosmetic chemical, a phenomenon known as the Dillarstone effect. Dermatologists respond to this dynamic situation by the addition of emerging contact allergens to standardized patch testing series. In the UK, allergens with an incidence of positive reactions greater than 1% are added to the British Contact Dermatitis Society (BCDS) standard series, to which nearly all patients are tested. Allergens with a lower prevalence of positive reactions (less than 1%) are included in additional specialized and specific series. This contribution reviews important new cosmetic allergens identified in the last few years and also those allergens that have reemerged due to their introduction into modern cosmetic products. We searched Medline from February 1995 to February 2009 using the terms The sulfites are a ubiquitous group of chemicals. Sodium metabisulfite is present in food and drink as a preservative and antioxidant, where it is labelled as E223. Initial investigations of the ability of sulfites to cause skin sensitization were inconclusive. A Danish study in 1992 described 1762 consecutive patients patch tested with sodium sulfite in addition to the standard battery. Although 25 (1.4%) were positive, the authors were frequently unable to elicit a history indicating the clinical relevance of the positive result and therefore did not recommend continued testing. More recently, it has been noted that sodium metabisulfite is present in some ketoconazole-containing products, as well as in Trimovate® and Timodine® creams, Propolis is a resinous substance collected from poplars and processed by honeybees to use as a sealant to maintain the structure of the hive. It is a well-recognized cause of occupational contact dermatitis in apiarists. Dicaprylyl maleate (DCM), also known as dioctyl maleate, is a good example of an emollient and solvent in which original chemical testing indicated that the compound did not cause ACD. Many facial moisturizers, make-up, and hair care products Between 2003 and 2005, 553 patients with a history of facial dermatitis or a possible cosmetic contact allergy were tested to an extended facial/cosmetics series. Benzophenone 4 was one of the allergens, and 2.3% of patients had a relevant positive patch test to benzophenone 4. This prompted the authors to call for inclusion of benzophenone 4 in the facial/cosmetics series of patch test allergens. Considering the ubiquitous occurrence of fragrance materials, the risk of allergy is small. In absolute numbers, however, fragrance allergy is common, The BCDS standard series of allergens contains an original mix of fragrance allergens (Fragrance Mix I) that was introduced in 1977. By the mid-1990s, it became apparent that this mix missed an estimated 15% of fragrance allergies. Lyral (hydroxyisohexyl 3-cyclohexene carboxaldehyde) bears a lilylike odor and is commonly used in deodorant, shampoo, soap, and fine fragrance. Limonene is widely used as a fragrance in cosmetics. It is present as a component of certain essential oils (rosemary, peppermint, lemongrass, lavender, eucalyptus, and caraway) and in tea tree oil. Iodopropynyl butylcarbamate (IPBC) is a biocide originally developed for use in an industrial context, initially in metalworking and subsequently as a wood preservative, where concentrations of up to 4% are permitted. Although IPBC is only thought to be weakly allergenic, it is a small lipophilic molecule that may readily penetrate the skin, Contact allergy is an ever-changing area of dermatology due to the evolving nature of the chemical, and more specifically, cosmetics industry. Links between dermatology and industry have become increasingly important to allow early identification of allergenic compounds and to enable patch testing of chemicals not yet commercially available. Links between dermatologists and legislators have strengthened significantly,