Although coal–gas interactions have been comprehensively investigated, prior studies have focused on one or more component processes of effective stress in driving only isotropic changes in coal permeability. In our previous work (Wu et al., 2009) a general porosity and permeability model was developed to represent the behavior of both the primary medium (coal matrix) and the secondary medium (fractures) under conditions of variable stress. In this study the permeability model is extended to define the evolution of gas sorption-induced permeability anisotropy under the full spectrum of mechanical conditions spanning prescribed in situ stresses through constrained displacement. These models are implemented into a fully coupled model of coal deformation, gas flow and transport in the matrix system, and gas flow and transport in the fracture system. The model separately accommodates compressible gas flow and transport in the coal matrix and fracture systems and rigorously accommodates the role of mechanical deformations for a dual-porosity continuum. Since mechanical interactions and the role of sorption-induced strains are rigorously accommodated, these micro-mechanical models are capable of following the evolution of porosity and permeability in both the coal matrix and the fracture network. This model represents important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects that cannot be recovered where mechanical influences are not rigorously coupled with the transport system. The permeability model for fractures is verified against the analytical solution for a constant volume reservoir and applied to successfully match a suite of field data from the San Juan Basin. The fully coupled model for coal deformation and gas flow has been applied to quantify the impacts of fracture spacing and in situ ground stresses on coal properties and active processes: those involving shrinkage, swelling and direct changes in effective stress. Model results demonstrate the complex interactions of fracture–matrix induced by CBM production.Coalbed methane (CBM) is an important natural energy resource and has grown to supply approximately 10% of US natural gas production ( Different to flow in low-permeability low-porosity formations, such as fractured crystalline rocks, gas flow in unconsolidated materials such as coal is essentially interstitial where flow routes may be rather tortuous. The fractured coal seam comprises both permeable fractures and matrix blocks. Gas flow in such a medium may represent an intermediate characteristic between fracture flow and interstitial flow. Dual-porosity representations ( All of these previous models were developed primarily for the flows of slightly compressible liquids without desorption and not applicable to the flow of compressible fluids such as methane (CH More importantly, coal is highly anisotropic, both in mechanical properties and in permeability. Directional permeability cannot be described using a scalar porosity variable, especially in representing fracture permeability. Gas sorption also has strong anisotropic effects on the coal permeability, especially when boundary conditions are different in each direction ( Correspondingly the response of coalbeds to methane production is crucially controlled by important and strong interactions between coal matrix and fracture as illustrated by In the following, a set of field equations for coal deformation and gas flow are defined. These field equations are coupled through new porosity and permeability models for coal matrix and fractures. These derivations are based on the following assumptions: Coal is a dual-poroelastic continuum. Strains are much smaller than the length scale. Gas contained within the pores is ideal, and its viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. Conditions are isothermal. Compositions of the gas are not competitive, i.e., only one gas component is considered at a time. In the following derivations, the coal is conceptualized as in Based on previous work ( In the coal matrix, the relationship between porosity, permeability and grain-size distribution can be defined as ( Based on this equation, we can obtain The porosity and permeability of the fracture system are controlled primarily by the aperture of the cleats. In order to analyse changes in fracture aperture, we take a representative element volume (REV) from the dual-porosity model as an example. As shown in As shown in There are three kinds of effects that affect coal deformation during coalbed methane (CBM) production: (i) Thermal effects Assuming the volumetric strain of the REV is If the model is constrained on all four sides and the temperature remains constant, the porosity and permeability models can be rewritten as follows: Considering permeability anisotropy, Eq. Dynamic porosity model for matrix Dynamic porosity model for fracture Dynamic permeability model for matrix Dynamic permeability model for fracture We develop appropriate field equations for coal deformation using the usual mechanics conventions: a comma followed by subscripts denotes differentiation with respect to spatial coordinates and repeated indices in the same monomial imply summation over the range of the indices. The governing equation for coal deformation can be presented as The mass balance equation for the gas phase is defined as Substituting the partial derivatives of For the Navier-type equation, the displacement and stress conditions on the boundary are given as In order to verify the model, we develop an analytical model for the case of a constant volume reservoir where the fracture pressure is suddenly lowered to a constant value ( From the porosity and permeability models identified above, it can be seen that the pore pressure in the matrix has the most significant influence on fracture permeability. Therefore, we can consider the change in pore pressure in the matrix in isolation. In order to obtain the analytical solution for the pressure in the matrix, a series of assumptions have been made as follows: The pressure in the fracture remains constant; The porosity of the matrix remains constant; The permeability of the matrix remains constant Based on these assumptions, the governing equation and boundary conditions for gas flow in the matrix can be written as follows: The analytical solution of Eq. The simulation model for the constant volume reservoir is constructed as shown in The comparison of matrix and fracture permeability ratios between simulation and analytical solutions are shown in In the previous section, the dual-poroelastic model has been verified by comparing simulation results with analytical results. In this section, the model is verified against field data as shown in The S&D model can be defined as [ In this study, we have derived the permeability model for the DP system as shown in Eq. As shown in We investigate the dual-poroelastic response of a coal seam to gas production using the simulation model of Appropriate boundary conditions must be applied to this coupled model. For the coal deformation model the left side and base are constrained and in situ stresses are applied to the top and the right side. The ratio of the horizontal in situ stresses is kept as A series of injection conditions as listed in Two simulations were conducted: (1) In   Two simulations were conducted: (1)    A new model is presented to describe the evolution of porosity and permeability in fractured coalbeds infiltrated with gas. Specifically it explores the evolution of sorption-induced permeability anisotropy and uniquely accommodates the full spectrum of mechanical conditions spanning prescribed in situ stresses through constrained displacement. This porosity-permeability model is incorporated into a fully coupled representation of coal deformation and gas flow and transport in the matrix and fracture system. The model separately accommodates compressible gas flow and transport in the coal matrix and fracture systems and rigorously accommodates the role of mechanical deformations for a dual-porosity continuum. Since mechanical interactions and the role of sorption-induced strains are rigorously accommodated, micro-mechanical models are capable of recovering the evolution of porosity and permeability in both the coal matrix and the fracture network. This model represents important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects that cannot be recovered where mechanical influences are not rigorously coupled with the transport system. Based on the model results, the following conclusions are drawn: The new permeability model incorporates the explicit interaction between fracture and matrix. Under conditions of constant reservoir volume, this interaction is controlled by sorption-induced strain alone, and regulated by the two fracture parameters of cleat porosity and the modulus ratio of coal mass modulus to coal-matrix modulus. Under conditions of stress control the differential stress may elevate the gas sorption-induced coal permeability anisotropy. The relations between directional strains and directional permeabilities are valid for the full spectrum of mechanical conditions spanning prescribed in situ stresses through constrained displacement. Successful application of these relations requires that compressible gas flow and transport in the coal matrix and fracture systems, and the role of mechanical deformations for a dual-porosity continuum be accommodated rigorously. Evolutions of both coal properties and process components are controlled by boundary conditions, fracture distributions and the fracture–matrix interactions. Each process affects the initiation and progress of other processes. These important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects have been presented because mechanical influences are rigorously coupled with the transport system. This work was supported by  average length of matrix average aperture of fracture component of the total strain tensor component of the displacement component of the total stress tensor component of the body force total sorption-induced strain Langmuir pressure constant volumetric strain of gas component k universal gas constant absolute temperature normal stress component bulk modulus of coal bulk modulus of coal grains stiffness of coal fracture shear modulus of coal Young’s modulus of coal Young’s modulus of coal grains Poisson ratio of coal Biot coefficient of matrix Biot coefficient of fracture Kronecker delta (1 for gas pressure in matrix gas pressure in fracture gas density vector of Darcy velocity gas source or sink permeability of matrix permeability of fracture dynamic viscosity of gas molar mass of gas density of gas under standard condition coal density porosity of matrix porosity of fracture Langmuir volume constant volumetric strain of coal component of known displacement on the boundary component of known stress on the boundary directional cosine of the vector normal to the boundary initial values of displacement initial values of stresses  initial value of the variable matrix fracture