Surface modifications of titanium (Ti) to improve the potential of implantable materials for orthopedic applications are widely studied. Coating the surface of a biomaterial with graphene oxide (GO) increases the durability of orthopedic implants due to the biocompatibility and antibacterial properties of GO. In the present study, anodized titanium (ATi) was coated with GO via anodization of Ti and anodic-electrophoretic deposition of GO at 200 µg/ml (ATiGO200). Cell culture results suggested that the surface topographic features of ATi and GO coating act synergistically to improve synthesis of the bone matrix and mineralization. Total protein content, calcium deposition, and alkaline phosphatase activity assays confirmed that osteogenic differentiation was improved on ATiGO200. Expression of the bone matrix protein genes (Bglap and Alpl) was upregulated on ATiGO200 during late-stage osteoblast differentiation. Combined anodization of Ti and electrodeposition of GO provides a bioactive surface for osteogenic differentiation to enhance osseointegration of orthopedic implants.Osteopenia, osteoporosis, osteonecrosis, and arthritis are common conditions in an aging population Titanium (Ti) is a lightweight metal that is often used for bone replacement because of its excellent physical, mechanical, corrosion-resistant, and biocompatible properties for bone ingrowth and effective osseointegration at the interface of the implant. A nanoscale roughness of the implant substrate provides higher availability of nucleation sites for bone mineralization Coating Ti with graphene nanomaterials increases the surface area and provides for effective bone regeneration Interactions, such as cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation, between the surface of an orthopedic implant and osteogenic cells are critical for bone growth The Ti samples were cleaned twice with acetone (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 15 min in a sonicating machine (TT230D Powersonic, Crest Ultrasonics, Ewing, NJ, USA). The Ti was etched for 10 s in a mixed acid solution (1:1) of 1.5 wt% nitric acid (Sigma) and 1.5 wt% hydrofluoric acid (Gammaco, Chang Wat Nonthaburi, Thailand) to remove the existing TiO GO solution at a concentration of 1 g/l (Graphene Square) was diluted to 150 and 200 µg/ml using isopropyl alcohol (Sigma-Aldrich). The diluted GO solutions were used as an electrolyte solution with either a Ti or ATi sample as the anode and a platinum coil as the cathode, as described previously X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) is performed to analyze the atomic and molecular structure of a crystal. A D8 Discover XRD System (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) was used at 1°/min to evaluate the surface crystal structure of the Ti, ATi, TiGO150, ATiGO150, TiGO200, and ATiGO200 samples. The radiation wavelength was between ~0.02 and 100 Å and the X-ray beam ranged from 0° to 90°. The GO sample (control for XRD) was prepared by dropping 10 µl of 1-g/l GO solution onto the ATi sample and drying the sample at 28–30 °C. This experiment was performed in triplicate ( X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; AXIS Ultra DLD, Kratos Analytical, Manchester UK) was performed to evaluate the chemical composition and chemical state of the GO-coated surfaces (TiGO150, TiGO200 ATiGO150, and ATiGO200) with the GO as the control. Base pressure in the analysis chamber was ~5 × 10 The water wettability of the samples (Ti, ATi, TiGO150, TiGO200, ATiGO150, and ATiGO200) was evaluated using a contact angle tester (DSA 10 MK2, Krüss, Hamburg, Germany). Approximately 10 µl of distilled water was dropped onto the sample surfaces to evaluate the water wettability using the sessile drop technique. The angle between the water drop and sample surface was measured within 5 s. This experiment was performed in triplicate ( An atomic force microscope (AFM) (SPA-400, Seiko, Japan) was used to analyze the surface topographic features of the Ti, ATi, TiGO200, and ATiGO200 samples using a non-contact mode ( A mouse pre-osteoblast cell line (MC3T3-E1, PN = 20; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) was used. MC3T3-E1 cells were grown in alpha-modified minimal essential medium (alpha-MEM; HyClone, Logan, UT, USA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and 1% antimycotic (Gibco). Osteoblasts were cultured at 37 °C with 5% CO After 48 h of cell-seeding on the samples in the 24-well culture plates, the media were replenished and the samples were washed twice with 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Sigma-Aldrich). Then, an osteogenic differentiation medium comprising 90 vol% alpha-MEM, 10 vol% FBS, 0.1 µM dexamethasone, 10 mM β-glycerol phosphate, and 50 µM ascorbic acid was prepared and added to the samples (Ti, ATi, TiGO150, ATiGO150, TiGO200, and ATiGO200) in the 24-well culture plates, with polystyrene (PS) used as the control. The total protein content, calcium deposition, and ALP activity were evaluated to determine cell differentiation on the samples at 7, 14, and 21 days. Total protein content was analyzed according to the Bradford assay method After culturing the MC3T3-E1 cells in the osteogenic differentiation medium for 7, 14, and 21 days, calcium deposition by the cells onto the samples was assessed. The calcium content analysis was performed according to the Takahashi et al. ALP activity was measured in the cells cultured on all samples in osteogenic differentiation medium for 7, 14, and 21 days. A colorimetric ALP assay kit (ab83369, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) GO, ATi, and ATiGO200 samples were used for the alizarin red S (ARS) staining. The GO sample was a GO-coated tissue culture plate (2 cm GO, ATi, ATiGO200, and PS samples were used in the gene expression study. Expression of genes encoding osteoblast differentiation markers in the pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 cells cultured on the samples was investigated by real-time or quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in 14- and 21-day cultures. Real-time/quantitative PCR starts with RNA extraction and its reversal to complementary DNA (cDNA) using reverse transcriptase in the PCR reaction. Total RNA was extracted from MC3T3-E1 cells using an RNeasy FFPE Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The RNA was reverse-transcribed in a reverse transcription step using an iScript™ Reverse Transcription Supermix Kit (Bio-Rad) with a T100™ Thermal Cycler machine (Bio-Rad) to generate single-stranded cDNA as follows: (1) 25 °C for 5 min, (2) 46 °C for 20 min, and (3) 95 °C for 1 min. The following primers were used: Runx2, Alpl, Bglap, Spp1, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH), which are encoded by Each primer pair was composed of reverse and forward primers. The primers were reacted with cDNA in the qPCR reaction using Luna Universal qPCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs). Real-time PCR was performed using Rotor-Gene Q (Qiagen) as follows: (I) initial denaturation at 96 °C for 1 min, (II) denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 30 s (40 cycles), and (III) melting curve at 60–95 °C in 5 °C steps. Either cycle threshold (Ct) or cycle quantification (Cq) in the Rotor-Gene Q software 2.3.1.49 was used to calculate the gene expression levels, which were normalized to total RNA values. The double-delta Ct analysis (ΔΔCt) method was used to calculate gene expression, and the expression fold-change was used to calculate 2 All experiments were performed in triplicate. Statistical analysis was performed using 1-way ANOVA and Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test. For the ARS staining test and gene expression by PCR, a 2-way ANOVA followed by a post-hoc Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference test was used. All statistical was analyses were performed with GraphPad InStat ver. 6 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) and Minitab® 14 statistical software (Minitab LLC, State College, PA, USA). Data are presented as mean ± standard error of mean. A The results of the XRD analysis of GO (control), TiGO150, ATiGO150, TiGO200, and ATiGO200 are presented in The reduction of GO after electrodeposition was also confirmed by XPS spectroscopy. The results of the fitting analysis of the C 1s XPS spectra are shown in The water contact angle was measured in triplicate ( AFM images of the surface topography differences of the Ti, ATi, TiGO200, and ATiGO200 samples are shown in In the differentiation phase, osteoblast cells regulate mRNA expression for various proteins such as osteonectin, OPN, and OCN. Therefore, total protein content can be correlated with the calcium content and ALP activity to evaluate the efficiency of osteoblast differentiation. The Bradford assay was used to determine the amount of total protein content secreted by the MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblast cells on the samples. Calcium deposition is indicative of mineralized matrix production by osteoblasts. Therefore, the amount of calcium on the samples is evidence of new bone tissue formation. ALP is an important component in bone tissue formation, and is highly expressed during the phase of matrix mineralization. The cell ALP activity levels on the samples at 7, 14, and 21 days of culture are shown in Mineralized matrix formation on the GO, ATi, and ATiGO200 samples was assessed by ARS staining. Calcium deposition in the mineralized matrix by osteoblasts was stained in red, as shown in the optical microscopic images of the staining ( A standard curve method (or Ct method) was used to determine the relative quantification of gene expression. Fold-changes in the gene expression of MC3T3-E1 cells cultured for 14 and 21 days were determined by calculating the ΔΔCt values between the control sample (PS) and the control gene ( GO has carboxyl and carbonyl groups on its edges, and hydroxyl and epoxide groups on its basal planes. When GO reacts with TiO The water contact angle is expected to decrease on the ATi samples after the anodization process because the TiO Bone tissue has a hierarchical structure ranging from microscale to nanoscale. Therefore, to create an osteo-mimetic architecture, both surface topographic features are necessary to promote better bone regeneration Nanotopography without microscale cue on Ti substrate improves early bone formation The surface properties (such as roughness, topography, and wettability) of biomaterials play a major role in osteoblast differentiation through increased protein absorption ALP is an important marker of osteoblast activity during its differentiation. It is well-known that TiO Synergistic promotion of MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblast differentiation by nanocomposites of rGO and hydroxyapatite was previously reported Total protein, calcium deposition, and ALP activity assays were used to determine osteoblast differentiation. The combination of GO coating and ATi significantly improved the total protein content, calcium deposition, and ALP activity on ATiGO200, demonstrating its capability as a bioactive surface for osteogenic differentiation. These findings might be attributed to the improvement of surface topographic features and surface chemistry. The use of ATiGO200 also increased  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Mr. Artit Ramdongbang for preparing the samples for AFM analysis, and the National Advanced Nano-Characterization Center, Thailand, for AFM testing. This work was supported by the