As a first approach, a wire with a single Nb3Al filament has been manufactured to study the rapid heating and quenching parameters. A reel-to-reel continuous rapid quenching apparatus has been designed and fabricated which will be able to produce some hundred meters of wire. The heating temperature is monitored by an infra-red two colours detector. Structural characterization of Nb3Al wires has been investigated by means of X-ray diffraction. Due to the absence of stabilizing Cu, superconducting transport properties were estimated by Bean formula as a function of a background magnetic field up to 10 T, while hysteresis losses were measured by vibrating sample magnetometer facility.The superconducting Nb Mono-filamentary Nb/Al precursor wires have been produced by the jelly-roll method. A simple apparatus for the rapid heating and quenching processing of small wire samples, as well as a reel-to-reel chamber for the production of hundred meters of wire have been built, respectively. The Nb/Al precursor filaments have been fabricated through a jelly-roll process The initial composite, The reduction ratio was of about 4.1×10 For the rapid heating/quenching treatment of longer samples, up to some hundreds of meters, a different apparatus has been designed and fabricated ( The wire is inserted into a vacuum chamber (  Short and long continuously heated samples have been submitted to a full characterization. The resistance vs. temperature curve Magnetization cycles performed by using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) for cycles ±1 T at different Magnetization measurements have been also performed as a function of the sample temperature and reported in From the magnetization loop in These values are about a factor of two less than best results published in literature Results concerning the first attempt to determine the process parameter for Nb First analysis has revealed good structural and superconducting properties. Critical current, as estimated by means of magnetization loop and Bean formula, is less than best results obtained in literature but is still a good starting point to continue wire optimisation. The authors would like to acknowledge P. Gislon for her fruitful advice, U. Gambardella, G. Grimaldi and M. Moroni for VSM measurements.