This work describes a versatile strategy for fabricating highly porous and nanofibrous titania, zirconia, alumina and tin oxide. Taking advantage from chitosan polysaccharide microspheres as nano-assembling system during sol–gel mineralization of monomeric alkoxides and the beneficial effect of supercritical CO2 drying to avoid the collapse of the transient hybrid material network, all targeted metal oxides were created, after calcinations, as fibrous filaments featuring dual meso- and macro-porous network with surface areas ranging from 110 to 310m2g−1. Chitosan alcogels were found to be the best mould for this replication alleviating the problems associated with the rapid kinetic growth encountered with hydrogels and those of diffusion limitations in dried aerogels. From mechanistic point of view, amino-metal coordination NH2
                     →M (M=Ti, Zr, Al, Sn) and hydrogen bonding between hydroxyl group and oligomeric metal oxide play a pivotal role during the mineralization process.A very fundamental principle in nature is close-packed solid-state structures that minimize the “empty space” between atoms. Accordingly, porous structures form only under special conditions that are able to overcome the tendency of close packing. In most cases, porosity is created either by templating strategies or by the use of directional bonding effect Nature offers undoubtedly some basic lessons to construct hierarchical and complex architectures In our attempts to further investigate the potential use of polysaccharide macromolecules in material chemistry, we recently reported the use of chitosan microspheres as porous support for hybrid materials with a special emphasize in catalysis Chitosan (Aldrich high molecular weight <25% acetylation) was used as the polymeric component. Metallic alkoxides [Ti(acac) Nitrogen sorption isotherms at 77 An aqueous solution of chitosan was obtained by dissolving 1 Three TiO The intermediate titania coated chitosan aerogels are then calcined for 6 The titania solution was prepared with Ti(acac) An alcoholic solution of metallic alkoxide was prepared by dissolving 4 During our course to find the optimum conditions for material synthesis, three experiments were performed by impregnation of titanium precursors in the hydrogel (chitosan beads in water), alcogel (chitosan beads in ethanol) and aerogel (dried chitosan beads). The impregnation of titanium alkoxide in the hydrogel results in rapid formation of titanium dioxide in the solution due to the higher reactivity of titanium alkoxide in water. This mineral oxide can not diffuse efficiently in the polymer matrix. After supercritical drying, only 2% of TiO Having optimized the nanocasting of titania species inside of chitosan hollow microspheres, we further investigated the infiltration of other inorganic alkoxide monomers. By the same way, immersion of chitosan alcogel microspheres in a solution of Zr(OBu) The obtained TiO The XRD patterns of the titania based materials These inorganic material networks were then subjected to nitrogen adsorption analysis to evaluate their porosity. For titania based materials, the adsorption isotherms displayed the intermediate between type II and IV, indicating the presence of large mesopores with a size distribution which continues into the macropore domain ( Nitrogen uptake of zirconia The morphology of these inorganic oxide microspheres was investigated by SEM and TEM analysis. SEM analyses show that all inorganic oxides present a network of isolated fibrils which corresponds to the structure of the starting polymer microspheres ( TEM analysis provides additional information in the nanoscale domain. The networks of the materials show several branched filaments ( The involvement of amino groups in the growth of titanium alkoxide was previously reported The variation of the In summary, this work describes a versatile and generally applicable strategy for the preparation of highly porous microspheres with filamentary nanostructures. The production of nanoparticles results from a short nucleation burst followed by diffusional growth of the nuclei around the fibrous polymer matrix. The resulting hybrids (inorganic oxide coated chitosan) were dried by supercritical CO This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 