Experimental investigation was performed on analysis of phenomena and equilibria of liquid–liquid extraction of chromium(III) from alkaline media with trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl). The effect of the presence of selected electrolytes in the aqueous phases was examined. Stoichiometry of chromium(III) complexes in the organic phase and their conditional extraction constants were determined. Ion pair-type complexes, containing mononuclear tetrahydroxochromate(III) anions and trioctylmethylammonium cations, are the prevailing species in the organic phase at initial concentration of extractant exceeding initial concentration of chromium(III). The effects of initial ionic strength of the aqueous phase, aggregation of extractant in the organic phase, and concentration of some electrolytes in the feed solution on extraction equilibria of chromium(III) were estimated. At equilibrium conditions aggregation of TOMA-Cl in the organic phase depends on initial ionic strength of aqueous phase and on initial concentration of extractant as well on equilibrium concentration of chromium(III) complexes in organic phase. Values of conditional extraction constants of tetrahydroxochromate(III) anions decrease with initial concentration of electrolytes in the aqueous phase and with initial ionic strength. Conditional extraction constants also depend on the kind of electrolytes present in the feed aqueous solution and on aggregation of TOMA-Cl in the organic phase. The dependences established on the base of experimental data allow for the estimation of equilibrium concentrations of TOMA-Cl aggregates and conditional extraction constants of chromium(III) (K
                     ex) in studied systems. These dependences are of practical importance because they permit to design the optimal initial conditions for extraction of chromium(III).In recent papers ( The model solutions of chromium(III) were prepared from reagent grade KCr(SO Solutions of trioctymethylammonium chloride (TOMA-Cl) (90% for synthesis, Merck-Schuchardt) in Experiments were carried out at constant volume phase ratio of The distribution of chromium(III) in extraction was determined spectrophotometrically with 1,5-diphenylcarbazide after oxidation of Cr(III) to Cr(VI) with mixture of concentrated acids and KMnO Stoichiometry of chromium(III) complexes formed in organic phase was estimated on the base of results of four series (I–IV) of extraction experiments ( In all experiments chromium(III) was extracted from solutions at initial pH approximately equal to 12.0–12.5. Assuming that anionic monomers Cr(OH) The extraction constant for equilibrium The equilibrium concentration of free quaternary ammonium salt ([R From Eqs. The coefficients ( Correlations established for the extraction series I–IV are straight lines only when Cr(III) is extracted with TOMA-Cl solutions at initial extractant concentrations not exceeding 0.05 M. At higher initial concentrations of TOMA-Cl ( Data from Calculation of initial ionic strength of the feed alkaline solutions of chromium(III) (prepared from KCr(SO From Eqs. The values of It is generally accepted that the increase of concentration of an electrolyte leads to the increase in the ionic strength ( The effect of the ionic strength of the aqueous phase on extraction constant of anions with quaternary ammonium salts was studied by The results of our studies ( Correlation In order to test correlations The final correlations are as follows: The quality of correlations In an ideal system the distribution ratio ( This rule is valid in the studied system of chromium(III) extraction at the initial concentrations of TOMA-Cl up to 0.05 M. At higher concentrations of TOMA-Cl in the organic phase the decrease of distribution ratio of chromium(III) is observed (see These results of extraction of chromium(III) at According to Therefore, we attempted to evaluate the effect of aggregation of TOMA-Cl in the organic phases on equilibrium of extraction of chromium(III) from alkaline solutions. We have assumed that in the studied extraction series (see II extraction series (0.5 M NaOH), experiments 1–4: III extraction series (0.3 M NaOH), experiments 1–5: IV extraction series (0.1 M NaOH), experiments 1–5: Assuming that only monomers of TOMA-Cl participate in extraction of chromium(III), the equilibrium concentrations of TOMA-Cl monomers, [TOMACl] Results of these calculations ( initial concentrations of extractant ( initial ionic strength of the aqueous phases ( equilibrium concentrations of chromium(III) in the organic phases ([Cr] Statistical quality of correlation Dependence From correlation Consequently, the equilibrium concentrations of TOMA-Cl monomers and theoretical conditional extraction constants of chromium(III), The effect of initial concentration of extractant ( It appears that aggregation of TOMA-Cl in the organic phase occurs within whole studied range of initial concentrations of extractant and depends on conditions of extraction of chromium(III). The decrease of the initial ionic strength of aqueous phase leads to a decrease in effective concentration of extractant in organic phase. However, this negative effect can be reduced by an increase in concentration of Cr(III) in organic phase. On the other hand, comparing all series of results at the same initial concentrations of extractant (0.01 M and 0.02 M) the most of aggregates of TOMA-Cl are observed in series I with high initial ionic strength of the aqueous phase but with the least equilibrium concentration of chromium(III) complexes in the organic phase. In all extraction series (I, II, III, IV), the analytical equilibrium concentrations of free TOMA-Cl are higher than its effective equilibrium concentrations as monomers. Consequently, calculated from each series (for the whole range of initial concentrations of TOMA-Cl), the average values of theoretical conditional extraction constants, Therefore, one can conclude that aggregation of TOMA-Cl in the organic phases is a factor affecting extraction of chromium(III) from alkaline solution, especially, when initial concentration of extractant exceeds 0.05 M. However, concentration of aggregates at equilibrium depends on the conditions of extraction and changes according to correlation In recent paper ( Presently, we report a study on the effect of some electrolytes and anions originating from them on extraction equilibrium of chromium(III) from alkaline solutions. The extraction system: chromium(III)–NaOH–TOMA-Cl– In studied system the effect of electrolytes present in aqueous phase on equilibrium of extraction of chromium(III) can be discussed, like the effect of some salts on the yield of extraction of Cr(III) ( competition of anions originating from added salts with tetrahydroxochromate anions in the extraction, increase of total ionic strength of the aqueous phase resulting from an increase in concentrations of salts as well of sodium hydroxide, salting-in or salting-out action of salts added to the aqueous phases. The data in The results in Taking this into account, the values of conditional extraction constants of Cr(III) determined for extraction in the presence of each electrolyte ( Values of  Values of log We have demonstrated that in studied extraction system [chromium(III)–NaOH–TOMA-Cl– Aggregation of extractant in the organic phase changes with conditions of extraction. Equilibrium concentration of TOMA-Cl aggregates increases with the increase in its initial concentration in the organic phase, however, it decreases with the increase in initial ionic strength of the aqueous phase and with increase in equilibrium concentration of chromium(III) complexes in organic phase. The presence of NaCl, NH Established dependences reflect the extent of all effects on equilibrium of extraction of chromium(III). They nicely reproduce values of experimental conditional extraction constants of Cr(OH) The work has been sponsored in part within the grant No. 3 T09B 045 26 of Ministry of Scientific Research and Information Technology (Poland). Professor Witold A. Charewicz is gratefully acknowledged for fruitful discussion on the paper.