Optimum condition for the oxidation and reduction of WC–Co sludge was investigated for a low-cost and environmentally friendly recycling process. Upon oxidation, WC and Co in the sludge were converted to WO2, WO3, and CoWO4. Subsequently, carbon powder was mixed with oxidized sludge. The carbothermal reduction of the mixture of oxidized sludge and carbon powder was carried out in Ar atmosphere. The reduced products were further analyzed using XRD. Based on the XRD analysis and thermodynamic point of view, the possible reactions involved in the carbothermal reduction were proposed. The influence of the carbon mixing ratio and temperature was analyzed.Hard alloys are composite materials consisting of metal-like compounds bonded with a metal or alloy, the base material of which is usually carbide of transition metals Conventionally, grinding WC–Co cermets results in the formation of very fine sludge in the manufacturing process of tools. Hence, many studies have been conducted so far on recycling WC–Co cermets. Lassner and Schubert have reported a detailed review on the different recycling methods for tungsten-containing materials A variety of hydrometallurgical processes have been employed to treat WC–Co cermets scrap. The most common method involves the separation of carbides and metal Co, or oxidation followed by alkali leaching. Subsequently, the impurities are refined, and the valuable elements are extracted from the solution. However, there are certain shortcomings associated with this process, such as formation of coarse carbide powders, origin of environmental problems due to usage of large amount of chemicals, and relatively high treatment cost. Other important recycling processes are the zinc decomposition process and the menstruum process. In the zinc decomposition process, the hard alloy scrap is immersed in a zinc bath in the presence of argon, and the carbide and Co are separated. Subsequently, zinc is removed from the melt by vacuum distillation, which leaves behind the materials containing WC. On the other hand, in the menstruum process, hard alloy scrap is dissolved in a carbon-saturated iron or cobalt melt followed by leaching it with acid. The residues thus obtained are used as the source of reclaimed WC. Nevertheless, these processes require large facilities, which increase the recycling cost. On contrary, the oxidation and carbothermal process is a relatively simple, environmentally friendly, and cost-effective, two-step process. The first step involves oxidation of WC–Co hard material scrap or sludge, and the second step involves a reduction process, wherein the oxidized powder is reduced by the carbothermal reaction. Hence, in this study, we have adopted the oxidation and carbothermal process and analyzed the optimal condition for recycling WC–Co hard metal waste sludge for establishing an eco-friendly life-cycle assessment system for tungsten carbide. The typical process adopted in the present work is described as follows. Recovered WC–Co hard alloy sludge was dried sufficiently and oxidized in air above 973 The composition of WC sludge was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, HORIBA XGT-5000) and the C/S analyzer (LECO, CS 600). The morphology and crystallinity of the sample powders obtained during each step of the process were examined using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. FE-SEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) analyses were performed on JEOL JSM5410. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on Rigaku D-max 2500 using Cu The composition of the WC hard alloy tool sludge was analyzed to be Cr 0.38, Fe 0.24, Co 9.94, W 77.23, C 5.34 and O 6.90 in wt%. The Cr and Fe components are supposed to be the impurities entrained from the manufacturing process, as well as excess carbon which include the particles from grinding tool and oil. The WC hard alloy tool sludge was oxidized in air above 973   Using thermodynamic data, the standard Gibbs free energy for reactions As mentioned earlier in the experimental section, the oxidized powder was mixed with carbon powder, and the resultant mixture was ball-milled for 24     Comparing the shapes of peaks corresponding to WC and Co in the XRD patterns of sludge powder and that recovered by the oxidation and carbothermal reduction process in the present work indicate that very sharp peaks were observed for the recovered powder. This could be attributed to the improved crystallinity and refining effect resulting in removal of impurities such as humidity, oil, and particles from grinding tools. Tungsten carbide sludge collected from the manufacturing process of hard alloy tool contains cobalt, moisture, oil, and diamond particles. In order to get basic information on the recycling of WC and Co metal, the oxidation and carbothermal reduction were made for the tungsten carbide sludge. Upon oxidation, WC and Co were converted to WO This work was supported by the