Natural n-type PbS single crystals have been studied using AFM, STM and STS after long-term oxidation in air at ambient temperatures and extensive etching in aqueous acid solutions, in contrast to previous work devoted to initial corrosion of fresh surfaces. The exposure of PbS to atmosphere at high relative humidity for several days yields widespread loose oxidation products; the process is much slower at low humidity. Surface morphologies diverge after the treatment in 1M perchloric and hydrochloric acid solutions at room temperature and become widely different at elevated temperatures, displaying commonly etch pits up to several micrometers in size and depth along with rather uniformly distributed 20–100nm protrusions of PbS phase. The changes both in topography and semiconducting properties of PbS found by tunneling spectroscopy have been explained in terms of the non-uniform distribution of donor- and acceptor-type defects D+/D− in the metal depleted surface layer, which are generated by chemical reactions and, in turn, determine the rates of the PbS corrosion. In particular, the D− centers exhibit a self-catalyzing effect on the non-oxidative local dissolution of PbS in HCl media, resulting in the deep etch pits.Lead sulfide (PbS, galena) is the major ore mineral of lead and is applied in infrared detectors as a semiconductor with the band gap of about 0.4 A number of researchers employed scanning probe microscopy (SPM) to examine PbS surfaces It is worth emphasizing that the chemical reactions were conducted at room temperature in all the SPM studies cited above, and they mostly dealt with initial stages of PbS corrosion. There is a need, however, to understand longer-term metal sulfide corrosion rather than just initial corrosion of fresh surfaces. In the current paper, we report scanning probe microscopic images and tunneling spectra of natural PbS single crystal surfaces oxidized in air for long periods or substantially modified in aqueous acidic solutions. The images were recorded ex situ in order to conduct the chemical treatment under fairly severe conditions. The acidic etching was found to pattern the reacted surfaces simultaneously in nano- and micrometer scales and to modify semiconducting characteristics, differently in various solutions. These results shed new light on mechanisms of the metal sulfide reactivity and open up possibilities for creation of premeditated surface topographies. Single crystals of natural galena obtained from Geological Museum of Central Siberia had less than 0.1% by mass of metal impurities and no inclusions of other phases. The material was of n-type conductivity with (1–10) AFM, STM and STS investigations were performed at the same specimens using a multimode Solver P47 device equipped with a 14  AFM exhibits some roughening of the terraces, and STM images become noisier over the aerial oxidation. Significant changes in the topography occur at high RH after 1–2 days exposure when protrusions 20–100 Rinsing of the oxidized specimens with water removes most of the oxidation products, but leaves nanometer-scale traces of the accumulations (not shown in figures). All the products actually are not observable in STM images, which are clearer than those from the samples exposed to the humid atmosphere for several days but are still noisy. Previous works Initial stages of the PbS etching in 1 More intensive PbS dissolution eliminates steps and other intrinsic defects and confines the protrusion size within 20–80 PbS surfaces contacted with 1 The PbS etching generally proceeds via the non-oxidative route at elevated temperatures A series of experiments has been performed with HCl solutions containing small controlled concentrations of an oxidizing agent. It was found previously  STS plots given in Tunneling spectra The While inherent defects in original PbS are most likely responsible for the spatially non-uniform corrosion of the material at initial stages It was previously proposed From this standpoint, tunneling spectra obtained in the present research during the long-term exposure of PbS to atmosphere imply the formation first of acceptor-like D The PbS dissolution at room temperature and elevated temperatures, excepting possibly in the HCl We assume that the D It is commonly accepted that both heavily doped crystalline semiconductors and non-crystalline ones have geometrically inhomogeneous distribution of defect densities, resulting in large-scale electrostatic potential fluctuations and rather small deformation fluctuations related to the distortions of chemical bonding The fluctuations of potential and dissolution rate are small if the Fermi level is pinned by the two levels of D The tailoring of metal sulfide surfaces by the simple etch procedure that fabricates simultaneously nano- and micrometer-scale topographic features, well-ordered at certain stages, may be of interest for such applications of PbS and related materials as IR-detectors and sensors. Further research is necessary in order to understand better the mechanisms of both the dissolution and solid state reactions, and to work out techniques forming predetermined patterns. The exposure of PbS to atmosphere at high relative humidity produces protrusions of about 20 This work was supported in part by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project 01-03-32687a.