Arsenic is a penalty element in base metal gravity and flotation concentrates and during beneficiation efforts are often made to reduce its level in concentrates destined for smelting. In some Australian tin and tantalum circuits this arsenic can occur as elemental arsenic, lollingite, or arsenopyrite. A great deal is known about the flotation of arsenopyrite, but little is known about the flotation of lollingite and arsenic. This paper is concerned with the flotation of metallic arsenic with ethylxanthate as a function of pulp pH and pulp potential (Eh). A synthetic mixture of arsenic metal and quartz was used in all tests.
                  Arsenic was found to be strongly floating (up to 95% recovery in 8 min flotation with Aerofroth 65 frother and 40 g/t of KEX) over the pH range 5–10. At more alkaline conditions, the recovery dropped off slowly with increasing pH.
                  At pH 6, arsenic was strongly floating over the pulp potential range +125 mV to +275 mV vs. SHE (Standard Hydrogen Electrode) but exhibited an upper limiting threshold value of about +375 mV vs. SHE. The flotation response dropped off slowly with more reducing conditions below about +125 mV vs. SHE. Here the flotation kinetics were slow. At pH 10, arsenic was found to be strongly floating in the potential range −300 mV vs. SHE up to about +225 mV vs. SHE. Interestingly, no lower limiting potential in the reducing potential range tested (down to −300 mV vs. SHE) was identified. The rate data indicated fast flotation kinetics at pH 10 at potentials less than about +225 mV vs. SHE.
                  At pH 6, little genuine flotation of metallic arsenic in the absence of collector was observed and it appears that metallic arsenic does not exhibit any significant natural flotability as do some other metals.
                  Importantly, the results of this study show that metallic arsenic could potentially be readily removed from base metal concentrates by controlled potential flotation over a wide range of pH values by a simple reagent combination.Arsenic is a penalty element in many base metal concentrates, both gravity and flotation, that are destined for smelting to produce the relevant metallic products. In some Australian tin and tantalum circuits this arsenic can occur as arsenopyrite, lollingite, and native arsenic. One way of removing the arsenic is by flotation, using typical sulphide-type flotation conditions. Whilst the flotation behaviour of arsenopyrite is well documented in the literature (e.g., It was therefore decided to undertake a brief study of the flotation of arsenic metal using CSIRO Minerals' single mineral flotation methodology. This method has been used to define the flotation behaviour of many sulphides, oxides, and metals. The objective of the work reported here was to define the flotation response of arsenic metal as a function of pulp pH and electrochemical potential (Eh), two of the more critical flotation parameters, using standardized conditions and reagents. Arsenic is a Group VA element, and elements in this group (N, P, As, Sb, and Bi) can exhibit metallic characteristics (e.g., Sb), or non-metallic characteristics (e.g., N), or intermediate characteristics (e.g., As). Hence arsenic is variously termed elemental arsenic, a semi-metallic solid, a metalloid, a non-metal with metallic characteristic, metallic arsenic, or arsenic metal. We have used the terms metallic arsenic or arsenic metal in this paper. Experimental work involved the preparation of feed samples (500 g) containing nominally 5% arsenic and 95% quartz, conducting flotation tests under controlled levels of pH and Eh, chemical analysis of feed and flotation test products, and physical analysis of selected test products. The metallic arsenic used in this work was high grade lump material from an unknown source which was available in the CSIRO Minerals chemical store. The lumps were stage crushed to minus 2 mm in a laboratory jaw crusher and riffled into 25 g charges for blending with quartz for flotation tests. Sub-samples were also riffled out and pulverised for chemical and mineralogical analysis. High quality white quartz was obtained locally. This was also crushed in a jaw crusher and then screened into various size fractions. The amount used in each flotation test was 385 g of − The total feed weight for each flotation test was therefore 500 g with a nominal composition of 5% As and 95% SiO For all tests a 500 g charge of the arsenic/quartz mixture was wet ground for 20 min in a closed mild steel ball mill (22.5 cm in diameter by 19.5 cm long) using sixty 25 mm diameter mild steel balls (4 kg in weight) and 250 mL of either distilled water or deoxygenated distilled water. Before each grind the mill and ball charge were cleaned by grinding with quartz and distilled water for 10 min, followed by rinsing with distilled water. For flotation tests conducted below the air-set potential, the grinding mill was purged with nitrogen gas for 5 min prior to the addition of the minerals, and the water added to the mill was deoxygenated distilled water. Flotation tests were conducted over the pH range of 5–12 and the Eh range of − High purity potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX), synthesized from pure ethanol, carbon disulphide, and potassium hydroxide, was used as a flotation collector. A fresh solution of this reagent was prepared each day as a 0.1% w/v solution in distilled water. The frother used was a commercial quality polypropylene glycol (Cytec Aerofroth 65) prepared as a 0.25% w/v solution in distilled water. The flotation gas was either high purity bottled nitrogen or high purity bottled air (a synthetic mixture of oxygen and nitrogen). Either distilled water or deoxygenated distilled water was used to maintain the pulp level in the flotation cell at a pre-set level. Dilute solutions (2.5% w/v) of laboratory grade sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) and sodium dithionite (Na Flotation was conducted in a modified 3 L laboratory stainless steel Denver cell ( For both conditioning and flotation the impeller speed used was 1200 rpm. Air or nitrogen was delivered to the cell at 8 L/min. Frother was added during flotation via a variable speed dispenser. The addition rate was generally 2 mL/min commencing 1 min prior to flotation. For a feed charge of 500 g, an addition of 2 mL of frother was equivalent to 10 g/t. This frother addition maintained a high active froth column that did not limit flotation rates and was similar to rougher flotation in practice. The pH and pulp potential (Eh) were monitored continuously throughout each flotation test. The pH was measured with a Radiometer glass electrode. Before each test the system was calibrated using standard pH 7 and pH 10 buffer solutions. Pulp potentials were measured with a high impedance differential voltmeter using a polished platinum flag electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The performance of the system was checked using a standard ferric–ferrous solution ( Dilute solutions of sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) or sodium dithionite (Na The flotation response for arsenic metal was determined at selected pH values between pH 5 and 12. In addition, the flotation response for arsenic metal was determined at selected Eh values between − The flotation procedure used followed a standard sequence developed in our laboratory, but there were differences for tests conducted above and below the air-set potential. These modifications were necessary to ensure that the oxidising or reducing conditions required during flotation were not compromised by any prior steps such as slurry transfer from mill to cell, or when setting the pulp pH or Eh, or when conditioning the pulp. After the ground pulp was transferred to the flotation cell, the pH and Eh were set to their desired values using the automatic titrators, with the potential being set upscale; that is from reducing to oxidising. Following this a standard addition of 40 g/t of potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX) was made and the pulp was conditioned for 5 min. The required carrier gas (either nitrogen or synthetic air) was then turned on and flotation concentrates were removed over five flotation periods ( For tests below the air-set potential, the ground slurry was transferred from the mill to the cell under nitrogen and a blanket of nitrogen was maintained above the pulp, both whilst the Eh and pH were being set and during conditioning. This helped to minimise exposure to air before flotation commenced. In these tests, nitrogen was the carrier gas during flotation and the make-up water used during flotation was deoxygenated distilled water. For tests above the air-set potential, the flotation feed was prepared in the same way as for tests below the air-set potential, but none of the precautions used to avoid exposure of the pulp to oxygen were taken, and the flotation carrier gas was synthetic air rather than nitrogen. The order of addition of reagents and the conditioning and flotation times remained unchanged. All flotation products were weighed wet to enable calculations of water recoveries, dried in an oven at 60 °C, re-weighed, and prepared in a standard manner for analysis. Analyses conducted included chemical analysis of the minerals used (arsenic and quartz) and test products (concentrates, tailings, and solutions) as well as selected size products, a sizing analysis of ground flotation feed, and an X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the feed minerals. Chemical analyses of dried solid products were done by using an acid microwave digestion of a suitable size sub-sample followed by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Flotation solutions for analysis were obtained by pipetting a 20 mL sample of pulp from the flotation cell, and filtering this sample through a 1.2 μm aperture Millipore filter. The filtrates were analysed by ICP-AES for selected anions and cations. Sizing analyses were done by a standard wet and dry sizing technique using Tyler screens. X-ray diffraction patterns for the arsenic and quartz used in this work were recorded on a Philips PW 1050 goniometer with a PW 1710 diffraction controller using Cu Kα radiation. Phases present were identified by comparison of the peak positions and intensities with data published by the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD). Results of the analyses of the feed materials are discussed first and then the effects of the various variables investigated are considered. An elemental analysis of the feed minerals used in this work is given in However, the value for arsenic of 93.9% As in the metallic arsenic indicates that about 6.1% of the total weight was unaccounted for. Most, if not all, of this material is thought to be oxygen. The XRD pattern of this material showed that arsenic metal was the major phase present with minor amounts of arsenolite (As Elemental distributions by size for a typical ground flotation feed are given in The calculated head for arsenic for the sizing test was slightly lower than the assay head. This is thought to have been caused by dissolution of some of the arsenolite, rather than arsenic metal, in the substantial quantities of water used in wet screening. Further comments on this aspect are given later. A plot, which is not given here, of cumulative weight percent passing as a function of screen size for a sample of flotation feed gave a straight line, as expected, with a The calculated assay of flotation feed samples based on the assays of the arsenic metal and the quartz used in their preparation was 4.70% As and 44.41% Si. The average of the calculated head assays for all flotation tests was 4.46% As and 44.01% Si. As shown later ( As noted above, flotation tailing solutions from three flotation tests (test numbers 1, 8, and 16) were chosen for analysis for selected dissolved species; namely As, Fe, and S, and the results are given in Small amounts of arsenic were dissolved under a range of Eh and pH values. It is thought that this arsenic does not come from the metallic arsenic, as it is insoluble in water or dilute acid or alkali, but from the arsenolite present. Arsenolite dissolves slightly in cold water (1.2 g per 100 mL) ( Small amounts of iron were dissolved from the iron ball mill and grinding media. The form of this iron in solution is unclear, but it does not seem to have affected the flotation of the arsenic in any way. The low level of sulphur (2–3 ppm) in two solutions (tests 1 and 8) is thought to represent a low level of residual xanthate. The higher level in test 16 (125 ppm) probably comes from the reducing agent, sodium dithionite (Na As noted earlier, the pH and Eh were carefully controlled during conditioning and flotation for all flotation tests conducted in this work. The effectiveness of the system used is shown in A typical cumulative arsenic recovery curve as a function of flotation time is shown in The relationship between arsenic metal flotation and pulp pH at natural Eh as a plot of metal recovery over an 8 min flotation period is illustrated in If competition in the pulp between collector and hydroxyl ions for the arsenic metal surface at the higher pH values was the mechanism for this trend, one would expect a much sharper decrease in recovery once the critical pH with ethyl xanthate, as defined by The flotation response for arsenic metal was determined at various Eh values between − Recovery data for arsenic metal flotation after 1 min and 8 min flotation as a function of pulp potential at pH 6 are shown on Recovery data for arsenic metal flotation after 1 min and 8 min flotation as a function of pulp potential at pH 10 are shown in The data indicate that the upper limiting threshold potentials have shifted about 75 mV vs. SHE more positive as the pH drops from pH 10 to pH 6. We have not investigated this further but note that theoretically the threshold potential, which is related to the oxidation potential of the metal, should be dependent on pH. An important finding from the work is the strong flotation of arsenic metal at relatively low reducing potentials. This finding could be useful in other flotation systems where a separation of arsenic metal from other floatable minerals is required. For example, most sulphide minerals exhibit a lower limiting threshold potential for flotation with a thiol collector, whilst some also have an upper limiting threshold potential. The lower limiting potentials, however, are rarely as reducing as − Some minerals, such as native gold ( The data in The key conclusions from this work are, firstly, that metallic arsenic has no natural floatability but that it floats readily (up to 95% recovery in 8 min) over a wide range of pH and Eh conditions with a simple collector such as KEX and a polypropylene glycol frother such as Aerofroth 65. Arsenic floats readily over the pH range 5–10, but recovery drops off slowly with further increase in pH. At pH 6, arsenic metal floats strongly in the pulp potential range of + At pH 10, arsenic metal was found to be strongly floating at all potentials tested up to about + The strong flotation of arsenic metal over such a wide range of conditions indicates that separation of the metal from most base metal concentrates (both sulphide and oxide) should be possible by selecting appropriate pulp chemistry conditions. The authors wish to thank the staff of the CSIRO Minerals Research Resources Group for conducting the many analyses required in this work.