While it is generally accepted that Information Technology (IT) has a self-propagating function which ensures that the more widespread its use, the greater its functionality, its emerging dynamism remains a black box.
                  This paper attempts to shed some light on this dynamism through utilizing monthly trend data for the number of Japan's mobile phone subscribers over the last 12 years. A bi-logistic growth model demonstrating the diffusion trajectory initiated by both generations of mobile phones was constructed, with the goal of identifying the increase in the functionality development in the transition from traditional mobile phones with a simple communication function (1st wave mobile phone) to mobile phones with an Internet protocol function (2nd wave mobile phone).
                  Through an empirical analysis utilizing the bi-logistic growth model, it was determined that the 2nd wave mobile phone emerged at an earlier stage of diffusion trajectory than the 1st stage mobile phone, which enabled a sustainable functionality development in Japan's mobile phones over the decade.
                  Factors governing a dramatic decrease in mobile phones prices were analyzed, utilizing the result of the measurement of functionality development. This led to the discovery that while an increase in functionality development enhanced the price of mobile phones, this increase accelerated self-propagating diffusion, thereby enabling a dramatic reduction in prices through the effects of learning exercise and economies of scale.
                  Based on the foregoing findings, the driving forces of self-propagating functionality development were analyzed, and it was determined that effective utilization of potential resources in innovation (e.g., assimilation of spillover technology and learning effects) is the key driving forces behind self-propagating functionality development.Fixed phones have demonstrated steadily increase in Japan as a fundamental communication mean and their total number of subscribers reached to 61.8 million in 1996 as shown in However, the number of mobile phone subscribers have increased since 1991, and exceeded the number of subscribers in message exchange and fixed phones in 1998. Starting from simple communication function, triggered by i-mode service in February 1999, mobile phones with an Internet protocol service exceeded those of non-Internet protocol mobile phones in 2001. Diffusion of mobile phones can be classified into three stages as summarized in In line with such dramatic diffusion, mobile phones have accomplished successive functionality development Incorporating such functionality development permits expensive handsets in mobile phones diffusion trajectory. At the same time, functionality development stimulates customer's demand leading to rapid increase in number of subscribers. This increase leads to dramatic decline in handsets prices as a result of both effects of learning and economies of scale. Balance between prices increase by functionality development and their decrease by effects of learning and economies of scale has been the driving force behind the growth in mobile phones. Stimulated by these understandings, this paper attempts to analyze the functionality development dynamism in a diffusion trajectory. Epidemic function has been popularly used for analyzing the diffusion trajectories in innovative goods Watanabe et al. In addition, functionality development is enhanced by the learning effect of the market in the long term. Following Arrow's postulate on “learning-by-doing” To date, while a number of studies have attempted to analyze functionality development dynamism in the diffusion process, its mechanism has still remained a black box. This paper, based on the empirical analysis of the diffusion trajectory of Japan's mobile phones development over the last decade and utilizing the bi-logistic growth function, first attempts to develop a numerical function depicting the trend in functionality development in successive innovations. Second, by incorporating this function into a price formation function, governing factors and their magnitude to increase and decrease in price of innovative goods is analyzed. Third, utilizing the result of the price formation analysis, inside the black box of the dynamism of the driving force of mobile phones development is elucidated. Fourth, based on these analyses, sources of self-propagating functionality development in firm's technopreneurial trajectory are identified.  Corresponding to the broad diffusion of mobile phones with an Internet protocol, functionality development in a self-propagating way has been clearly observed. This process can be traced by the logistic growth function within a dynamic carrying capacity. First, the following epidemic function with its carrying capacity This carrying capacity itself enhances in the diffusion process of mobile phones as Synchronizing Eqs. Diffusion trajectory of mobile phones can be estimated by this logistic growth function within a dynamic carrying capacity with self-propagating behavior in their diffusion process as demonstrated in Since the diffusion of IT is induced by the demand to functionality development, this demand terminates at d  As demonstrated in Functionality development (FD) emerges in the market when diffusion reaches certain level and customers share information sufficient enough to eliminate fear of new innovation. Provided that this level is equivalent to one Given this level is where Since the functionality development is the ratio of carrying capacity ( In order to win the race in a competitive market, firms endeavor to develop new innovation which incorporates higher functionality development leading to the successive innovation as series of mobile phones development. Functionality development level in each individual innovation In line with the analytical framework in the preceding section, aiming at analyzing the dynamism of the functionality development trajectory of the successive innovation in Japan's mobile phones development, an empirical analysis by utilizing the bi-logistic growth model as depicted in Eq.  Following Rogers' pioneer work on the innovativeness based on adopter of the categorization The first and the second derivative of two waves of Japan's mobile phones diffusion as demonstrated in  Comparing Functionality development of the 1st wave of mobile phones emerged in July 1996 corresponding to The first wave of mobile phones stagnated from April 1999 corresponding to Functionality development of the 2nd mobile phones emerged in February 1999, 2 months earlier than the timing of inflection points On the basis of the foregoing observations, Functionality development (FD) increases as time Integrating by time  Consequently, functionality development trajectory as demonstrated in  Looking at While functionality stimulates customer's demand leading to a rapid increase in number of subscribers, this increase induces both effects of learning and economies of scale leading to dramatic decline in handsets prices. Thus, factors governing the prices of Japan's mobile phone handsets can be depicted by the following function: By means of the regression analysis, parameters in Eq. Based on this result, factors contributing to change in prices can be identified as summarized in  Balance between increase in prices by functionality development and their decrease in prices by effects of learning and economies of scale induce the driving force of mobile phones development. Since high technology products can be considered as the crystal of technology stock, the epidemic function can be developed incorporating technology stock Taking partial differentiation of Eq. Technology stock Therefore, This is equivalent to the successive FDs (FD Therefore, functionality development generated by assimilating spillover technology is equivalent to those generated by the bi-logistic growth model with This suggests that assimilating spillover technology is essential for self-propagating functionality development in firm's technopreneurial trajectory. In light of the significance of the sustainable functionality development for firms' competitiveness in an information society, functionality development dynamism in a diffusion trajectory was investigated. In this paper, the diffusion trajectories from mobile phones with a simple communication function to mobile phones with an Internet protocol function was first examined for the measurement of the functionality development, using monthly trend data for the number of Japan's mobile phones subscribers over the last 12 years. Factors governing a dramatic decrease in mobile phones prices were analyzed, utilizing the result of the measurement of functionality development. In addition, based on this analysis, the driving forces behind self-propagating functionality development were analyzed. These analyses led to identification of the sources enabling self-propagating functionality development in firm's technopreneurial trajectory. Noteworthy findings obtained include: It was determined that mobile phones with an Internet protocol function emerged at an earlier stage of diffusion trajectory than traditional mobile phones with a simple communication function, This has enabled a sustainable functionality development in Japan's mobile phones over the decade, It was found that while an increase in functionality development enhanced the prices of mobile phones, this increase accelerated self-propagating diffusion enabling a dramatic reduction in prices through the effects of learning exercise and economies of scale, and Effective utilization of potential resources in innovation (e.g. assimilation of spillover technology and learning effects) is the key driving forces behind self-propagating functionality development. These findings suggest the following policy implications suggestive to sustainable functionality development for firms for their competitiveness increase: Earlier undertaking of the new innovation than the preceding one is essential for self-propagating functionality development, Virtuous cycle between functionality development and acceleration of the self-propagating diffusion is essential for gaining profit while decreasing prices, Effective utilization of potential resources in innovation is essential for self-propagating functionality development, and Effective learning and assimilation of spillover technology are thus important for firm's technopreneurial trajectory management. Further works should focus on the in-depth analysis taking institutional factors into the foregoing analyses thereby identify the similarity and disparity of the functionality development dynamism between countries with different institutional systems. Eq. The level of functionality development in the 2nd mobile phones can be computed as follows: Assimilation capacity (See Watanabe et al.  where From Eq. where This is equivalent to the successive FDs (FD Given the logistic growth model, level and timing of inflection in diffusion trajectory can be identified by taking the first as well as the second derivative of the function as illustrated in As postulated by Mahajan et al. Thus, higher level of diffusion accelerated by the innovation enables earlier timing of the emergence of functionality development with higher level as illustrated in Primitive mobile phones emerged in Japan immediately after the start of high speed digital data link service (9600 bps) in April 1995. They disseminated substantially up until the emergence of the short message service (SMS) in June 1997. Their diffusion trajectory can be depicted by the following simple logistic growth function: Therefore, their diffusion trajectory can be identified by means of a regression analysis over the period April 1995–June 1997 as summarized in Table A1 From the estimated logistic growth function, functionality development of Japan's primitive mobile phones can be expressed as follows: Utilizing the estimated logistic growth function, the timing of the emergence of the functionality development which corresponds to the timing of the shift from early adopters to early majority can be identified as December 1995 Therefore, Japan's primitive mobile phones are estimated to emerge in December 1995 with the functionality development level 3.838.