This study investigated the effects of various types of paddles on the oxygen gas holdup in different regions at a temperature of 403 K, oxygen partial pressure of 0.6 MPa, and agitation rate of 500 r/min. The results illustrate that the application of a self-priming agitator can significantly promote a bubble holdup in a solution. Furthermore, experiments determining the effects of the agitation rate, temperature, and oxygen partial pressure on the gas holdup were carried out, where the gas holdup increased from 0.03% to 1.59% with an agitation rate of 200 to 700 r/min, from 0.83% to 1.06% with a temperature of 363 to 423 K, and from 0.50% to 1.27% with an oxygen pressure of 0.1 to 0.8 MPa. The kinetics of oxygen pressure acid leaching of marmatite using various types of paddles were also studied. The activation energies of Zn leaching when using various types of paddles were determined to be 53.23, 56.30, 59.76, and 67.58 kJ mol−1, which shows that the processes were controlled through the surface chemical reactions. Based on a comparison of the activation energies, the self-priming type agitator was shown to be optimal. Finally, a similar criteria relationship of a self-priming agitator was established using the principle of homogeneity and Buckingham's theorem. Comprehensively, an empirical equation of a gas holdup was deduced based on experimental data and a similarity theory, where the criterion equation was determined to beε = 7.20 × 10−10
                     n
                     2.63 T
                     -1.52
                     P
                     g
                     0.45. It can be seen from the formula that the agitation rate has the greatest impact on the gas holdup during the pressure leaching process using a self-priming agitator.Mixing equipment has a long history and is widely used in many applications such as the chemical, pharmaceutical, food, mining, paper, paint, metallurgy, wastewater treatment, and other types of industries ( The pressurized leaching process of marmatite is a typical gas–liquid–solid multiphase reaction system. The oxidation process of marmatite with pressure leaching takes place during the liquid phase ( Owing to the restrictions of the equipment and testing methods, most researchers in this field ( In this work, the gas holdup of a pressure leaching process using various types of paddles was investigated. A comparison of different agitators provides theoretical guidance to the current problem of relatively low oxygen utilization. A transparent quartz autoclave and various types of paddles were used to investigate the mixture conditions of the gas–liquid phase and the bubble behaviors in an aqueous solution under high temperature and high pressure. Obtaining an empirical equation for a gas holdup would be meaningful, perhaps even leading to an improved productivity, enhanced reaction kinetics, and reduced operating cost of the pressure leaching operation. Marmatite was obtained from Kunming, Yunnan, China and the particle size used in leaching experiments was between 48 and 58 μm. The bulk chemical composition as determined by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is given in ICP-MS shows that the samples contained 52.70% Zn, 11.32% Fe, 1.15% Pb, 0.33% In, 33.19% S, and 0.6% Si. XRD analysis shows that the main mineralogical phase in the marmatite is Zn Water model experiments were carried out in a BCFD 2–0.8 transparent quartz autoclave (2000 mL) with a transparent body, circular oil heating attachments, and maximum tolerances to pressure and temperature of 0.8 MPa and 473 K, respectively. The medium was deoxygenated water. Marmatite and acid leaching were carried out in a KCF 02–10 zirconium autoclave (2000 mL), and maximum tolerances to pressure and temperature of 10 MPa and 573 K, respectively. The reaction medium was mixed slurry of sulfuric acid and marmatite. The process of bubble collection was performed by high-speed photography (model LIGHT NING RDT. DRS, USA) at a frame rate of 800 frames per second, and a resolution of 1280 × 1024 pixels. 20 photographs were selected from 800 photographs to mark the number of bubbles, and gas volume can be obtained by using Image-Pro-Plus 6.0 software, then calculated their average value. A special halogen tungsten lamp with a 1300 W was applied as the light source. Photographs of the high-speed photography setup and floodlight are shown in In the water model experiment, a certain amount of deoxygenized water was added to the transparent quartz autoclave and then heated with circulating oil. When the temperature was stabilized at a set value, oxygen flowed into the autoclave, and the initial system was verified to exhibit a steady pressure level. A high-speed camera was used to investigate the bubble behavior at different temperatures, oxygen partial pressures, and agitation rates. The static picture was forward processed using Image-Pro-Plus 6.0 software. A schematic diagram of the experimental procedure is shown in High-speed photographic-image processing technology (in The effects of different paddle types on the gas holdup of oxygen bubbles were investigated at a temperature of 403 K, partial oxygen pressure of 0.6 MPa, and agitation rate of 500 r/min. Photographs of the different paddles are shown in Photographs of the static gas–liquid mixing effect under different conditions are shown in The gas holdup in different regions (A, B, C, and D), shown in Under the experimental conditions of a temperature of 403 K, partial oxygen pressure of 0.6 MPa, the transient photos of bubbles on various agitation rates were subsequently taken by the high-speed camera. Physical photos and information about bubbles were processed by Image-Pro-Plus software. The results of the gas holdup are shown in  The temperature was varied in the range from 363 to 423 K to investigate the effect of temperature on bubble holdup at a fixed agitation rate of 500 r/min and a fixed partial oxygen pressure of 0.6 MPa. The transient photos of bubbles on various temperatures were subsequently taken by the high-speed camera. Physical photos and information about bubbles were processed by Image-Pro-Plus software. As in the previous case, photos were collected, the results are illustrated in The results show that the gas holdup of all type agitators increased with increasing temperature, but the influence on the gas holdup is not obvious. In the temperature range from 363 K to 423 K, the increase amplitude of gas holdup was only 27.29% using self-priming type agitator. Further it can be seen that the self-priming type agitator has a remarkable effect on gas holdup. Given that pressure is a key factor determining extraction efficiency, industrial pressure leaching process are often performed under relative high pressures. Therefore, under the experimental conditions that temperature of 403 K, agitation rate of 500 r/min, the oxygen partial pressure from 0.1 to 0.8 MPa was set to investigate the effect on gas holdup. The results are shown in The results show that the gas holdup of all type agitators increased with increasing oxygen partial pressure. From 363 K to 423 K, the increase amplitude of gas holdup of all type agitators were 115.22%, 34.42%, 0.04% and 6.93%, respectively. The increase amplitude of gas holdup was highest using self-priming type agitator, which was due to working principle of pressure difference. Under the experimental conditions of different agitation rate, temperature and oxygen partial pressure, the gas holdup obtained using self-priming type agitator was much better than other type agitators. Therefore, the working principle, stability, mathematical model of gas holdup and leaching kinetics were investigated with the self-priming agitator. An operational schematic diagram of a self-priming type agitator is shown in The pressurized leaching process of marmatite is a typical gas–liquid–solid multiphase reaction system. An oxygen gas holdup has a close relationship with the residence time of the oxygen and its contact area with the reaction mineral, which are crucial to the leaching of marmatite. A relative vacuum will occur at the vane outlet owing to the high-speed rotation of the self-priming agitator blade, and as a consequence, large amounts of oxygen will be pumped into the aqueous solution through the agitator shaft owing to the pressure difference between the gas inlet and outlet, which increases the residence time of the oxygen and its contact area with the reaction mineral; thus, a self-priming type agitator can be more conducive to a gas–liquid–solid reaction. As shown in On the other hand, to determine the operation stability of a self-priming type agitator, photographs of a static phenomenon at different stirring angles (36–360°) with a temperature of 403 K, partial oxygen pressure of 0.6 MPa, and agitation rate of 500 r/min were taken, and are shown in The photographs shown in It can be seen that there is little difference in the gas holdup among the various angles of the self-priming type agitator, which fluctuated within 0.96%. This shows that the self-priming type agitator has strong stability. The marmatite reacted according to the following chemical equation: The total kinetic equation of the leaching reaction of the solid product layer ( When When When The effects of temperature on the leaching ratios within the range of 363 to 423 K were investigated. Four types of agitator blades were used in the experiments, under a partial oxygen pressure of 0.8 MPa, 120 g L To determine the steps during the leaching process, the Zn leaching ratios were plotted and fitted using a self-priming type agitator, six-bladed disc turbine type agitator, three-bladed push type agitator, and an agitator with three straight blades at different temperatures, as shown in The results in where The activation energies of Zn leaching using self-priming type agitator, six-bladed disc turbine type agitator, three-bladed push type agitator, and agitator with three straight blades were determined to be 53.23, 56.30, 59.76, and 67.58 kJ/mol, respectively. This value clearly confirms that the processes were controlled through surface chemical reactions. Based on a comparison of the activation energies, the activation energy of marmatite leaching is minimized when using a self-priming type agitator, and the leaching reaction becomes less sensitive to temperature. Thus, the self-priming type agitator was optimal. The effects of H  The effects of oxygen partial pressure on different types of agitation are presented under a partial oxygen pressure of 0.8 MPa, 120 g L  Based on the above analysis of the leaching kinetic modeling for Zn leaching using different agitators, the kinetic equation of marmatite dissolution is shown in Eq. (10). The relationships between 1 − (1 − Based on the activity energy, the reaction order, and the previously obtained The experiment results show that the gas holdup ( The agitation rate: The temperature: The oxygen partial pressure: The diameter of the transparent quartz autoclave: The height of liquid level: The density of the gas: The viscosity of the gas: μ The gas-liquid interfacial tension: The density of water: The viscosity of water: μ Parameters To convert the thermodynamic temperature On the basis of the aforementioned analysis, we can use dimensional analysis to construct a general functional form as follows: The variable dimensions are listed in By π-principle analysis, the total number of variables is 11 and the number of independent variables is k = 3, thus, n − k = 8 dimensionless quantities can be set up ( Because Eq. (20) is not equal to 0, For The exponential equation set is obtained as We solve for Similarly, According to the specific circumstances of our experimental study, To obtain the expression for the gas holdup, Eq. (26) can be expressed as an explicit function: According to the established Eqs. (26) and (27), combined with the specific conditions, the specific empirical formula can be derived ( In various phenomena, the criterion equation can be expressed in the form of a power function with the independent variable within a certain range; the result is shown in Eq. (28): With logarithmic operations on the above formula, then Eq. (28) is acquired as follows: The experimental data are listed in On the Basis of the linear relationship of the Eq. (29), fitting was carried out on the data (shown in From Thus, Because the values of The relationship between From After the statistical thermodynamic temperature conversion for the thermodynamic temperature, the criterion equation relationship of gas holdup can be acquired as: The effects of different paddle types on the oxygen bubble holdup were investigated under a temperature of 403 K, partial oxygen pressure of 0.6 MPa, and agitation rate of 500 r/min. The results show that the gas holdup improved with increases in the agitation rate, temperature, and partial oxygen pressure. The gas holdup obtained using a self-priming type agitator is much better than that using other types of agitators, where the gas holdup increased from 0.03% to 1.59% with an agitation rate of 200 to 700 r/min, 0.83% to 1.06% with a temperature of 363 to 423 K, and 0.50% to 1.27% with an oxygen pressure of 0.1 to 0.8 MPa. At different temperatures, concentrations of H A similar criteria relationship was established based on the principle of homogeneity and Buckingham's theorem, and according to experimental data and the similarity theory, an empirical equation for the gas holdup was determined using mathematical methods. The criterion equation was determined as Financial support were provided by the Joint Funds of the