Though many studies pertaining to heap leaching have been carried out to study the reaction kinetics in cylindrical columns, in the scaled up variants the extraction efficiency has not always complemented the laboratory expectations. Since heap leaching is a hydrometallurgical process, the reactions are contingent on the effective interactions between the two main phases (i.e. solid and the fluid). Thus, this work attempts to elicit the understanding of the liquid flow without the focus on the reactions as the prior imparts higher importance. A pseudo 2-D packed bed of 266 mm in length, 200 mm in height and 100 mm in thickness was employed in this work and subjected to X-ray computed tomography (XCT) imaging. XCT is typically used to identify the solid structures in a study specimen. The current study explores the inter-particle flow behaviour and pore networks of two packing types, namely, glass beads and ore particles. The inter-particle flow development at varied flow rates using medical XCT was attempted in this work by the addition of a clinical contrast agent. The same packed beds were subjected to laboratory experiments to determine the respective liquid drainage distributions. The flow model was proposed on a weighted random walk (RW) approach to ascertain the probabilistic behaviour of the gravity dominated flow features in the examined packings using the pore networks inferred from the XCT images. The model was able to generate comparable liquid drainage profiles for the examined packings, though the effect of flow rate was not captured. This approach could be used to specify operational parameters, such as drip emitter spacing, particle size and agglomerate size in heap leaching to enhance the overall extraction of the valuable metal species.Hydrometallurgical techniques rely strongly on the effective interactions between solids and liquids in order to extract valuable metal species from ore deposits. Heap leaching is such a technique employed to extract metals (i.e. both base and precious) primarily from low-grade ore deposits. This method is economically highly desirable due to the lower capital investment requirements. On the other hand, the higher capital investment of the conventional techniques (i.e. flotation followed by smelting) becomes justified in the case of a high head grade. However, certain weaknesses detract from the attractiveness of heap leaching with the most dominant one being the lower metal yield. Surface chemistry, gas transport, particle size distribution and microbial growth are salient parameters in determining the initial heap operational conditions ( Viewed superficially, the process might seem simple, consisting of a crushed or agglomerated ore stockpile being irrigated from the top surface with a lixiviant to facilitate the chemical reactions (e.g. sulphuric acid solution for copper ore and cyanide solution for gold ore). The ore stockpiles are prepared in lifts of 6–10 m high by the use of conveyor belts or dump trucks ( Uniform liquid distribution through the rock mass is a requisite for the enhanced metal extraction ( With regards to producing predictive hydrodynamics tools for heap leaching, many researchers have favoured the uniform material properties (e.g. homogeneous and isotropic) assumption along with a continuum approach (i.e. local variations are discounted but the entire domain properties are considered). Furthermore, the random walk (RW) theory has been employed by many researchers to predict the fluid transport in porous media and it is the simplest of the statistical models of dispersion ( In addition, the preceding discussion on numerical techniques, namely finite element and finite volume fall under direct numerical simulation (DNS) techniques, which are computationally burdensome when the domain becomes larger. In order to deviate from the typical numerical schemes, this study employed an alternative of pore network modelling (PNM) following the accurate realisation of the void structure of the porous medium through XCT. PNM excels over DNS techniques, as it simplifies the study domain to a topologically equivalent pore-throat network with appropriate simplifications ( In the context of heap leaching, XMT or XCT has only been employed to assess the chemical reaction efficiencies ( The experimental setup consisted of a pseudo-2-D Perspex column with dimensions of 266 mm*220 mm*100 mm in length, height and thickness, respectively ( The Perspex column was fitted with 9 liquid outlet ports spaced equally to measure the liquid drainage distribution ( Two distinct packing types were investigated in this study, namely, ore and glass beads. The overall packing material details are illustrated in The glass beads packings were of two sizes, namely, 8 mm and 16 mm particles. These two sizes were selected to be comparable with the two rock packings examined. The 8 mm glass beads matched with the geometric mean size of the ore mixture. Additionally, the 16 mm glass beads packing was comparable with the narrowly-sized fraction ( The application of glass beads circumvents the shape effects and the particle porosity, where the values corresponded to sphericity of virtually 1 (~0.99) and zero for the porosity. On the other hand, the ore particles were slightly porous (~5% estimated porosity) with irregular shapes. Furthermore, the glass beads packings are primarily utilised to study the accuracy of the imaging technique and the model simulations ( The XCT scans were carried out at Sunway Medical Centre (Sun Med), Sunway, Malaysia ( Two types of scans were performed, namely a dry bed and a scan after the liquid was introduced. A liquid distributor was placed on top of the levelled packed bed and the initial scan of the dry bed was conducted. Subsequently, the liquid addition was commenced at 2 L/h for 20 min. The packed bed was expected to approach a pseudo steady state during this time. The flow rate was then adjusted up to 4.2 L/h and the liquid was introduced for another 20 min. These two flow rates were selected to study the inter-particle flow behaviour. Flow paths identification was performed with the help of a clinical contrast agent, namely Gastrografin®. For further details on the flow identification technique, the readers are referred to The medical XCT imaging was comprised of a variety of parameters thus, the ideal selection of them dictates the accuracy of the selection. Two image reconstruction kernels were employed, namely, a bone (Hr69 – high frequency) and a soft tissue reconstruction (Hc40 – low frequency) ( Furthermore, the accuracy of the XCT imaging technique was examined by the use of glass beads with a known size and sphericity. The 8 mm glass beads packing was selected and the results are illustrated in The pore network extraction is performed by watershed segmentation in this study. Extraction of these pore networks is not explicitly elaborated in this work. The interested readers can refer to the studies carried out by For the pore network extraction, this work used the workflow described in The X-rayed packed beds were permitted to dry up sufficiently (5–7 days) to be able to perform liquid flow experiments (i.e. staring from dry bed condition) using a fluorescent dye at the laboratory. The UV experiments used sodium fluorescein dye (2 g/L concentration) mixed into the irrigation liquid. Further details on the UV experiments are discussed in The laboratory UV experiments were also carried out for the same two liquid flow rates (i.e. 2 L/h and 4.2 L/h) as the XCT experiments. In addition, the liquid drainage profiles were recorded continuously for both the liquid flow rates throughout the experimental time span to obtain a global liquid distribution (i.e. liquid distribution at the bottom) for each packed bed. For a given packed bed and flow rate, the inter-particle flow paths in the bed during both XCT tests and UV imaging are assumed to be the same ( Towards greater insights in the nature of the inter-particle flow paths, an RW simulation is conducted based on the extracted pore networks of the respective samples. Many hydraulics and mass transfer processes on pore networks were previously reported by several researchers (e.g.    By superimposing the above-mentioned weighting functions an implicit measure ( The liquid holdup trends for the examined packed beds are presented in The liquid holdup trends of the ore beds are comparable with the ones reported in the literature (i.e. Furthermore, due to the large number of particle contacts in the mixture ore bed (i.e. more capillary held liquid) in contrast to the narrowly-sized ore fraction and the varied porosities of the ore particles, the liquid holdup of the mixture packing portrayed greater values. This is clearly evident from a comparison of intensities in the UV fluoresce images illustrated in The 3-D flow features deduced at the XCT facility are displayed in three distinct views for the two ore packed beds ( The mixture packing ( As the flow rate is increased in the mixture packing, a multiple number of inter-particle liquid formations was visible along with the increased wall flow (highlighted by the white rectangle and arrows). Once the mixture packing results at 4.2 L/h were analysed ( Notably, the continuity of the flow paths is not entirely evident at all instances in the XCT images (e.g. The experimental liquid drainage results presented in According to the presented results in The results also present the effect of the flow rate changes to the global liquid drainage distributions. Although the flow rate effects were pronounced in the local flow path formations ( The corresponding simulated liquid drainage distributions of the investigated packed beds are presented in The probability functions for the liquid drainage distribution obtained from the model were normalized such that the area under the curve equals unity. In contrast, the experimental liquid drainage results were discrete readings at the channel numbers (varying from −4 to +4 with 30 mm distance between two adjacent drainage channels – The RW model correctly predicted the general shape and features of the non-uniform liquid drainage profiles although it should be appreciated that the liquid channelling effects were not entirely accurately emulated. Moreover, the proposed model is not capable of predicting the liquid holdup in the respective packings, due to the limited flow physics incorporated in the model. The inputs for the RW model were the pore network parameters (e.g. throat length, throat radius, pore elevation) of the respective packings. Thus, the results of the devised RW model is only contingent on the voidage distribution of the packings. Furthermore, the results from the RW model is deduced as the steady state flow results. Nevertheless, it is observed that knowledge about the voidage distribution is crucial to predict the extent to which the liquid will be dispersed away from the dripper points in heap leaching systems. Overall, the results indicate the ability of the RW model to predict the flow features of a packing based on the extracted pore networks within certain physical constraints. However, further complexity needs to be amalgamated into the flow model to account for the liquid holdup, flow rates and the initial bed conditions, which will be focused on in a future study. Conversely, the simulation work carried out by Liquid dispersal in heap leaching has been crucial to facilitate mass transfer mechanisms where diffusion via capillary held liquid governs the effective kinetics of the reactions between reagents and mineral grains, whereas active inter-particle flow paths carry the reagents and dissolved species between the rock particles. Since liquid channelling is an inherent property in packed beds pertaining to heap leaching (  The applicability of an XCT image based model to predict the inter-particle liquid flow paths was investigated in this work. Four packed beds were constructed during this exercise, consisting of namely 8 mm glass, 16 mm glass, narrowly-sized ore fraction and mixture packed bed. A medical XCT was employed to provide digital images of these constructed packed beds (i.e. of the order of tens of centimetres). Furthermore, laboratory experiments were conducted to complement the XCT results. The XCT images were employed to extract the pore networks for the respective packed beds and a RW model was devised based on the pore networks. The governing factors for the flow model were identified as throat conductivity (included the radius and the length), throat angle and the pore elevation. The resulting model simulations were able to map the general shape and features of the experimental liquid drainage profiles, though an exact match was not reported. Nevertheless, the results also indicated the importance of a known voidage distribution for liquid flow modelling in heap leaching. Furthermore, the current model overlooks the dynamics of the development of liquid holdup and liquid flow rates, hence only steady state results are currently considered. The authors suggest future pore networks based heap leaching simulations employing these factors to improve liquid drainage distribution results, including liquid channelling predictions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to extend their gratitude to the technical staff at the Sun Med, Radiology Department. The first author gratefully appreciates Janarthanan Supramaniam and Susil Sathasivan for the support provided to conduct the experiments.