During normal operations, the only deposition on a spent nuclear fuel electrorefiner cathode consists of uranium. A computer model, ERAD, was used to simulate conditions under which the electrorefiner salt was progressively contaminated from spent nuclear fuel processing without operator intervention. The model was adjusted to reflect three scenarios: one in which salt removed with every cathode deposit was returned but the UCl3 concentration was never adjusted, one in which the salt was not removed and UCl3 concentration was never adjusted, and one in which the Pu/U ratio in the salt was allowed to reach a value of one before starting the first scenario. Under the base conditions simulated, uranium initially deposits alone but eventually plutonium begins to co-deposit along with uranium. Up to 350g of plutonium was calculated to deposit along with 8.3–9.5kg of uranium. While precise tracking of changes in the salt composition may not be possible, the model was able to identify markers for plutonium deposition by tracking changes in electrode potential. This type of marker should ultimately provide inspectors with more options for situations when they have limited access to electrorefiner data.The recycling of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) is projected to be vital to the long-term sustainability of nuclear power. It not only minimizes the waste that requires special handling and storage, it also reduces the amount of fuel required to operate nuclear power plants, which decreases the need for extraction of uranium ore from mining. One demonstrated method that can be used to recycle SNF is pyroprocessing. Pyroprocessing involves the use of an electrorefiner (ER) with LiCl-KCl eutectic salt as the electrolyte. The electrolyte normally contains about 5 Pyroprocessing for the purpose of recycling SNF was initially researched in the 1980s when Argonne National Laboratory started developing the process for the fuel separation function of the Integral Fast Reactor (IFR) Electrorefining (ER) is at the center of the process and is instrumental for separating actinides from the remaining constituents in spent nuclear fuel. It utilizes a molten LiCl-KCl-UCl It is technically more difficult to recover elementally pure plutonium using pyroprocessing than aqueous separation methods such as PUREX. This is based on the proximity of the free energy of actinide and rare earth chlorides in the molten salt used for electrorefining. The process has always been run in a batch mode of operation in remote equipment located in hot cells. Multi-stage separations are not practical for pyroprocessing compared to the much simpler, ambient temperature liquid extraction steps used in PUREX. Besides elemental purity, another important consideration is isotopic purity. Regardless of which processing method is used, the plutonium isotopic distribution from spent nuclear fuel is not “weapons grade” (93+% Pu-239). Typical spent fuel from a pressurized water reactor would contain 59% Pu-239, 21% Pu-240, 14% Pu-241, 5% Pu-242, and 1–2% Pu-238 ( Another important factor to consider when weighing the importance of applying safeguards to pyroprocessing is the issue of self-protection. Spent nuclear fuel is generally observed to be too radioactive to handle safely. It contains fission products that emit high energy gamma radiation that requires bulky/cumbersome shielding for safe handling. Referring back to Based on above arguments, the importance of having international safeguards in place for non-weapons states that operate pyroprocessing facilities can be considered to be well established. This refers to oversight and inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to verify user declarations and adherence to international treaties. While there currently are no commercial facilities that utilize pyroprocessing, development of effective and practical safeguards methods for this technology should be considered to be a prerequisite for startup of such a facility. Unfortunately, the traditional international safeguards (SG) approach of nuclear material accountancy (NMA) has widely been recognized to be inadequate for pyroprocessing ( Rather than measuring plutonium inventory in various batches of material, output from PM sensors can in theory be used to distinguish between normal and off-normal operations using a proposed system called Signature Based Safeguards ( Much previous work has been published on modeling of spent nuclear fuel electrorefiners, led principally by Argonne National Laboratory, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, and Idaho National Laboratory with significant additions by Korean and U.S. universities ( Outblk2 – Contains wt.% and masses of each element present in the electrolyte. Outblk3 – Contains wt.% and masses of each element present on the cathode. Outcurc – Contains the partial current for each metal and cathode potential. The one input file must be overwritten every cycle to model running of successive batches of spent fuel in a single batch of salt. This is a key functionality to the model used for this study, as there are no known other studies of the effect of sequences of batch operations on electrorefiner products. Every time a run is completed in ERAD, the program also overwrites the output files. Rather than modify the source code for ERAD, a supplemental program was created using MATLAB that allows interaction with ERAD without altering the original code. The MATLAB program is able to call the ERAD function, allow the input files to be edited, and obtain data from the output files. It also allows multiple runs in succession without the user having to manually edit the input file each time and saves copies of the input file and output files in a dedicated folder for data analysis. The model is designed to track data from two sensors – molten salt density and cathode potential relative to a reference electrode. Cathode potential is directly calculated by ERAD and listed in the output file labeled “outcurc”. Based on the input parameters, it assumes a Cl The same model is used at Idaho National Laboratory in its Mass Tracking System ( Under normal operations the electrolyte is not replaced with a new batch after each cycle. Such frequent replacement of salt would be costly, inefficient, and would generate an enormous amount of waste. This means that in subsequent runs, any metals that did not deposit onto the cathode in the previous cycle will be increasingly present within the molten salt. In particular, this means that Pu concentration progressively increases in the salt as PuCl The first scenario that was studied was for the ER to run continuously without cleaning or replacing the electrolyte and with the off-normal condition of not adding more UCl The second scenario is much the same as the first but assumes that some of the electrolyte is lost with each removed cathode. The consequence of this salt not being returned to the salt pool is that the volume of the pool decreases, and that lowers the liquid level of the salt. As the liquid level goes down, the cathode surface area goes down. This has a direct impact on the process, because it is assumed that a constant current is always applied and the operator is not aware that changes are occurring in the cathode area. Therefore, the reduction of the cathode area results in an unreported increase in current density. The change in the volume of the salt pool (ΔV For this simulation, the salt pool container and cathode have radii of r For all calculations reported for this study, MATLAB was used to run ERAD in continuous 20-hour cycles. The composition of the 25-kg uranium SNF sample (anode) remains consistent for all cycles, while the 500 Under the first scenario (S1), five different current values (80, 100, 120, 140, and 160 As described in the modeling section, the density of the salt in the ER was calculated using the additive volumes model calculated with a MATLAB function. ERAD calculates potential of both the anode and cathode at every time increment and writes the data to one of the output files. Electrode potential is relative to a reference electrode, which in experiments is constructed of Ag wire in contact with a LiCl-KCl-AgCl molten salt mixture. This salt mixture is kept from mixing with the bulk liquid in the ER by containing it in a semi-permeable tube made of ceramic or thinned glass. For standardization, the potential scale used in this study is relative to the standard Cl For this same set of simulations, the mass of Pu deposited on each cathode was plotted versus the ratio of plutonium to uranium in the salt (see The regime examined in the first set of simulations is on the low Pu concentration extreme. A case was also considered in which the plutonium chloride concentration had been allowed to increase in the salt to achieve a 1:1 Pu/U ratio. This could happen by running at a lower cell current for many cycles. Rather than run so many cycles to achieve this salt composition, another set of simulations were run in which the Pu/U ratio was initially set to 1:1. The corresponding scenario is S2, and the initial electrolyte composition is reported in the last column of Via trial and error, it was determined that with initial Pu/U in the salt of 1, the Pu deposition required a minimum current of 160 amps. Thus, the simulation was run with the current set to 140 amps. The cathode potential and Pu mass deposited are plotted in The cathode potential is at −2.95 The original off-normal scenario (S1) was then modified to account for loss of salt from the ER after each cathode deposit. This is referred to as Scenario 3 (S3). This used the same initial conditions as given in As with the S1 scenario, the density decreases linearly as shown in When comparing the cathode potential data from Scenario 1 (S1) and Scenario 3 (S3) in The ERAD electrorefiner model has been enhanced to include models of sensors to calculate density and cathode potential in addition to providing the option to run any number of batches of fuel in succession with updated salt composition. Several simulations of off-normal electrorefining conditions have been performed to assess the usefulness of these sensors for detecting these conditions that can lead to Pu deposition on the cathode. It is clear from these simulations that the declining UCl Detection of Pu deposition on the cathode is key in order to develop a functional safeguards approach that does not solely rely upon nuclear material accountancy. Density of the salt changes slightly due to depletion of UCl The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge valuable discussions on pyroprocessing safeguards with Prof. Ed Blandford (University of New Mexico), Prof. Ed Arthur (University of New Mexico), and Prof. Man Sung Yim (Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology). We also acknowledge the invaluable assistance provided by Riley Cumberland (Oak Ridge National Laboratory) for troubleshooting the ERAD program.