Fault zone structure and permeability data from the Median Tectonic Line (MTL) in Mie Prefecture, Southwest Japan suggest that fault permeability models are currently too simplistic for such large structurally complex fault zones. Ryoke Belt mylonites are cut by mineralised brittle structures up to 300m North of the MTL that show evidence of fluid circulation. The Sambagawa schist on the south side of the MTL is deformed into foliated quartz/phyllosilicate gouge across a 15-m-wide zone. The complex fault contact area has foliated cataclasite up to 4m wide, and is cut by a narrow central planar slip zone that probably represents the most recent seismogenic principal displacement zone. Laboratory-determined permeability data show wide variation with fault rock microstructure (e.g. gouge microclast size), controlled by structural position in the fault zone and slip zone intersections. Central slip zone gouges have the lowest permeabilities of all of the fault rocks studied. Fault permeability models should take into account asymmetry where widely contrasting protolith lithologies exist and large permeability variations within a complex central fault zone ‘core’. Pore pressure evolution during rupture propagation may vary greatly because of this complexity, but thermal pressurisation is feasible above certain pressures if the slip remains within fine-grained gouge. The different deformation behaviours of contrasting protolith lithologies control the fault zone fabrics and hence final permeability structure.Fluid flow is an important geological process because it strongly affects metamorphism and deformation processes within the Earth's crust (e.g. Permeability data for fault gouge from the San Andreas fault (e.g. The Median Tectonic Line (MTL) is the tectonic discontinuity separating the Ryoke low-P/high-T metamorphic terrain from the Sambagawa high-P/low-T metamorphic terrain throughout Southwest Japan ( Mylonites exposed on the north side of the MTL consistently show evidence for sinistral shear, which is thought to have predominated from the late Cretaceous to mid-Tertiary (e.g. In the Kii Peninsula ( In western Mie Prefecture ( Mapping at a particularly spectacular outcrop close to the village of Tsukide (‘Moonrise’) shows that the Sambagawa schist has been deformed into black foliated gouge across an approximately 15-m-wide zone ( The central slip zone ( The contact between the foliated cataclasites and the black gouge is not uniformly planar, although for much of the length of the outcrop it is defined by the continuous planar central slip zone. Although narrow central slip zones have been described from other large strike-slip fault zones (e.g. The Ryoke mylonites contain feldspar porphyroclasts that are surrounded by aligned recrystallised quartz (termed ‘s-mylonites’ in Of the Sambagawa-derived gouges, the crenulated gouge within the localised intersection zone of a subsidiary fault and the main fault (close to sampling site 4; An important aspect of the MTL fault gouges described above is the variable proportion and size of microclasts present in the clay matrix. Microclast size distributions in the gouge were examined by particle sieving (minimum measurable size of 32 To summarise these observations of the structural nature of the MTL fault zone ( Permeability was measured using a high-temperature high-pressure deformation and fluid flow gas apparatus. The gas apparatus ( The cylindrical samples of core used for permeability measurement were taken from the outcrops usually by means of inserting 20 Permeabilities were measured at a pore pressure ( In a typical pressure cycling experiment, permeability decreases markedly with increasing confining pressure ( For the Ryoke mylonite-derived fault rocks ( The lowest permeabilities were recorded in mylonites and cemented foliated cataclasites, in the order of 10 The variably fractured mylonites and remaining cataclasites show higher permeabilities of around 10 Artificial fracturing of a sample of fractured cemented ultracataclasite (sample E17) was achieved by subjecting it to an axial stress of 100 Permeability data for the Sambagawa-derived fault rocks and protolith do not show such a clear three-fold division ( The protolith Sambagawa schist and clay gouges of the central slip zone, which have low permeabilities. The foliated gouges and crenulated gouge, which show higher permeabilities than the central slip zone gouge and protolith, albeit very variable. The data show that at confining pressures of 100  The fault gouge samples showed wide differences in both grain size distribution and permeability, in a systematic trend across the fault zone ( At low pressures such as 50 Some previous works have suggested that a negative exponential relationship (constant pressure sensitivity coefficient, The permeability data in The effect on permeability of a change in pore pressure is not necessarily identical to that of an equal and opposite change in confining pressure. In other words, for an effective pressure The previous highest effective pressure can be important in controlling future permeability at lower effective pressures in at least two ways. Firstly, at any given pressure on the deconfining path, the higher the previous peak The Tsukide outcrop of the MTL was excavated by a local government project to a depth of 2–4 The scale problem of using laboratory cores to infer larger scale permeability structure must also be considered (e.g. A summary of the integrated structure and laboratory permeability data ( Relatively unfractured Ryoke mylonites of low permeability. Variably fractured mylonites and cataclasites of very heterogeneous permeability—permeability is high in the fractured/veined rocks, and also in incohesive cataclasites, whereas it is low in cemented fault rocks that have not been refractured. A narrow central slip zone of extremely fine-grained fault gouge of very low permeability, considered to be the most recent principal displacement zone. A 15-m-wide zone of foliated gouge whose foliation-parallel permeability increases steadily as grain size increases from the central zone towards the edge of the fault zone. Metapelitic Sambagawa schist of moderately low permeability, locally increased in isolated minor fault zones even a few hundred metres away. Our laboratory permeability data at room temperature on these fault rocks exhumed to the surface is probably only applicable to fault permeability models in the upper crust ( Fracturing and cataclasis of Sambagawa schist also resulted in enhanced permeability, as evidenced by the high permeability of foliated gouges adjacent to the Sambagawa schist protolith. Finer grain sizes and increased proportions of platey grains increase the efficiency of grain packing, resulting in shear-enhanced compaction and permeability decrease (e.g. The very low permeability of the central slip zone suggests that frictionally heated pore fluids during a rapid slip event may undergo pressurisation rather than be allowed to flow out into surrounding higher permeability rocks in the fault zone. This increase in fluid pressure could cause dynamic weakening by resulting in an effective normal stress decrease, resulting in a large coseismic stress drop ( The presence of many oblique minor faults close to the principal displacement zone suggests that previous fault ruptures had occurred through many different fault rocks within the central core portion of the fault zone. Rates of pore pressure changes in slip zones during earthquakes have been demonstrated in models (e.g. In summary, the general hydrological behaviour of the MTL in the shallow crust may in part be similar to the simple model of Combined structure and permeability data from the MTL show an asymmetric permeability structure in contrast to previous models: On the north side of the fault zone, a variably fractured mylonite zone and cataclasites localised close to the fault contact have highly heterogeneous permeability structure, controlled by degree of fracturing, mineralisation and re-fracturing of cemented fault rocks. On the south side of the fault zone, metapelitic schist suffered fracturing and comminution to produce a foliated gouge. Deformation in the gouge progressively localised towards the centre of the fault zone, resulting in increased comminution and metamorphic generation of clays that lead to a systematic decrease in permeability moving inwards to the centre of the fault zone. Fault zone permeability structure is controlled by the interplay between fracture dilatancy, cementation, shear-enhanced compaction and clay formation. The importance of each of these processes depends very much on protolith lithology and low-grade metamorphic reactions. A well-defined central slip zone of extremely fine gouge appears to have accommodated the most recent seismic slip events, and has the lowest permeability of all the fault rocks measured. For the gouges in general: A good correlation exists for certain pressures between permeability and microclast size distribution in the gouge that may lead to a predictable tool for the permeability of a fixed gouge composition. Both permeability and pressure sensitivity coefficient during deconfinement depend upon the earlier peak An initial analysis suggests that principal displacement zone permeabilities are low enough for thermal pressurisation to be an important dynamic weakening process provided that the gouge had previously been subjected to an effective mean stress in the range 60–120 The Median Tectonic Line has a long-lived history of progressive strike-slip deformation during exhumation generating fault rocks at a variety of conditions. The range and complexity of structural processes affecting fault rock generation and microstructure, and therefore permeability structure, may consequently be larger than for other faults. Within the central ‘core’ zone, lateral continuity is best for the youngest fault rocks in the centre. Geological evidence suggests these fault rocks are the weakest, suggesting weakening in the MTL fault zone with continued deformation and/or exhumation. Their continuity means they have an important impact on hydro-mechanical properties of the fault during earthquake slip. The first author acknowledges the support of a Science and Technology Fellowship from the European Commission. We thank Kanetaka Suwa and Hideo Takagi for introducing us to the spectacular outcrop at Tsukide, which motivated this study, and the latter also thanked for feedback on fabric chronology data. Discussion with Shinichi Uehara, Kazuo Mizoguchi and Takehiro Hirose helped in sampling and undertaking the laboratory measurements. Thorough reviews from Dan Faulkner and David Gray, and the editorial guidance of Jim Evans helped greatly to improve the manuscript.