Producing robust agglomerates with desirable structural properties is key to the success of the heap leaching of complex, low-grade nickel (Ni) laterite ores. The agglomerate microstructure characterization is essential for greater understanding and correlation with its key properties (e.g., porosity, permeability, strength) and performance during heap leaching. In this study, computed X-ray tomography and scanning electron microscopy are used with compressive strength and re-wetting integrity/stability analyses to establish links between Ni laterite agglomerate strength/stability, microstructure (e.g., porosity, inter-particle bridges), formulation of agglomeration medium and granule drying/curing condition. It is shown that both the agglomeration medium (e.g., tap water vs. 30% w/w H2SO4) and agglomerate drying/curing play pivotal roles in structural changes within the agglomerates and hence significantly impact on the agglomerate's physicochemical and microstructural properties. Acidic medium, in contrast to tap water, leads to significant leaching of Ni, Co and gangue from the ore during mixing. Upon agglomerate drying, solidified/crystallized leached species form strong intra-granular solid bridges which lead to greater agglomerate compressive strength. The strength of dry agglomerate is markedly greater for acid- than for water-bound agglomerates at equivalent residual moisture content. Structural stability/integrity of cured agglomerates upon contact with acidic solution, however, decreases dramatically due to greater internal pore volumes and the acid solubility of solid bridges. These findings are useful in shedding more light on agglomerate structure.Heap leaching is used in the mining industry to recover valuable metals such as copper, nickel, gold and uranium from complex, low grade ores, where other conventional hydrometallurgical methods (e.g., atmospheric and high-pressure leaching) are economically non-viable. Producing agglomerates or pellets with desirable attributes (e.g., size distribution, strength, porosity and structural robustness) is a major challenge to successful and efficient Ni laterite heap leaching operations. Structurally strong but porous agglomerates with a size distribution in the range of 5 to 40 Depending upon the ore type and subsequent heap leaching conditions, different agglomeration medium formulations may be used for agglomeration to produce stronger and stable agglomerates. Liquid media act to bind ore particles through liquid film bridges and solid bridges form as a result of chemical reactions involving secondary mineral phase crystallization/solidification of dissolved species. Such solid bridges are likely to improve the agglomerate compressive strength and wetting stability in the more saturated heap than liquid binding forces ( To date, only a limited number of studies dedicated to understanding the key structural properties of Ni laterite ore agglomerates have been reported ( In this paper, the effects of agglomeration medium and post-agglomeration drying on interfacial, microstructural and mechanical properties of Australian, siliceous goethite Ni laterite agglomerates were investigated. Compressive strength and re-wetting stability measurements together with high resolution X-ray micro, computed tomography (micro-CT), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyses were used to reveal the new chemistry within agglomerates, their porosity and strength as well as their absorption of leach solution before and after drying. Polydispersed, − Tap water or 30% w/w H To investigate the effect of the agglomeration medium on the leaching of the ore particles, 60 The micro-CT analysis was conducted on 10–15 Agglomerate stability was estimated via soak–disintegration time tests. Although the soak test does not simulate what happens to agglomerates in the heap under normal irrigation, the disintegration time during the soak test gives an indication of the agglomerate strength when wet. The procedure comprised submerging the agglomerates in pH Strength measurements were conducted by determining the agglomerate fracture stress under compressive load ( For all compressive strength and wetting stability measurements, at least 10 agglomerates, each 10 and 15 In comparison with the feed particles shown in Such new features were not clearly detectable within dry, water-bound agglomerates, as shown in To understand the effect of the agglomeration medium, the leaching behavior of the SG ore was investigated.  The effect of binder composition on compressive strength of wet and dry (air- and oven-dried) agglomerates is indicated in The strength of dry agglomerates was greater than that of wet ones. The drier the agglomerate, the higher is the strength. The strength of wet agglomerates produced with tap water or 30% w/w H After drying at 20 The latter observation, however, is an artifact of the residual moisture in what appeared to be dried agglomerates, which turned out (i) not to be completely dried and (ii) not having the same residual moisture content between those water-agglomerated and those acid-agglomerated. When the moisture content is controlled to be the same, the acid-bound agglomerates are stronger than the water-bound agglomerates, as shown in The soak test data ( For an insight about the microstructure of wet and dry agglomerates, micro-CT images were acquired and analyzed.  Despite full wetting of feed particles with agglomeration medium, there are air-filled pores in the agglomerates immediately after agglomeration. This is mainly attributed to the presence of the air voids between the neighboring, coarse, wet particles. Hence, it is expected that almost all of these pores in wet agglomerates are touching the liquid film. Before drying, acid- or water-bound agglomerates have about the same volume ratio of air-filled pores (A1 vs. B1). This is not unexpected as in both cases; the feed particles are wetted with the agglomeration medium to the same level. After drying, acid-bound agglomerates have fewer pores than water-bound agglomerates because of the (i) precipitation of dissolved species as gypsum and magnesium sulfate in the former and (ii) greater extent of agglomeration medium evaporation (from moisture-filled pores) in the latter (A2 vs. B2). Most important of all, the volume of air-filled pores increased significantly after drying, regardless of the agglomeration medium and despite the shrinkage of the agglomerate volume during drying (A1 vs. A2, and B1 vs. B2). This can be mainly attributed to the replacement of moisture-filled pores in the wet agglomerates with air-filled pores upon moisture evaporation. Although there might be some other explanations for the observed agglomerate microstructural changes upon drying, that there are more pores after drying is a good thing, as it would promote more solution penetration upon re-wetting once the heap is irrigated. As true as this might be, the drying of agglomerates to such conditions is not the reality of current heap leaching operations that practice agglomeration. Current operations stack moist agglomerates and the agglomerates within the bulk of the heap remain moist until irrigation is turned on. It would be a major technological change for future heap leaching operations to dry agglomerate before stacking. The present findings suggest that acid for laterite ore agglomeration not only releases Ni more rapidly, but also appears to improve agglomerate structure that may be conducive to a heap's long-term geotechnical stability. For improved industrial scale heap leaching, more attention will need to be paid to drying conditions to find the optimum agglomerate dryness (e.g., depending on ore mineralogy, binder type, ambient temperature/humidity) for robustness and acceptable permeability. Bulk/structural (SEM/EDX) and micro-CT studies shed light about the agglomerate pore structure. Drying of agglomerates before leaching led to increased agglomerate strength but reduced re-wetting stability in the soak test. We speculate that stronger, dry agglomerates with greater pore volume would allow higher heap height and greater permeability. Drying of agglomerates would be a major technological deviation from current practice. In this paper, the links between Ni laterite agglomerate strength/stability, microstructure (e.g., porosity, intra-particle bridges), agglomeration medium and moisture content were investigated. The results revealed that: Solidification and/or crystallization of leached species during the drying of moist agglomerates agglomerated with acid leads to the development of strong solid bridges between particles and enhanced agglomerate compressive strength. Dry, acid-bound agglomerates displayed significantly greater compressive strength at equivalent residual moisture content than water-bound ones, and only slightly better structural stability when dry agglomerates overwetted. Drying rate of acid-bound agglomerates is slower than that of water-bound ones. To achieve similar dryness, the former needs to be dried either at higher temperature or longer. Drying of agglomerates before leaching leads to greater porosity and permeability mainly due to moisture evaporation. Financial support provided under