The objective of this paper is to study the effect of the properties of masonry buildings on the threshold values of the deflection ratio, which is used to assess the damage category of buildings. Based on the results obtained from a sensitivity analysis, fragility curves are drawn and used to develop a probabilistic approach to help assess the damage for different structure typologies due to ground settlement.
                  The threshold values of the building deflection ratio are primarily empirical. The analytical method of Burland et al. (1977) was used to define analytical threshold values to assess the building damage in relation to the building properties: length L, height H, equivalent Young’s modulus E and equivalent shear modulus G. This paper starts with a comparison of various empirical and analytical threshold values of the deflection ratio. Next, a sensitivity analysis is performed using the analytical method of Burland et al. (1977) and modified by Saeidi et al. (2012) to take into account the anisotropic behaviour associated to the masonry mechanical properties and the existence of openings. The investigated parameters are the E/G and L/H ratios and the position of the neutral axis of the beam simulating the building. The results show a significant influence of the E/G and L/H ratios and suggest defining a range of the threshold deflection ratio associated to different damage categories for different building typologies. Fragility curves are then developed based on the definition of the building typologies. These fragility curves are a useful tool to estimate the probability of reaching each category of damage once the deflection ratio and the properties of the relative structure are determined. To improve their accuracy, several intervals of the properties of the buildings were used to develop these fragility curves. The choice of these intervals to draw the fragility curves was based on various bibliographic studies and numerical studies in the case of E/G and statistic studies in the case of L/H.Many ground movements can occur due to different natural and manmade hazards (subsidence, landslides, consolidation…) and induce a differential settlement of the buildings. As many existing and new recent structures are composed of masonry, this paper focuses on the damage of the masonry buildings caused by such movements. As a result of the differential settlement of the buildings, these masonry structures may be subjected to damage, whose levels may vary from simple cracking to partial or total collapse. The severity of the damage is assessed relative to many parameters noted in terms of the threshold parameters. The damage category may be estimated after the damage occurs in the building using different parameters, such as crack widths. As a consequence, correlations are observed between the damage category and the building movements, as the deflection ratio and some threshold values of those movements may be provided to categorise the damage and qualify the level of damage. These values may then be used to assess the damage due to a predicted future ground movement. However, many different threshold values can be found, and the selection of the good ones for a given building is a challenging problem. The first objective of this paper is to show the consistency of the threshold values of the deflection ratio and to justify some of the relationships used to define the threshold values of this parameter in relation to the building properties. As a consequence, the damage assessment for a given deflection ratio must be seen as uncertain. The problem raised by the uncertainties for the assessment of building damage is addressed in other fields, such as in seismic engineering The methodology developed in this paper is as follows: First, a comparison between the threshold values of the deflection ratio for different damage categories given in the literature is presented to show their consistency. A figure summarising the threshold values of the deflection ratio given by many authors is provided. Next, a sensitivity analysis is performed to highlight the range of variation of the threshold values of the deflection ratio relative to the properties of the structure. The analytical method of Burland et al. Finally, this paper will provide a new diagram of thresholds of the deflection ratio with a wide range of variation, depending on the building properties. The question of uncertainties when assessing the building damage is then addressed. The fragility curves are developed. These curves may then be used for a probabilistic assessment of the building damage category as a function of its deflection ratio. Many authors have studied the subject of the masonry building damage due to ground movements This paper will consider the scale of Burland et al. When settlement occurs, the building represented by AB in Many threshold values of the deflection ratio were provided in the bibliographic references, depending on the type of the building. Mine subsidence engineering  Burland and Wroth Burland et al. Eqs. Burland et al. This section focuses on an analytical method to study the threshold values of the deflection ratio of a masonry building relative to its properties. The analytical study of the paper is based on the method of Burland et al. The sensitivity analysis is based on the variation of the geometric properties (length-to-height ratio, The Young’s-to-shear modulus ratio In addition, because this method uses beam theory, the position of the neutral axis may be questionable. Burland and Wroth  The sensitivity study on the effect of the ratio of the Young’s modulus to the shear modulus The variation of the length to height ratio, The peak point represents the passage between the two critical areas of bending and shear. In The position of the neutral axis has a small influence on the values of the deflection ratio. The neutral axis position mainly affects the position of the maximum peak point of each curve, as noted previously. This result, which shows the effect of the position of the neutral axis on the position of the peak point, can be obtained analytically as well by equating the equations relative to the computation of the deflection ratio in the shear area and the bending area, once for a neutral axis at the bottom of the section of the beam and once for a neutral axis at the middle axis of the beam section. As a result of the sensitivity analysis ( As previously seen, a variability of the damage for the same deflection ratio can be observed. This is the consequence of heterogeneities in the mechanical and geometrical properties of the masonry structures. As a consequence, the damage assessment for a given deflection ratio must be seen as uncertain and fragility curves are an effective way to represent this uncertainty. Such a way was already investigated by Giardiana et al. Consequently, this section presents the methodology followed to draw fragility curves that estimate the probability of a building being classified in a specified category of damage, once the deflection ratio and the building typology are known. After that, a typology for masonry structures is defined in Section Fragility curves provide the probability The development of fragility curves is first based on the definition of a building typology. Each building type must be described over a range of variation of each parameter used in the analytical method. The choice of the range of variation is important because each real building of a given type will eventually be assessed using the same fragility curve. Fragility curves will be developed using Monte Carlo simulations. For a given building type, a set of random theoretical buildings from this type are defined and studied using the analytical method. Because each building is different, each building has a different set of threshold values associated to each damage category. Thus, the fragility curves represent a synthesis of these results. Fragility curves were drawn via the Monte Carlo method using MATLAB software. Four steps were followed to draw the fragility curves for each building type. The first step is to generate randomly, for each combined intervals of  The fragility curves were then drawn for both bending and shear areas. The drawn curves correspond to a neutral axis situated at the middle height of the beam section. This choice is taken because in the sensitivity analysis, the position of the neutral axis only slightly affected the values of the thresholds of the deflection ratio. First, the curves are drawn for the two critical areas of bending and shear, as shown in the example in To develop a building typology, we chose to divide the intervals of For the choice of intervals of Saeidi The partition of the interval of Before explaining the choice of the intervals, this paragraph briefly describes the distinct element method to explain the signification of the shear and normal stiffness of the joints. At each contact between two blocks, the mechanical interaction between blocks is represented by force–displacement relations with normal stress ( Son and Cording From To be more descriptive, we proceed with a study of the choice of the ratio of Ks/Kn to explain its significance. Lourenço The equations provided by Lourenco From Finally, we proposed implementing the intervals of After defining the four cases of masonry buildings, fragility curves are drawn, using the methodology presented in Section Many important findings can be obtained from these fragility curves. These curves allow the visualisation of the probability of being classified in a specified damage category once knowing the values of the deflection ratio of the masonry building (i.e., the differential settlement subjected by the building) and the typology of the building. First, the threshold value of the deflection ratio at which the probability When increasing the ratio For the first two intervals of By increasing the interval of To study the effect of These fragility curves may be compared with other studies that try to relate the effect of the building properties on the damage assessment, and try to study the uncertainty of this assessment. Giardiana et al. Finally, in this paper, we covered a large ratio of building typology allowing the assessment of damage category. First, this paper presented different threshold values of the defection ratio used to evaluate the damage level of the masonry buildings due to differential settlements. Second, to study the variation of the threshold values of the deflection ratio, a comprehensive sensitivity analysis of the effect of the properties of the masonry buildings on this parameter was conducted. The analytical method of Burland et al. The objective of the fragility curves is to provide the probability to suffer a damage category for each building that falls into a given typology developed in this paper, once knowing its deflection ratio. These typologies refer to the geometrical properties of the building (length-to-height ratios from 2 to 8) and the mechanical properties of the building (equivalent ratios of the Young’s modulus to the shear modulus from 2.6 to 52) in relation to the masonry components (blocks and mortar) that govern its mechanical behaviour. From these curves, the minimum value of the thresholds of the deflection ratio to achieve a probability of damage greater than zero (i.e.,