A method of predicting sphere diameter distributions from chord size data is presented and evaluated. This is the probability apportioning method (PAM2) and is significantly improved on a previous presentation. It assumes that the particles or droplets are near spherical and cut randomly by a sensor. For an assumed particle diameter distribution, Bayes' theorem is used to calculate hit probabilities for each particle diameter. The diameter distribution is then recalculated and the process is repeated until there is no significant further change. Using numerical simulations, PAM2 is shown to be quite accurate and robust for a number of different types of size distribution.There are many examples in the process industry where system performance depends upon the size distribution of particles or fluid droplets. For example, in mineral crushing, particle size significantly affects power requirements. In fluidised bed coal combustion, the particle size is critical for fluidisation and reaction kinetics. The performance of two-phase separation equipment and gravity settlers is highly dependent on the droplet sizes present. In the food industry, quality can be significantly affected by particle segregation. Hence, being able to measure or predict such size distributions can be very beneficial. To obtain such data, several different techniques have been developed as reviewed by Simmons et al. An advantage of the majority of the techniques employed is that the droplet diameter distribution is measured directly or can be obtained by analysis. However, these methods can only obtain useful data from dilute systems. Within the oil industry, concentrated oil–water dispersions frequently occur and, hence, it is necessary to measure drop sizes for such systems. The Lasentec backscatter instrument previously mentioned is one of the very few techniques suitable for this task producing distributions of droplet chord lengths for 38 logarithmic size bins from 1.8–1000 μm. Jones and Maxwell In order to compare the Par-Tec results with other measurement techniques, it is necessary to process this chord data. Herringe and Davis This paper follows on closely from our previous work As in the previous paper, we use a numerical simulation of the Par-Tec instrument, developed from an existing particle flow model In this method, we take each chord size detected and then calculate the probability   This method has been improved here by the use of Bayes' theorem for combining conditional probabilities and using an iterative procedure that can approach the true diameter distribution. Lee We have applied this equation here defining For example, we have defined a size range from 0 to 1 with 20 equal-sized diameter bins and 1000 equal-sized chord bins. In all of the DEM simulations, we have used 5000 particles and sampled about 12% with chord cuts. The sample sizes are shown in the figures. The PAM2 algorithm is as follows: Assume a uniform diameter distribution For each diameter bin For each For each For each If the diameter distribution Note that the chord data is the same for each iteration. Only the diameter distribution, This method is not complicated and is stable. It assumes that each particle-detection is independent of all others. It does not suffer from the cumulative errors of the “peeling” method described in A DEM computer simulation has been developed to model the flow of granular materials in hoppers and silos (see for example, The main benefit of this analysis is that we obtain a chord size distribution where we know the actual sphere diameter distribution so we can have a direct measure of how good the methods used here are at estimating the diameter distributions. We can also show how accurate our sample is at representing the overall population. Say we cut 200 particles out of the 5000, then we can compare the diameter distribution of the 200 to the 5000. There are two main cases to evaluate how well PAM2 can calculate the diameter distribution. These are when the particle diameters are known and when they are not known. Let us consider the former case first for a binary distribution. For this scenario, let us say that we know that the diameters of the particles are potentially 0.2 and 0.5, but we do not know the population of each. The DEM simulation is set up with 5000 particles. The first case in The second case in The same cases and samples are now analysed on the basis that we do not know that only particles with 0.2 and 0.5 diameters are present. This is a much more difficult test. The PAM method in our previous paper was very inaccurate in this case. Here, we set up the analysis with 20 equal-sized particle diameter bins between 0.0 and 1.0. The first case in The analysis for the second case of the 80/20 nominal split in We will now look at some examples of general distributions with the general assumption that we know nothing about them except that the particle diameters are in the range 0 to 1. In all cases, we have used 20 equal-sized bins in this range. The DEM simulation was run with 5000 particles in each case, and the sample sizes are about 12–13%. Ten iterations have been used in each case. The figures show the following: Actual — the actual or true distribution of the 5000 particles in the DEM simulation. Sample — the sampled distribution, that is of all those particles which have been cut, normalised by dividing by the diameter. Calculated — the PAM2 calculated distribution after a number of iterations. Chord — the chord distribution by a solid line; note that this should not be compared directly with the diameter distributions.  Very good agreement is shown in Most granular materials follow a log normal distribution more closely than a normal one.  The assumption that the probability of a droplet being cut is directly proportional to its diameter has a very significant affect on the calculated diameter distribution here. This should be carefully considered when analysing results from a sensor. The model calculations seem quite consistent and applicable to real data. It is considered that the sensor accuracy is a more significant limitation. Note that PAM2 uses equal-sized diameter bins. For this sort of data, the results might reasonably be converted into bins with a logarithmic size variation. This would overcome the artefact that the calculated results jump between zero and a number for the larger diameters because the sensor data has been recorded in logarithmic bins. With the logarithmic scale, fewer points are collected at the higher diameters. When transformed onto the linear scale from PAM2 analysis, it gives the appearance that some bins have no droplets. If it were transformed onto a logarithmic scale, this would disappear. The revised PAM, incorporating Bayes' theorem and an iterative procedure, is shown to be an accurate and robust algorithm for predicting diameter distributions from chord sizes. A range of distributions was analysed and the model accuracy was consistent with sampling accuracy in the numerical experiments. The model is applicable where the potential diameters are known, and also when there is no other information on these diameters. There is a significant improvement over the previous method because the chord data is now used in a collective manner rather than each piece in isolation. The model was also successfully applied to real experimental data obtained from a Par-Tec 300C instrument manufactured by Lasentec™. Other statistical techniques should be evaluated especially when the particle packing or droplet flow is dense phase and the assumption of independent measurements is no longer valid. particle (or droplet) diameter representative diameter for bin fraction of particles with a diameter in bin number of diameter bins number of chord cuts probability probability of cutting a particle with a diameter in bin probability of cutting a chord of size in bin chord size The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of BP Exploration and the EPSRC.