The nature of coal and gas outburst involves the gradual damage evolution of gas-containing coal until it becomes suddenly destroyed under the influence of mining. The excavation rate of a working face has an important influence on the mechanical properties of the coal, which are known to be closely related to these disasters. Therefore, based on the mining mechanics path, this study utilized a mechanical testing procedure for gas-containing coal under different loading and unloading rates. Under the conditions of loading axial pressure, and unloading confining pressure (LAUC), the experimental results showed that, when the loading rates of the axial pressure were 0.10 kN/s, 0.14 kN/s, and 0.18 kN/s, the triaxial strength of the coal samples were 37.39 MPa, 39.52 MPa, and 45.68 MPa, respectively, which had increased by 5.7% and 22.2% with the increase in the loading rates. It was observed that the gas flow increased dramatically during the failure stage, and the corresponding increase ranges were more than 4.5 L/min, 1.4 L/min, and 0.3 L/min, respectively. Under the conditions of unloading both the axial and confining pressures at the same time (UAUC), when the unloading rates of the confining pressure were 0.01 MPa/s, 0.02 MPa/s, and 0.05 MPa/s, the coal sample reached a rupture state in a relatively short period of time. Also, the new micro-cracks in the coal samples could not extend or penetrate within a short period of time with the increase in the unloading rates. As a result, the brittle failure of the coal samples were found to be stronger, and the gas flow rates increased to 0.242 L/min, 0.097 L/min, and 0.008 L/min, which indicated that the higher the unloading rate was, the smaller the increase in the gas flow would be. Finally, based on the energy principle, the cumulative dissipation energy was used to define the damage variable of the coal. Then, a damage evolution mathematical model was established on the basis of the logistical equation. It was found that the model could better characterize the damage evolution of the coal, which then provided some theoretical reference values for the prediction of the coal damage. The results of this study potentially provided a design basis for future excavation steps, gas drainage, and outburst prevention measures.Coal and gas outburst is considered to be a typical type of coal-rock dynamic disaster. The nature of this disaster is that gas-containing coal gradually experiences damage evolution until it is suddenly destroyed under the influence of mining process ( In previous related studies ( Previously, great progress has been made regarding the mechanical properties, permeability, and damage monitoring of rock under different mechanics paths. However, there has been few research studies conducted on the damage evolution of gas-containing coal under different loading and unloading rates, especially in the case where both the axial pressure and confining pressure unload simultaneously. In addition, coal is a typical example of a highly heterogeneous material, which contains complex mineral materials linked by a large number of different sized pores and cracks ( In this research study, FLAC3D is used to analyze the change relationship between vertical stress (SZZ) and strike stress (SXX) during the exploration of the #2 coal seam in the Dashucun Mine, at the distance of 30 m, 60 m and 90 m, in order to determine the mechanical path of the experiment. The stress distributions of different mining distance are shown in The coal samples used in this experiment were taken from the #18 coal seam of the Nanshan Mine, which was located in China's Hegang coalfield. The mining depth was 550 m, and the gas pressure was 0.89 MPa. In addition, the permeability was low, and a severe risk of coal and gas outburst was present. Large coal samples were selected from the working face, which were sealed and transported to the research laboratory for cutting, drilling, and grinding. Finally, they were processed into standard sizes with a diameter of 50 mm and length of 100 mm. The coal samples were screened in order to reduce the discreteness of the test results. First, the coal samples with no obvious scarring on the surface were selected through observation. Second, through testing the wave velocity of sound passing through the samples, the coal samples with similar wave velocity were selected to carry out the mechanical experiment. The sound wave testing device is shown in In the equation, In this study, a triaxial servo-controlled seepage device for the heat-flow-solid coupling of gas-containing coal was used for the experimental research. The principle of the test device is shown in First, in order to ensure the sealing in the test process, a layer of silica gel was evenly applied on the surface of selected specimen. When the silica gel was dried and solidified, the specimen could then be installed. Next, the specimen with silica gel was placed on the base, and the side of the press bar with honeycomb holes was placed onto the specimen in order to ensure the alignment of the press bar, specimen and base. Subsequently, the specimen was coated by a heat shrinkable tube with a length of about 165 mm, and heated by a heat gun to cause the heat shrinkable tube to shrink around the specimen. Then, the sealing hoop was used to lock the heat shrinkable tube with the contact section between the press bar and base, thereby further ensuring sealing. Finally, the radial extensometer was installed in the middle of the specimen, as shown in  Design Ⅰ: Mechanics and seepage tests under the conditions of LAUC First, the confining and axial pressures were alternately applied up to 8.0 MPa under the conditions of hydrostatic pressure, and the gas was absorbed into a dynamic balanced state. Then, a force control method was used to load the axial pressure according to the rates of 0.10 kN/s, 0.14 kN/s, and 0.18 kN/s, respectively. Meanwhile, the confining pressure was unloaded at the rate of 0.01 MPa/s, and the test was terminated after the failure of the coal sample occurred. During the test process, the gas pressure was 1.2 MPa, and the confining pressure was greater than the gas pressure. Also, the deformation and seepage rate were measured simultaneously. Design Ⅱ: Mechanics and seepage tests under the conditions of UAUC First, the confining and axial pressures were alternately applied up to 8.0 MPa under the conditions of hydrostatic pressure, and the gas was absorbed into a dynamic balanced state. Second, the axial pressure was loaded to the yield state of the coal sample in which the confining pressure was 8.0 MPa (approximately 75% of the triaxial failure strength). Third, the axial and confining pressures were unloaded simultaneously, and the test was terminated after the failure of the coal sample occurred. The unloading rate of the axial pressure was 0.005 kN/s, and the unloading rates of the confining pressure were determined to be 0.01 MPa/s, 0.02 MPa/s, and 0.05 MPa/s, respectively. During the process of the test, the gas pressure was 1.2 MPa; the confining pressure was greater than the gas pressure; and the deformation and seepage rate were simultaneously measured.   Based on the first law of thermodynamics, the coal body unit (unit volume of the coal) can be regarded as a closed system, without an external energy exchange (  The calculations of The experimental conditions in this paper are a false triaxial test, where It can be obtained from Eq. Eq. The increase in the dissipation energy during the deformation and destruction processes of the coal sample were mainly used for the generation of the internal damage, and the process was irreversible. Therefore, the cumulative dissipation energy could be used to define the damage variable of the coal sample. The expression is shown in Eq.   The damage evolution process of the coal was the result of the continuous competition between the elastic and dissipation energy. During the initial stage, due to the fact that the elastic energy was in an advantageous state, and the dissipation energy was in a disadvantageous state, the damage was at a lower evolution stage. In the middle and later stages, with the coal sample gradually entering the yield state, the advantage of the elastic energy gradually decreased, and the dissipation energy began to change from a disadvantage to an advantage, which resulted in the damage entering a rapid evolution stage. Therefore, the damage evolution process of the coal was in line with the change of the logistical curve equation ( The differential Eq. In this study, based on Eq. In this research study, based on the mining mechanical paths, a mechanical test of gas-containing coal under different loading and unloading rates was performed. The main conclusions which were drawn from this study's results included the following: The test results of the LAUC showed that, when the loading rates of the axial pressure were 0.10 kN/s, 0.14 kN/s, and 0.18 kN/s, the triaxial strength of the coal samples were 37.39 MPa, 39.52 MPa, and 45.68 MPa, respectively, which had increased by 5.7% and 22.2% with the increase in the loading rates. During the failure stage, the gas flow was observed to dramatically increase, and the corresponding increase ranges were higher than 4.5 L/min, 1.4 L/min, and 0.3 L/min, respectively. The test results of the UAUC showed that, when the unloading rates of the confining pressure were 0.01 MPa/s, 0.02 MPa/s, and 0.05 MPa/s, the coal sample reached a rupture state in a relatively short period of time. However, the new micro-cracks in the coal sample could not extend or penetrate within a short time with the increase in the unloading rates. As a result, the brittle failures of the coal samples were stronger, and the gas flow rates increased to 0.242 L/min, 0.097 L/min, and 0.008 L/min. These findings indicated that the higher the unloading rates were, the smaller the increase in the gas flow would be. In this study, based on the principle of energy dissipation, the cumulative dissipation energy was used to define the damage variable, and the damage evolution process was further analyzed. A mathematical model of the damage evolution was established by combining the logistical equation, and the damage evolution results were fitted and analyzed by using a Levenberg-Marquardt and general global optimization method. The fitting process was completed by means of the nonlinear fitting software 1stopt. The fitting results showed that the established mathematical model was able to effectively describe the evolution process of the coal sample. This research study was funded by the Science and Technology Research Program Young Talents Project of the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at