Background
                  The use of less-invasive techniques in the treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures (DIACFs) remains controversial. No prior meta-analysis has considered the influence of differences in the fracture type. Thus, our meta-analysis aimed to investigate the efficacy and safety of minimally invasive (MI) in Sanders type II and III fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A comprehensive search was performed to identify RCTs comparing MI using sinus tarsi approach (STA) or percutaneous reduction (PR) to open reduction (OR) via extensile lateral approach (ELA) from the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase and CNKI. Dichotomous and continuous data were pooled using risk ratio (RR) and mean difference (MD), respectively, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The data were analysed using Review Manager 5.3.
               
                  Results
                  Eight RCTs (495 participants) were selected in our meta-analysis. Based on the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score (AOFAS), both general pooled data and subgroup analysis of Sanders type II fractures indicated that MI improves functional outcomes, while in the Sanders type III subgroup, the advantage disappeared. Additionally, the pooled results showed that MI reduces the rate of wound complications; lowers the VAS score; and shortens the time to surgery, duration of surgery and length of hospital stay. There was no statistical significance with respect to recovery of calcaneus length and width or improvement of Gissane's angle and Bohler's angle.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our meta-analysis suggests that MI and ELA are equally effective treating Sanders type II and III fractures. However, MI is effective in improving the AOFAS score (Sanders type II); reducing the rate of wound complications; and shortening the time to surgery, duration of surgery and length of hospital stay. Keywords: calcaneus fracture; minimally invasive; Meta-analysis.The Sanders classification is often used to categorize the intra-articular calcaneal fractures. Type II–IV fractures are DIACFs and are divided by different articular pieces [ Due to these risks, an increasing number of surgeons have focused on the protection of the soft tissue over the past 20 years. Through the efforts of most orthopaedic experts, some less-invasive techniques were developed as alternatives to ELA, including percutaneous cannulated screws (CS), percutaneous k-wires, percutaneous plate positioning, STA and arthroscopic techniques [ Although several meta-analyses were recently performed to compare MI with ELA for the treatment of DIACFs [ A medline search was performed in the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Embase databases and CNKI up to September 2017. The search terms included ‘calcaneus’ or ‘calcaneal’ AND ‘less invasive’ or ‘minimally invasive’ or ‘mini-incision’ or ‘minimal incision’ or ‘mis’ or ‘sinus tarsi’ or sinus' or ‘Modified Palmer's Approach’ or ‘limited’ or ‘percutaneous’. The references of identified studies were also assessed to seek additional articles. All results were limited by “randomized controlled trials”. We selected studies with the following eligibility criteria: (1) Population: patients with close Sanders type II and III calcaneal fractures or one of them, (2) Interventions: reduction through an MI technique, including STA + plate, PR + CS, STA + CS, longitudinal approach (LA) + plate and LA + CS. (3) Comparison: reduction through ELA with plate fixation, (4) Outcomes: at least one key datum reported postoperatively: wound complications, duration of surgery, time to surgery, length of hospital stay, VAS, function, recovery of calcaneus length or width, improvement of Gissane's angle or Bohler's angle, (5) a prospective RCT, and (6) a minimum of 6-month clinical follow-up. Two authors (ZKZ and YQS) independently evaluated the methodological quality of eligible articles using the Cochrane Collaboration risk assessment tool [ Two reviewers (ZKZ and LMY) independently extracted relevant information from each study: first author, date of publication, sample size, patient's age and gender, follow-up periods, fracture type, and surgical methods (surgical approach and fixation devices). Outcome measurements of surgery included the following: wound complications, duration of surgery, time to surgery, length of hospital stay, VAS score, function, recovery of calcaneus length or width, and improvement of Gissane's angle or Bohler's angle. When the standard deviation was missing, we tried to contact the author for information by email. If not available, the average of other studies' standard deviations were employed based on the Cochrane Handbook [ Review Manager 5.3 was used to analyse the data. Dichotomous and continuous data were pooled using risk ratio (RR) and mean difference (MD), respectively, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Both the Q-test and I A total of 726 articles were selected via the initial database search. After scanning the titles and abstracts, 701 records were excluded. The remaining 25 articles were reviewed in a full-text review; 5 non-RCT studies and 4 RCT studies that were not reports of MI versus ELA clinical trials, as well as 8 RCT studies not excluding Sanders type IV, were excluded from the analysis. Finally, eight studies involving 495 participants were selected for the present study. The literature selection process is shown in Detailed characteristics of the 8 identified RCT studies are presented in All eight studies reported the rates of wound complications [ Regarding the AOFAS score, which was reported in seven studies [ Time to surgery was reported in five studies at the end of follow-up [ Six studies reported the duration of surgery [ Two studies reported the length of hospital stay [ VAS score one day postoperatively was reported in three studies [ The improvement of Bohler's angle was documented in seven studies [ Six of the 8 studies reported the improvement of Gissane's angle [ Reduction of calcaneus width was reported in three studies [ Three of the 8 studies reported the recovery of calcaneus length [ To evaluate the influence of differences in the fracture type on pooled estimates, a subgroup analysis was performed for the AOFAS score. Wound complications were chosen as the index for the sensitivity analysis in the present meta-analysis to estimate the reliability of the results because the information was provided in all eight studies. After each study was excluded individually or sub-analysed, the results of statistical significance were stable. Due to a high degree of comminution, severely damaged articular cartilage and the geometry of the calcaneus, regardless of the type of treatment performed, uniformly poor results presented more frequently within Sanders type IV fractures. Therefore, care should be taken when interpreting the recently published data [ The overall pooled results indicate there is no statistical significance in terms of recovery of calcaneus length, width, Gissane's angle and Bohler's angle. Similar to recently published studies [ The DIACFs had a high wound complications rate after ORIF [ There is no statistically significant difference between the 2 groups with respect to restoring the anatomical structures although some surgeons may worry that it is more difficult to restore the posterior facet when MI is used, and these constructs are often poorly tolerated by patients [ The general pooled data indicated that the MI group was superior to the ELA group in terms of the AOFAS score. However, because two different types of calcaneal fractures were included in most of the studies, the conclusion should be treated cautiously. We cannot simply draw a conclusion that the MI group had a superior AOFAS score compared with ELA group for Sanders type II and III fractures separately. The subgroup analysis revealed that the difference becomes more obvious for Sanders type II fractures, while in the Sanders type III subgroup, the advantage disappeared. In our opinion, it is within reason to conclude that MI improves the function of Sanders type II fractures, which was a major finding of the present meta-analysis. This differs from the opinion of recently published studies [ As mentioned above, both groups had equal effectiveness of anatomical reduction for Sanders type II and III fractures, which could be explained by the application of the principle of ligamentotaxis and percutaneous screw fixation or even the minimally invasive introduction of some specially designed plates. Especially for Sanders type II DIACFs, it is not difficult to achieve accurate reduction and stable fixation via an MI approach. Moreover, minimal soft tissue dissection, reduction of wound complications and less operational scarring by MI will contribute to better postoperative rehabilitation compared with the conventional ORIF group. Consistent with recently published studies [ Inevitably, some limitations exist in our study. First, the overall sample size is not large enough: although the comprehensive search performed in multiple databases, only eight trials were selected. In addition, the sample size of one study was less than 30 patients [ Our findings suggest that MI improves the functional outcomes in treating Sanders Type II DIACFs, and are not inferior to ORIF for Sanders type III fractures, which have significant implications for our clinical practice. Additionally, MI performs equally to ELA + plate in calcaneal reduction while dramatically reducing wound complications and shortening time to surgery, length of hospital stays and duration of surgery. Therefore, percutaneous techniques or combined mini-open if necessary could be recommended for Sanders type II and III fractures, especially for Sanders Type II. However, because of the limitations of the present study, more high quality RCTs that distinguish fracture type and employ consolidated standards to compare minimally invasive with open reduction are needed. The authors declare that there is no competing interests. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. No needed. reviewregistry387. Zhikui Zeng and Youqiang Sun conceived and designed the research; Zhikui Zeng, Lingmei Yuan and Shengpeng Zheng performed literature selection; Zhikui Zeng, and Lingmei Yuan analysed the data; Zhikui Zeng and Feng Huang prepared the paper. Zhikui Zeng accepts full responsibility for the work. We thank all of the clinical researchers and patients involved in the randomized controlled trials selected in our study.