While cooking has long been argued to improve the diet, the nature of the improvement has not been well defined. As a result, the evolutionary significance of cooking has variously been proposed as being substantial or relatively trivial. In this paper, we evaluate the hypothesis that an important and consistent effect of cooking food is a rise in its net energy value. The pathways by which cooking influences net energy value differ for starch, protein, and lipid, and we therefore consider plant and animal foods separately. Evidence of compromised physiological performance among individuals on raw diets supports the hypothesis that cooked diets tend to provide energy. Mechanisms contributing to energy being gained from cooking include increased digestibility of starch and protein, reduced costs of digestion for cooked versus raw meat, and reduced energetic costs of detoxification and defence against pathogens. If cooking consistently improves the energetic value of foods through such mechanisms, its evolutionary impact depends partly on the relative energetic benefits of non-thermal processing methods used prior to cooking. We suggest that if non-thermal processing methods such as pounding were used by Lower Palaeolithic Homo, they likely provided an important increase in energy gain over unprocessed raw diets. However, cooking has critical effects not easily achievable by non-thermal processing, including the relatively complete gelatinisation of starch, efficient denaturing of proteins, and killing of food borne pathogens. This means that however sophisticated the non-thermal processing methods were, cooking would have conferred incremental energetic benefits. While much remains to be discovered, we conclude that the adoption of cooking would have led to an important rise in energy availability. For this reason, we predict that cooking had substantial evolutionary significance.Bacteria Annual number of illnesses [A] Mean body temperature elevation (°C) [B] Mean duration of fever (days) [C] Annual energetic cost of foodborne illness (multiple of daily BMR) [D] Meat Bacteria Samples infected (%) [A] Annual per capita intake (kg) [B] Annual servings [C] Assumed infection rate (%) [D] Annual number of illnesses [E] With respect to energy, the significance of cooking for human evolution has been subject to contrasting interpretations. On the one hand, energetic consequences are often treated as minor. Thus, even anthropologists on the forefront of research on fire and diet commonly propose that the primary effect of cooking is to broaden the diet. For example, On the other hand, cooking is sometimes regarded as “a technological way of externalizing part of the digestive process” that “not only reduces toxins in food but also increases its digestibility” ( Accordingly, such questions as whether cooking consistently improves energy acquisition, and if so how much energy it provides, need to be resolved. Unfortunately, no discipline has paid much attention to these matters. Nutritional scientists have reported numerous energetic effects of cooking. However, many of the effects are in opposite directions, few have been quantified in terms of calories, and there has been virtually no effort to integrate conclusions about the effect of cooking on specific nutrients or through different mechanisms, into an overall picture of its energetic consequences for different food types. Nevertheless, considerable pertinent information is available. In this paper, we review current evidence concerning the effects of cooking on the net energy value of the diet. We consider plant and animal foods separately, since the mechanisms by which cooking influences net energy value differ for starch, protein, and lipid. We define cooking as the use of heat to prepare food. From hunter-gatherers to industrialised society, many plant foods are routinely eaten without being cooked, especially low-starch, high-sugar items such as ripe fruits. For example, among foods eaten by Australian aborigines, the proportion of fruit species that were cooked (sometimes or invariably) was 13.4% ( Humans on vegetarian diets gain more weight and exhibit higher reproductive performance when eating cooked food than raw food. The raw-foodists represented in Evidence of low energy intake in women eating predominantly raw food is supported by their having higher rates of amenorrhea or menstrual irregularities than those eating cooked food. We have found no records of individuals tending to gain weight while eating raw diets, even though the plant foods eaten by raw-foodists are mostly high-quality items such as germinated seeds, sprouts, fruits, nuts, and cereals, and tend to include oil ( Although raw starch was once thought to be digested completely within the small intestine, for at least two decades it has been known that a significant proportion survives passage through the small intestine ( The degree of resistance to digestion of raw starch granules is correlated with their X-ray diffraction pattern, which comes in three types. Type A occurs in cereals. Type B is found in tubers, such as potato, and in green bananas. Type C is in legumes. Starches of Types B and C are more resistant than Type A to pancreatic amylase. Cereals thus tend to be more digestible raw than tubers and legumes, but raw starches of all three types have important reductions in digestibility compared to cooked starches. To quantify the increases in digestibility shown in The figure of 50% recovery of energy from fermented starch allows us to provide a rough estimate of the energetic consequences of cooking starch. According to data in The mechanism by which cooking increases the digestibility of starch is well understood. Raw starch granules are semi crystalline mixtures of two carbohydrates, amylopectin and amylose, together with small amounts of lipid and protein. Granules resist hydrolysis by amylases, but application of heat causes a collapse of the semi-crystalline granule structure, a process called gelatinisation. Heat also improves digestibility by degrading amylose and denaturing amylase inhibitors ( In addition to cooking (or thermal processing), non-thermal processing can also influence the digestibility of starch. Processing that reduces particle size, such as cracking of wheat grains, increases the While cooking is well known to increase the digestibility of starch, it might also increase energy availability from plant foods in other ways. First, thermal processing is expected to promote greater digestibility of plant protein and lipids (cf, animal foods, below), as well as some non starch polysaccharides (e.g., fructans: In sum, quantification of the many different effects of cooking on net energy gain from plant foods remains a remote goal. However, the fact that cooking consistently increases the energy value of starchy foods contributes importantly to explaining why humans eating raw foods experience low BMI and impaired reproductive function. Meat is an important item in human evolution, but few studies have addressed the potential energetic effects of cooking meat; and in general, the literature on the nutritional consequences of cooking animal protein is diffuse and inconsistent. Animal foods consist largely of protein and fat, with a small amount of ash. Protein represents approximately 70% of muscle tissue by dry matter mass, with relatively higher importance for lean wild meats ( Cooking by dry heat methods, such as roasting, results in fat loss due to dripping ( As Here, therefore, we review evidence for the impacts of cooking meat on four contributory factors to net energy: food intake, digestibility, the metabolic cost of digestion, and basal metabolic rate. We focus mainly on the effects of cooking on whole meat or animal protein rather than animal fat. The purpose is not to suggest that protein was more important than fat in human evolution. Indeed, fat-rich portions of animal carcasses, including brain, bone marrow, and adipose tissue, would have been actively utilised whenever possible ( Perhaps not surprisingly, food intake has been shown to vary with palatability ( Tenderness is the most important determinant of palatability in meat ( By contrast, there is little question that cooking consistently improves the flavour of meat. Quintessential “meat” flavour results from the Maillard reaction, a non-enzymatic condensation of amino acids and reducing sugars that proceeds at room temperature but is greatly accelerated by the application of heat ( The human attraction to certain Maillard compounds poses an interesting conundrum. As will be discussed below, the generation of Maillard reaction products contributes to reducing protein digestibility. Moreover, as precursors to mutagenic heterocyclic amines, Maillard reaction products have been associated with numerous physiological problems, including pancreatic ( As with starchy foods, the digestibility of meat must be assessed by ileal rather than faecal measures (e.g., The failure of fermented protein to yield energy to the consumer is important because even in typical Western diets, up to 12 The only study of this problem in humans to date has been of protein in eggs laid by chickens eating isotopically labelled diets. Ileostomy patients ate 25 g of a homogenised mixture of yolk and white, served either raw or microwaved. By monitoring the appearance of labelled proteins in ileal effluent collected from the stoma at regular intervals following a meal, Further Among other species, studies have compared the ileal digestibility of protein for cooked and raw forms of meat and bone meal (MBM), a product of the rendering industry that is commonly used to supplement the amino acid profiles of animal feeds. MBM consists of highly processed substances that are liable to have experienced prior denaturation of proteins, thus MBM is not an ideal model for whole meat. However, it is instructive that these studies generally report that ileal digestibility of MBM is reduced by cooking. Among dogs, for example, A final challenge to the hypothesis that cooking increases the digestibility of meat is the inhibitory effect of Maillard reaction products on protein digestibility. The heat-catalysed condensation reaction consumes amino acids, making them unavailable for digestion. Thus, the presence of Maillard reaction products has been implicated in lowering protein digestibility in Western diets ( In sum, no consensus has been reached regarding the influence of cooking on the digestibility of meat. The diversity of outstanding questions concerning protein source, enzyme-specific interactions, and the role of Maillard reaction products indicate the need for direct evaluations of the ileal digestibility of cooked and raw meats in human subjects. However, the most biologically relevant study we have found to date, that reported by The cost of digestion (also commonly referred to as diet-induced thermogenesis, specific dynamic action, or the thermic effect of feeding) stems from numerous metabolic processes involved in the digestion, absorption, and excretion of ingested nutrients, including muscular activity and the production of acid and proteolytic enzymes needed to reduce food to usable elements ( First, meat proteins are costly to digest. Second, as discussed above, cooking can tenderise meat if done properly. In other animals, the cost of digesting food is reduced when its physical structure is more easily broken down. It has been shown among reptiles and amphibians that food items that are softer induce a lower cost of digestion ( Finally, our experiments with Burmese pythons ( Pythons were used in this study because: a) body temperature and activity could be strictly controlled, b) the ability to feed a large meal made it easier to detect experimental effects with basic respirometry equipment, and c) infrequent feedings permitted the entire postprandial response to be captured without the confounding effects of a subsequent meal. How closely the results for pythons apply to human costs of digestion is unknown, but there are reasons to believe that the differences could be profound, even apart from the fact that metabolic demands differ between poikilothermic and homeothermic animals. For example, pythons typically ingest their meals whole, necessitating greater gastric effort to break down meals into a soup-like chyme suitable for passage into the small intestine ( For these reasons, it would be useful to validate the effects of cooking and grinding on the cost of digestion in humans. Although experimentally more challenging due to the confounding variables of activity expenditure and body temperature regulation, metabolic chambers have been used successfully to estimate 24-hour cost of digestion in humans ( Cooking kills foodborne bacteria, including strains associated with raw meat products such as The potential energy savings due to reduced immune maintenance and upregulation could be sizeable. With customary cooking, the lifetime energetic cost due to bacterial infection is very small. Our review of the diffuse and largely indirect literature suggests several mechanisms by which cooking might increase the energy available from meat. These include increasing food intake through positive effects on palatability related to texture and flavour, rendering proteins more digestible through denaturation, lowering the cost of digestion through food softening, and reducing immune upregulation by eliminating foodborne pathogens. It is, however, difficult to draw definitive conclusions about the net energetic effects of cooking from studies focused at the subcomponent level (e.g., digestibility or cost of digestion), because the components themselves may interact. For example, we might predict that the lower the digestibility of a food with a given macronutrient composition, the lower its cost of digestion, because the cost of digestion includes expenditures due to absorption and post-absorptive processes like deamination, ketogenesis, and protein synthesis. Moreover, we do not know whether the combined effects on intake, digestibility, cost of digestion, and basal metabolism are sufficient to counteract reductions in the gross caloric value of meat due to fat loss arising from cooking. Controlled studies of growth or energy balance on cooked and raw meat-rich diets will be required to better understand the effects of cooking and the mechanisms involved. Collection of longitudinal anthropometric and ovarian data among raw-foodists incorporating different quantities of raw meat, different forms of raw food processing, and different raw-to-cooked fractions in their diets would be especially useful. Among humans and nonhuman great apes, even small improvements in energy balance confer significant advantages on survival and reproductive success ( Unfortunately, the time when human ancestors first practiced thermal food processing has not been identified using archaeological data, because the record of the control of fire does not exhibit any threshold pattern distinguishing periods of use and non-use. The problem is that traces of fire normally disappear rapidly: even as recently as the Mesolithic, fireplaces can be invisible ( Anatomical adaptations provide an alternative means to infer when cooking began. The poor performance of humans eating both raw vegetarian and raw omnivorous diets (e.g., Based on anatomical adaptations, cooking has been proposed to begin with Among hypotheses attempting to understand the relationship between diet and human evolutionary anatomy, the principal alternative to cooking originating with Key problems for the hypothesis that cooking originated with However, the evidence from urban raw-foodists, who exhibit low energy status despite extensive use of sophisticated non-thermal processing techniques ( The second problem for the proposed association of In the Lower Palaeolithic, spheroids could have been exploited as pounding instruments. The effectiveness of such tools for food processing has not yet been evaluated because Oldowan hammer stones are typically assumed to have been used for smashing or flaking, rather than for pounding food ( Ultimately, studies of the relative energetic impacts of cooking and non-thermal processing for plant and animal foods will be required to better discriminate the developments in food processing technology attributable to Much research is devoted to the strategies used by humans and our closest relatives to meet daily energy requirements. Surprisingly, however, the effects of cooking have only recently begun to be discussed in this respect ( Our data suggest that if non-thermal processing methods like pounding were used by early We are grateful to W.C. McGrew and Robert Foley for the invitation to participate in this special issue. We thank Susan Antón, Nancy Lou Conklin-Brittain, Victoria Ling, Geoffrey Livesey, Peter Lucas, Charles Nunn, Stephen Secor, John Slyconish, Katherine Zink, and the anonymous reviewers for useful comments and discussion.