An investigation has been carried out in order to study the fatigue performance, both in air and in a 3wt.% NaCl solution, of a quenched and tempered (Q&T) SAE 4340 steel substrate coated with a TiCN film of ∼4μm in thickness deposited by plasma assisted physical vapor deposition (PAPVD). The results obtained show that the presence of the coating provides a significant increase, in the range of ∼140–180%, in fatigue life, in comparison with the uncoated substrate, when the material is tested in air under rotating bending conditions at maximum alternating stresses in the range of ∼550–700MPa. It is also shown that when the material is tested in the NaCl solution only a marginal increase (25% at the most) in the number of cycles to failure is observed, particularly at maximum alternating stresses above ∼570MPa, which suggests that the TiCN film is susceptible to the corrosive effect of the solution under the combined action of cyclic loading. The increase in the number of cycles to failure in air is explained in terms of the high mechanical strength of the film, its compressive residual stress state and excellent adhesion to the steel substrate. It is shown that fatigue cracks nucleate at the surface of the coating and propagate normal to the substrate–coating interface without bifurcation along the latter, after going through the entire coating thickness. Under the assumption of the validity of a simple linear law of mixtures, the tensile strength of the film is estimated in ∼34GPa, very close to its absolute hardness of ∼33GPa, whereas its fatigue limit is found to be in the range of ∼12.6GPa.SAE 4340 steel constitutes a very important engineering material employed in the manufacture of many different parts and components which encompass automotive crankshafts and rear axle shafts, aircraft crankshafts, connecting rods, propeller hubs, gears, drive shafts, landing gear parts and heavy duty parts of rock drills, among others. All these parts involved in many different applications could be subjected to combined severe conditions of wear, corrosion and cyclic loading and therefore, hard coatings could be employed for improving the surface properties of such components. However, the improvement of surface properties by means of coatings in order to increase the performance against wear and corrosion could deteriorate significantly the fatigue properties of the substrate. Typical examples of this situation are the deposition of electrolytic hard chromium (EHC) on high strength steel parts and to a lesser degree the use of electroless NiP (EN) and thermal spray coatings In this context, in a recent investigation, Nascimento et al. Regarding the use of hard coatings deposited either by PVD or CVD onto structural steels, the results reported in the literature indicate a different trend to that of the EHC, EN and thermal spray coatings. For instance, Jaeger et al. More recently, Baragetti et al. All these results are in agreement with those reported by Berríos-Ortiz et al. Therefore, taking into consideration that the evaluation of the fatigue and corrosion-fatigue properties of a coated substrate constitutes an issue of utmost importance regarding the integral assessment of the performance of any coated system, the present investigation has been carried out in order to study the effect of a TiCN film deposited by PAPVD, on the fatigue performance both in air and in a NaCl solution, of a SAE Q&T 4340 steel substrate and compare the behavior of the coated material with that of the uncoated substrate. This coating was selected to carry out the present study due to its importance in the coating tool industry, where high wear-resistant materials with low friction coefficients are required. The present investigation has been carried out with samples of a Q&T SAE 4340 steel substrate with the following composition (wt.%): 0.34 C, 0.3 Si, 0.50 Mn, 1.50 Cr, 0.20 Mo, 1.5 Ni and Fe bal. This material was provided as bars of approximately 12.7 Five tensile, 78 fatigue and the characterization D2 tool steel samples were sent to Balzers Inc. to be coated with TiCN, known commercially as Balinit The static mechanical properties of the uncoated and coated substrate were evaluated employing a computer-controlled servo-hydraulic machine (Instron 8502, Canton, MA, USA). Tensile tests were carried out at a cross-head speed of 3 SEM techniques were employed for the evaluation of the fracture surfaces of some selected coated specimens tested both in tension and fatigue. In the latter case the assessment was conducted employing specimens tested at the lowest and highest alternating stresses. The main interest of the analysis was, firstly to study the state of the coatings after tensile testing regarding their final morphology and adhesion to the substrate. Secondly, the determination of the origin of the fatigue cracks and the occurrence of delamination of the coating during cyclic loading. For this purpose, both the fracture surfaces and planes normal to these were analyzed employing a potential of 20  An important aspect of the characterization of the coating is the determination of its absolute hardness and the description of the change in composite hardness with the relative indentation depth (RID), The tensile tests conducted on the substrate samples employed in the present investigation indicated that this material had a yield strength Regarding the fatigue tests conducted both in air and in the NaCl solution, as already mentioned these were carried out at maximum alternating stresses in the range of 539–696  After fatigue testing a number of selected coated samples were analyzed by means of the SEM in order to study the characteristics of the fracture surfaces, identify the crack initiation sites and determine of the role of the film in the fatigue fracture mechanism. Regarding the coated samples tested in the NaCl solution, The analysis of the cross-section of some of the coated samples tested both in air and in the NaCl solution reveled that fatigue cracks are nucleated at the surface of the material and propagate normal to the substrate–coating interface, as clearly shown in The increase in the yield strength of the coated samples indicate that the TiCN film is able to accompany the substrate onto which it is deposited up to the initiation of extensive plastic deformation of the coated system. Due to the difference in ductility between the film and substrate material, beyond the yield stress the former is not able to contribute to the mechanical strength of the substrate-coating system. However, from these observations it is possible to determine a crude estimate of the mechanical strength of the film, by assuming that the yield strength of the system is given by a simple linear law of mixtures of the form: The increase in fatigue life and fatigue limit for the coated samples tested in air in comparison with the uncoated ones indicates that in the coated material fatigue cracks are nucleated at the surface of the specimen and that these have to propagate through the TiCN film before reaching and propagating into the substrate, giving rise to the final fracture of the sample. If cracks were nucleated at the substrate–coating interface these would readily propagate into the substrate material whose mechanical strength is much lower than that of the film. In this hypothetical case the stress-life curves and fatigue limits for the uncoated and coated specimens would not show any appreciable difference. Thus, it can be speculated that the increase in fatigue properties of the coated material could in principle be attributed to the high mechanical strength of the film, its high compressive residual stress state (∼3–4 The fracture mechanism envisaged from the stress-life results can be clearly confirmed from the analysis of the cross-sections of the samples taken normal to the fractures surfaces, The present investigation has shown that coating a Q&T 4340 steel substrate with a TiCN film of ∼4 The present investigation has been carried out with the financial support of the National Fund for Science, Technology and Innovation (FONACIT) through the Project No. S1-2000000642, and the financial support of the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council (CDCH), Universidad Central de Venezuela, through the Projects Nos. PI-08-00-5790-2005 and PG-08-17-4595-2000. The authors acknowledge the contribution of our former students Mariana E. Moreno-Castillo and Luis J. Cabeza-Hernández for conducting the experimental work and Balzers Inc. for carrying out the coating of the samples.