In this study, the appropriate collector and collector amount for Ukraine coal in froth flotation was determined. For this purpose, the performance of classic oils (kerosene, diesel-oil and fuel-oil) and lubricating oils (spindle oil, bright stock and heavy neutral) was evaluated by combustible recovery, ash rejection and efficiency index. It was found that the combustible recovery and ash rejection changed, depending on the type and concentration of oil. The maximum combustible recovery was obtained by using bright stock. It was determined that bright stock, fuel-oil and kerosene were suitable for the flotation of Ukraine coal. On considering the flotation efficiency index values, the best results were obtained with bright stock and diesel-oil. Consequently, it was shown that bright stock and spindle oil could be used as alternative oils instead of classic oils for cleaning of Ukraine coal by the froth flotation.Both modern mining methods and cleaning processes increase the quantity of raw fine coal particle Water-insoluble hydrocarbons are widely used as collectors to increase the affinity of coal particles towards the air bubbles. These collectors are basically non-polar oils such as kerosene, crude petroleum, fuel-oil and certain coal-tar distillates Wettability characteristics of minerals have substantial influence over the efficiency of beneficiation and processing methods such as agglomeration, aggregation, flotation, dust controlling and solid–liquid separation The principles of froth flotation of different coals have been investigated by various studies In this study, coal sample was floated with classic oils (kerosene, diesel-oil and fuel-oil) and lubricating oils (spindle oil, bright stock and heavy neutral) used as collector and pine-oil used as frother. The response of Ukraine coal to flotation with these oils was evaluated by combustible recovery, ash rejection and efficiency index. The influence of oil concentration on the results is interpreted here. The coal sample was obtained from Sivas Coal Office (imported from Ukraine). The total sulphur content was 0.29%. The result of proximate analysis of the sample is given in In the experiments, classic oils (kerosene, diesel-oil and fuel-oil) and lubricating oils (spindle oil, heavy neutral and bright stock) obtained from Tüpraş (Turkish Petroleum Refineries Corporation) Aliağa Petroleum Refinery were used as the collector. All the oils were paraffinic hydrocarbon oils and commercial product of the petroleum refinery. The lubricating oils contain a mixture of hydrocarbons (between C The experiments were performed in a Denver laboratory flotation machine. The cell has a value of approximately 1500 It was reported in the literature that role of the oil in froth flotation was due to wetting of the coal surface and to act as a collector As can be seen in  The aim of any process used for evaluation feed coals is to achieve maximum ash rejection with virtually quantitative recovery of combustible material. However, the necessity to grind the feed coal to extreme fineness so as to totally liberate mineral matter from coal and pure mineral matter, as well as the efficiency of the process used for that particle size make this objective unattainable The relationship between flotation efficiency index (EI) and collector (oil) amount is shown in As seen in High combustible recoveries obtained by using kerosene and fuel-oil were based on easy dispersion and the increase of the oil coating on the coal particles with kerosene is because of low viscosity and low surface tension. The reason for this situation for fuel-oil was based on the increase of wetting/adsorption ability of fuel-oil on coal surface due to the existence of relatively more abundant polar groups, although fuel-oil had high viscosity and relatively high surface tension. The ash rejection percentages by using kerosene and fuel-oil were lower than that of diesel-oil. This situation was attributed to the adsorption of kerosene and fuel-oil because of presence of polar groups in their structure on the ash-forming mineral matter. It was reported in the literature that the oils (kerosene, diesel-oil and fuel-oil) had substances containing polar groups with undetermined structure (amines, resins, asphaltenes, etc.), which were relatively more abundant in fuel-oil Low combustible recoveries were obtained by using heavy neutral among the lubricating oils. The viscosity and the surface tension of heavy neutral are higher than those of spindle oil. As a result of high viscosity and high surface tension, the coal particles cannot be wetted sufficiently by heavy neutral. Therefore, the low combustible recoveries were obtained by using heavy neutral. The ash rejection percentages obtained by using heavy neutral were higher than those for spindle oil and bright stock. This can be attributed to the highest hydrophobic particles from the feed coal. As a result, high amount of feed coal cannot be floated and, therefore, high ash rejection percentages are obtained. The combustible recoveries obtained by using spindle oil were higher than those obtained with heavy neutral. This is due to the easy dispersion of spindle oil and the increase of oil wetting degree on the coal particles because of low viscosity and low surface tension in comparison to that of heavy neutral. The ash rejection percentages obtained by using spindle oil were lower than those with heavy neutral. This can be attributed to the low surface tension and the high content of aromatic compounds in spindle oil. Aromatic compounds have greater affinity for ash-forming mineral matter The highest combustible recoveries obtained from bright stock were higher than those with the other collectors among the oil amounts tested. The ash rejection percentages were also lower than those obtained from the other collectors. This can be attributed to the non-selective adsorption of bright stock on the organic materials and the ash forming mineral matters because of polar groups The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: In the present study, the froth product was obtained with the lowest ash content obtained by using without any collector as 2.7 Maximum combustible recoveries were achieved at 3000 As the flotation efficiency index values were considered, the best results were obtained with bright stock and diesel-oil depending on collector concentration. Bright stock and spindle oil that are used as lubricating oils can be used as alternative oils instead of classic oils (kerosene and fuel-oil) for the flotation of Ukraine coal.