Degradation of phenols with different substituent groups (including –OCH3, –CHO, –NHCOCH3, –NO2, and −Cl) at boron-doped diamond (BDD) anodes has been studied previously based on the removal efficiency and •OH detection. Innovatively, formations of CO2 gas and various inorganic ions were examined to probe the mineralization process combined with quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis. As results, all phenols were efficiently degraded within 8 h with high COD removal efficiency. Three primary intermediates (hydroquinone, 1,4-benzoquinone and catechol) were identified during electrochemical oxidation and degradation pathway was proposed. More importantly, CO2 transformation efficiency ranked as: no N or Cl contained phenols (p-CHO, p-OCH3 and Ph) > N-contained phenols (p-NHCOCH3 and p-NO2) > Cl-contained phenols (p-Cl and o,p-Cl). Carbon mass balance study suggested formation of inorganic carbon (H2CO3, CO3
                     2− and HCO3
                     −) and CO2 after organic carbon elimination. Inorganic nitrogen species (NH4
                     +, NO3
                     − and NO2
                     −) and chlorine species (Cl−, ClO3
                     − and ClO4
                     −) were also formed after N- and Cl-contained phenols mineralization, while no volatile nitrogen species were detected. The phenols with electron-withdrawing substituents were easier to be oxidized than those with electron-donating substituents. QSAR analysis indicated that the reaction rate constant (k
                     1) for phenols degradation was highly related to Hammett constant (∑σ
                     
                        o,m,p
                     ) and energy gap (E
                     LUMO - E
                     HOMO) of the compound (R
                     2 = 0.908), which were key parameters on evaluating the effect of structural moieties on electronic character and the chemical stability upon radical attack for a specific compound. This study presents clear evidence on mineralization mechanisms of phenols degradation at BDD anodes.Phenolic compounds are common persistent organic pollutants in wastewater generated by many industrial processes, such as oil refining, dyeing, pulp and paper, pesticides and herbicides manufacturing, Electrochemical oxidation is demonstrated to be one of the most promising technologies to remove phenolic compounds due to its high efficiency, environmental friendliness, easy operation and low cost ( The oxidation effectiveness and mechanisms of BDD electrodes for phenolic compounds have been extensively investigated in the past two decades. Up to now, only a few studies compared the degradation efficiency and pathway of different phenolic compounds using BDD anodes. Based on the study by Ph, Bulk electrochemical oxidation tests of phenolic compounds were performed based on our previous research ( The concentration of phenolic compounds was measured using Thermo Scientific U3000 HPLC with a Hypersil Gold-C18 column and a UV detector. A mixture of methanol and water ( Different from The pseudo first-order kinetic model is introduced to describe the phenols degradation kinetics, which is expressed as: QSAR analysis, which was not used in the previous study (   During the electrochemical oxidation using BDD, phenols can be degraded by both direct electron transfer (DET) and indirect attack by strong ROS (•OH) ( DET and •OH-induced degradation of phenolic compounds in the electrochemical oxidation system has been well studied ( In this study, the representative hydroquinone-liked intermediates, hydroquinone, 1,4-benzoquinone and catechol, were identified to better understand the degradation pathway of phenols during electrochemical oxidation. It is found that the three hydroquinone-liked intermediates were successfully detected in the degradation process of four phenolic compounds, including Ph, Besides, SEM images and Raman spectra verified that the no electrode fouling or corrosion occurred during the electrolysis as BDD surface had no significant change ( To further understand the carbon transformation and mineralization process, variation of TOC, escaped CO  For The chlorine-contained phenols, i.e., For the transformation of inorganic Cl ions at BDD anode, the rate-determining step is proved to be the oxidation of ClO It is worth noting that the amount of ClO The Hammett constant is usually used to reflect the effect of structural moieties on the electronic character, and the positive and negative value of Hammett constant suggesting the electron-withdrawing group and electron-donating group, respectively (   In summary, efficient electrochemical oxidation of phenolic compounds at BDD anode was observed in this study. QSAR analysis indicated that the oxidation reactivity is related to Hammett constant (∑ The authors declare no competing financial interest.  None. This work was supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at