Introduction: Understanding how teeth move in response to mechanical loads is an important aspect of orthodontic treatment. Treatment planning should include consideration of the appliances that will meet the desired loading of the teeth to result in optimized treatment outcomes. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the use of computer simulation to predict the force and the torsion obtained after the activation of teardrop loops of 3 heights. Methods: Seventy-five retraction loops were divided into 3 groups according to height (6, 7, and 8 mm). The loops were subjected to tensile load through displacements of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm, and the resulting forces and torques were recorded. The loops were designed in a CAD software, and finite element analysis was performed with Ansys software (version 7.0, Swanson Analysis System, Canonsburg, Pa). Statistical analysis of the mechanical experiment results was obtained by ANOVA and the Tukey post-hoc test (P <.01). The correlation test and the paired t test (P <.05) were used to compare the computer simulation with the mechanical experiment. Results and Conclusions: The computer simulation accurately predicted the experimentally determined mechanical behavior of teardrop loops of different heights and should be considered an alternative for designing orthodontic appliances before treatment.An important aspect of orthodontic treatment is to understand tooth movement in response to mechanical loads and the associated adjacent tissue response at both clinical and histologic levels. As an example of the interplay between the orthodontic appliance and anatomic structures, mechanical properties of springs used in maxillary-incisor retraction arches should be determined by the balance necessary between forces and moments produced as the arch is activated. Design alterations can be made or orthodontic appliances combined to better tailor the ability to direct and distribute the mechanical forces for tooth movement. The addition of helices or changes in alloy composition and processing are commonly used to allow clinicians to more accurately achieve desired forces for tooth movement in various clinical scenarios. In medicine, finite element analysis (FEA) has been mainly applied in orthopedic research for the evaluation of mechanical responses of bony structures to applied external forces. In FEA, the element type that best represents the structure parts depends on 2 factors: model geometry and analysis type. For example, when the object length is greater than the other dimensions, the volume can be represented by beam-like elements. The purpose of this study was to evaluate computer simulation to predict the force and the torsion obtained after activation of teardrop loops of 3 heights. Seventy-five teardrop retraction loops of stainless steel, 0.019 × 0.025-in rectangular wire (Rocky Mountain Orthodontics, Denver, Colo) were bent and divided into 3 groups based on the height of the loops. The same operator prepared the specimens using a template and a light wire pliers with medium tips (100-130P, TP Orthodontics, LaPorte, Ind). After preparation, each stainless steel wire extension measured 10.0 cm in length ( After loop production, a 15.0-cm wire segment of the same cross-sectional dimension as the teardrop loop was connected on a straight hook (30.40.005, Morelli, São Paulo, Brazil). This wire segment was connected by using a clampable hook pliers (420, Starlet, São Paulo, Brazil) parallel to the loop at 4.0 mm from the base point of the loops ( The springs were then subjected to a tensile load on the testing machine. A load cell of 20.0 N was used. For this purpose, 1 end of the specimen was fixed on the machine, and the other was displaced. Special care was taken to avoid torque incorporation while the loop was connected to the testing machine. The loops were subjected to activation steps of 0.5 mm to a maximum displacement of 2.0 mm at 1.0 mm per minute. The forces and the angle variations were measured at each of the 4 steps. For observation of the teardrop loop deformation during loading, a conventional protractor was scanned with 600 dpi resolution ( For computer simulation, the geometry of the springs used in the mechanical testing was obtained with a universal digital paquimeter (797B, Starrett, São Paulo, Brazil). The different loop models were created in Ansys (version 7.0, Swanson Analysis System, Canonsburg, Pa). According to the characteristics of the teardrop loop structures and also considering the specific movements imposed by the intended mechanical activation, BEAM 4 elements were used for the teardrop model. This (finite) uniaxial element can respond to tension, compression, traction, and torsion movements. The BEAM 4 element has 6 df, and 3 translation and 3 rotation points around the axis. The modulus of elasticity of the orthodontic wire used in the FEA analysis of the springs was 157.6 GPa with a Poisson coefficient of 0.30. The teardrop loops were discretized into finite elements, and an average of 237 elements was used for modeling the various heights. To simulate the activation in orthodontic practice (and on pulling experiments), the 6 df were constrained in an extremity of the structure, and displacements of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm were applied on the x-axis direction. The structures and materials used in the simulation were considered isotropic and homogeneous, and with a static linear behavior. Output data were analyzed with the von Mises failure criterion. The mechanical experiment results were analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA), and multiple comparisons were performed with the Tukey post-hoc test. The confidence interval was set at 99%. A correlation test was used to compare the computer simulation with the mechanical experiment. Paired The mechanical testing and summary statistics results are given in A representative displacement with computer simulation during a 0.5-mm teardrop loop activation is shown in The mechanical and computer simulation results were compared and had a correlation coefficient of 0.9953. Paired Knowledge of the mechanical behavior of an orthodontic appliance is important to allow its correct assembly and use, and increase its efficiency for good clinical outcomes. Such knowledge also prevents its use in areas where the results might be unsatisfactory. After mechanical testing, the 6-mm teardrop loop had the highest force and torque results at all activation levels. This loop also showed proportional behavior regarding the force obtained and the activation displacement. These results are comparable with those of Burstone and Koenig, The correct spring height is proportional to the patient’s anatomic limitation. When possible, springs that release low force levels are preferred. The ideal force applied to achieve movement of the mandibular incisors is approximately 2.60 N. For the maxillary incisors, the ideal force level is 3.10 N. Considering the torsion angle incorporated after activation, the torque observed ranged from 0.2° to 1.4°. The 7-mm teardrop loop had the highest values on all the activations tested: 0.5°, 0.9°, 1.2°, and 1.4° for activations of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm, respectively. The spring that incorporated less torque was the 6-mm teardrop, which had values of 0.2°, 0.7°, 1.0°, and 1.3° for activations of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mm, respectively. On the other hand, the FEA simulation did not show torque incorporation during or after activation. The torque observed in the experimental study can be explained by the absence of dimensional symmetry, even though a template was used during specimen preparation. The discrepancy observed between experimental and simulation was due to the symmetry designed into the software. Between-group comparisons of mean force values showed significant differences between groups ( Considering torque angle, the only case when a significant difference was observed was between the 6- and 7.0-mm teardrop loop ( The computer simulation showed remarkably close results compared with mechanical experimentation. According to Thurow Most of the simulation results were higher than those obtained through mechanical testing ( A high correlation coefficient (0.9953) was found between mechanical testing and simulation. The paired Computer simulations are now widely available because of significant decreases in costs associated with increased computation power capability. Additionally, computer simulation software has gained interfaces that are more user friendly and, thus, has become more popular recently. These 2 factors might result in the development of customized software for orthodontic applications and the choice of appliances used in clinical practice. The computer simulation accurately predicted the experimentally determined mechanical behavior of teardrop loops of several heights and should be considered an alternative for designing orthodontic appliances before treatment.