This chapter presents the characteristics of noble metal powders including silver, gold, and platinum-group metals (Pt, Ru, Rh, Pd, Os, Ir) and fundamentals of their synthesizing. Chemical processes, atomization, mechanical comminution, and the electrolysis technologies of silver powder production are discussed. Production of silver powder by chemical reduction with electrochemical regeneration of the producer and the production of fibrous dendritic silver residue from molten electrolytes are considered. Production of gold powders by gold vaporization in an inert gas atmosphere, ultrafine powder produced from the solution based on organic complexes by thermolysis, spherical gold particles obtained by reduction from aqueous gold chloride solution, and gold powder and gold flake manufacturing by mechanical comminution are described. The production of platinum-group powders by chemical reduction, carbonyl process, and autoclave precipitation as well as the production of noble metal alloys powders are discussed. Synthesis of palladium nanoparticles by the zone electrochemistry method and the production of platinum black deposit (niello) are considered.   Chemical Processes Atomization Mechanical Comminution Processes Production of Silver Powder From Solution by Electrolysis Production of Silver Powder by Chemical Reduction With Electrochemical Regeneration of the Reducer Production of Fibrous Dendritic Silver Residue From Molten Electrolytes   Powders of Platinum Metals Chemical Reduction The Carbonyl Process Autoclave Precipitation   Synthesis of Palladium Nanopowders by Methods of Zone Electrochemistry Producing of Noble Nanoparticles in Metal-Organic Frameworks Pores Noble Metals Application in Implantable Medical Devices  The properties of noble metals including silver, gold, and platinum-group metals are listed in Chemical precipitation, thermolysis, electrolysis, hydrogen reduction, and melt atomization are often used for the production of powders of these metals. The basic materials are solutions, salt pulps, and hydroxides; in the latter case, solid-phase properties significantly influence the properties of the powder produced, complicating the reproducibility of a number of its characteristics (particle size, bulk mass, surface). Among organic reagents, such as formaldehydes, alcohols, oxalic and formic acids and their salts, and glycerin, and among nonorganic ones, such as hydrazine and its derivatives, borates of alkali and alkaline-earth metals, hypophosphites, Ti (III), Cr (III), and V (III) salts, are used most often. Organic reducers are safe, available, and allow carrying out the process at low temperatures. The produced powders have a developed surface; they are also dispersed (1.0–10 Reney's method is based on producing the alloy, followed by selective leaching of the less noble component by acid or alkali solutions. The produced precipitates of metals or their alloys have a large specific surface (80–100 Thermolysis means the thermal decomposition of metal salts (nitrates, halides, ammoniates, carbonates, formates), which form volatile products upon heating. The powders produced are distinguished by a nonuniform granulometric composition, a small specific surface, and contamination by thermolysis products. Electrochemical methods (extraction from solutions, processing of salt pulp and hydroxides, electrolysis of wastes and recycled raw materials) are widely used in the production of noble metal powders. Powder properties depend on the electrolyte content, the current density, the hydrodynamic conditions, and the cathode shape. A solid-phase reduction of salts and oxides of noble metals by hydrogen at 500–700 Basic methods of production are solid-phase reduction, chemical precipitation from solutions or pulp, electrolytic precipitation, and electrolysis. Most silver salts are easily reduced from the solution, with the only limitation being their solubility. The most common compounds are silver nitrate and silver oxide. Organic reducing agents such as alcohol, sugar, or aldehydes are used to manufacture silver powder from silver oxide. For example, dextrose can be used to produce a very fine silver powder: Organically precipitated silver powders have particle sizes ranging from 5 Silver powders are produced by mixing an acidified solution with a solution of tin (II) salts in the presence of anion-type surfactants, controlled pH values, and temperature. To produce submicron particles of silver and palladium, their concentrated nitrate solutions are used, aerosol forming and drop separation by size are provided, and then drying and conversion of aerosol particles to the metallic condition are performed in a reducing atmosphere at elevated temperature. Particles 7–10 Metal-ceramic contacts of heightened wear resistance are produced from silver-based compositions (Ag–oxides of cadmium, copper, zinc, tin, or lead, and Ag-Ni) from nitric-acid solutions of appropriate composition; the metals are jointly precipitated in the form of hydrates and carbonates. Powder mixtures with a particle size of 0.1–0.4 A composition for the products that retains their electrical conductivity and wear resistance at low temperatures (for example, electrical contacts) and in a vacuum is produced by mechanical stirring of dispersed silver powders with additives of 2%–49% of rhenium or molybdenum disulfide in water or alcohol. Silver powder is produced by processing a solution of silver nitrate (0.05 Silver powder is also produced by processing hydroxide pulp with a solution of sodium formate; the precipitate is washed by water and dried. Powder properties (specific surface, The consumption of the reducing agent is 1.1%–2.4% of the precipitated powder mass with a content of 99.9% of Ag. It is possible to produce silver powder by a self-propagating low temperature reaction of precipitated silver chloride with zinc. In this process, powder of silver or a “silver-zinc” alloy of the Ag Zinc consumption is stoichiometric; the duration of the process is 15–20 Silver powder is produced by the atomization of a molten silver stream with gas or liquid. Average particle sizes generally are within the range of 10–50 The spray pyrolysis technique for the manufacture of silver powders is also used. This process involves spraying a silver nitrate solution into a flame formed by a coaxial burner. Control of the flame temperature and spray conditions allows for the control of particle size and shape Spray pyrolysis produces solid spherical dense silver powders. An aerosol of silver nitrate solution is heated to temperatures as low as 873 Mechanical milling is used to change the properties of silver powders, including disintegration of particle aggregates, particle shape, and particle surface characteristics. This process can be used for most types of silver powders with techniques such as ball milling, vibratory milling, or attrition milling. A feature of these processes is that they are time consuming and require special precautions to prevent contamination from the mill and milling medium. Various types of milling media can be used, including zirconia balls (ZrO The basic raw material is Dore's alloy that contains: 87%–95% of Ag; 2%–14% of platinoids and gold; 1%–4% of Cu; 0.06%–0.01% of Ni; 0.005%–0.01% of As; 0.01%–0.05% of Sb; 0.1%–0.2% of Fe; 0.001%–0.005% of Pb; 0.002%–0.01% of Se; 0.005%–0.1% of Te; and silver-containing materials (80%–84% of Ag; 16%–20% of Cu). In according with State Standard 28595-90, silver of three brands (CpA-1, CpA-2, and CpA-3) is used in the cells with soluble anodes (respectively 99.99%, 99.98%, and 99.9% of Ag). Silver is precipitated on the cathode as a loose needle-like deposit that is easily stripped from the cathode. The current efficiency in the nitrate solution is approximately 100%. The cause of electric loss is short circuits of silver dendrites and simultaneous reduction of NO The respective O/R potentials are 0.94, 1.01, 0.77, and 0.95 Fine silver powder is precipitated at the silver anode due to the Ag The powder is produced in cells with vertical or horizontal cathodes ( Cells with a horizontal location of electrodes are manufactured of plastic or ceramics and lined with acid-proof tiles. A graphite dalle (cathode) is embedded into the cell bottom. Half the cell bottom length is splayed to provide powder deposit discharge. An anode box with the bottom made of fire bars, on which a filtration nylon material, plastic grid, and some layers of anode plates are placed, is installed above the horizontal part of the cell. The current is supplied by heavy contacting leads, to which the ends of a flexible cable are soldered. Anodic contacts are manufactured of 50% Ag It is possible to produce silver powder in the cells with insoluble anodes. Titanium sheets are covered by a thin platinum layer. Anode current density is twice as high compared with the cathode one. The nitric acid concentration increases during electrolysis whereas the silver ion concentration decreases. Periodically, a part of the electrolyte is vented away for regeneration and removal of platinum metals and gold. Silver powder produced by electrolysis meets the following requirements: > Fine silver powder is produced in the anodic space of the electrolyzer close to the surface of soluble silver anodes by chemical reduction with titanium (III) ions: The composition of the solution is 10% of Ti The several ways of production of electrolytic silver and silver-alloy powders are shown in Electrolysis is carried out using a silver nitrate melt based on the potassium-sodium eutectic (15–33 Gold-bonding conductors, owing to their high reliability and conductivity, find a variety of applications in electronics and communication systems. The bonding behavior of gold as well as its electrical conductivity make it desirable in hybrid microcircuitry. A special reliability of gold is connected with its superior resistance to oxidation. The primary cost of using gold is rather high, but lost operating time and repair expenses as a result of the deterioration of electrical properties of nongold elements due to the formation of oxide or sulfide films on contact surfaces are much higher Production of particles 3–180 Many processes for manufacturing gold powder use an aqueous solution of HAuCl Potassium sulfite or sodium sulfite can be directly added to an aqueous gold chloride solution to produce spherical gold particles Gold powder can also be produced by mechanical comminution. Sheets of gold are reduced by rolling to produce a foil between 10 and 20 The chemical composition is shown in       The precipitation of platinum oxide at the interaction of H The process of reducing [PtCl The fractional conversion of the metal to powder achieves 99.9% in processing of chloro-amine compounds of platinum and palladium in a sodium hydroxide solution by reducing agents (sodium formate, aluminium, hydrazine salts). Platinum niello is produced by the reaction of ammonium hexachlorplatinate with a 2.5-M solution of formic acid or sodium formate at 375 Metallic palladium powder is formed (without reducer) in the process of boiling dichloridiamminpalladium salt in a saturated alkali solution. If this salt is treated slowly (3 The greatest influence on the increase of the process rate is exerted by an increase of temperature, sodium formate concentration, and seed consumption. The process rate decreases at high pH and especially if chloride ions are introduced. It is explained by the enhanced resistance of metal chloride components to the activation: Palladium powder is produced by processing its ammonium complexes with a mixture of formic acid and with its ammonium salt prepared in the following manner: (CH Cladding of powders of various metal oxides by platinum or palladium is achieved by the thermolysis method. Powders of platinum, palladium, ruthenium, and iridium are precipitated from an acid-salt solution by cementation with zinc, copper, magnesium, aluminum, or cadmium. The powder surface area is 0.1–1.0 Fine powders of platinum group metals are precipitated from aqueous or nonaqueous solutions of salts by radiation by an electron beam in doses of 10–30 Powders of platinum group metals can be precipitated by the use of carbon monoxide: There are several platinum carbonyl compounds: High carbonylchlorides are hydrolyzed to monocarbonylchloride; the latter is decomposed by interaction with water forming the platinum powder: Platinum metals may exist in chloride solutions in different ion forms according to the concentration of chloride ions. Palladium complexes with maximal coordinate number 4 are formed in concentrated chloride solutions. In accordance with the above mentioned mechanism: This process includes a number of subsequent transformations with complex ions of different structures as the participants. The reduction is performed from the solutions (100–120 The rate of palladium precipitation decreases in the presence of organic compounds (acetone, ethanol, butane). When the organic phase concentration is increased, the fine fractions output is increased also, and practically monodispersed powder can be produced. Palladium powder with a particle size of 1.2–1.7 The properties of palladium powders used for the manufacture of thin-walled ceramic condensers are presented in Characteristic properties of palladium powders are homogeneity of phase and chemical composition, high particle size dispersity (0.3–3.5 Osmium powder is produced from platinum containing 0.6%–1.0% of Os in two steps, according to the scheme OsO Complex compounds are stable forms of noble metal ions in aqueous solutions. The thermodynamic probability of their autoclave reduction by hydrogen is sufficient significant. The development of the process of metal powder precipitation processes is determined by the kinetic parameters and courses at less rigid parameters than the precipitation of copper, nickel, and cobalt powders. The precipitation of gold from its thiosulfate, chloride, and bromide complexes with 3+ charge proceeds at 330–340 V.V. Ipatyev (1926) had first revealed the possibility of platinum precipitation from the chloride complex. He carried out this process at 293–303 Similar reactions for actual platinum metals are presented below: Palladium and rhodium were reduced from the solutions containing 15–25 In processing the acetate sulfate solutions, the reduction of Rh (III), Pt (IV), and Ru (III) to metal proceeded rather quickly, and the process rate did not depend on the anion concentration and the ionic force of the solution. Cl The precipitation of palladium from the solution bearing 2 Iridium can be reduced only to Ir (III) during the processing of chloride solutions bearing Ir (VI) ions at 303 Homogeneously sized silver powder with a bulk weight of 0.3–3.0 Noble metal powders can be precipitated by carbon monoxide in the interval of pH ≤ The key condition of alloy production is phase composition uniformity achieved by alignment of the precipitation rate of components and their joint crystallization. The most popular methods are chemical, contact displacement, and electrochemical precipitation. Silver-palladium powders used, in particular, as metallized paste fillers in capacitor production have to meet the following requirements: 70% of Ag and 30% of Pd, surface of not lower than 1.5–2.3 For their production, the basic raw material is dissolved in nitric acid, then the solution (80–100 Powders with an average particle size of 0.6 The Pd-Cu alloy (55% of Pd) is produced from the solution of chlorides of these metals by reduction with hydrazine-sulfate. Two-three component alloys are produced by precipitation from hydroxy-ammonia and chloride ammonia complexes (the latter to provide the phase composition uniformity) of the (NH A local reduction, first of all of palladium, is possible when using a pulp of salts of metals, which are constituents of the produced alloy, and its precipitation by an organic reducer (most often sodium formate). Further, this results in a nonhomogeneous distribution of solid solution components in the volume of a unit particle and a formation of up to 2%–5% of individual metal inclusions. Powders of Pt-Pd alloy are produced by joint precipitation by treatment of a solution of chloride complexes of these metals with a sodium formate solution: at pH < at pH > The process includes: (1) induction, (2) precipitation and growth of nuclei, and (3) desorption and withdrawal into the solution of reaction products: The induction stage is the diffusion of complex ions of the metal and the reducer to the seed surface. The stage of precipitation and growth of nuclei is adsorption and an oxidation-reduction reaction: accompanied by the growth of nuclei. The stage of reaction product desorption and their diffusion into the solution. In the case of multiple crystallization, the limiting stage is diffusion of Pt (Pd) (II) compounds to crystal surfaces. With the increase in pH, a part of aqua and hydroxo forms in the composition of the metal complex ions as well as the probability of niello precipitate formation. The basic diagrams of alloy chemical precipitation are shown in The composition of the alloy of PtPd-40p brand (in CIS classification) is: Σ(Pt, Pd)>96.5 This alloy is a single-phase alloy; its bulk density is of 1.4–1.9 The technique provides a quick and complete procedure with the minimum consumption of alkali and without an external reducer. The particles have a spherical form, their size is 0.3–0.4 Pt-Pd-Rh alloy is produced by thermolysis of a mixture of complex salts of [M (NH A powder with apparent density of 0.7–1.9 Powders of palladium-based compositions were produced by thermolysis of aminooxalate complexes of [Pd(NH3) An isomorphic solution of platinum in palladium is precipitated by hydroformulation of a solution bearing platinum and palladium. The larger the palladium content, the greater the process rate. Platinum is precipitated sufficiently completely at the atomic proportion Pt/Pd Before platinization, the electrodes are carefully cleaned in a chrome mixture or by SiO After platinization, the electrodes are put into a 10% solution of sulfuric acid and polarized cathodically within 5 Palladium powder with a particle size of 5–15 Manufacturing methods for electrolytic platinum-group powders and electrolytic platinum-group alloy powders are shown in Metal-organic frameworks or porous coordination polymers continue to attract much attention in new emerging areas, particularly those related to energy use and environmental protection. The ZIF-8 framework (Zn(mim) Zhang et al. Implantable medical devices (cardiac defibrillators, cochlear implants, or neuromuscular micro stimulators) have been used worldwide to restore body functions, improve the quality of life, and save lives. Implantable medical devices are implanted long term and contain electronic circuits and batteries. In addition, for a safe and sustainable implantation in the human body without the release of toxic products and device degradation by body fluids, a hermetic housing is required. Generally, conductive pads that are surrounded by a biocompatible insulating material To bond metal and ceramic materials, brazing is so far the most widely used technique when a mechanically reliable gas tight bonding is required. However, for implantable devices, a high content of expensive noble metals is often added into the brazing paste, such as gold. The commonly used ceramic/metal feedthrough is made of pure platinum pins surrounded by alumina Powder injection molding (PIM) can open new opportunities to manufacture hermetic feedthroughs between metal electrodes, ceramic insulators, and metal rings for packaging welding. The process allows manufacturing complex multimaterial and gas tight components in a reduced number of producing steps. Moreover, it allows, with an appropriate choice of materials and treatment conditions, bonding ceramic and metal without brazing. This work proposes to explore the PIM potential to carry out a hermetic feedthrough without brazing. Two feedthroughs for medical implantable devices were carried out by PIM The leakage measurements performed on a circular feedthrough show that, for parts sintered under argon or vacuum, the rate of leakage is lower than 1·10