Amine-functionalized carbon nanoparticles (NH2-CNPs) were synthesized by one-step hydrothermal reaction using the polyethylenimine (PEI) polymer as precursor. CNPs which present an intense photoluminescence under UV light (300–400 nm), were dispersed in graphene oxide (GO), generating a novel complex carbon-based material. The structure of the nanocomposite and its physiochemical properties were investigated using various analytical techniques. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy indicated the presence of CN bonds and NH2 groups attesting the successful incorporation of the functionalized carbon nanoparticles into the graphene oxide nanosheets. Transmission electron microscopy revealed the homogeneous dispersion of NH2-CNPs, which their size ranges between 10 and 20 nm, in GO sheets.Functional carbon-based nanomaterials (CBNs) have reserved broad interest due to their excellent characteristics such as high strength, light weight, chemical stability, and high hardness. In addition, the versatility of CBNs is obtained through the large number of the chemical or/and physical functionalization routes that have been developed The present work focuses on the one-pot synthesis of NH Powder graphite (purum, ≤0.2 mm), sulfuric acid (95–97%), nitric acid (65%) and potassium chlorate were acquired from Fluka. Sodium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide carbonate were supplied by Merck and Riedel-de Haën respectively. Hyperbranched polyethylenimine was donated by BASF. Graphene oxide was produced from graphite using a modified Staudenmaier method FT-IR spectroscopy of the as-received NH  The results of spectroscopic investigation of the composite NH The Raman spectrum of the raw GO sample displays the characteristic graphitic peaks in the range of 1250–1650 cm The structure of NH The present investigation describes the synthesis of amine-functionalized carbon nanoparticles via a simple hydrothermal process and their dispersion in graphene oxide. Spectroscopic techniques and photoluminescence, indicated the successful NH The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We are immensely grateful to Apostolos Enotiadis from National Center for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, Greece and Konstantinos Spyrou from Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, Greece for their valuable contribution to the whole experimental process.