This paper describes how till bulk porosity and pore shape, size and connectivity relate to till deformation processes. Methods have been developed to examine till pores microscopically using thin section analysis, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray computed micro tomography (μCT). Porosity is quantified using digital image analysis of thin section images from the petrographic microscope and SEM and from X-ray μCT. These methods were applied to a selection of Pleistocene tills with diverse properties. The micromorphological techniques have allowed porosity to be related to other till microstructures. Most of the microstructures examined, including the pores, have been interpreted to be indicative of either plastic or brittle subglacial deformation and the type and extent of till deformation has been interpreted to affect bulk porosity, pore type and pore connectivity.Despite increasing interest in till structure in the past 30 years, there is still limited knowledge about the geotechnical characteristics of tills, especially porosity. Till porosity has largely been ignored, principally because primary pore permeability has been found by some authors to be almost inactive in transporting groundwater. To the authors’ knowledge, there is one publication about till porosity outside the field of hydrogeology: The aims of this study have been to identify methods of till porosity measurement, determine percentage porosity, describe pore shape, size and connectivity, and to interpret these results in the context of processes of deformation by which till pores have been formed and destroyed. This paper presents the results of till pore, and other microstructure, analyses on a selection of Pleistocene basal and flow tills, or debris flows, with diverse properties. We have interpreted modes of till deposition and deformation from pore types and bulk porosity, together with other till structures. In this paper, the term ‘porosity’ relates to relatively small voids in till such as those associated with fissile structures and ‘marble bed’ structures ( The study area was County Laois in the Irish midlands (1719 Detailed surface mapping of the Quaternary geomorphology of County Laois, and bulk sampling, sieving and stone count analysis of tills ( In 2001, 24 undisturbed till samples with diverse properties were collected from 13 sites in County Laois ( The undisturbed till samples were acetone dried and then impregnated with crystic resin in a vacuum chamber. After impregnation, the samples were hardened and then cut in half to be made into thin sections. One half was polished and then mounted on glass, ground to a thickness of about 25 The thin sections were analysed on a Petroscope and a petrographic microscope, using magnifications of ×25–×85 and ×63–×320, respectively. The microstructure was described according to the terminology of Scanning electron microscopy, of polished sub-samples from seven of the remaining resin-impregnated till blocks, was used to examine and describe pores that were too small to be observed in thin section. Images were taken in the backscattered electron imaging (BEI) mode at magnifications of ×25, ×75, ×230 and ×1300. This provided a good overlap with the light microscope analysis and allowed pores to a minimum of about 1 Digital image analysis, of photomicrographs (petrographic microscope photographs) from 10 thin sections and from SEM images of 14 sub-samples, was used to measure percentage porosity in two-dimensions. The image analysis was performed using Idrisi software, following the methodology of Experimental X-ray computed micro tomography (μCT) was carried out on fourteen sub-samples from seven resin-impregnated till blocks, in order to investigate the value of this technique for examining pores in three-dimensions (3D). X-ray CT reveals 3D structure as determined by variations in density, and to a lesser extent atomic composition. The samples can be viewed as multiple cross sections or as reconstructed 3D blocks ( Finally, till porosity observations and measurements were related to other till microstructures. Increasingly, examination of till microstructures has revealed that tills possess deformational characteristics which demonstrate, in parallel with field investigations, that tills are or were deforming glacier beds (see Tills, dating from the last glaciation, make up a substantial proportion of the glacial sediments in County Laois and are found throughout the county in the uplands and lowlands. They are predominantly derived from the local bedrock lithologies ( The particle size distributions of the tills vary greatly, but samples form quite distinct populations based on their dominant petrography ( The most visible difference in till porosity characteristics in the field was between ‘mature’ tills, which were found almost throughout the county, and ‘immature’ tills, which were in one area in the southwest of the county (for example site G). The immature tills of the southwest had little fine-grained material to infill pores between clasts and appeared much more porous than mature tills. More subtle changes in grain size and consolidation did not cause differences in porosity that were perceptible in the field. Many matrix supported mature tills appeared, from field observation or viewing with a hand lens, to be non-porous. The main exception to this was the porosity resulting from distinctive sub-horizontal fissility in many mature limestone and sandstone tills. The fissile partings were plate-like structures <3 The texture of the majority of the samples was plasma supported ( Turbate structures were found in samples from almost all sites, though they are poorly formed in flow tills, and absent in grain supported till. Lineations are found in all samples containing turbates, apart from those in which the turbates are very poorly developed. They have not been found in the flow tills or grain supported tills. Samples from eight of the 13 sites contain beds and bands of diverse size, composition, structure, frequency and shape. Most of the samples containing beds or bands also contain sorted sediment pockets, usually of the same composition and structure as the bands. Five samples contain diamictic intraclasts; four samples have, and two possibly have, a marble bed structure associated with an absence of, or very poorly developed, turbates and lineations. Crushed grains occur in the grain supported tills, or tills containing coal grains. Plasmic fabrics are moderate to well developed in six sandstone or shale-dominated samples. The limestone tills do not show plasmic fabrics due to the cloaking affects of carbonates. Strong microfabrics are found in one flow till sample, banded till samples from Slieve Bloom, and samples from a shale till in the Castlecomer Plateau. Pores described in this study are: vesicles, vughs, simple and complex packing voids, planar voids delineating fissile partings, planar voids delineating marble bed structures and other planar voids ( Vesicles are small (large silt/fine sand sized), rounded, smooth-walled and isolated pores. When viewing vesicles at high magnifications, using SEM, many of them were found to be irregularly shaped, and could be classified as small vughs. Most really rounded small pores, within till matrix, were found in flow tills ( Most samples contain vughs. Vughs are more irregularly shaped than vesicles and vary greatly in size. They were commonly 1–2 Planar voids are elongate and narrow. They were found in most thin sections. Planar voids, demarcating fissile partings that were also visible in the field, were identified in samples from seven sites ( Planar pores in till form other, non-fissile, configurations also ( Planar voids varied greatly in width from less than 30 Packing voids were found in poorly consolidated tills (complex packing voids) and in tills lacking fine-grained sediment (simple packing voids). Most tills containing packing voids were very porous ( Finally, the shape of pores, and other structures may vary, when thin section samples have been taken at varying angles to ice flow direction. To date there has been no systematic investigation of the effect of thin section orientation on structure. In this study two sites samples were taken both parallel and perpendicular to flow (G and H) and the shape and size of pores and other structures are found to be comparable. The results in Those samples that show marked differences in porosity at different magnifications in petrographic microscope and SEM analysis, do so because different sized voids are visible at these magnifications. For example, the petrographic microscope ×63 image and two of the SEM ×25 and ×75 images from sample 3251, site K, contain planar voids that delineate the marble bed structure in this till, but the higher magnification images describe the porosity of the till mass between the large pores. This apparent decrease in porosity has also been observed in other samples ( The highest porosities were measured in sorted sediment bands and pockets and in immature tills. A ×75 SEM image from an area characterised by simple packing voids, in the immature till from site G, is 43.72% pore space; an area with relatively densely packed plasma and grains is 12.71% pore (×63 thin section image). It is clear that porosity does vary greatly in this immature till, but it is always high. The sorted sediments in samples 3258 and 3260 also have relatively high porosities ( The remainder of the samples has porosities from 1.04% to 7.16% (×63 petrographic microscope images). The two samples with the highest porosities in this group were from site H and contain large or frequent fissile partings (sample 3258 and area ‘ As part of this study we investigated the possibility of estimating till porosity from particle size distributions. As first described by Fine-grained particles have an important property other than their small size: clays have surface electrical charges, so clay sized grains encourage the formation of agglomerates thereby potentially increasing porosity. The percentage clay in a selection of publications ( We have identified one published data set of till particle size curves with associated porosity measurements ( It would seem that particle size distribution has a very limited effect on the overall porosity of tills, at least in the larger pore size range (>15 Porosity of tills is difficult to discern in the field, with the exception of fissile partings ( Descriptions of consolidation may give a good indication of porosity, although the descriptions are subjective. When comparing field descriptions of the degree of till consolidation with bulk porosities there appears to be a good correlation between the two. The least porous samples are from a fissile till that was extremely difficult to sample in the field due to its degree of over-consolidation (site E, The number of samples on which image analysis has been performed precludes any conclusions about whether till petrography has a significant influence on porosity. Different rock types affect the grain size distribution of till, but as discussed in Thin section analysis allows pore size, shape and connectivity to be described and percentage porosity to be measured using image analysis. Low magnification images were found to be the most useful because they include large pores and pore configurations. Illuviated clay (cutans), or precipitates of iron and manganese ( Image analysis of SEM images allows very quick and easy measurements of till porosity and gives a more definite porosity measurement than image analysis of photomicrographs, because occasionally there is ambiguity between pore spaces in photomicrographs and areas where the thin section may have had material removed during processing. However, scanning electron microscopy is not useful for examining most other till structures. The experiments with X-ray μCT illustrate the suitability of this method for the measurement and analysis of till porosity. Using μCT to examine the planar fissile partings and marble bed structures confirms that these features, and some vughs, are connected in 3D. This is an important addition to the two-dimensional observations. Any sediment overridden by a glacier may start out with high bulk porosity. As a glacier overrides this sediment, the normal stress caused by the weight of the ice combined with the shear stress due to its forward motion will cause shear stresses within the sediment. These stresses will be greatest at the top of the sediment, now a till bed, and will diminish towards the base. Particles will rotate due to the differences in velocity between the top and the bottom of the particles ( Moving particles will naturally seek out the path of least resistance. Pore spaces will be the paths of least resistance, so particles will rapidly fill available voids ( Shearing and the production of lineations may only occur after rotational deformation has increased the density of till to such a degree that rotational deformation can no longer easily occur. Shear strain may then build up until it results in discrete failure along lineations or fissile partings. This may occur in some parts of a till bed while rotational deformation is continuing elsewhere. In the case of lineations it may result in the infilling of pore spaces along these shear zones ( The formation of a marble bed increases the degree of porosity and results in interconnected planar pores, though the till within the individual aggregates tends to be very dense ( Sorted sediment bands and beds in the thin sections, whether formed by water-escape, by inclusion of pre-existing sorted sediments, or by sub- or pro-glacial meltwater deposition, are important for the formation of continuous pore systems. The incorporation and survival of these bands depends on the type of deformation the till bed undergoes and whether pervasive deformation continues following their inclusion. Those tills that show little sign of deformation are some of the most porous, which supports the hypothesis that it is deformation of till that decreases porosity. This includes flow tills and immature basal tills. Immature basal tills do show evidence of deformation but only for a relatively short period so that there was a lack of comminution of the till, which is very local in origin. The banded till in Slieve Bloom is also more porous than most other basal till samples; this may be due to this till having undergone deformation for a shorter period of time (thus preserving the banding) and being overlain by thinner ice than the lowland tills. The porosity of the 12 Pleistocene till samples in this study tended to be low, with effective porosity ranging from 1% to 19%. The highest porosities are for immature grain dominated to grain supported tills and for sorted sediment pockets in till, which can have porosities greater than four times that of the surrounding till. Fissile partings may increase porosity by two to three times; marble bed structures also increase porosity significantly. Planar and packing voids frequently contain precipitated iron or manganese indicating that they are hydraulically active. Pores are created and destroyed in the till bed as it deforms beneath the glacier. Samples containing well-developed turbate structures and lineations contain few and small pores, as particles rotating in the deforming till bed, or migrating towards and along shear zones, seek the path of least resistance and fill pores. On the other hand shear deformation may result in the creation of fissile partings, or the break up of the till bed into a marble bed structure, thus increasing porosity. Those tills that show little sign of deformation are most porous. In conclusion: Deriving porosity estimates from particle size analyses seems unreliable, though very coarse grained, clast dominated till will, contrary to particle packing theories, be very porous. Microstructure of tills is a far more important controlling factor for porosity in most, matrix supported, tills. The variable consolidations and structural and textural complexities of tills mean that detailed descriptions and analyses must be obtained for estimates of bulk porosity and pore connectivity. Both fissile partings and sorted sediment bands are easily recognisable in the field. This indicates that detailed field descriptions of tills, together with strategic thin section sampling, should allow till porosities to be estimated on maps, for instance at the scale of a landfill site or similar development. These results, together with hydrogeological investigations and knowledge could give a much better indication of probable permeabilities than has been the case to date. Pore types and percentage porosity give an indication of the nature and extent of deformation towards the end of till formation. A University of London Ph.D. studentship supported AK. Kamil Zaniewski (Lakehead University, Canada) provided invaluable advice about image analysis of thin sections. Adrian Palmer (Royal Holloway, University of London) supported thin section production; Bob Whitenstall and Zofia Luklinska (Queen Mary, University of London) supported SEM analyses. Xavier Pellicer Mir and Michael Sheehy (Geological Survey of Ireland) assisted thin section sampling in the field. Thin section sampling was partially funded by the British Geomorphological Research Group and the Dudley Stamp Memorial Trust. The early mapping work by AK was conducted at the Geological Survey of Ireland and University College Dublin under the supervision of William Warren, Ronnie Creighton and Colman Gallagher. We would like to thank John Menzies and an anonymous referee for helpful comments on this paper.