Background
                  Regarding the treatment of humeral shaft fractures, the choice of plating or intramedullary nailing remains controversial. Previous randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses failed to draw a unanimous conclusion. To guide clinical decision making, we conducted an updated meta-analysis on the optimal treatment of humeral shaft fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  We identified eligible studies published from 1969 to July 2011 using the Cochrane Library; Cochrane Bone, Joint and Muscle Trauma Group; MEDLINE; Embase; OVID; and Google Scholar and manually searched the references of relevant studies. Randomized controlled trials that compared nailing and plating in the treatment of humeral shaft fractures were included. After the methodologic assessment, available data were extracted and statistically reviewed. The primary outcomes were nonunion, delayed union, postoperative infection, reoperation, and radial nerve palsy. The secondary outcomes were restriction of shoulder motion, shoulder impingement, iatrogenic fracture comminution, and implant failure.
               
                  Results
                  We included 10 studies comparing plating and nailing in patients with humeral shaft fractures, comprising 439 participants. Plating reduced the risk of shoulder impingement and shoulder restriction in comparison with nailing. Regarding reoperation risk, a secondary sensitivity analysis showed the finding favoring plating over nailing remained unstable. Otherwise, no significant differences were found in postoperative infection, nonunion, delayed union, radial nerve palsy, iatrogenic fracture comminution, and implant failure between groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  On the basis of current evidence, both plating and nailing can achieve a similar treatment effect on humeral shaft fractures, but plating may reduce the occurrence of shoulder problems. Randomized controlled trials with larger sample sizes using appropriate blinding methods are needed to confirm these findings.Humeral shaft fracture is one of the most common fractures in adults, accounting for approximately 3% of all fracture types. In general, operative treatment is indicated in patients in whom there is failure to maintain stable alignment and reduction at the fracture site, as well as those with severe open fractures, segmental fractures, or fractures associated with neurovascular injury, multiple injury, and floating shoulder or elbow. Recently, several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) compared plate fixation with intramedullary nail fixation, but these were all limited with regard to their small sample size and had methodologic deficiencies. Even previous meta-analyses based on such evidence failed to yield the same conclusions. We aimed to identify published and unpublished RCTs of humeral shaft fractures treated with fixation by either plating or intramedullary nailing. Databases used for our search included the Cochrane Library; Cochrane Bone, Joint and Muscle Trauma Group; MEDLINE; Embase; OVID; and Google Scholar from 1969 to July 2011. Using these databases, we searched for studies that had specific keywords, such as humeral shaft fractures or humeral diaphyseal fractures, as well as articles whose content was not sufficiently clear from the title, abstract, or keywords. All articles were initially screened by title, abstract, and keywords. Any references in the selected articles relating to operative treatment of humeral shaft fractures were selected for further reading. No restriction for language was applied. Two authors (P.X. and J.X.) reviewed possible abstracts and retrieved the full text if the screening criteria were met. According to the methodology described by Bhandari et al, We (Z.C. and J.X.) graded studies according to the modified Jadad scale. One reviewer (P.X.) extracted the available data from all eligible studies, and another reviewer (Z.C.) verified the data for accuracy. Disagreement was resolved by discussion and a third reviewer’s opinion. All data were analyzed by use of the Review Manager software (version 5.1.6) provided by the Cochrane Collaboration. In association with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), the differences in risk ratios of the complications between the 2 fixation methods were calculated and then represented in forest plots. The χ The literature-retrieving strategy and results are shown in As shown in Statistical analysis results of secondary outcomes were available in most studies ( Sensitivity analysis was performed to exclude low-quality studies (Jadad score <4). On the basis of the list of study characteristics, we conducted a secondary sensitivity analysis excluding the low-quality study identified (Bolano et al, We performed an updated meta-analysis comparing plating fixation and intramedullary nailing fixation in patients with humeral shaft fractures. Different from previous meta-analyses published in 2006 and 2010, our meta-analysis involved a larger number of participants using a more comprehensive search to reduce searching bias. The 10 RCTs in this review were of varying quality with different designs, and all were published in English. We failed to identify any RCT published in other languages; thus language bias had limited impact on our results. Our meta-analysis results are not completely the same as those of previous publications on the primary outcomes assessed. Regarding the reoperation rate, it should be noted that our finding was not completely consistent with the findings of either Heineman et al Regarding the risk of postoperative infection, though showing a trend favoring nailing, our meta-analysis found no statistically significant difference between the two groups. To our knowledge, the intrinsic defect of plate fixation involving impairment of the blood supply and wide intraoperative exposure might increase the risk of infection. Especially for the middle and distal parts of the humeral shaft, the blood supply deficit might lower the ability to avoid infection at the fracture site. To solve this problem, minimally invasive plating osteosynthesis (MIPO) with preservation of blood supply and limited dissection has been recommended in the treatment of humeral shaft fractures. An important consideration in future studies is the timing used to confirm whether delayed union has occurred. The timing of delayed union varied in studies included in our meta-analysis. A unified timing of delayed union described in 3 RCTs ensured the pooled data comparable for meta-analysis. Problems of adjacent joints involving the shoulder and elbow can be seen commonly after antegrade or retrograde nailing fixation. It remains difficult in most cases to avoid impairment to the rotator cuff during nailing through the antegrade approach. This might result in postoperative restriction of shoulder motion, although it has been proved that repair of the rotator cuff was helpful in improving postoperative function of the shoulder. Our results showed that the risk of implant failure with plating was comparable to that with nailing. This complication is frequently associated with nonunion. As a result of nonunion, various forces such as rotation force and shearing force are unable to pass through the fracture site during postoperative functional exercise. This results in a high stress concentration on the implant, which might lead to implant failure eventually. Conversely, sequent invalid fixation can rarely provide enough stability for fracture healing. Therefore, patient-specific rehabilitation planning according to regular radiographic evaluation of healing is strongly recommended to lower the risk of implant failure. Meanwhile, this result also supported our finding that plating did not incur a greater risk of nonunion than nailing. Our study can be considered a follow-up of previous meta-analyses. Although more participants were involved, our meta-analysis had several limitations to conclude a definitive selection of surgical intervention. First, the methodologic quality of included studies was not satisfactory, mainly because a blinding method was not used in the trials, except that published by Chapman et al In summary, regarding the treatment effect, both plating and nailing can achieve similar outcomes. However, compared with plating, nailing incurs a greater risk of complications related to the shoulder. In addition, on the basis of current evidence, it remains difficult to determine whether plating gives a lower risk of reoperation than nailing. The current evidence indicates that plating remains superior to nailing in the treatment for humeral shaft fractures, although limitations remain in this meta-analysis. To draw a convincing conclusion on the optimal treatment, more methodologically improved trials with standardized outcome measures are recommended in future work. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.