Structural stability with respect to heat treatments of the Al–Co–Cu–Ni decagonal phase has been explored. Decagonal phases are stabilized in Al–Co–Cu–Ni alloys with Al65Co15Cu20 and Al70Co15Ni15 as ternary end members. Characteristic features of this alloy series have been reported earlier. Both in the as-cast and rapidly solidified condition they form decagonal phases. From a knowledge of the differential thermal analysis plots of the alloys, and on the basis of earlier studies, two compositions Al68.85Co15Cu6.15Ni10 and Al67Co15Cu8Ni10 were selected. Samples were annealed at 900 °C for 435 h for the as-cast alloy of the former composition and at 450 °C for 65 h for the rapidly solidified alloy of the latter one. Only for the latter composition, were samples ion milled prior to TEM investigations. In both samples, we observed a lowering of symmetry in the 10-fold diffraction patterns with annealing.The decagonal quasicrystalline (DQC) phase discovered independently by Chattopadhyay et al. S1 has been shown to give rise to type II and type I superstructures upon cooling, over a range of compositions Grushko et al. All of these studies pertain to structural modifications of the Al–Co–Ni DQC with heat treatments. It is important to note here that the possibility of the formation of these modifications with changing alloy composition has not been attempted prior to the work of our group The two quaternary alloys were prepared by melting the required proportion of the various components in an induction furnace. Details of the melting process can be found elsewhere The possible solid-state transformations that may influence the order–disorder transition in these alloys were assessed by differential thermal analysis (DTA). Alloy-2 was heated at the rate of 10 °C/min. The DTA runs were taken up to a maximum of 800 °C. The annealing experiment was carried out in a vacuum-sealed glass ampule. To ensure an oxygen free atmosphere inside the glass ampule, titanium wool was placed in the ampule, separated from the sample by a constriction in the glass tube. The whole assembly was kept inside a furnace. The melt-spun ribbon of Al As mentioned earlier, alloy compositions with the same Co content were studied by us. A ternary composition diagram of Al, Cu and Ni shows that the alloys chosen by us are concentrated around a narrow regime of Ni composition ( As mentioned in  We have reported the effect of heat treatment on the stability of the decagonal phase in Al We acknowledge stimulating discussions with Professor S. Lele (BHU) and Dr N.K. Mukhopadhyay (BHU). We thank Professor W. Steurer (Switzerland) and Professor K.F. Kelton (USA) for having critically discussed our poster at ICQ-8. We thank Professors S. Ranganathan and K. Chattopadhyay the Co-chairmen of ICQ-8 for extending necessary support to participate in the conference.