A 67-year-old lady presented with a supracondylar fractured right shaft of femur after a fall from a single step. She had a past history of a right fractured shaft of femur at age 12, treated in traction, a right fractured neck of femur at age 57 treated with a dynamic hip screw and severe rheumatoid arthritis treated with long-term steroids. It was noted she had a preexisting valgus deformity of the knee. The fracture was treated with a LISS plate with an anatomical reduction. An experienced orthopaedic surgeon familiar with the implant performed the procedure. No complications were encountered during the plating. Two weeks later, she developed further pain in the femur and an X-ray showed pullout of the top screws ( The patient was taken to theatre by a different surgeon. Preoperatively it was decided to remove the plate and insert a supracondylar nail. The old incision was opened; the cables and ordinary screws were removed without difficulty. The screws attached to the plate could not be removed. All attempts to undo the screws failed. The head of each screw was burred as all of them appeared to be cross-threaded. There was no suggestion of this on X-ray. Eventually the plate was levered out of the lateral femoral condyle with all of the screws still in the plate. Even out of the patient, the screws could not be removed from the plate despite the use of vice grips. The femur was then successfully nailed after removal of the two most distal screws of the DHS ( The patient made excellent progress after this procedure and the fracture healed uneventfully. She is now full weight bearing although the leg is 2 Krettek Accompanying these new techniques are new implants. The LISS plate is a percutaneous plate with monocortical self drilling screws and threaded screw holes in the plate. This provides theoretical enhanced stability of the construct with unicortical fixation, particularly useful with distal medial comminution. The technique is fairly new and consequently few of these plates have been removed and thus few complications reported. Significant difficulties may be encountered if removal or revision of this implant is required. This case progressed to a successful conclusion partly due to the osteoporosis of the bone. Normal bone density would almost certainly have prevented successful plate revision without marked bony destruction. Cross threading may not be apparent at the time of original surgery despite adherence to the technique prescribed including the use of a torque screw driver. Surgeons contemplating the use of these implants should be aware of the potential hazards and modification of the implant design may be necessary to prevent this complication.