As an experimental study, the research in this paper was conducted to illustrate the influence of solids content and composition of cemented paste backfill (CPB) on the material's rheological and mechanical characteristics. A new type of CPB was used in this research, which was composed of waste rock as coarse aggregates, fly ash as fines, lime slag as activator proportions and ordinary Portland cement as binder. The mechanical strength of CPB improved significantly with an increase in the solids content, but the workability decreased because the water content decreased. When the solids content was 75% by weight (wt.%), the slump value was 165mm, which met the requirement for pumping. At a solids content of 75%, the CPB also had an unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of 1.83MPa, tensile strength of 0.401MPa, and Poisson's ratio of 0.136 at a curing time of 28days. Increasing the fly ash proportion caused the workability and mechanical strength of the CPB to increase until they reached maximum values, at which point subsequent increases caused the values to decrease. The workability of CPB reached its peak when fly ash proportion was 35wt.%, and the mechanical strength reached its peak at 45wt.%. The workability of CPB decreased as the lime slag proportion increased. The strength of CPB also increased with an increase in the lime slag proportion, however, only until it reached 12wt.%, at which point the strength began to decline. The addition of more cement resulted in much better mechanical performance of the CPB samples, especially with longer curing times. However, workability of CPB increased as cement portion increased in the range of 0% to 2.5%, before decreasing over the range of 2.5%–5.0%.The process of mining involves the removal and recovery of economically valuable minerals from the earth's crust ( Gonggeyingzi Coal Mine is located in Chifeng City, Inner Mongolia, China. The area of the mine field is 0.42 Although cemented paste backfilling technology has already been applied successfully, further research of CPB is needed to determine ways to improve the materials workability and strength, as well as lower the technology's operational costs. Workability is defined by the rheological properties to represent the transportability of the CPB. Mechanical properties are very important for CPB since its function is to support overlying strata and to prevent it from breaking and causing subsidence( The purpose of this paper is to highlight how the factors of solids content and material proportions influence the rheological and mechanical properties of CPB. To achieve this goal, different mixtures of CPB used at the Gonggeyingzi Coal Mine were sampled using different solids contents, fly ash proportions, activator proportions, and binder proportions. The slump values of the CPB were tested to illustrate the rheological properties, and the mechanical properties such as unconfined compression strength, splitting tensile strength and Poisson's ratio were tested. The waste rock which came from the waste dump of this mine was mostly composed of sandstone and sandy shale, and it acted as coarse aggregate in the creation of CPB ( The fly ash used in the experiment came from the Yuanbaoshan Power Plant. It mainly consists of cenosphere, spongy vitreous, quartz, ferric oxide, carbon fines, and sulfate. Its particle size is 5–50 Lime slag was used as an activator, and was obtained from Huayi Lime Plant. The percentage of calcium oxide was about 39.71%. Lime slag is an air hardening cementation material that does not solidify in water. The purpose of adding the lime slag to CPB is to take advantage of its alkalinity, ability to activate fly ash, and subsequently produce hydraulic cementing materials. The binder used in the preparation of CPB mixtures was #32.5 Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC). The main components of OPC include tricalcium silicate, dicalcium silicate, calcium aluminate, calcium ferroaluminates and gypsum. The content of tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate was about 50% and 20% respectively. The function of binder material is to produce a hydration reaction in order to create cementing properties. The cementation properties are required to make the CPB condense while enhancing its mechanical properties to ensure good support capacity. Another function of OPC is to increase the lubrication of CPB during the transport process. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to test the mineral components of CPB. The XRD machine was a D8 Advance model and manufactured by Bruker, Germany. The XRD test pattern is shown in  To study the effects of the solids content, fly ash proportion, activator proportion, and binder proportion, four groups of CPB samples were prepared by mixing waste rock, fly ash, lime slag, OPC and water in different proportions ( After mixing the materials, a part of the slurry was used for slump tests. The remaining material from the mixture was poured into cubic steel molds to make CPB cubes for mechanical testing. The size of the CPB cube used in testing was 70.7 Slump is a simple and intuitive reference index in engineering operations for pumping slurries, and its value directly reflects the consistency, fluidity, and rheological properties of CPB ( The CPB samples were tested for unconfined compressive strength (UCS) according to the CNSC testing standard GB/T 23561 ( Generally, the tensile strength of CPB is much lower than UCS, so the materials like CPB are too weak to carry out the commonly used direct tensile test. The splitting tensile strength (STS) test, also known as Brazilian test, is used as a substitute method to test the tensile strength of CPB. The CPB samples were tested for STS according to the GB/T 23561-2009 testing standard ( The Poisson's ratio of CPB is a very important mechanical parameter ( The Group A of CPB samples was used to study the influence of solids content on CPB's rheological and mechanical properties consisting of 40% fly ash, 10% lime slag, 2.5% OPC and 47.5% waste rock. Variable solids contents of CPB samples were set for the test at 73%, 74%, 75%, 76% and 77%, as shown in the The slump test results of different solids contents presented in The mechanical characteristics of CPB, including Poisson's Ratio, UCS, and tensile strength are shown in The Group B of CPB samples were used to illustrate the influence of the fly ash. The samples consisted of 10% lime, 2.5% OPC and 75% solids content, the remaining 87.5% of the solids materials were composed of fly ash and waste rock. Variable fly ash proportions of CPB samples were set for the test at 30%, 35%, 40%, 45% and 50%, as shown in The slump test results of samples with different fly ash proportions are presented in The mechanical characteristics of CPB are also highly influenced by the fly ash proportion. The mechanical parameters, including Poisson's ratio, UCS, and tensile strength are shown in The Group C of CPB samples were used for investigating the influence of the activator proportion. The solids content of CPB was 75%. The solids proportion of the samples consisted of 40% fly ash and 2.5% OPC, with the remaining 57.5% of material being composed of lime slag and waste rock. Variable activator lime slag proportions of CPB samples were set for the test with values of 6%, 8%, 10%, 12%, and 14%, as shown in  Increasing the lime slag proportion has a negative impact on the workability of CPB, but it has a positive impact on the mechanical strength properties. The mechanical strength, including UCS and tensile strength, are shown in The Group D of CPB samples were used to show the influence of the binder component. The binder in this CPB mixture is Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC). These samples consisted of 10% lime slag and 40% fly ash, with the remaining 50% of material being composed of OPC and waste rock. The solids content was 75%. Variable binder (OPC) proportions of CPB samples were set for the test at 0%, 1.5%, 2.5%, 3.5% and 5%, as shown in the  Binder proportion has an important role in determining the mechanical characteristics of CPB samples. The Poisson's ratio decreased slightly from 0.175 to 0.131 with an increase in the OPC proportion from 0% to 5%, as shown in The presented results have shown that the solids content of the paste, the fly ash proportion, the lime slag proportion, and the OPC proportion all have a considerable effect on the rheological and mechanical properties of CPB. (1) The mechanical strength of CPB improves significantly as the solids content increases, but the workability decreases because the water content decreases. (2) As the fly ash proportion increases, both the workability and mechanical strength of the CPB increase at first and then decrease. When the fly ash proportion was 35%, the CPB had the best workability, and the mechanical strength reached its peak at the 45% of fly ash proportion. (3) Overall, the workability of CPB decreased as the lime slag proportion increased. However, the strength of CPB only increased until the lime slag proportion reached 12%, at which point UCS and tensile strength reached a maximum and subsequent increases in the lime slag proportion caused strength to decline. (4) The addition of more OPC resulted in much better mechanical performance of CPB, especially CPB samples of longer curing times, but workability was also affected. The binder proportion should be designed dynamically based on the mining condition requirements and its price. We thank the managers and staffs of the Gonggeyingzi Coal Mine for their important support. Special thanks go to those researchers who have made great contributions to the project. This work was supported by the Research Fund of The State Key Laboratory of Coal Resources and Safe Mining,