Background
                  Clavicle malunion affects the biomechanics of the shoulder joint. The purpose of this study is to establish the abduction, flexion, and internal (medial) rotation biomechanics of the shoulder after clavicle malunion.
               
                  Methods
                  A computational study was performed utilizing a three-dimensional, validated computational model of the upper extremity. Sequential shortening of the clavicle up to 20% was simulated. Muscle forces, moment arms, and moments were calculated for the surrounding musculature through a range of flexion, abduction, and internal rotation during the simulated shortening.
               
                  Findings
                  Shortening of the clavicle decreases the shoulder elevation moments of the upper extremity muscles during abduction. Internal rotation moments are also decreased with shortening. Flexion moments were affected less through physiologic range of motion. The observed effects are due to a combination of changes in moment arms of the individual muscles as well as a decrease in the force generating capacity of the muscles. Additionally, shortening of the clavicle increases coronal angulation of the clavicle at the sternoclavicular joint.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Shortening causes a decrease in the moment generating capacity as well as the total force generating capacity of the shoulder girdle muscles. The clinical significance of these computational results, which are consistent with recent clinical studies, is validation of the proposed functional deficit caused by clavicle malunion.Clavicle fractures are common fractures among all age groups and represent 2.6% to 10% of all fractures ( Clavicle fractures are described by the Allman classification ( The clinical results of non-operative treatment have generally been considered favorable ( Malunion of the clavicle may affect its function. It has been proposed that shortening the lever arm of the shoulder girdle muscles leads to a functional impairment in overhead movements and an increase in shear forces across the glenohumeral joint ( A computational study was performed utilizing a validated computational model of the upper extremity made publicly available by The model describes interactions between the muscles, bones, and joints of the upper extremity. In addition to muscle direction, it is able to compute the active and passive forces generated by the muscles and the relationships between these structures and joint motion (through their moment arms). Peak achievable muscle forces depend on optimal fiber length and tendon slack length. Joint moments depend on both muscle forces and moment arms. The peak force is calculated as the product of physiological cross section area (PCSA) and specific tension. The PCSA for each muscle is the ratio of the muscle volume to fiber length. Specific tension for the shoulder muscles is assumed to be is 140 The intent of this work is to determine the biomechanics of malunited clavicle fractures, thus, the Holzbaur model was modified by sequentially shortening the clavicle by 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% of the original length ( The upper extremity model included the muscle groups responsible for abduction, flexion, and internal rotation about the glenohumeral joint and bones associated with shoulder joint movements. Achievable shoulder abduction, flexion, and internal rotation moments were evaluated throughout a physiologic range of motion to determine the effect of clavicular shortening on shoulder biomechanics. Active and passive muscle forces were also monitored. Abduction was simulated as having contributions from the supraspinatus and the deltoid muscles. Flexion was simulated as having contributions from the pectoralis major, coracobrachialis, biceps brachii and anterior fibers of the deltoid. The internal rotators included the anterior deltoid, latissimus dorsi, teres major, pectoralis major and subscapularis muscles. The shoulder abductors include the deltoid and supraspinatus muscles. The deltoid consists of three distinct sets of fibers: anterior fibers (DELT1), middle fibers (DELT2), and posterior fibers (DELT3). They have a common insertion, the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus. The origins, attachment, and paths of these muscle fibers are important to the mechanics of shoulder abduction.  At the extreme end of the range of motion, between 165° and 180° of abduction, clavicular shortening increases the achievable moment. This minor enhancement of strength may have no clinical significance. To explore the source of strength deficit in abduction moment, the individual fiber forces, moments, moment arms, and included angles are plotted in The anterior deltoid is the only abductor whose origin is on the clavicle. The shortening of the clavicle affects the total fiber force, moment arm, and hence the abduction moment generated by the anterior deltoid fiber ( The muscles that contribute to shoulder internal rotation include: the anterior fibers of the deltoid, the latissimus dorsi, the teres major, the pectoralis major, and the subscapularis. As shown in Shortening affects the moment arms, total fiber force, and included angle of the internal rotators. The total reduction in internal rotation moment is the sum of the changes in moments of individual fibers of the pectoralis major (PECM1,2,3), the latissimus dorsi (LAT1,2,3) and the anterior deltoid fibers. The largest contributions are from the pectoralis major fibers. The pectoralis muscle inserts into the lateral lip of the bicipital groove of the humerus which translate medially with clavicular shortening. Thus, the PECM fibers have reduced forces and moment arms with shortening. The included angles between the fiber forces and their moment arms are nearly unchanged with shortening but depend on the internal rotation angle. Flexion was simulated as having contributions from the pectoralis major, the coracobrachialis, the biceps brachii, the anterior fibers of deltoid and the supraspinatus. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this study is the first to analyze for, and demonstrate, a relationship between degree of clavicular shortening, change in anatomic relationships, and function. The results from this study demonstrate, in a clinically relevant manner, the fundamental effect that malunion has on muscle mechanics. With progressive clavicular shortening, there is a resulting functional change in the biomechanics of the shoulder including a clinically significant change in the moment generating capacity about the glenohumeral joint. This is seen as a decrease in the force generating capacity of the affected muscles as well as a decrease in the muscle moment arm. These changes demonstrate the adverse effects of clavicle shortening on abduction, internal rotation, and flexion motions of shoulder joint. Several clinical studies point to a causal relationship between clavicle fracture malunion and associated functional deficits, although in clinical studies pain may be a confounding variable. Common clinical measures used to assess outcomes of shoulder injuries include the Constant score (   Lazarides et. al. ( All of these studies, albeit with different methods, conclude that clavicle malunions may cause functional problems and patient dissatisfaction. The current study sheds light on the mechanism by which malunion can lead to dysfunction, that is, an alteration in the glenohumeral biomechanics. The current study is consistent with the above studies in several ways. For example, the peak abduction moments of the deltoid and supraspinatus combined are observed to be 40 Computationally, this study supports the argument that an anatomic union of the clavicle is biomechanically superior to a shortened malunion. These limit checks ensure that the data from this study is consistent with existing literature. The limitations of this study are several. Shoulder joint motion is a complex three-dimensional activity. Because the clavicle acts as a linkage between the glenohumeral joint and the thorax, its shortening affects the length-tension relationship of the supporting musculature. Shortening also causes a decrease in the muscle moment arms and total force generating capacity of muscles and thus decreases the moments in internal rotation and abduction about the glenohumeral joint. The performance of individual fiber groups are affected according to their anatomical origins and insertions. It is observed that the anterior and middle fibers of deltoid are the prime contributors in shoulder abduction and that clavicular shortening has a greater effect on the anterior fibers. Furthermore, the results demonstrate that the moments are created less efficiently at the highest abduction angles due to reductions in the included angle between the line of action and moment arm. It is found that the anterior fibers of the deltoid and the subscapularis are the largest contributors to internal rotation mechanics. Again, clavicular shortening affects the moment arms, the fiber forces, and moment generation efficiency of the internal rotators. The total internal rotation strength deficit is the cumulative effect of many small changes in the pectoralis major, the latissimus dorsi, and the anterior deltoid fibers. The total available flexion moment is minimally affected by shortening; however, changes in individual muscle fiber forces modifies their role in fatigue. Finally, the shortening of the clavicle increases coronal angulation of the clavicle at the sternoclavicular joint. These outcomes support the clinical observations that malunited clavicle fractures may lead to functional deficits.