Faults are by nature dynamic, as their architecture and composition evolve progressively in space and through time steered by the interplay between strain weakening and hardening mechanisms. This study combines structural analysis, geochemistry and chlorite geothermometry to investigate deformation and strain localization mechanisms of the Kvenklubben fault, a Paleozoic brittle–ductile thrust in northern Norway, with the goal to constrain their temporal variations and the consequences thereof on fault architecture development and rheological behavior. The fault evolved from an initially discrete brittle feature slipping mainly by seismogenic ruptures to a wide brittle–ductile phyllonite deforming by aseismic creep. The formation of mechanically weak phyllosilicates by decarbonation of footwall dolostones and carbonation of hanging wall metabasalts was the main weakening mechanism, whereas partitioning of fluid flow and fracture sealing following transient high pore pressure-driven embrittlement caused episodic and localized strain hardening. The interplay between strain weakening and hardening mechanisms caused the fault core to widen. We suggest that the ability for carbonate-hosted faults to slip by seismogenic rupture is also a function of the faults' structural-evolutionary stage, and that it decreases progressively with fault maturity. This study demonstrates the importance of calibrating the present-day fault anatomy against the dynamic character of faults, which evolve geometrically, compositionally and mechanically in space and through time.Deformation in the upper crust is heterogeneous and localized mostly along relatively thin brittle faults that dissect the rock mass into lenses of essentially undeformed material. Much effort has recently been invested into refining the understanding of the internal architecture of upper crustal faults, of their fundamental rheological properties and of the mechanisms that localize strain therein, mainly because of the impact thereof on seismogenesis (e.g. An often neglected or downplayed source of complexity in the analysis of natural fault systems is that brittle faults are often long lived and, once formed, tend to become zones of mechanical weakness that can easily accommodate later strain increments (e.g. This contribution and its companion paper ( The study demonstrates how the full structural and temporal evolution of a complex brittle–ductile fault can be unraveled by combining structural analysis with geochemical and stable isotopic studies and K–Ar dating of authigenic synkinematic illite/muscovite. In this first part we focus on the structural and rheological characteristics of the KF, with the goal to constrain the mechanisms of fault initiation and widening by continued localization in metabasalt and dolostone and the evolution of temperature and mineral formation within phyllonitic fault rocks. The implications of a compositionally heterogeneous fault core evolving continuously in space and time are assessed against the bulk rheological behavior of the fault. The paper provides the foundation upon which the second part builds to interpret the K–Ar illite/muscovite age constraints on the KF faulting history ( The Repparfjord Tectonic Window (RTW) is the northwesternmost exposed termination of the Fennoscandian Shield, representing a basement culmination within the Caledonian Nappe System about 100 km south of North Cape in northern Norway ( Along most of the periphery of the window the Raipas Supergroup is overlain by a thin autochthonous and parautochthonous cover sequence, the Lomvann Formation, consisting mainly of shales, siltstones and quartzites, plus rare Neoproterozoic–Vendian tillite diamictites ( The tectonic window is exposed from beneath the Kalak Nappe Complex, a series of stacked thrust nappes of the upper Allochthon of the northern Scandinavian Caledonides (e.g. The RTW records the structural influence of at least two major orogenies. During the Paleoproterozoic Svecofennian orogeny, the Raipas Supergroup rocks were deformed and metamorphosed under greenschist- to lower amphibolite facies conditions until c. 1840 Ma, as constrained by the K–Ar dating of metamorphic hornblendes in the eastern part of the window ( The Silurian-age Caledonian orogeny, which involved the SE- to E-directed emplacement of nappes onto the western margin of the Fennoscandian Shield ( In the northwesternmost part of the window, however, a series of discrete thrusts developed on the limbs of inherited Paleoproterozoic folds during the early stages of nappe emplacement ( Gravitational collapse of the Caledonian orogen commenced rapidly after the peak Scandian phase (c. 425 Ma), as indicated by muscovite and biotite Ar–Ar cooling ages around 410–400 Ma ( In the southwestern Barents Sea, situated west of the RTW, several episodes of extension and basin formation are documented by seismic imaging and drill cores within the offshore Paleozoic to Cenozoic strata. The principal phases of extension and rifting are represented by the opening of NE–SW trending basins during the Late Devonian to Early Carboniferous and the Late Triassic to Cretaceous ( This study is based on field structural analysis of a number of traverses across the PIS. In addition, detailed investigations of key fault rock outcrops were carried out by microstructural studies and petrography. The composition of synkinematic chlorites from six samples of the KF core was determined to study phase authigenesis and to constrain the temperature of chlorite crystallization. Analyses were done on polished thin sections using a JEOL JXA-8500F electron microprobe at the Electron Microscope Laboratories of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. The instrument was operated at 15 kV, 20 nA and with a beam diameter of 1 μm, with natural silicate minerals as standards. Special care was taken to avoid mixed mineral phases. This means that cloths of densely intergrown chlorite–illite were avoided, but interstratified chlorite–smectite was analyzed as a single phase. We used the chlorite geothermometer by The PIS forms the northwestern part of the RTW ( Mapping revealed a strong control by preexisting folds on the development of the thrusts. The Paleoproterozoic rocks within the RTW are folded by km-wavelength, upright NE–SW-trending F Undeformed primary contacts are rarely observed, as most of them were exploited as thrusts. Along the limbs of syn- and antiforms, bedding-parallel thrusts developed preferentially along lithological contacts and within weak lithologies, such as the graphitic Kvalsund slates ( Although most kinematic indicators within the PIS indicate top-to-the SE thrusting, top-to-the NW extensional shear bands are commonly observed. They are well developed in strongly sheared metabasalts, for example at Neverfjord ( The main fault segment of the KF dips c. 40° to the NW ( The core of the main KF is 1–3 m thick and consists of two equally thick phyllonitic packages: (1) a beige calc-phyllonite at the base (lower phyllonite: LoP) and (2) a gray–green chlorite phyllonite at the top (upper phyllonite: UpP), both developed at the expense of the immediately adjacent lithologies. On either side of the core, the metabasalt foliation and dolostone bedding are asymptotically bent into parallelism with the orientation of the fault ( The LoP is a veined and transposed dolostone with a well-developed network of phyllosilicate-rich slip planes that occasionally form cm-scale duplexes, giving top-to-the SE kinematics ( In the UpP, shearing caused asymmetric, tight to isoclinal folding of the phyllonitic foliation ( Chlorite and illite are the dominant phases in the UpP, along with minor quartz and calcite and trace apatite, albite, titanite, psilomelane and allanite. SEM analysis shows mixed-layer chlorite–smectite in small amounts throughout the UpP, whereas smectite/vermiculite is a prominent mineral phase only in the uppermost part. At the base of the UpP, the phyllonitic foliation is disrupted by extensive quartz–calcite veins ( The SF is located in the footwall about 25 m below the main KF. Displacement along this fault caused an angular discordance between the bedding in the juxtaposed blocks and an asymptotic folding of the bedding similar to that observed at the main fault ( Results of chlorite geothermometry are summarized in The results document a linear upward increase of the chlorite crystallization temperature across the fault core, from a mean of 198 °C at the base of the LoP to a mean of 285 °C at the top of the UpP ( Estimated temperature variations within individual samples are relatively small at the margins of the fault core ( Based on our observations and analytical results we suggest a complex spatial and temporal evolution for the KF wherein, after an initial possible seismic brittle localization, the fault accommodated shortening by widening as a result of complex physical–chemical processes. Analysis of the transiently activated deformation mechanisms and of the modality of their spatial and temporal interaction allows constraining the details of the KF deformational history. We present our fault evolution conceptual model here below and in The earliest phase of Caledonian compressional deformation within the PIS is best documented by the SF, the structurally less evolved fault segment of the KF system. Pressure solution, forming sub-vertical stylolites at high angle to the greatest sub-horizontal compressive stress, and fracturing, forming sub-horizontal tensile fractures, accommodated the first increments of NW–SE shortening and led to the initial and localised weakening of the dolostones ( The growth of laterally continuous fault planes locally enhanced the permeability within otherwise massive dolostones. The presence of fluids and their interaction with the wall rock allowed for the formation of talc by synkinematic dolomite decarbonation, as demonstrated by the truncation of early brittle features by talc-decorated slip planes ( The more advanced stages of faulting can therefore be investigated only by studying the main KF segment. Its LoP ( Key to understanding the advanced structural development of the KF is the eventual juxtaposition of metabasalts against dolostones ( The progressive increase of phyllosilicates caused by both dolomite decarbonation and metabasalt carbonation was the driving factor that eventually led to a change in the governing deformation mechanisms within the KF core and a shift from a brittle deformational style to overall ductile creep. The ability of phyllonitic fault rocks to deform by stable creeping has been attributed elsewhere to either increased fluid pressures ( Tight to isoclinal folding of the phyllonitic foliation demonstrates that at least some deformation was accommodated by pure frictional grain sliding. Chlorite, as other phyllosilicates, has a low friction coefficient ( Kinking of phyllosilicates and dynamic recrystallization of quartz by sub-grain rotation demonstrate that strain was also accommodated in a plastic manner. It should be noted that the maximum temperatures reached in the KF (c. 300 °C) are lower than those generally expected for sub-grain rotation recrystallization with formation of core and mantle textures to be operative (>400 °C; Extensional reactivation of the upper part of KF, as indicated by asymmetric crenulations ( The presence of weak phyllosilicates in fault rocks has a significant impact on the fault's mechanical strength, as demonstrated by a large number of recent contributions ( The conceptual dynamic model in Transient localized embrittlement with rapid fracture sealing is thus proposed as an important strain hardening mechanism that may cause widening of fault cores by continuously forcing strain to re-locate to the fault core margins, where reaction weakening is most effective. In this sense the transient volume of fault core that actively accommodates strain may not necessarily increase, but the accumulated end-result is a wider fault core ( When the metabasalts were eventually juxtaposed on top of the dolostones, strain localized in the hanging wall-side of the fault core leading to the progressive upward development of the UpP ( From the large difference in calculated temperatures and chlorite compositions across the KF ( The study of the KF demonstrates that the rheology of middle to upper crustal faults can vary significantly during fault evolution in response to continuously evolving deformation and strain localization mechanisms. The implications thereof on faults' seismic behavior cannot be overlooked. This is of particular relevance for carbonate-hosted faults, as they are associated with a major part of all medium to large earthquakes (e.g. The KF represents an outstanding example of how brittle–ductile phyllonitic faults initiate as discrete brittle faults that can widen due to the delicate and transient interplay between chemical weakening and localized strain hardening. This is in turn controlled by fluid flow and reactivity, wall rock composition and the deformation mechanisms active at different stages of the fault strain path. In the light of our new results we conclude that the composition of fault rocks and, as a consequence, the architecture of fault zones, have to be treated as continuously evolving factors and, as such, need to be projected against the faults' relative and if possible absolute temporal evolution ( We suggest that progressive weakening by chemical decomposition and phyllosilicate precipitation is widespread in upper crustal faults in general and carbonate-bearing faults in particular. This weakening mechanism greatly impacts the faults' seismic behavior and implies that newly-formed fault segments are more likely to rupture co-seismically whereas structurally evolved faults mainly deform by aseismic creep. M.P. Raanes, NTNU, is thanked for technical assistance with electron microprobe analysis. Constructive reviews by Alexandre Kounov and Luca Menegon helped to improve the quality of the paper and their input is gratefully acknowledged. Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.