Fast pyrolysis of wood and straw was conducted in a drop tube furnace (DTF) and compared with corresponding data from a wire mesh reactor (WMR) to study the influence of temperature (1000–1400)°C, biomass origin (pinewood, beechwood, wheat straw, alfalfa straw), and heating rate (103
                     °C/s, 104
                     °C/s) on the char yield and morphology. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), elemental analysis, and ash compositional analysis were applied to characterize the effect of operational conditions on the solid residues (char, soot) and gaseous products. The char yield from fast pyrolysis in the DTF setup was 3 to 7% (daf) points lower than in the WMR. During fast pyrolysis pinewood underwent drastic morphological transformations, whereas beechwood and straw samples retained the original porous structure of the parental fuel with slight melting on the surface. The particle size of Danish wheat straw char decreased in its half-width with respect to the parental fuel, whereas the alfalfa straw char particle size remained unaltered at higher temperatures. Soot particles in a range from 60 to 300nm were obtained during fast pyrolysis. The soot yield from herbaceous fuels was lower than from wood samples, possibly due to differences in the content of lignin and resin acids.Suspension firing of biomass is widely used for power generation and has been considered as an important step in reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Unlike coal, biomass is difficult to mill to < In suspension firing, biomass particles are heated rapidly to high temperatures of 1000–1400 Previous investigations of biomass pyrolysis In the present study the relation between different types of biomass and their solid residue (char, soot) properties was investigated. Char and soot yields were obtained from fast pyrolysis in a drop tube furnace (DTF). The char yields from the DTF were compared with results from a wire mesh reactor (WMR) Pinewood, beechwood, Danish wheat straw, and alfalfa straw were selected for the fast pyrolysis study in the DTF and WMR. The wheat straw was leached in deionized water (room temperature) by continuous stirring for 12 The proximate and ultimate analyses of fuels are shown in The water-ethanol extraction was performed on wheat straw and alfalfa straw which contain a high level of hydrophilic and lipophilic extractable compounds as described by Thammasouk et al. The Drop Tube Furnace (DTF) used in the present study is shown in Biomass was rapidly heated and reacted while it fell down through the reactor. Reaction products were separated into coarse particles (mainly char and fly ashes), fine particles (mainly soot and precipitated ash vapor), and permanent gases. Soot particles passing the cyclone (cut size 2.5 In the present study, the experiments were conducted by feeding ≈ 5 The wire mesh reactor at TU Munich used in this study was previously described by Tremel et al. For the DTF, the measurement error was calculated for each component of a mass balance (C For the WMR, the error bars represent the standard deviation from the mean of the series of experiments at each condition Three different solid residues were distinguished in the present study, namely char, soot and coke. Char and soot were collected in a char bin and on a filter at the different experimental temperatures. Char is the fraction of non-devolatilized solid from the initial biomass, consisting mainly of carbon and ash with minor presence of hydrogen and oxygen. Coke, the carbonaceous material deposited on the reactor walls, was quantified after each experiment by measurement of the concentration of CO SEM analysis of char was performed on a microscope (FEI Company, Inspect) with a tungsten filament under high vacuum in order to understand char structural and chemical properties. Prior to the analysis, char samples were coated with a thin layer of carbon (40 Soot samples were studied on the transmission electron microscope (200-kV FEI Tecnai T20 G The elemental analysis was performed on two instruments of the same model (Eurovector, model EA3000). Acetanilide was used as a reference standard. The ash content was determined using a standard ash test at 550 The ash compositional analysis was performed by an X-ray fluorescence instrument (Shimadzu, model EDX 800-HS) at TU Munich. Prior to the XRF analysis, char samples were pre-heated in oxygen at 5 The particle size and shape of the original biomass and its char were characterized on a 2D dynamic imaging instrument (CAMSIZER XT, Retsch), designed for a particle size range of 3 The Martin minimal (x The mass balances of the DTF experiments with respect to measured solid residues (char, soot, coke) and major gaseous products (CO At 1000 The wire mesh reactor (WMR) results were obtained by Trubetskaya et al. As a general trend, the char yield of beechwood, wheat straw and alfalfa straw decreased with increasing temperature, indicating a dependency of the char yield on the heat treatment temperature. On the other hand, the char yield of pinewood and leached wheat straw decreased only slightly between 1000 and 1400 The results showed that there is a clear difference between char yields in the WMR and DTF. The char yield in the DTF was 3–7% wt. (daf) points lower than that in the WMR, possibly due to the differences in heating rate and residence time. The pyrolysis in the WMR was carried out with a lower heating rate (1000   The concentrations of H The yield of CO In the literature The weight of each inorganic element retained in alfalfa and wheat straw char from DTF is shown in The inorganic composition of original wheat straw showed a large fraction of Si (seven times larger than in alfalfa straw), leading to the formation of silicates during devolatilization. Thermodynamic equilibrium calculations of gas and solid phases, performed with the Factsage software, indicated that under reducing conditions potassium in the alfalfa and wheat straw chars was most likely present as chlorides and silicates. In addition, potassium and calcium could be present as carbides in the alfalfa straw. In the wheat straw char, calcium was obtained as a silicate. The beechwood and straw soot clusters contained both organic matter and minerals as shown in As it can be seen in The particle size and shape of the original biomass and its char were analyzed by CAMSIZER XT instrument. Prior to the 2D dynamic imaging analysis, the original fuel was sieved to a particle size fraction of 0.2–0.4 The particle shape of biomass was characterized using the sphericity (SPHT) and width/length ratio (b/l) parameters. The pinewood char particles showed a near-spherical shape (SPHT  The SEM images showed that the pinewood particles lost all features of the parental structure, becoming spherical and porous with large inner cavities, formed from the simultaneous release of a large volatiles fraction. The pinewood particles have undergone stronger melting during fast pyrolysis by forming smooth and near-spherical structures. It is believed that under fast heating the formation of metaplast is mostly affected by the bond-breaking and cross-linking of organic components present in lignin that is less volatile than holocelluloses. Surprisingly, beechwood char particles were only slightly molten on the outer surface and kept the shape and size characteristics of the parental fuel, contrary to the results of Dall'Ora et al. This observation is most likely caused by the presence of beechwood at a stage of being converted from the water-conducting sapwood to the heartwood, and to formation of tyloses, which are filled with a large quantity of phenolic compounds, lignin, and aromatic substances Alfalfa straw and wheat straw have undergone plasticization, but less melting than the pinewood, indicating an effect of ash on the char morphology. The high levels of K and Ca in the herbaceous biomasses could cause less severe plasticization, by catalyzing the conversion of bridges into char links, and therefore increasing polymerization/cross-linking and reducing char fluidity. The alfalfa and wheat straw char obtained two types of a particle shape (elongated cylindrical and near-spherical). The transformation of herbaceous char shapes was probably affected by the presence of potassium and calcium silicates, remaining in the char. The high Ca content in the alfalfa straw could provide additional stability to the char, preserving the particle size of the original fuel. In the present study, the effect of extractives on the char structural transformations was studied by removing resin, fatty acids, waxes, and phytosterols from the pinewood and beechwood by acetone extraction. In the fast DTF pyrolysis, the solid sub-micron particles were collected on a filter. The particulate matter at 1250–1400 Interestingly, also larger sub-micron particles of a size > Char yields from the DTF were lower than those obtained in a wire mesh reactor. This was attributed to the higher heating rates in the DTF, while self-gasification by reaction with CO The measured soot yield of wood was 3–9% higher compared to herbaceous biomass above 1250 The pyrolysis process caused the characteristic length of both wood samples and wheat straw particles to decrease by a factor of two as shown by 2D dynamic imaging analysis, while the pinewood char obtained the most spherical shape. The beechwood and herbaceous char particles retained a cylindrical shape. Scanning electron microscopy on the chars indicated structural transformations of all biomass under fast heating. The chars underwent strong deformation with clear signs of melting and development of macropores at all applied temperatures. The ability of char to melt under the fast heating followed the order pinewood The authors from DTU would like to acknowledge the financial support that they received for this project from  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at