Distal radius fractures are one of the most common injuries in orthopaedics. The management of these fractures is complicated in the setting of multiple extremity trauma and with metaphyseal diaphyseal extension of the fracture. Dorsal bridge plating of select distal radius fractures has improved the management of these fractures and has allowed for earlier mobilization of these fractures. We discuss the indications, surgical techniques, and advantages of this procedure.Distal radius fractures are among the most common upper extremity fractures. They are bimodal in distribution, with most of them seen in the setting of low-energy trauma and treated nonoperatively. High-energy distal radius fracture with metadiaphyseal extension. This includes intra- or extraarticular fractures that contain variable amounts of comminution. The use of newer, extended length volar locking plates may be adequate for some of these injuries. Patients with multiple injuries and associated lower extremity fractures. Extremely distal fractures with poor bone stock. As adjunct fixation following volar plating with questionable stability. A relative indication has been the use of bridge plating in elderly patients with osteoporosis where purchase in the metaphyseal bone is suboptimal. Volar shear distal radius fractures where the fragment may be reduced and stabilized using a standard volar locking plate. Concomitant fractures of the distal radius and metacarpal shafts. The patient is positioned supine with the affected extremity on a radiolucent arm board. A nonsterile tourniquet placed at the upper arm is used for hemostasis. The extremity should be prepared up past the elbow to allow for easy pronation and supination of the wrist. An initial reduction is performed to determine the effect of distraction plating and to establish the length of the plate needed for fixation. Typically a 12-14 holes 3.5-mm limited contact dynamic compression plate is required. The plate is selected to span from the second or third metacarpal to 4 A 3-cm dorsal incision is made at the level of the third metacarpal centered over the shaft. The incision should be midline to avoid the cutaneous branches of the radial and ulnar dorsal nerves. The dorsal aponeurosis is incised and the common extensor tendon is exposed. Alternatively, the second metacarpal may be used for distal fixation. Next a 3-cm incision is made approximately 4 On completion of the distraction plating, radial length, height, and inclination should be reestablished. Attention is now turned to intraarticular reduction and dorsal bone grafting as needed. Radial styloid and dorsal ulnar fragments may be addressed with additional Kirschner wires. Any impacted fragments are elevated and supported with bone graft. A volar incision may also be used to address small articular fragments with limited screw fixation. Postoperatively the patient is initially placed in a volar short arm splint with the fingers free to provide soft tissue rest. The splint is typically removed 2 days after the operation and unrestricted ROM is instituted. A long arm splint may be indicated if the distal radioulnar joint or ulna is also disrupted. The patient is allowed to perform activities of daily living with the affected hand. Occupational therapy is instituted to assist in maintenance of ROM including supination and pronation. Patients without elbow pathology are able to bear platform weight. Lifting is restricted to 5 Plate removal is planned for 12-16 weeks postoperatively pending radiographic evidence of bone healing. Extensor tenolysis may be performed as needed during the hardware removal. Immediate institution of occupational therapy emphasizing ROM of the wrist helps regaining most of the wrist flexion and extension postoperatively. As a technique, distraction plating has been proven to be safe and effective. In an early study of patients undergoing bridge plating for metadiaphyseal fractures, Ruch et al The complications of distraction plating include deep infection, nonunion, and malunion. As the fixation is dorsal there is the added risk of tendon attrition, entrapment, or digital extensor lag. In their retrospective review of 140 patients, Hanel et al A 66-year-old right-hand-dominant man sustained a fall from a standing height onto his outstretched right wrist after slipping on ice. He sustained a markedly comminuted extraarticular fracture of his right distal radius with metadiaphyseal extension, as well as a type 2 open fracture of his ipsilateral distal ulnar ( A healthy 38-year-old right-hand-dominant woman sustained polytrauma because of a motorcycle accident. She was thrown from her bike after running into a car, struck her right hand on the windshield, and landed on the asphalt 20