Magnetostrictive materials exhibit (i) reversible strains in the presence of an applied magnetic field and (ii) changes in magnetic properties on the application of stress. While magnetostriction is observed in all ferromagnetic materials, materials that exhibit large magnetostriction preferably at low fields are of interest in actuator and sensor applications. (Tb Magnetostrictive materials with high mechanical strength, good ductility, large magnetostriction at low saturation fields and high imposed stress levels, and low associated cost relative to the above mentioned materials are of great current interest. Attention is therefore placed here on finding Fe based alloy phases with a cubic structure that show enhanced magnetostriction and minimal hysteresis. Identifying such an alloy requires a fundamental understanding of magnetostriction in Fe and the influence of alloying elements, which is lacking at this time. Al has been known to improve magnetostriction in Fe and an Fe-15 a% Al alloy has a magnetostriction coefficient of around 140 ppm in the [001] crystallographic direction The equilibrium solubility of Ga in α-Fe is about 11 a% at room temperature, and 36 a% at 1037 °C Fe-Ga based alloys were prepared by arc melting in an Edmund Beuhler® high vacuum arc melting system. High vapor pressures of Ga and careful melting procedures used resulted in negligible Ga loss. The chamber was first evacuated using an Edwards® diffusion pumping system and back-filled with ultra-high-purity argon to about 0.6 atmosphere. Before melting the Fe-Ga alloy materials, a piece of Ti was melted to getter the residual oxygen and water molecules in the chamber. A low-power arc was used at the early stage of arc melting and the melting was completed with a high-power arc to obtain 25–30 g ingots. The ingots were melted four times to assure homogeneity. The 25–30 g arc-melted ingots of Fe-15 a% Ga, Fe-20 a% Ga and Fe-27.5 a% Ga alloys with and without 1 vol% NbC addition were remelted. The liquid metal was then allowed to flow into a 12.5 mm dia. cylindrical cavity of a copper block with a 1.6 mm-thick alumina insulation sleeve. The liquid metal was cooled by heat extraction primarily through the bottom water-cooled copper electrode block face. The directional casting was intended to facilitate a preferred crystallographic orientation in the ingot. A 25 mm × 25 mm × 75 mm block of (Fe-15 Ga) The microstructures of cast and annealed ingots and the deformation processed Fe-Ga based ingot materials were examined using optical microscopy to assess the grain size and precipitate distribution. X-ray diffraction examinations of these materials were performed using θ-2θ scans to determine the lattice parameters and to assess the nature of crystallographic texture from relative peak intensities. Pole figure measurements were also carried out using a Philips diffractometer unit with a texture goniometer attachment. Magnetostriction measurements were performed on 9 mm dia. and 25–30 mm long cylindrical samples cut from as-cast as well as cast and annealed ingots. Magnetostriction measurements were made using a set up similar to that shown in  The magnetostriction measurements on 9 mm diameter and 25 mm long cylinders of (Fe Magnetostriction measurements were also made on (i) Fe-20 a% Ga alloy that was directionally cast, annealed at 1100 °C for 1 h and then at 600 °C for 1 h, and quenched to obtain disordered bcc structure, (ii) Fe-27.5 a% Ga alloy that was directionally cast, annealed at 1100 °C and then at 730 °C, and quenched to obtain ordered DO Rolled and texture-annealed (Fe It is shown that the addition of Ga significantly enhances the magnetostriction of Fe as expected. Fe-Ga alloys with a (110) texture along the specimen axis showed magnetostriction values of up to 110 ×10 Support of this work by Dr. Kristl Hathaway, Office of Naval Research Materials Division under grant # N00014-99-1-0508 and by the State of Utah Mineral Leasing Funds are gratefully acknowledged.