One of the principal issues in the design of surface and underground structures on/in rock is the shear behavior of rock discontinuities that irreparable damages are caused when neglecting it. Several parameters are involved in the shear behavior of rock discontinuities which can interact with each other. The purpose of this study is to model the shear behavior of rock joints with regard to the individual impact of the influencing parameters and their interaction. To do so, a number of direct shear tests was performed where the values of independent parameters including the compressive strength (σ
                     c), normal stress (σ
                     n), modulus of elasticity (E), joint roughness coefficient (JRC) and basic friction angle (ϕ
                     b) were varied. Then, the response surface methodology (RSM) was used to incorporate the individual influence and interaction of the parameters into constitutive relationships for the peak shear strength, peak shear displacement, and dilation angle. For the shear strength, the most significant interaction was found to be between E and ϕ
                     b, for the peak shear displacement between JRC and E, and for the dilation angle between σ
                     c and E. The results show that the proposed model performs better in estimating the shear behavior characteristics than the model obtained from the nonlinear regression and the Barton-Bandis model. Therefore, the application of RSM is a winning approach for modeling the rock shear behavior which is capable of modeling the most complex interactions and provides a reliable performance.The rock masses inherently contain the discontinuities such as faults, joints and other weak planes. The mechanical behavior of rock masses depends not only on the properties of intact rock materials but also on the discontinuity properties. Since Patton proposed a bilinear shear strength model for joints, Comprehensive experimental studies on shear behavior of rock joint from the early 1960s until the present time have demonstrated the nonlinear shear behavior with interaction between the involved parameters. However, no systematic effort has been made to incorporate the whole interactions between the influencing parameters into a constitutive model for shear behavior of rock joints. This study focuses on the interaction of parameters affecting the shear behavior of rock joints to develop relationships for estimating the parameters of shear strength, peak displacement, and dilation. For this purpose, a number of direct shear tests were performed on the joints replicas with natural surface morphologies. In these experiments, the values of compressive strength ( In this study, the parent joints with very high, high, medium and low roughness levels were selected in magnetite, gneiss, and quartz schist rocks from the Golgohar iron ore mine, Iran ( Tse and Cruden proposed the use of the root mean square (RMS) of the slopes of the profile asperities, called Z The 2D roughness analysis is very sensitive to the number and position of the profiles selected from the surface. For example, First, the morphology of the four parent rock joints was captured by silicone molding ( The experimental study of rock joint behavior was performed by direct shear tests under the constant normal load (CNL) conditions. After the sample was consolidated at the desired normal stress, the shear phase began. The shear load was applied at a constant rate to the upper part of the sample, while the lower part was fixed. The joint replicas were subjected to the direct shear test under the CNL conditions. In the shear displacement of 8 mm, the test was terminated. For modelling the interactions and describing the effect of factors on the system response, the response surface methodology (RSM) were developed based on the mathematical and statistical methods. This approach has been successfully applied to constitutive modeling of geomaterials. The equation obtained for the shear strength of rock joints with a coefficient of determination ( In the data analysis, one of the essential components is the response transformation. In case the errors (residuals) are a function of the response value, it is necessary to use the transformation. Typically, the normal plot of the residuals can be utilized to check the normality. It is required to use the response transformation if the plot of predicted response values against the residuals shows a pattern. The response transformation will make a considerable difference if the maximum to minimum response ratio is large. The recommended transformation is thus provided by the Box-Cox plot ( After extracting the shear strength model, the performance and accuracy of the model were evaluated by analysis of variance (ANOVA) at 95% confidence level ( The last column in  With increasing the With the In this study, using the non-linear regression (NLR) and examining different forms of functions, the following relationship was developed between the independent variables and the rock joint shear strength. For further comparison, the Barton-Bandis (BB) criterion for the shear strength of rock joints was also fitted to the laboratory data as follows The The equation developed for estimating the peak shear displacement using the response surface methodology is expressed as follows:   In addition, using the non-linear regression, the following relationship was developed between the independent variables and the peak shear displacement with For further comparison, the Barton-Bandis (BB) model for the peak shear displacement of rock joints was also fitted to the laboratory data as follows Asadollahi and Tonon revised the BB model for estimating the peak shear displacement as follows  The equation obtained for the dilation angle using the RSM is expressed as follows: The interactions of It can be seen that at the lower bound of   Using the non-linear regression and examining different forms of functions, the following relationship was developed between the independent variables and the rock joint dilation angle with For further comparison, the Barton-Bandis model for the dilation angle of rock joints was also fitted over the laboratory data as follows The Asadollahi and Tonon revised the BB model for estimating the dilation angle as follows  This study focuses on the interaction of parameters affecting the shear behavior of rock joints to develop some relationships for estimating the parameters of shear strength, peak shear displacement, and dilation angle. For this purpose, a number of CNL direct shear tests under different levels of normal stress ( For further comparison, some relationships were also developed using the non-linear regression and examining different forms of functions. Although these relationships also performed fairly well, they were not fully capable of considering the interactions and complexities between the input parameters. This is because the relationships generated based on trial and error are highly dependent on the number of guesses and their quality. On the other hand, the Barton-Bandis constitutive model and its revised version, which first addressed the interaction between some parameters, does not show acceptable performance except for the dilation angle estimation. Therefore, using the response surface methodology is a winning approach for modeling the shear behavior of rock joints which is capable of modeling the most complex interactions and offers reliable performance in the estimate of shear behavior parameters. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.