Purpose
                  To evaluate clinical and radiographic outcomes in patients treated with limited-open retrograde intramedullary headless compression screw (IMHS) fixation for metacarpal neck and shaft fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective review of prospectively collected data on a consecutive series of 39 patients (34 men; 5 women), mean age 28 years (range, 16–66 y) treated with IMHS fixation for acute displaced metacarpal neck/subcapital (N = 26) and shaft (N = 13) fractures at a single academic practice between 2010 and 2014. Preoperative magnitude of metacarpal neck angulation averaged 54° (range, 15° to 70°), and shaft angulation averaged 38° (range, 0° to 55°). Patients used a hand-based orthosis until suture removal and began active motion within the first week. Clinical outcomes were assessed with digital goniometry, pad-to-distal palmar crease distance, and grip strength. Time to union and radiographic arthrosis was assessed. Twenty patients reached minimum 3-month follow-up, with a mean of 13 months (range, 3–33 mo).
               
                  Results
                  All 20 patients with minimum 3 months of follow-up achieved full composite flexion, and extensor lag resolved by 3-week follow-up. All patients demonstrated full active metacarpophalangeal joint extension or hyperextension. Grip strength measured 105% (range, 58% to 230%) of the contralateral hand. No secondary surgeries were performed. There were 2 cases of shaft re-fracture from blunt trauma following prior evidence of full osseous union with the screw in place. All patients achieved radiographic union by 6 weeks. There was no radiographic arthrosis at latest follow-up. One patient reported occasional clicking with metacarpophalangeal joint motion not requiring further treatment.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Limited open retrograde IMHS fixation proved to be safe and reliable for metacarpal neck/subcapital and axially stable shaft fractures, allowed for early postoperative motion without affecting union rates, and obviated immobilization. This technique offers distinct advantages in select patients.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.