Fly ash from coal power stations consists typically of a series of oxide minerals. These minerals can have beneficial effects when used as reinforcement in a plastic matrix. In this work the advanced technique SIMS has been utilised to identify the spatial distribution of the various minerals in fly ash in an epoxy matrix with fly ash weights of 10% and 50%. It is observed that SIMS, which can scan normally to a precision of 0.5 to 0.05wt.%, could positively identify the distribution of the fly ash mineral elements in the epoxy. Attempts were also made to identify the fly ash element distribution in the epoxy using a composition analysis method, namely, EDS. However, it is observed that in the present fly ash–epoxy composites, EDS could not identify the fly ash elements demonstrating SIMS is a much preferred identification technique than the popular EDS method.Fly ash (FA) is a ‘waste by-product’ from coal electric power stations. Owing to being very cheap, light weight, abundantly available as waste material and equivalent or superior to other virgin ceramic oxide materials ( The most commonly used thermoset plastic in polymer matrix composites (PMC) is epoxy resin ( Fly ash as filler in epoxy matrix helps further improve the resulting polymer properties ( Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) is a highly sensitive surface analysis technique because it can detect elements present in parts per billion ranges ( Dynamic SIMS has been used in this work. In Dynamic SIMS, using high-energy and high primary beam densities a volume of a 100 to 1000  Little or no sample preparation may be needed. Can detect elements from Hydrogen (H) to Uranium (U). Most elements may be detected down to concentrations of 1 Can measure isotopic ratios, normally to a precision of 0.5 to 0.05 wt.%. 2-Dimensional ion images may be acquired. A secondary ion leaves the surface at a point close to its original location. This enables localized analysis of the sample to be undertaken and is the cornerstone of ion imaging. 3-Dimensional ion images may be acquired by scanning (rastering) the primary beam and detecting the ion signal as the sample is gradually eroded ( Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS, EDX, or XEDS) is an analytical technique used for the elemental analysis or chemical characterization of a sample (  Use the method SIMS to identify the dispersion of fly ash ingredients in fly ash–epoxy composites with different compositions (fly ash contents 10 and 50 Compare and correlate the SIMS results with EDS analysis to ascertain the relative accuracy of each. The epoxy resin used was diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) which has base of formulated bisphenol A. The hardener used was cycloaliphatic polyamine containing mainly carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. The epoxy system was supplied by The Barnes, NSW, Australia. It was a clear colour liquid with low viscosity (500–1000 Fly ash class F sample was obtained from Cement Australia Brisbane from their Tarong power plant Queensland, Australia. The elemental analysis is shown in Two composites were fabricated as per Casting was done inside silicone rubber dogbone shape moulds of typical dimensions 165 Curing was carried out at 120 Surface study of epoxy–fly ash composites was carried out using: Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS), and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS). The experimental programme included SIMS and EDS analyses of surfaces of selected unpolished moulded specimens fly ash–epoxy composites. Two samples were examined for 10% FA–epoxy composite, and 50% FA–epoxy composite systems. SIMS quantified several elements of importance Si, Mg, Fe, S, Ca, K, Al, Mn and O, as these are the usual constituents of the fly ash phases. Samples were cut to dimensions of 10   For this With reference to element distribution, Si and Mg do not have uniform distribution — rather they are accumulated in one or two places only in the epoxy matrix. Referring to Fe and S have very uniform distribution. S, K and Al have some clustering. By contrast, 50% FA–epoxy composite was studied, as shown in   In There is enriched evidence of Al, Ca, K, and Si in Less presence is observed for Mg There exists a uniform distribution in the matrix for Fe and S. Si as well as C and O can be found in 50% fly ash–epoxy composite as seen in The SIMS and EDS data can be summarized as below in It is anticipated that for both SIMS and EDS, data are the combined signal responses from the matrix, the fly ash, and possibly the fly ash–matrix bonding interface in the composites. From the content/composition of the fly ash used in this study as seen in EDS detected C and O in the 10% FA composite and C, O and Si in the 50% FA composite. In general EDS could detect C, O and Si only for all compositions.  This project utilised SIMS to generate a total knowledge regarding composition as well as distribution and surface contamination for the fly ash material constituents in epoxy resin composites. Fly ash–epoxy composites were fabricated using DGEBA epoxy and crosslinking agent cycloaliphatic polyamine cured at 120 SIMS and EDS studies of as-fabricated (but unbroken) surfaces of two composites provided good comparative information. Trace amounts of Si, Mg, Fe, S, Ca, K, Al, Mn and O have been found in fly ash–epoxy composites using SIMS. Si as well as C and O were found by EDS in the 50% fly ash–epoxy composite as seen in SIMS is a very advanced equipment for getting elemental distribution as well as surface contamination. Notably, whilst This research was fortunate to receive an