Polyurethane (PU) rigid foam structures are the most effective materials with the best insulation value per unit thickness and thermal energy storage via phase change materials (PCMs) offers flexibility to play key role in heat management. In this sense, the paper presents the feasibility of PU–PCM composites by direct utilization of a PCM and its compatibility with the used PU formulation recipe in terms of improved thermal characteristics. The thermal properties are reported in terms of phase change temperature, enthalpy, total absorbed heat and thermal decomposition with necessary statistical calculations. The stability of the PCM inside the foam matrix has also been investigated to clarify its leakage behavior. The particle distribution in the foam samples have been reported with optical microscope and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging. The DSC analyses indicate that the total heat absorption capacity can be improved up to 34% which represents the improved buffering function against temperature changes. The composites offer higher heat absorption capacity with combined heat deposition property of the PCM and thermal insulation property of the PU foam.Energy is an essential to our daily life. However, costs of retrieving energy from primary sources and the energy demand have been increasing simultaneously since the last decades. Decrease in oil and coal reserves increases the extraction costs and natural disasters make us question the safety of nuclear energy. Under these circumstances, renewable energy sources and efficient utilization of energy gain importance to balance the demand and provide economical savings. When thermal energy storage is the point of interest, PCMs are important tools for heat and cold deposition. These materials have high latent heat values and they are capable of storing or releasing high amount of energy during phase change with small temperature variations. They can be classified into two main groups as inorganic and organic PCMs. The inorganic PCMs are the largest group, including salt hydrates, nitrates and hydroxides. However, they principally suffer from low chemical and thermal stability and corrosiveness. On the other hand, the organic PCMs are more stable materials with reliable thermal behavior. They are compatible with encapsulation materials and they have small supercooling degree and high rate of crystal growth. Paraffin waxes, fatty acids and high-chain fatty acid esters of lower alcohols like methanol or ethanol are the most widely covered organic PCMs in literature In thermal applications, PCMs are entrapped in encapsulating materials which allow liquid phase to be handled more easily in solid barriers. Different forms of micro-capsules Thermal energy obtained from primary or renewable sources can be more efficiently utilized with proper thermal insulation for minimized loss of produced energy. For this purpose, polyurethane (PU) rigid foams have been widely used in plastic and metal walls of refrigerators and freezers, behind surface materials in construction sector and for insulation of pipelines Several researchers have investigated the incorporation of PCMs into different polyurethane foam matrices Borreguero et al. In contradiction to the above mentioned researches, Castellon et al. Although microencapsulated PCMs have been preferred by most of the researchers in order to prevent possible leakage problems of PCM in liquid state, such an approach has several disadvantages. First of all, it drastically decreases the enthalpy values of the thermally active material in unit mass and secondly, hampers its thermal response. It should be taken into consideration that the shell material acts as a barrier and delays the thermal response of PCM against temperature changes. Consequently, underachieving thermal results of PU composites with microencapsulated PCMs might be experienced as a result of these drawbacks. Unlike to the above mentioned research groups, Sarier and Onder The conducted researches commonly indicate that the thermal properties of the PU–PCM composites depend on the used reagents, formulation recipes and the type of PCMs in addition to their direct or microencapsulated utilization. Therefore, the compatibility of the thermally active PCM with the PU formulation recipe gains importance in order to fabricate thermally enhanced composites. Based on the advantages of PCMs in thermal energy storage and the researches on PCMs incorporated with PU foams, the aim of this paper is to investigate the feasibility of PU–PCM composites by direct utilization of a fatty acid ester-based PCM at different ratios in addition to demonstrate its compatibility with the PU formulation recipe and raw materials in terms of thermal properties. PU–PCM composites were fabricated by using industrial raw materials. The raw materials of PU and PCM parts were kindly provided by the Flokser Group, Hadımköy-İstanbul and BASF Türk Kimya Sanayi ve Ticaret Ltd. Şti., Dilovası-Kocaeli, respectively. Polymeric diphenylmethane diisocyanate (PMDI), Suprasec 5025, is the product of Hunstman with isocyanate value (NCO) of 31% and density of 1.23 Polyether polyol, Petol PZ 400-5G, is the product of Olctchim with hydroxyl value of 425 Catalyst, Dabco EG, is the product of Air Products which is mainly composed of 33% triethylenediamine and 67% ethylene glycol. It is used as a standard catalyst in microcellular applications Silicon additive, Tegostab B 8951, is the product of Degussa and it is a polysiloxane polyether block copolymer which serves as an auxiliary agent in the process of manufacturing PCM part of the composite, Cetiol MM, is a commercial product of BASF The Chemical Company and it has been widely used in cosmetics industry as consistency-giving agent in body to all skin formulations. The product is mainly composed of tetradecyl tetradecanoate (myristyl myristate) which is a high-chain fatty acid ester. The chemical composition and thermal properties of the product have been reported in literature in detail Tetrahydrofuran (THF), Sigma–Aldrich, was used as solvent of PCM part in the used synthesis method. The PU–PCM composites were fabricated by using a modified synthesis method in this research. Initially, the solid PCM was dissolved in 20 FT-IR spectra were recorded on Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 100 spectrometer with universal ATR accessory between 4000 and 380 Perkin Elmer Jade DSC was used for the calorimetric analyses of the PU–PCM composites. The measurements were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The total enthalpy changes of the PU–PCM composites and reference foam were determined in the temperature interval of 5–90 The analyses were carried out according to the ASTM standard test methods with designation numbers E793-06 and E1269-11, explaining the determination of enthalpies of fusion and freezing and specific heat of liquids and solids, respectively Perkin Elmer STA-6000 was used for determining the thermo-gravimetric decomposition, including decomposition behaviors, onset temperatures and ash contents of the materials. The analyses were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The analyses were conducted according to the general principles given in BS EN ISO 11358:1997 Olympus BX51 optical microscope was used to take images of PU–PCM composites at 400× magnification in order to clarify the homogeneous distribution of PCM particles throughout the foam matrix. The optical microscope has Evolution LC color camera equipment and Image Proexpress software. JEOL JSM-6390LV scanning electron microscope was used to take images of platinum coated PU–PCM composite specimens at 2000× magnification in order to clarify the main particle size distribution of the PCM particles. In general, the synthesis of polyurethane rigid foam is a simple exothermic process which takes place spontaneously in the presence of catalyst and blowing agents. There are many PU formulations and several raw materials in the market to assure specifications for different application areas. However, the foaming process can be interrupted when a chemically inert, but thermally active chemical is introduced into the reaction medium. In such a case, the synthesis formulation recipe must be modified in a way that the reaction thermodynamics are not interfered. Such a counter effect can be explained with the high heat storage capacity of the solid PCM granulates during melting. The changes in reaction thermodynamics during heat absorption by PCM prevent the temperature rise, evaporation of blowing agent and in turn, interrupt the diffusion of carbon dioxide which is produced as a result of the reaction between water and isocyanate. The utilized Cetiol MM as thermally active component is solid at room temperature and has high phase change latent heat values. Its reported thermal properties include 201.54 According to the new mechanism, the organic solvent works as blowing agent and PCM crystals settle gradually as it evaporates. Thus, the heat absorption effect during the exothermic reaction is minimized and fine and homogeneous distribution of the PCM particles throughout the polymer matrix is ensured by settlement of crystals from the organic solvent. PU–PCM composites have been successfully synthesized according to the modified method at different weight percentages to examine the contribution of PCM (Cetiol MM) in thermal behavior of the material with respect to the reference foam sample. 9.2 22.6 The optimum solvent volume was determined as 20 The FT-IR spectra of the reference foam, PU–PCM composites and Cetiol MM in The leakage behavior of the PCM particles in the foam matrix is an important parameter which must be determined due to direct employment of the PCM in the formulation. The leakage behavior in liquid state was determined gravimetrically by exposure of the composites to elevated temperatures for several hours under constant load. The leakage test procedure included 55 In the first run, the PCM in the boundary surface layer leaked as expected in an extent less than 1.5 Similar to the observations of Sarier and Onder The foam samples were further analyzed for determination of their thermal properties after the performed leakage tests. The DSC analyses help to understand the thermal behavior of the PCM inside the polymer matrix and its contribution to the PU rigid foam by changing percentages with respect to the reference foam. The latent heat values of the PU–PCM composites are presented as measured and calculated stoichiometric enthalpy values in order to clarify the chemically inert and stable behavior of the PCM during the polymerization reactions. According to the presented values in In Compared to the previously published papers Directly utilized PCMs also provide sharper phase changes which decrease the response time of the PCM to the temperature changes. Similar to the reported thermal data of directly utilized The heat absorption capacity improvement of the polyurethane rigid foam samples, provided by PCM, can be expressed in terms of total enthalpy change in a broader temperature interval with the help of additional DSC analyses. The total enthalpy change of a material is equal to the sum of heat absorbed in terms of specific heat and latent heat, i.e. the total heat absorbed by temperature increase of the polymer and PCM, and during phase change of the PCM, respectively. The results presented in Thermogravimetric analysis helps to determine the maximum temperature that the material can withstand without decomposition. However, polyurethane is not a very resistant material to heat in its own chemical nature. The formulation of the synthesized foams in this study does not contain any fire retardant additives and therefore, the samples are sensitive to elevated temperatures. Even though the thermogravimetric analyses are performed under inert nitrogen atmosphere, the absence of such additives affects the decomposition results. It can be concluded that the samples can be used up to 100–110 The overlapped TGA curves in The homogeneity and particle size distribution are two important factors which are affecting the uniform thermal response of the composites in larger scale. Therefore, the distribution of the PCM particles should be examined in order to clarify that the given data are also be valid if the PU–PCM composite foam is produced in pilot scale. In this research, the distribution of PCM throughout the polymer matrix has been examined with the help of the optical microscope and SEM images. The low magnification images of optical microscope (400×) presented in According to the SEM images (2000×) of the PU–PCM composites in PU rigid foam is the best known thermal insulation material which has been employed in different application areas with the best insulation value per unit thickness. In this research, the thermal energy storage capacity of the foam increased by incorporating with a fatty acid ester-based PCM as latent heat storage agent. The total heat absorption capacities of PU–PCM composite samples were enhanced up to 34% with respect to reference PU rigid foam. The improved heat sinks of the composite materials provided enhanced buffering function against temperature changes. The results demonstrate the applicability of direct utilization of PCMs in PU foam matrices to increase their heat sink capacities. The directly employed PCM content is well encapsulated in the crosslinked polymer matrix with respect to negligible leakage at temperatures above its melting point. The presented modified synthesis method for PU–PCM composites is an effective way to overcome the drawbacks of using solid PCMs which melt during exothermic reactions. Thereby, good surface appearance is ensured via proper blowing and surface formation during foaming. However, the given method modification may not be necessary in industrial scale production where heated molds are utilized. The interruption of the solid PCM can be prevented by keeping the mold temperature above the melting point of the thermally active component. This research was supported by the 24th Group Sectoral Committee of Manufacture of Basic Chemicals of Istanbul Chamber of Industry (ICI). The commercial products were kindly supplied by Flokser Group (Hadımköy/İstanbul-Turkey) and BASF Türk Kimya Sanayi ve Ticaret Ltd., Şti. (Dilovasi/Kocaeli – Turkey).