We report here successful synthesis of Al-based nanocomposites with L12–Al3Ti particles in binary Al–Ti (4.1, 5, 8.3, 10, 15 and 20% Ti) and ternary Al-1.6Ti-0.5Cr, Al-3.2Ti-1.0Cr and Al-6.3Ti-2.0Cr alloys, by rapid solidification processing. The microstructure of all the alloys consists of uniform distribution of nanocrystalline L12–Al3Ti intermetallic in ultra-fine α-Al matrix. The volume fraction of L12–Al3Ti phase in the as-spun ribbons was found to increase with the Ti content in the binary alloys with exception of Al-20% Ti alloy, which formed equilibrium DO22–Al3Ti. The α-Al grains were measured to be in the size range 0.5–1.0μm embedded with L12–Al3Ti particles of ∼50nm diameter. Nanoindentation as well as microhardness of nanocomposites in binary Al–Ti alloys measure hardness value of 3.75GPa (367 VHN). The nanocomposites formed by rapid solidification processing retain about 70–85% of its room temperature hardness even at 500°C for 100h, while the hardness of conventional Al alloys such as 2017 is almost lost at 350°C in 30min.High temperature strength of Al alloys is improved by adding transition metals those form intermetallic phases with Al Attempts have been made earlier on formation of Al-based nanocomposites reinforced with L1 The present work is aimed at the synthesis of nanocomposites in Al–Ti alloys by RSP and study of their mechanical properties (hardness) at ambient as well as high temperatures. The present work also attempts to study the influence of Cr addition on the stabilization of L1 Mother alloys with nominal compositions Al Microstructure of spun ribbons of Al–Ti alloys and Al–Cr–Ti alloys was examined in JEOL JEM 2000EX and PHILIPS CM20 transmission electron microscope (TEM), respectively. The samples for TEM observations were thinned for electron transparency by ion milling maintaining the specimen at −30 XRD patterns of the as-cast and melt spun (at 30   Ternary addition of Cr into binary dilute Al–Ti alloys was made keeping the Ti:Cr ratio approximately 3.2:1 for stabilization of L1 In melt spun Al-1.6Ti-0.5Cr alloy, the microstructure was equiaxed with grain sizes in the range of 0.5–1 The effect of increase in total solute content in the alloys resulted in obvious increment in the volume fraction of L1 The L1 It may be mentioned here that evaluation of mechanical properties of the nanocomposites prepared in the present study was beyond the scope of the work. However, detailed evaluation of hardness at room temperature as well as at high temperature has been carried out. In the present work hardness was evaluated as an indirect method to assess the strength of the nanocomposites. The variation of Vickers hardness of the nanocomposites that formed in rapidly solidified binary Al–Ti alloys is shown in The effect of volume fraction of L1 In contrary to melt spun binary Al–Ti alloys, rapidly solidified ternary Al–Ti–Cr alloys have shown lower hardness values in the range 85–138 VHN (   Aluminum based nanocomposites with nanocrystalline L1 Hardness values of binary Al–Ti were observed to increase with increase in volume fraction of L1 The nanocomposites formed in ternary Al–Ti–Cr alloys retain 70–85% of their room temperature hardness even at 500 Low drop in hardness of nanocomposites is due to the stability of L1 S.S. Nayak is thankful to Prof. D.H. Kim for providing support to carry out part of this work at Center for Noncrystalline Materials, Yonsei University; Seoul, South Korea. The authors acknowledge the help of H.J. Chang, a doctoral student at Yonsei University, for the electron microscopy studies.