With an increase in mining depth, rockburst is becoming an important problem in roadways of Linglong gold mine, where the overburden is up to 1000m. Field observations indicate that rock failures are often triggered by blasting at the adjacent workface. In order to understand the rockburst mechanism, numerical investigation associated with an energy index, strain energy density (SED), is conducted to simulate the energy accumulation and dissipation characteristics of the failure process. The results show that rock failure follows different mechanisms under dynamic loading as a result of unloading and loading zones generated around the cavity. Numerical modelling demonstrates that strain burst occurs at the corner and the floor with the release of massive energy, while dynamic spalling occurs at the lower sidewall due to the reflected tensile stress wave at the free surface. The failure types and damage extend from simulated results agree well with field observations. The findings presented in this study will contribute to effective support design strategies in deep underground openings.As underground mines go to deeper ground, the geo-stresses derived from gravitational and tectonic stresses significantly increase. Mining increases this stress, triples it in the rock around the excavation, which can fracture and burst. The surrounding rock mass is overstressed under a differential stress state that the maximum principal stress generally is much larger than the other principal stresses, which may cause instability. Generally, rock failures in deep underground engineering, such as rockburst, spalling and slabbing, take place suddenly and behave in very brittle behaviour, with no apparent signs prior to the failure ( On the other hand, the failure of rock is assumed to be a process of strain energy accumulation, dissipation and release inside the rock ( Linglong gold mine is one of the deepest metal mines in China, where unconventional rock failures (rockburst, spalling or slabbing) have been frequently encountered in recent years. In this study, the rockburst characteristics in Linglong gold mine are first investigated. A strain energy density index is introduced to evaluate the energy release regime when rock fails due to strain burst or spalling. Numerical simulations of rockburst under geo-stresses and dynamic disturbance are developed to investigate the mechanism of rockburst. This study contributes to effective design of rock support systems in rockburst prone areas, as well as reducing rockburst risk in Linglong gold mine. Linglong gold mine, located in Shandong province, is the largest and one of the most productive gold mines in China. There are more than 100 ore veins distribute in this mine area. The general strike of the orebodies is in NE direction with dip of 50-70°. The thickness of the ore veins varies from 0.5 to 10 m, while the depth and length of some veins could extend as long as few hundreds to a thousand meters ( In recent years, the mining has approached the ore vein No. 131 at a depth of about 500 Based on preliminary observations and investigations in field, two factors are considered to contribute to the rock bursting: the high induced stress due to excavation, and the external dynamic disturbance from adjacent mining activities or blasting. Excavating-induced stresses goes up to an excessive high level, which deteriorate the rock strength in the vicinity of the new-opened cavity. Under this circumstance, cracks begin to initiate inside the rock mass, without any sign of instability. However, dynamic loading may interrupt the critical state of equilibrium, leading to a further increase in crack initiation and coalescence. Alternatively, dynamic loading accelerates the rupture of rock mass under a lower stress state than its inherent strength. A full understanding of how dynamic disturbance affects the rockburst occurrence is therefore of great importance in understanding the mechanism and predicting the rock burst prone areas. The rock specimens were drilled from near the local surrounding ground where the rockburst happened, and were processed into standard cylinders with height-diameter ratio of 2:1 according to ISRM suggested method ( Along with the Hoek-Brown criterion parameters, a brittle damage material model was used in ANSYS/LS_DYNA code to simulate failure characteristics of Linglong granite rock mass. The model permits progressive degradation of tensile strength and shear strength across smeared cracks which are initiated by tensile loadings. The elastic modulus as input is an internal variable to consider the damage evolution governed by maximum dissipation law, while the rate effect is modeled through setting certain viscous behaviour of the material ( The feasibility of the model has been previously validated by comparing the stress strain curves between experimental and numerical results ( To simulate the fracturing behaviours of the roadway under static geo-stresses and dynamic loading, an implicit to explicit sequential solution method is used. First, the implicit module is called to initialize the static geo-stress state of the roadway. The displacements obtained from the implicit solution stage are imported into the explicit module, which is accomplished by creating a database file that updates the geometry and the stress history of the explicit element so that it matches the implicit static solution. More details on this solution method can be found in A 3D simulation model, having overall 15 In the stress initialization (implicit calculation stage), the bottom boundary of the model is restrained in all directions, while the back and the right boundaries are constrained with zero normal displacement. In-situ stresses obtained in Section Generally, smaller size of the element will contribute to higher precision of calculation results, which is however, at the cost of increasing the computation time. To estimate the minimum required number of element to achieve stable and reliable simulation, convergence tests were carried out on the model with reducing the element size (increases the total number of element). The stability and reliability of the calculation can be guaranteed when the difference between the simulation results, such as stress, strain and displacement for two consecutive element size is less than 5%. After convergence tests, the total number of elements used in the model is 385852 with an average size of 0.3 From field observations and investigations, dynamic disturbance is a main factor that induces rockburst in the roadway of Linglong gold mine. In this section, in order to study the effect of dynamic disturbance on rockburst mechanism, a dynamic wave is added to the numerical model. Many disturbances such as explosion, vibration, stress impact from neighbouring rockburst and earthquake should all be considered as dynamic loading ( The explosive process can be generally simulated by LS-DYNA using an explosive material model and a JWL (Jones-Wilkins-Lee) equation to govern its pressure-time behaviour. However, to use this method it is to simulate a borehole charged with explosives. Undertaking this task in modelling is difficult and also may lead to unreliable results. Researchers, such as By analysing the rock outburst characteristics based on the energy theory, this section introduces an energy index to quantitatively illustrate the strain energy accumulation and release regime in the rock mass. When the rock mass is deformed, the stored strain energy inside the rock is equal to the work done by external force, including body force and surface force. Therefore, the total rock work is given by The equilibrium equation can be written as: Substituting Eqs. The total work Substituting the generalized Hooke’s law into the above equation, Eq. As for the surrounding rock near a tunnel or cavity, the stress state is always presented as tangential stress The SED index is a relative value and independent to volume, which is a simple index for demonstrating the strain energy accumulation and dissipation. When an underground opening is created, the in situ stress of rock surrounding will adjust to attain a new equilibrium state. The initial 3D stressed state turns into 2D stressed state at the surface, causing geo-stress redistributes in the vicinity of the opening ( It may be observed from To examine how the strain energy distributes in the surroundings near and far from profile of the roadway, five special lines, e.g. roof a-a′, spandrel b-b′, sidewall c-c′, corner d-d’ and floor e-e’ are selected to trace the variation of SED, as shown in After the geo-stress initialisation in the implicit solution stage, the dynamic disturbance, i.e. the triangle stress wave (shown in Specifically, as for the roof units, the initial strain energy is much higher, reaching 80 The SED dynamic variation characteristics of the surrounding ground is related to underground excavation shape, opening location, source and location of dynamic disturbance and stress concentration around the opening. As demonstrated in The fracture and damage zone in the surrounding ground under dynamic disturbance is presented in As it is demonstrated in To understand the failure mechanism, The main reason for generation of the two different failure types, i.e. strain burst and spalling, is attributed to the different strain energy levels in the surrounding rock mass and the different actions of dynamic disturbance. As analysed above, the roof, the corner and the floor of the roadway are located in stress loading zone, accumulating massive of strain energy so that the stored energy is much larger than the initial energy (i.e. strain energy under initial geo-stresses prior to excavation). Under great enough dynamic disturbance, the strain energy within the corner and floor rock mass may be released. Part of the energy is consumed for fragmenting rock volume and the redundant part transfers into kinetic energy forms, such as rock ejection, ground vibration and so on. Much differently, however, the sidewall is situated in stress unloading zone where little strain energy is gathered. In this circumstance, the reflection of dynamic disturbance plays a dominating role in rock dynamic response. The rock mass in the sidewall is thus damaged due to the action of reflected tensile stress wave, generating “spalling” rupture paralleled to the free surface. By measuring the geo-stresses and induced stresses around new-excavated roadway, the failure modes and possible failure locations can be predicted. Using the results presented in this study, feasible and effective support plan can be made to reduce the risk of rockburst in Linglong gold mine. Numerical simulations were conducted to characterize the rockburst damage of a 500 In Linglong gold mine, these two rock ruptures, i.e. rock burst and spalling, are commonly encountered. Rock burst is predicted to happen near the corner and floor where high stresses present, while spalling is expected to occur at the sidewalls. These results of numerical simulations are consistent with field observations. The research presented in this paper was financially supported by the