The selective flotation of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) and molybdenite (MoS2) was studied using surface oxidation treatments (i.e., ozone (O3) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)). The results indicated that the oxidation treatments had different effects on the wettability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. Single mineral flotation results showed that the H2O2 treatment had higher separation selectivity for molybdenite and chalcopyrite compared with that of the ozone treatment. The contact angle measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis results showed that the chalcopyrite surface became hydrophilic owing to the surface deposition of oxidized iron and copper after the H2O2 treatment. On the other hand, the contact angle of molybdenite slightly increased following the H2O2 treatment at high concentrations. Possible mechanisms of this phenomenon were proposed in this work. Moreover, the separation selectivity of each oxidation method was discussed. Flotation tests using bulk Cu-Mo concentrate showed that H2O2 could deliver a flotation result comparable to conventional Cu-Mo flotation using NaHS.Copper sulfide minerals are often associated with molybdenum minerals ( The production of molybdenum is mainly performed using copper–molybdenum (Cu-Mo) ores (  Other oxidation methods utilize ozone (O In addition, ozone decomposition in water can be described as follows ( The OH radical is not selective and possesses a very high oxidative potential (2.8 On the other hand, H In addition, H Therefore, it may be hypothesized that other surface oxidation methods could give similar results as the plasma treatment process for the selective separation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite. To test this hypothesis, this study investigated the effect of oxidation treatments using ozone and H Pure chalcopyrite (Miyatamata mine, Japan) and molybdenite (Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia) minerals were employed in contact angle measurements. A 10 For contact angle measurements, the minerals were cut, and the basal plane of the molybdenite surface was exposed by peeling off the top layer of the mineral. The mineral samples were cast in an epoxy resin (SpeciFix-20 Kit, Struers, Germany). Afterward, the mineral surfaces were polished consecutively on 1200–4000 For Hallimond tube flotation experiments and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses, the chalcopyrite mineral (Miyatamata mine, Japan) was ground using an agate mortar and pestle and was dry screened (+75 −106 The powder sample (∼0.5 The powder sample (∼0.5 Surface wettability has been known to affect the floatability of minerals. Minerals with high surface wettability tend to have lower floatability, and vice versa. Surface wettability is usually estimated from the surface contact angle. Therefore, contact angle measurements were conducted to investigate the effect of oxidation treatments on the surface wettability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. The contact angle of the mineral surfaces (either with or without oxidation treatments) was measured using the bubble captive method in a Goniometer (Dropmaster 300, Kyowa Interface Science Co., Ltd.). An air bubble (0.1 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was conducted by following the procedure applied in The floatability test of single and mixed minerals of chalcopyrite and molybdenite (1:1) was performed using the Hallimond tube method ( A bulk concentrate of Cu-Mo produced at a copper mine in Chile was employed in this experiment. The sample was the final product of a bulk flotation process with copper and molybdenum grades of 22% and 4.5%, respectively. The grades of iron and silicon dioxide were 25% and 8.1%, respectively. The bulk concentrate contains 51.0% chalcopyrite, 4.2% covellite, 3.0% bornite, 8.6% molybdenite, and 20.0% pyrite, and non-sulfide gangue minerals like feldspar. The sample was taken after the thickening process of the bulk concentrate, where a polymer flocculant (anionic polyacrylamide) was added to promote the settling rate of the sample. A shear agitation process in which the sample was strongly agitated without air in a flotation machine (D12 Laboratory Flotation Machine, Metso Minerals, Inc.) was applied for 60 For comparison with the conventional Cu-Mo flotation process, a flotation test using NaHS was also performed. After the shear agitation process, the pulp density was adjusted by adding tap water. Then, NaHS (9.8 The floatability of untreated chalcopyrite and molybdenite was ∼85% and ∼73%, respectively, and decreased with increasing the ozone oxidation treatment time ( The effect of various concentrations of H The floatability of chalcopyrite decreased drastically in low H The separation selectivity of chalcopyrite and molybdenite after ozone and H A similar trend can be seen from the floatability of mixed chalcopyrite and molybdenite (1:1 ratio) for both oxidation treatments ( The separation selectivity of chalcopyrite and molybdenite in the mixed system flotation also follows a similar trend as that observed from the single mineral flotation. Both ozone and H Mineral floatability is affected by surface wettability, which can be estimated from the contact angle of the surface. The contact angle of untreated chalcopyrite and molybdenite was ∼73° and ∼68°, respectively ( The contact angle of both minerals decreased rapidly in low H Chalcopyrite was highly depressed in both treatments due to surface oxidation by oxidizing agents, likely hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl radicals. These radicals are formed due to the reaction of H Moreover, the selective conversion of mineral wettability by oxidation can also be explained from the Pourbaix diagrams for copper ( Copper and iron from the chalcopyrite surface can exist as solid species and deposit as oxides or oxyhydroxides (i.e., Cu Interestingly, the floatability and contact angle of molybdenite decreased in the low concentration range and then increased with increasing H Although both oxidation methods demonstrated the ability to oxidize both mineral surfaces, producing hydrophilic species that alter the surface hydrophobicity, the H Finally, XPS was conducted to analyze the surface chemistry of chalcopyrite and molybdenite with and without oxidation treatments (30 Untreated chalcopyrite had a high intensity Cu(I) peak at 932.6 The Fe(2p) peak intensity of chalcopyrite decreased after surface oxidation treatments at 708.2 The O(1s) spectra of chalcopyrite treated with ozone and 0.1% H From the XPS analysis results, the ozone and H In contrast with the chalcopyrite surface, the Mo(3d) spectra slightly increased after ozone and H In summary, ozone and H The effect of H These results suggest that H The effect of oxidation treatments using ozone and H This work was supported by a