Repair of an isolated anterior table frontal sinus fracture traditionally requires a coronal incision, which results in a large scar, alopecia and paresthesias, because of these problems, endoscopic approaches have been attempted. These approaches still involve small incisions at the forehead or behind the hairline so might be better described as endoscopy-assisted surgery. This report describes the reduction of an isolated anterior table frontal sinus fracture in a 14-year-old boy using an endoscopic procedure that involves a transnasal approach with no external incisions. Endoscopic instruments were used under 25 and 70 degrees endoscope guidance. A custom-made latex glove balloon was inserted into the frontal sinus, and then expanded and maintained for 20 days to support the reduced bony fragments. Postoperatively, the reduction was successful. The cosmetic deformity was repaired and there was no postoperative morbidity. This case indicates that endoscopic reduction may be a valuable treatment option for certain types of frontal sinus fractures.Frontal sinus fractures comprise 5–15% of all facial trauma The treatment algorithm for fractures involving the frontal recess or posterior table is complex because of the associated risks of brain injury, meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid leakage and mucocele formation Traditionally, repair of isolated anterior table frontal sinus fractures involves a bicoronal incision, which results in surgical sequelae including a large scar, alopecia and paresthesias, therefore some surgeons have reported endoscopic approaches The present report describes the surgical reduction of an isolated anterior table frontal fracture in a 14-year-old boy using an endoscopic procedure involving only a transnasal approach, without external incisions. A 14-year-old boy presented with a left forehead depression due to head trauma while playing soccer. The incident occurred 5 days before presentation. A facial bone computed tomography (CT) scan taken at another hospital, 3 days post-trauma, showed an isolated anterior table frontal sinus fracture at the medial portion without nasofrontal duct injury or posterior wall fracture ( Physical examination revealed a depressive lesion without scarring at the glabellar level of the left forehead. Mild swelling and crepitus was present at the site. At day 11 post-trauma, the patient was placed under general anaesthesia. During reduction surgery 25 and 70 degree endoscopes were used. To obtain sufficient access to the frontal recess, a left partial middle conchotomy and a wide frontal sinusotomy were performed after an anterior ethmoidectomy using typical techniques for functional endoscopic sinus surgery ( Once access to the frontal sinus was obtained, reduction of the depressed anterior table was undertaken using curved frontal sinus instruments such as a frontal sinus curette and a curved suction. Under endoscopic examination, the bony depression was repaired successfully, and immediately a near normal appearance of the left forehead was achieved. To support the reduced bony fragments, a single balloon catheter was placed in the frontal sinus through a frontal sinus opening. At first, a urethral Foley catheter was inserted, but the balloon was easily ruptured owing to the bony spurs. A custom-made latex glove balloon (YungJin Pharm, Co., Ltd., Korea) with an injection line (ShanghaiMotex Healthcare Co., Ltd., China) ( On postoperative day 2, the Merocel At a 6-month follow-up appointment, the nasal cavity was clear and the frontal sinus opening was intact according to endoscopy. The patient had good cosmetic results and no clinical evidence of frontal sinus disease. The advantages of endoscopic surgery include more accurate visualization, minimal or no external incisions, shorter operative time, reduced soft-tissue dissection, and reduced hospital stay Using endoscopic techniques, several authors have reported successful management of anterior wall fractures of the frontal sinus. Endoscopic-assisted repair of a frontal sinus fracture was first described by G The patient described here was treated using only a transnasal endoscopic approach. This approach does not need any incision or subperiosteal elevation, and the support provided by the balloon is an easy and stable technique for maintaining the stability of the reduced bony fragments. Based on the authors’ experience, this endoscopic transnasal reduction in combination with balloon support may be used as an alternative treatment option for selected cases of isolated anterior table frontal sinus fracture. The balloon catheter technique for temporal fixation of the orbital floor has often been used in reduction surgery Not all frontal sinus fractures are suitable for endoscopic transnasal reduction. Endoscopic reduction is not appropriate for injuries with severe comminution, displaced posterior table fractures with evidence of dura tear, associated orbital roof blow-in fractures, or extensive skull bone fractures. In such situations, a conventional open approach is more suitable. Preoperative evaluation, including a high resolution CT scan, is important for selecting the treatment method. Ideal candidates for an endoscopic transnasal approach are those with isolated anterior table fractures limited to the vertical and medial portion of the frontal bone, with an intact nasofrontal duct.