A model taking into consideration flow compressibility and gas–solid reactions in a packed bed is presented in this paper. The isothermal chemical reaction has two effects on the flow of a gas mixture: (i) the creation of a sink (or a source) due to reaction, and (ii) the density change of the gas mixture due to reaction. A one-dimensional numerical solution for transient flow of a gas mixture in a packed bed having isothermal gas–solid reactions is carried out. The numerical results show that the velocity profile obtained from this coupled model differs greatly from the existing non-coupled model, not only in magnitude but also in the velocity variation trend in the packed bed. A coupled mode, including only the mass dissipation of gas or generation effects of gas but neglecting the density change of a gas mixture, leads to an extra sink of gas mass dissipation or a source of gas mass generation, which depends on the molar mass of gas species. It is shown that the density change of the gas mixture in reaction cannot be ignored, especially in the case that there is observable difference in the molar mass between reactive gas and inert gas. It is also found that concentration profiles obtained from the coupled models differ greatly from that obtained from a non-coupled model.stoichiometric coefficients for gaseous reactant [–] molar concentrations of gases [mol/m molecule diffusivity of gaseous reactant A [m/s reaction rate constant [m/s] permeability of the packed bed [m length of packed bed [m] molar mass [kg/mol] pressure of gas mixture [Pa] dissipation rate of gaseous reactant A per unit packed bed due to reaction [mol/m radius [m] velocity of gas mixture [m/s] gas constant [J/mol K] density [kg/m dynamics viscosity of gas mixture [Pa s] tortuosity factor of the pellet [–] tortuosity factor of the packed bed [–] porosity [–] gaseous reactant solid reactant and solid reactant layer in a pellet packed bed shrinking unreactive core inert gas outlet gas mixture pellet inlet Gas–solid reactions in a packed bed are common occurrences in chemical and metallurgical industries. Solid reactant involving in the gas–solid reaction in metallurgical industries, leads to the aggregation of particles in a tubular furnace. These particles, having approximately the same shape and same diameter, can be regarded as pellet. A pellet consists of a lot of fine mineral grains. However, these grains are metal compounds including some impurity rather than pure metal, which must be removed by appropriate gas–solid reactions in order to obtain pure metal. For example, oxygen must be removed from the compound Fe Although the general mass conservation equations in the presence of chemical reaction have been presented in the continuum theory of mixtures In a recent paper by Song et al. Consider a compressible flow in a packed bed as shown in The following assumptions are adopted in this paper: (1) gas species in the gas mixture are considered as perfect gases, (2) the motion of gas mixture in a packed bed obeys Darcy's law, and (3) the radius of pellet does not change during reaction process. The last assumption implies that both the radius The mass conservation equation for gaseous reactant A can be written as In the above equation, the radius The mass conservation equation of gas mixture in the presence of gas–solid chemical reaction without the generation of gas product is According to Darcy's law and the model of resistance to flow in porous media In the presence of chemical reaction, the density of a gas mixture is variable, which arises from two causes: (1) the concentration change of gas species in the gas mixture due to reaction, and (2) the pressure variation of the gas mixture itself. Because of the presence of inert component, and the assumption of perfect gas, the molar concentration and density of the gas mixture are respectively If the effect of reaction on the density of gas mixture is ignored, the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. In order to compare results based on the three different models, numerical solutions were carried out under the following initial conditions: The non-coupled model #III, the coupled models #I and #II, subject to the initial and boundary conditions given by Eqs. The initial molar concentration of    The various coefficients are updated by using the current variables Steps ( For the calculation at the next time level We consider the production of calcium carbonate from carbon dioxide by mixing it with nitrogen as an example to study compressible flows in a packed bed with gas–solid reactions. Numerical computations were carried out for a gas mixture consisting of carbon dioxide (a gaseous reactant A) and nitrogen (an inert gas) in a packed bed consisting of calcium oxide with calcium carbonate as the solid product. The following coefficients and parameters taken from   Rearranging the continuity equation of gas mixture given by Eq. We note that the continuity Eq. A comparison of Eq.  A comparison of the velocity variation trend of gas mixture in the bed from coupled model #I and from coupled model #II is shown in  The following conclusions are obtained from this paper: Isothermal gas–solid chemical reaction have the following two effects on the flow of gas mixture: (i) the creation of a sink of gas mass dissipation (or a source the gas mass generation) on the mass conservation of gas mixture, and (ii) the density change of the gas mixture. The velocity profiles of the gas mixture obtained based on coupled models are very different from that based on the non-coupled model, not only in the magnitude of velocity but also in velocity variation trend in the packed bed. For the flow of a gas mixture in a packed bed with gas–solid chemical reactions taken into consideration, a coupled model which neglects the density change of a gas mixture due to reaction will lead to the creation of a sink term of mass loss or a source term of mass generation, depending on the molar masses of gases components. Concentrations profiles obtained based on the coupled models are very much different in the magnitude from those based on the non-coupled model. When there are the observable differences in the molar mass between gaseous reactant and inert gas, the density change of the gas mixture due to reaction cannot be neglected. The supports of the Nature Science Foundation of China under grant No. 50136020 and the Education Ministry of China under grant No. 01056 on this work are gratefully acknowledged.