Hydrodynamics, temperature, pH and various other physico-chemical factors influence the morphology of nickel produced via hydrogen reduction. The focus of the current work is the effect on hydrodynamics of changing the impeller and reactor configurations in a 75 l stirred vessel with draft tube and baffles. The aim was to determine which configuration resulted in maximum particle suspension and local gas hold-up while using the minimum impeller speed and power consumption.
                  A response surface methodology of experimental design was employed. This ensured that the number of candidate variables to be tested was reduced to a minimum and that interactive effects between variables were taken into account.
                  The impeller configurations tested were a single Rushton turbine, a single axial flow impeller, and a double impeller system consisting of a combination of the two. The reactor configurations, tested at different gas flow rates, were varied to test the effects with and without baffles.
                  It was found that optimum mixing could be achieved using a baffled vessel with an upper axial flow impeller and a lower Rushton turbine, and by keeping a minimum impeller clearance from the vessel bottom. This is in agreement with [Mineral Processing, 1–2 August 2002].Precipitation often exhibits very fast reaction kinetics. For this reason, the product quality can be greatly influenced by the manner in which the reactants are mixed. It has been shown ( For the current investigation, mixing has three different functions, Previous studies in hydrodynamics have been performed by The experiments were aimed at identifying a reactor configuration that provided for maximum particle suspension and gas dispersion, and minimum power consumption. The reactor was designed to approximate the hydrodynamics of a draft tube-baffled crystalliser. This apparatus has been described in The experimental design employed The experimental design for the current work allowed more than one factor to be varied for a particular experiment, since the response surface showed the interaction between the different factors. The method of analysis was that of the steepest descent (or ascent) to find the minimum (or maximum) of the response (phase one). This is followed by a refined second-order response surface design (phase two). Three parameters of key importance were measured, namely the critical impeller speed ( The gas hold-up was measured as the fraction of gas present in the liquid phase, using the following equation: All samples were taken using a syringe and rubber tubing of known length and diameter at three different heights in the vessel, far away from the sparger. For the purposes of the current study, the increase or decrease in gas hold-up was more important than the actual quantitative value for different reactor and impeller configurations. The different experimental systems considered were the following: (i) impeller configuration (four levels), i.e. single Rushton turbine, single axial flow impeller, or a double impeller system at different configurations (upper/lower Rushton turbine with an upper/lower axial flow impeller), (ii) absence or presence of baffles (two levels), (iii) different impeller clearances from the vessel bottom (three levels), and (iv) different gas flow rates (three levels). In the initial experimental design (phase one), the clearance between the impellers was held constant. Phase two entailed using the best configuration, determined in phase one, to perform experiments in which the clearance between the impellers was changed, whilst keeping their clearance from the vessel bottom constant. The gas flow rate was varied as before, but the impeller configuration (type and position on shaft, i.e. upper or lower) was held constant. The clearance from the vessel bottom was always at a minimum, since it was previously shown that this provided the maximum particle suspension and gas dispersion. The clearance between the impellers was varied at three different values. It was found that, as the amount of nickel added to the vessel was increased, the impeller speed (and hence power consumption) had to be increased to achieve adequate particle suspension. Above 16.5 kg (22.1 mass %) of nickel particles, there was barely any suspension. Above 13.5 kg (18.1 mass %), the speed had to be increased by much larger increments than for nickel masses less than 13.5 kg. For this reason, the mass of nickel used in the experiments was 13.5 kg (give mass %), as this would minimise the power input. It was observed that the system was very unstable without baffles. There was a large degree of flooding, hence no results could be obtained for this configuration. Using the baffled configuration, the system was less susceptible to flooding. The results reflected that the worst case was to use an impeller clearance of 246 mm and a gas flow rate of 10.7 l/min. Using these settings, the impeller was always flooded, even at the maximum impeller speed. Since a fitted first-order model showed curvilinearity, it was necessary to fit a second-order model to the results ( The fitted second-order model for the critical impeller speed is the following: The significance levels of factors  The maximum suspendible mass of nickel solids in the 62 l active volume was found to be 13.5 kg, or approximately 18.1% by mass of solids. The best impeller configuration was a double impeller system with a lower Rushton turbine and an upper axial flow impeller. This is in agreement with Using the lower Rushton turbine ensured maximum particle suspension and gas dispersion. In addition, a minimum impeller speed (462 rpm) and minimum power consumption (19 W) were achieved. Minimum impeller clearance from the vessel bottom also aided particle suspension. A baffled vessel provided the system with more stability than an unbaffled one, and the former was less susceptible to vortexing and flooding of the impeller. Using RSM, the fitted second-order model showed that the clearance between impellers (at a minimum impeller clearance from the vessel bottom) was the most important factor, having a significance of 72–81%.