The objective of this research is to determine the effect of basic pumice on morphologic properties of interfacial transition zone in load-bearing lightweight/semi-lightweight concretes. In this respect, it has been researched how the chemical and physical structure and the volumetric ratio of basic pumice affected the following three morphologic properties of interfacial transition zone: compactness, width and physical adherence. In accordance with the stated purpose, 15 concrete serials with various properties were produced using basic pumice as aggregate and 670 images were taken from the samples collected from these serials via scanning electron microscope (SEM). Semi-analytical detections were performed based on non-generalizing numeric data obtained in conclusion of the determination of grain limits in these images and comments on visual analysis. In accordance with these detections, it has been concluded that the basic pumice has a high level of potential to contribute to the morphologic properties of interfacial transition zone.Concrete is one of the materials with wide area of usage in construction. Ayhan et al. Morphologic properties of ITZ have significant influence on compressive strength and elasticity module of concrete. Although the cement paste and the aggregate have dense structures, weak ITZ functioning as a bridge significantly influences concrete – a composite construction material – as it influences the tension transmission. According to Yeğinobalı, compressive strength of cement paste and aggregate used in ordinary concrete is above 100 In load-bearing concretes, the morphologic properties of ITZ are of greater importance. The aggregate to be used in the production of such concretes have a great effect on the morphologic properties of ITZ. Aggregate with different properties may be used in the production of load-bearing concretes. Load bearing ordinary concrete may be produced using ordinary aggregate and load-bearing lightweight or semi-lightweight concrete may be produced using lightweight aggregate. Load-bearing lightweight/semi-lightweight concretes were initially produced using artificial lightweight aggregates. Later on, along with the development of plasticizer admixtures, load-bearing lightweight/semi-lightweight concretes were started to be produced with natural lightweight aggregates One of the natural lightweight aggregates is pumice. Pumices are divided into two groups as acidic and basic. Since lightness and heat conductivity generally gain importance in scientific researches and practices, emphasis was placed on acidic pumice that is superior to “basic pumice (BP)”. Therefore, there are very few researches conducted regarding this material. Lack of scientific data regarding BP was observed in application as well. Material with limited information on behavior in concrete was not used so much In all reports of Eurolightcon, it has been emphasized that the “insulation” performance of concrete should be taken into consideration following the “load bearing” performance in the production of load-bearing lightweight/semi-lightweight concrete. In literature, the load bearing performance of BP is recognized to be superior to acidic pumice The objective of this research is to determine the effect of BP on the morphologic properties of ITZ in load-bearing lightweight/semi-lightweight concretes. In this regard, it has been researched how the chemical and physical structure and the volumetric ratio of BP affected the following three morphologic properties of ITZ: Compactness. Width. Physical adherence. Concrete produced using BP could be defined as “load-bearing lightweight concrete” or “load-bearing semi-lightweight concrete”. These definitions are limited with the unit weight value of concrete. Therefore, the importance of aggregate having an influential role on the determination of concrete properties was taken into consideration and such concretes were defined as “basic pumice concretes (BPC)” in this research. There are many researches in which ITZ was analyzed in concretes produced using ordinary and artificial lightweight aggregates In accordance with the purpose stated within this research, 15 different BPC serials were produced. The properties of cement used in the production of BPC serials were given in “Absolute volume method” suggested in ACI 213R-03 Material mixture ratios were designed to obtain high strength BPC and the production of BPC serials was initiated after the 7 Considering the fact that cement paste and BP may interact within the process, the produced BPC serials were retained in the laboratory under normal ambient conditions for one year in order to determine the long term performances. Furthermore, based on the anticipation that the hydration development could be observed much better in cracks in the concrete, the BPC serials were subjected to bending test at the end of 90 The morphologic properties of ITZ in concretes could be determined in micro levels through images obtained using scanning electron microscope (SEM). The samples, from which SEM images were taken, collected in the form of cubes of 50 The planes for which images were taken from the samples were determined according to the concrete cast direction. SEM images were generally taken from the planes of samples perpendicular to concrete cast direction in the studies within the literature. However, in this research, SEM images were taken from the planes of samples parallel to concrete cast direction considering the bleeding fact. Two types of images could be taken from SEM device. One of these images is called “Scatter Electron Image (SEI)” and the other is “Backscatter Electron Image (BSEI)”. SEI is the image with higher quality reflecting three-dimension effect more. Therefore, SEI is preferred to determine the morphologic properties. BSEI is a type of image based on the principle to be sensitive to atomic numbers of elements. The phases with low atomic numbers appear in dark colors, whereas, the phases with high atomic numbers appear in light colors and bright Thirty-eight (2 Semi-analytical detections were performed based on non-generalizing numeric data obtained in conclusion of the determination of grain limits in these images and comments on visual analysis. This analysis method is frequently referred in the researches within the literature for the analysis of SEM images Three main hydration products are generated as a result of cement hydration. These are “CSH”, “CH” and “AFT” crystals. According to Uğurlu, more water than the amount required for cement hydration is added to concrete due to the treatable mixture preparation obligation. After the concrete is paved, the coarse grains tend to move downwards in order to equilibrate and due to gravity, whereas, the water not included in hydration process (yet) tend to move upwards. Water unable to flow under coarse aggregate grains is retained here When the Certain aggregates cause the hydration process to take longer time by reacting with cement paste due to their chemical structures. In this case, secondary hydration products are generated and the cavities among crystals are filled. This development causes a decrease in the width of ITZ. ITZ that is looser from cement paste at the beginning becomes more compact within the process and its density comes close to the density of cement paste. In rare cases, its density may exceed the density of cement paste In this regard, the chemical structure of aggregate to be used in the production of concrete considerably affects the hydration development. Three-hundred and sixty days after the production of BPC serials the images taken from the cracks formed in ITZ since the produced BPC serials are subjected to bending test at the end of 90 Image of the largest unhydrated clinker particle that has been determined in this research in ITZ was given in The fact that the hydration development in the produced BPC is very strong and positively affected the structure of crystals that are hydration products in ITZ. It has been determined that the CSH crystals in ITZ were formed in a structure almost undistinguishable from the aggregate ( Due to their forms and large sizes, CH crystals cause the formation of cavities in ITZ. CH crystals are generally in the form of hexagonal-plate. In this research, it has been determined that the CH crystals – different from the forms defined in literature – are in prismatic forms close to cube three sizes of which are not different from each other ( AFT crystals are determined based on their acicular structures. There are many cavities around these crystals due to that structure. In respect of their structures, the increase in ratio causes the increase in porosity ratio of ITZ. In concretes produced using ordinary aggregate, the ratio of AFT crystals in all hydration products is about 15–20% The formation of hydration crystals in a manner to decrease the porosity ratio of ITZ has positively affected the morphologic properties of ITZ (compactness, width and physical adherence). Examples regarding the general compactness level of ITZ in BPC were given in The formation of hydration crystals in a manner to decrease the porosity ratio of ITZ has caused the width of ITZ to decrease and the physical adherence to increase because of the increased contact surface of BP and ITZ paste. Due to bleeding, it has been determined that the ITZ width under the BP is more than the ITZ width over it ( The morphologic properties of ITZ in BPC serials with high The cavities of BP used in this research are generally in circular forms. The cavity size was determined to be between 100 and 250 The cavity structure of BP used in crushed forms in the production of concrete is important as it affects the surface morphology and thus, the physical adherence of ITZ. The entrance of paste into the bays of aggregate in physical adherence and immerse of aggregate asperities into paste cause interlocking in the form of pinning Due to the connected cavities of BP, it has been determined that the ITZ paste infiltrates to BP and the hydration products developed in these cavities. These formations are to be defined apart from the formations defined as “interlocking zones”. These zones were defined as infiltration zones in the research ( The interlocking and infiltration zones in BP have increased the physical adherence of ITZ. It is obvious that ordinary and artificial lightweight aggregates will not allow a physical adherence at this level due to their physical structures. Within the scope of the research, BPC serials with the same In accordance with the findings obtained from this research, the following determinations were performed regarding the affect of BP on the morphologic properties of ITZ: Due to its chemical structure, BP has caused a very strong hydration development (the size of unhydrated clinker particle was determined to be about 3 Since the surface bays and asperities of BP are much more compared to the bays and asperities of artificial lightweight aggregate, the size of interlocking zones in the produced BPC is much larger (the largest is 600 The compactness of ITZ has decreased and the width has increased in BPC serials with high volumetric ratios of BP. Furthermore, in consequence of the decrease in the contact surface of BP and ITZ in these BPC serials, the physical adherence has also decreased. In this regard, it has been determined that the morphologic properties of ITZ are in better conditions in the BPC serials in which BP was used at the lowest volumetric ratio (40%). In accordance with the above-mentioned semi-analytic detections, BP has a potential to make high level of contribution to the morphologic properties of ITZ. The fact that high performance from BPC serials with high We thank to Dicle University Coordinator of Scientific Researches (DÜBAP) which provided funding, YKS Industry Co. which helped us procure hyper-plasticizer additives, Mardin Cement Industry and Trade Co. which helped us procure cement and BP, and valuable employees thereof.