Concrete shapes the modern way of civil engineering more than any other building material. It is besides water the most used good of the world [ Tricalcium silicate (Ca The rate of hydration depends on various factors also including the accessible reaction surface area. A common method to increase reaction speed and early strength is to grind the material to higher specific surface area. The definition of cement strength classes is based on these levels of fineness [ In conventional grinding processes, a brittle material is comminuted by overcoming the material-specific elasticity up to the plastic deformation and finally to the fracture. New surfaces are created, particle sizes are reduced and the required comminution work increases due to the diminishing initial structural defects. At a certain point in time of grinding, a balance between particle size reduction and agglomeration by interparticle forces is observed. The crushing by conventional grinding devices comes to an end at this point [ Using high-energy mills, effects beyond pure particle size reduction can be induced into the material [ There have been a lot of basic and detailed material-specific investigations on reactive milling [ The smallest defects are point defects (zero-dimensional defects) such as vacancies in the form of Frenkel or Schottky defects or substitutions. Point defects affect only very small parts of the lattice and it is assumed that these defects make a minor contribution to the Gibbs free energy of alite (0.0001 J/mol) [ Line defects (one-dimensional defects) occur as screw or edge dislocations and can increase the Gibbs free energy of the alite lattice by <300 J/mol. Planar defects (two-dimensional defects) are grain boundaries in particles and the particle surface area. This type of defects has traditionally been used in the cement industry to control strength development of cement by adjusting the fineness of the material [ Voids and the inclusion of other phases can be considered as three-dimensional defects and these may affect the crystal lattice energy. For example, a phase transition from monoclinic to triclinic alite is associated to a change in Gibbs free energy of 1000–3000 J/mol. In literature, some milling devices are considered as high-energy mills, namely planetary ball mills, attritors and vibratory mills. Beside pure particle size reduction, these devices are inducing a high amount of mechano-chemical modifications [ In the studies presented here, the effect of high-energy milling on the reaction capacity of alite is investigated. For this purpose, comparative analyses were carried out on differently ground C Pure alite, purchased from VUSTAH Brno (CZ), was used as the starting material. The reference material was produced in a gentle grinding. For this purpose, C After a pre-grinding step (1-minute treatment in vibratory disk mill (RETSCH, MM200) with zirconia oxide setup, without grinding aid), high-energy milling was executed by using a planetary ball mill (FRITSCH, pulverisette P5) with zirconia oxide balls having diameters between 5 mm and 20 mm in zirconia oxide vessels with 250 ml volume (to several finenesses). The ground mass was 100 g per vessel. Milling batches were performed in dry process also with diethylene glycol (DEG) as grinding aid to prevent agglomeration at a rotation speed of 360 rpm. The chemical composition of the ground materials was measured by X-ray flourescence (μXRF, ORBIS_PC by EDAX-AMETEK) using a rhodium target X-ray tube at 100 μA/25 kV with a 30 μm spot and an energy dispersive detector. Concentrations of the oxides were calculated from the measured intensities using appropriate standards. X-ray diffraction was performed using a Siemens/Bruker D5000 θ/2θ-instrument with a CuKα-tube operating at 40 mA and 40 kV. Scans were made using steps of 0.025°2θ over a range from 10° to 90° and a counting time of 10 s per step. Crystallite size and micro-strain were calculated by the Rietveld software AUTOQUAN 2.7.0.0. The external standard method (zincite) was used following the description by Jansen [ The following devices were used for investigating granulometric properties: the laser granulometer COULTER LS 230 using the classic Mie theory of light scattering and PIDS technology, the multipoint nitrogen adsorption measuring device COULTER SA 3100S in order to determine the BET-surface, furthermore a manual Blaine device for measuring air penetration. The hydration heat release of tricalcium silicate was monitored by isothermal heat conduction calorimetry at 20 °C using a water/cement-ratio of 0.50 using a TONICAL 7335 device manufactured by ZWICK/ROELL TONI-TECHNIK. Magic angle spinning (MAS) solid state NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker AVANCE III instrument with a B0 field strength of 11.7 T and MAS frequency of 10 kHz in 3.2 mm (o.d.) rotors. A pulse length of 3.2 μs was used to achieve a 90° flip angle of the magnetization in single pulse experiments. The longitudinal relaxation time T1 was tested for both samples by spin saturation. Based on these data, a recycle delay time of 60 s and 80 s was used for the disk mill sample and the planetary ball mill sample, respectively. The number of pulses and thus the duration of the experiments were adopted according to the availability of the instrument (4000–4300). Following the data acquisition, the signal/noise-ratio of the spectra was improved by reducing the length of the free induction decay to 50 ms. No artificial line broadening function was applied. The software DMFit [ After pre-grinding of tricalcium silicate a specific surface area of ~1000 cm It can be seen that the high energy milling process grinds with up to factor 40 more intensively than the comparable gentle mortar milling (cf. mortar mill: 2.22 m The chemical composition was carried out on three selected grinding products. The original material is used as a reference. Furthermore, a medium fineness (planetary ball mill after 20 min, 4.53 m There are only minor changes between the starting material and the ground samples, which can be attributed to the measurement inaccuracies. Only the difference of the iron content of sample “C The phase composition was analyzed to obtain information on possible phase changes during grinding (three-dimensional defects). Here, the focus is on the X-ray amorphous content, as this is an indicator for a high energy input and correlates with the reactivity of the material. Alite was assumed to be triclinic C An increase in X-ray amorphous content is observed during grinding (both gentle and high-energy) as well as a significant increase of the micro strain. As one can see in To compare the activation effects, the hydration heat releases of the mortar mill product after 180 min milling and planetary mill product after 5 min were used on the basis of their nearly identical specific surface areas of 3.39 and 2.88 m Furthermore, it was investigated whether the storage period has an influence on the development of hydration ( The It is evident from The focus of this study was on the question of whether high energy milling versus gentle milling can increase the reactivity of C The grinding curves indicate a significant higher grinding energy of high energy milling ( While the chemical composition of the material does not change over milling time, there is a slight change in the phase composition, in particular an increase in the X-ray amorphous content ( The comparison of the heat of hydration liberation of granulometrically identical materials shows, that high-energy milling enhances the reactivity of the material ( NMR results support aforementioned discussion. It was observed that treatment in the planetary ball mill affects micro-structural parameters such as FWHM and relative intensity of the resonances which indicates deformation of the crystal lattice. C fineness and surface area in consequence of grinding duration. structural defects in consequence of grinding intensity. self-healing effects after grinding. Special thanks go to the German Research Foundation (DFG), which made this paper possible within the project “Using the mechanically activated fraction <2 mm of crushed concrete as an alternative composite material in cement (LU 1652/13-1)” as well as to all technical employees of the F. A. Finger-Institute for Building Material Engineering, Weimar.