Chemically modified chitosan resin with magnetic properties has been prepared and investigated. The modification process took place through the reaction between chitosan and polymeric Schiff's base of thiourea/glutaraldehyde in the presence of magnetite. The resin obtained was tested for the recovery of Au(III) and Ag(I) from their aqueous solutions using batch and column methods. Uptake values of 3.6 and 2.1 mmol/g were reported for Au(III) and Ag(I), respectively. Both kinetics and thermodynamic parameters of the adsorption process were obtained. The data indicated that adsorption process is exothermic spontaneous reaction and kinetically proceeds according to pseudo second order model. The interaction mechanism between metal ion and active sites has been interpreted as ion pair for gold(III) and chelation for silver(I). Breakthrough time, critical bed height and durability of resin were estimated from column studies. These parameters indicated that the resin has a good efficiency towards Au(III) and Ag(I).Methods that have been applied to the recovery of precious metals from its solutions include zinc–dust cementation ( In continuity to our research on chitosan, a simple method for preparation of magnetic chitosan resin was reported in this paper. This method solved the problem of the crosslinking difficulty successfully via Schiff's base formation between glutaraldehyde and thiourea before addition to chitosan solution. The application of modified chitosan magentic resins for recovery of Au(III) and Ag(I) from aqueous solutions was studied. Thermodynamic and kinetic analysis for adsorption process has also been carried out. Chitosan, glutaraldehyde, thiourea, ferric chloride, ferrous sulphate were Aldrich products. All other chemicals were Prolabo products and were used as received. Metallic gold dissolved in aqua regia and silver nitrate were used as a source for Au(III) and Ag(I), respectively. The magnetite was prepared following the modified Massart method ( One gram of chitosan was dissolved in 50 mL of 25% aqueous acetic acid solution. Three grams of thiourea were dissolved in 100 mL distilled water. A 12 mL of (25%) glutaraldehyde solution was added to thiourea solution in a round flask. The mixture was heated on a water bath for 3 h at 50 °C. After completion of the reaction, magnetite was added to the product. The contents of the flask was then added to the chitosan solution and heated up to 70 °C for 6 h. A large quantity of gel was formed, washed several times with dilute sodium hydroxide, distilled water, acetone then dried at 70 °C for 8 h and sieved where the particle size fraction− IR-spectra of the synthesized resin were performed using a Perkin-Elmer IR-spectrophotometer 550. A stock solution of gold (1.2 The effect of contact time on the uptake of the metal ions by resin was carried out by swelling 0.1 g of dry resin in a flask containing 50 mL of distilled water for 1 h. Fifty milliliters of metal ions solution (1.2 Adsorption of metal ions on the resin obtained under controlled pH was carried out following the above procedures. The desired pH was controlled using HNO Complete adsorption isotherms were obtained by soaking 0.1 g of dry resin in a series of flasks containing 50 mL of distilled water for 1 h. In each flask, 50 mL of metal ions at the desired concentration were added. The initial pH of solutions were 0.5 and 6.9 for Au(III) and Ag(I), respectively. The flasks were shaked at 300 rpm while keeping the temperature at 30, 40, 50 or 60 °C for 3 h. Later on, the residual concentration was determined where the metal ion uptake was calculated. The relative higher uptake of Au(III) or Ag(I) at lower pH values was taken as indication for their selective separation from other metal ions. The uptake behavior of Au(III) and Ag(I) from a binary mixtures with Cu(II), Pb(II), Cd(II), Zn(II), Ca(II) and Mg(II) was studied at pH 1. The initial concentration of all metal ions in the mixture was (6 Column experiments were performed in a plastic column with a length of 10 cm and a diameter of 1 cm. A small amount of glass wool was placed at the bottom of the column to keep the contents. A known quantity of the resin was placed in the column to yield the desired bed height. Metal ion solutions having an initial concentration of 6 One gram of the resin was placed in a plastic column (10 cm length and 1.0 cm diameter). A solution of the studied metal ion with the desired initial concentration of (6 Comparing the spectrum of the modified chitosan with raw chitosan it is seen that the spectrum of modified chitosan displays new bands near 1651 and 1548 cm The data of the effect of the acidity of the medium on the uptake of Au(III) or Ag(I) is shown in  The uptake-time data obtained were treated in the form of two simplified kinetic models including pseudo-first-order and pseudo second order. The pseudo first order model is expressed as (  The degree of suitability of resin towards metal ions was estimated from the values of separation factor constant ( The observed decrease in both values of The values of ▵ The breakthrough curves of the uptake of Au(III) and Ag(I) by the resin at different flow rates (1, 2 and 4 mL/min) and a fixed bed height of 3.3 cm are shown in As shown in Sorption/desorption cycles up to four runs were carried out for Au(III) and Ag(I) on resin. The elution of the metal ions was performed using 100 mL of 0.5 M thiourea acidified with drops of 0.2 M H Recovery of Au(III) and Ag(I) from aqueous solutions was studied using magnetic resin derived from chemically modified chitosan. The recovery process was carried out through batch and column methods. Kinetic studies indicated that the adsorption reaction follows the pseudo-second order kinetics. Thermodynamic parameters obtained indicated that the adsorption process is spontaneous and exothermic. The mechanism of interaction between metal ion and resin was also clarified. The resin obtained showed good durability and easy regeneration.