Nanobubbles (NBs) have interesting and peculiar properties such as high stability, longevity and high surface area per volume, leading to important applications in mining-metallurgy and environmental areas. NBs are also of interest in interfacial phenomena studies involving long-range hydrophobic attraction, microfluidics, and adsorption at hydrophobic surfaces. However, little data are available on effective generation of concentrated NBs water dispersions and on their physicochemical and interfacial properties. In this work, air was dissolved into water at pH 7 and different pressures, and a flow was depressurized through a needle valve to generate 150–200nm (mean diameter) NBs and MBs-microbubbles (about 70μm). Microphotographs of the NBs were taken only in the presence of blue methylene dye as the contrast medium. Main results showed that a high concentration of NBs (number per volume) was obtained by decreasing the saturation pressure and surface tension. The number of NBs, at 2.5bar, increased from 1.0×108
                     NBmL−1 at 72.5mNm−1 to 1.6×109
                     NBmL−1 at 49mNm−1 (100mgL−1 α-Terpineol). The NBs mean diameter and concentration only slightly varied within 14days, which demonstrates the high stability of these highly concentrated NBs aqueous dispersions. Finally, after the NBs were attached to the surface of a grain of pyrite (fairly hydrophobic mineral), the NBs dramatically increased the population of MBs, which shows the enhancement of particle hydrophobicity due to NBs adhesion. The results were explained in terms of interfacial phenomena and it is believed that these tiny bubbles, dispersed in water at high concentrations, will lead to cleaner and more sustainable mineral flotation.Nanobubbles (NBs NBs are gaseous domains that are typically tens to hundreds of nanometers in radius, which are too small to be visible to the naked eye or standard microscopes. Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) images revealed that they form spherical caps, but the precise shape of the NBs remains unclear ( Bulk NBs are believed to be long-lived gas-containing cavities affected by random Brownian motion. It is now thought that bulk NBs are present in water at room temperature because of the nucleation of stable bubbles. Thus, there is a water affinity property at the nanoscale, whereby the disordered structure of a liquid becomes unstable and results in a spontaneous decrease in local density and formation of nano-sized voids. These voids would serve as nuclei for bubbles that are stabilized by ions (so-called bubstones) ( The main properties of NBs are their high stability, longevity and rapid attachment to hydrophobic surfaces. These particularities broaden the potential applications of NBs in many areas such as surface coating and cleaning ( In the mineral flotation of fine and ultrafine particles, NBs were found to increase the contact angles (coal, phosphates, quartz, and copper minerals), which improves the particle-bubble attachment and decreases the detachment. Other claimed flotation gains are a lower collector and frother dosages required in high kinetic processes ( Further research involving interfacial and bulk NBs are important to understand the fundamentals and broaden their technological applications. There is a demand for advances in terms of sustainable (workable) generation, mineral particles aggregation, hydrophobizing power and flotation (minerals fines and wastewater treatment and reuse). In the dissolved air flotation (DAF) process, stable (charged or uncharged) NBs are readily formed after the depressurization of air-saturated water at a high flow velocity, and a known distribution size of NBs can be obtained by either modifying the pH or introducing ionic surfactants (collector-coated NBs). This joint formation of microbubbles (MBs) and NBs was proven notably recently, and a separation technique in which NBs are split from MBs is now available ( According to many authors, the extremely high stability and longevity of bulk NBs cannot be explained uniquely by the surface potential and repulsion forces between the bubbles ( This study is a continuation of a series of articles regarding NBs and focuses on their generation as highly loaded aqueous dispersions, characterization, interfacial properties, lifetime and their role in hydrophobizing mineral solids. Deionized (DI) water at room temperature (23 Methylene blue from Sigma® (St. Louis - MO, USA) was used as a contrast medium to take microphotographs of the NBs. α-Terpineol (supplied by Química Maragno®; Turvo – SC, Brazil) was used to reduce the water surface tension and NBs generation. This reagent is a 154 Bubbles were formed by reducing the pressure of DI water, which was pre-saturated with air at various saturation pressures (P Then, the MBs were separated from the NBs because the MBs were allowed to rise and escape the glass column (during 5 Optical microphotographs of bulk NBs were taken using an optical microscope (Olympus®, Hicksville – NY, USA; model BX41) with backlight and an objective magnification of 1000×, which was coupled to a Microscope Digital Camera of high-performance (Olympus® DP73 - 17.28 megapixel of resolution). Methylene blue dye (about 50 The concentration, mean size and size distribution of the NBs were measured in quadruplicates in a nanoparticle-tracking analysis (NTA) instrument (NanoSight LM10 & NTA 2.0 Analytical Software, Malvern Instrument Ltd, Salisbury, UK) at room temperature. The NTA was equipped with a cell (model LM10) and a 20× magnification microscope, onto which a video camera was mounted. The camera captured a video file of the particles, which moved in Brownian motion, and the software tracked the particles individually. Then, using the Stokes-Einstein equation, the hydrodynamic diameter of NBs was calculated. The video images of the particles light scattered were followed in real-time using a CCD camera. The NBs aqueous dispersion samples (approximately 0.1 The advantage of this technique is that the NTA monitors the light scattered by individual nanoparticles (NBs in this case). Furthermore, because of the particle-by-particle measurement basis, the NTA can characterize polydisperse particulate systems with high precision ( A ZetaSizer Nano ZS (red badge) - ZEN3600 (Malvern Instrument Ltd, Salisbury, UK), which was coupled to disposable folded capillary cells (gold-plated Beryllium Copper electrodes), measured the zeta potential, and mean size of the NBs. This instrument uses a Laser Doppler Micro-electrophoresis technique, where an electric field is applied to the dispersion of bubbles that migrate at a velocity that depends on the zeta potential. This velocity is measured using laser interferometry-M3-PALS (phase analysis light scattering), which enables the calculation of electrophoretic mobilities and converts them into a zeta potential (millivolts) using Smoluchowskís equation ( To measure the mean size of the NBs, the ZEN3600 uses a dynamic light-scattering (DLS) technique, which monitors the diffusion of the bubbles that move in Brownian motion and converts this signal to equivalent diameters according to the Stokes–Einstein relationship. The high sensitivity of this equipment was ensured using a non-invasive backscatter technology. The zeta potential and size were measured at a scattering angle of 90°, a wavelength of 290 The concentration and size distribution of the NBs were assessed with NTA in quintuplicates using different P   NBs aqueous dispersions were generated in two different solutions (i. DI water; ii. α-Terpineol solution - 100  NBs were generated in 10  The effect of NBs on the rising velocity of MBs was investigated (in duplicate experiments – error ±10%) in a glass column cell (height  The effect of NBs conditioning on the MBs attachment onto hydrophobized solid particles was investigated using a 2 First, the pyrite particle was cleaned with a sulfochromic solution to remove possible organic contamination. Then, microphotographs of the pyrite grain, which was placed (fixed) in a glass cell, after the MBs injection, were taken under three conditions: i. Pyrite immersed in DI water; ii. Pyrite immersed in α-Terpineol solution (100 Microphotographs of uniformly aqueous-dispersed NBs using high-resolution optical microscopy were possible only after contrasting the air-liquid interface with methylene blue dye ( Information on the visualization of bulk-phase NBs using optical microscopy is scarce, if available. Taking microphotographs of NBs is not easy because of the transparency drawbacks and the necessity of a soluble contrasting medium in the continuous phase. Herein, microphotographs were taken in the presence of methylene blue dye (the bulk NBs do not absorb the dye); the NBs images were neat and highly uniform (homogeneous), which enables the measurement of the NBs mean diameter using the image analysis software ImageJ®. It is believed that these microphotographs are the first optical capture of stable dispersed NBs and certainly will broaden the routes for further characterization studies. Three different techniques for NBs size measurement were used in this work: i. NTA; ii. DLS and iii. Image Analysis (software ImageJ®). In the measurements with DLS technique, that uses the intensity of light scattered by the sample, the larger NBs (about 300 Another and perhaps the most important contribution of this work is the effect of P  Accordingly, a certain amount of energy must be transferred to the liquid phase to form bubbles by a cavity phenomenon. Decreasing the air/liquid interfacial tension lessens the liquid/solid attrition, enhances the flow fluid velocity and increases the kinetics of bubble formation (precipitation and nucleation) at the flow constrictor. In practice, the quantity of MBs that form at a P Therefore, the aqueous bulk-phase NBs concentration is a result of several simultaneous events with various equilibria. After the formation in the flow constrictors, the NBs and MBs interact as follows: i. The NBs and MBs collide and attach to each other; ii. The NBs slide around the MBs slip plane; iii. The MBs eventually trap or entrain the NBs. Consequently, some NBs disappear because they are engulfed by the MBs.  More, similar to the data obtained at different P Unfortunately, few data on the concentration of NBs, generated by the different techniques, are available. There are studies reporting the following values: i. 1.97 A major gain of the NBs formation technique developed in this work is that it takes advantage of a well-known industrial process DAF; the air depressurization in flow constrictors is widely applied in this technology. Because of the working P Summarizing, it seems that it is now possible to obtain highly concentrated (number of NBs per volume) charged or uncharged NBs dispersions with different sizes, with or without adsorbed surfactants (ionic or not) (  In addition, NBs are reportedly highly stable with considerable longevity when they are adsorbed onto hydrophobic surfaces (  In saturated liquids (free from micro-solids), such as in this work, the spontaneous nucleation of dissolved gases leads to NBs formation, and the NBs are notably stable probably because of the following phenomena (among others): i. The gas molecules inside the NBs do not contact the bulk liquid; ii. The gas molecules on the surface of the bubble leaves the surface in a perpendicular direction, and the gas molecules continuously leave and enter in constant flux; iii. The gas molecules usually move from one side of the bubble to the other side without touching one another because of the fineness of the NBs. This movement allows free flow of the liquid along the bubbles, which pushes the gas molecules to the surface of the bubbles and increases their stability; iv. The adsorption of ions on the NBs surface. Negatively charged bubbles adsorb protons onto their surface and result in Coulomb-repulsion forces that compensate the surface-tension forces ( The stability and high surface area per volume are important and useful properties of NBs. Advances in the understanding of NBs in water or complex aqueous solutions may broaden their applications in flotation (minerals and residual flotation reagents residual).  The MBs significantly attached onto the NB-coated pyrite, which proves that the NBs may act as a secondary flotation collector, as previously reported by It is expected that the injection of these highly loaded NBs aqueous dispersions in flotation cells or conditioners will improve the overall flotation of minerals, reducing the amount of chemicals in these processes, opening new routes for more efficient processes and cleaner production in the mineral industry. Additionally, most gas dispersion parameters as bubble surface area flux (Sb), air hold up, and superficial gas velocity (Jg) will increase and probably heighten the process kinetics with decreased operating and environmental costs (energy savings, less reagents and smaller footprint). A “new” technique to generate highly loaded dispersions of NBs was developed after depressurizing air that was saturated in water at low pressures (<3 The authors would like to thank all Brazilian Institutes that supported this study, namely