Dry grinding of gibbsite (α-Al(OH)3) and pseudo (p)-boehmite (γ-AlO(OH)) powder samples separately, with and without fine α-alumina powder as a seed, was conducted using a planetary ball mill to investigate effects of grinding and addition of the seed on their transformation temperatures to α-phase during heating. The transformation temperatures of both samples reduced to below 1000°C with increasing grinding time as well as the amount of seed. The transformation temperatures depend on the grinding time and the amount of seed, and the minimum temperatures are about 910°C for gibbsite and about 950°C for p-boehmite when they are ground for more than 60 min with an equivalent amount of the seed powder. Combination of grinding with addition of the seed would be an effective operation for the reduction in the transformation temperature of both compounds to α-phase.Gibbsite (α-Al(OH) The main purpose of this paper is to clarify effects of dry grinding with and without α-alumina powder as a seed on reduction in the α-transformation temperature of gibbsite and p-boehmite. Gibbsite (α-Al(OH) A planetary ball mill (Pulverisette-7, Fritsch, Germany) was used for grinding the gibbsite or p-boehmite sample with and without the seed powder sample. The mill was equipped with a pair of pots made of alumina. The inner diameter and depth of the pot are both equal to 4.0 cm, and the volume is approximately 50 cm The phase transformation temperature of both samples was determined by differential thermal analysis (DTA) as follows: 30.0 mg of the sample was heated at 20°C/min from room temperature to 1400°C together with 30.0 mg of the α-alumina standard material. The exothermic peak of the reaction can be observed when the phase transformation to α-phase takes place On the other hand, an X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was employed in order to confirm the phase in the sample/mixture after heating operation as follows. The sample, with and without alumina powder, was heated at 5°C/min by an electric furnace. The temperature was kept constant at different levels ranged from 800°C to 1200°C for 2 h, and then the sample was cooled down in the furnace.       Effects of dry grinding of gibbsite and p-boehmite using a planetary ball mill and addition of fine α-alumina powder as a seed on their transformation temperatures to α-phase were investigated. The transformation temperature of the sample was defined as the exothermic peak temperature in the DTA curve. The present experimental results are summarized as follows. (1) The transformation temperature of gibbsite to α-phase decreases rapidly from about 1350°C to 1100°C when the sample is ground for only 15 min. The temperature decreases gradually with an increase in grinding time, and reaches about 1020°C at 60 min of grinding. Further grinding is ineffective for the reduction in the transformation temperature. Addition of the seed is also effective for the reduction in the transformation temperature. The temperature is reduced to 910°C by grinding gibbsite with an equivalent amount of the seed powder. (2) The similar trend can be seen in the transformation temperature of p-boehmite to α-phase. The transformation temperature of p-boehmite decreases rapidly from about 1220°C to 1060°C when the sample is ground for 60 min. The transformation temperature decreases gradually with an increase in the amount of seed for the ground mixture, while no change in the temperature is observed for the unground one. Sixty-minute grinding of p-boehmite with an equivalent amount of the seed powder reduces the transformation temperature from 1220°C to 950°C. (3) It is confirmed that the transformation temperature of gibbsite and p-boehmite is significantly reduced by grinding with the addition of α-alumina powder as a seed. The authors are grateful to Mr. T. Kubota, Nippon Steel, Japan, for kindly supplying the pseudo-boehmite sample. They also wish to thank Mr. K. Horinouchi, Sumitomo Chemical, Japan, for supplying the gibbsite and alumina powders.