In this study, two new adsorbents, D301-g-EDAPGMA and D301-g-THIOPGMA, were obtained successfully on the basic of chemically modified D301 resin using ethylenediamine and thiourea. The adsorption, recognition and recovery properties of these two adsorbents for AuCl4
                     − were studied through batch method. The experimental results showed that these two adsorbents possess strong adsorption ability and excellent selectivity for AuCl4
                     −, and pH has a great influence on the adsorption capacity in the studied pH range. The maximum adsorption capacity of D301-g-EDAPGMA and D301-g-THIOPGMA for AuCl4
                     − reaches 298 and 326mg·g−1 at pH of 2, respectively. D301-g-EDAPGMA and D301-g-THIOPGMA possess very high selectivity coefficients for AuCl4
                     − and these two adsorbents can be used to recover AuCl4
                     − selectively from gold-bearing chloride solution. The extraction rate of these two adsorbents for AuCl4
                     − could reach 98%. D301-g-EDAPGMA and D301-g-THIOPGMA have excellent regeneration property, and the consecutive adsorption-desorption experiments showed that they could be reused almost without any loss in the adsorption capacity.Gold play a significant role in many fields such as catalyst, electronic industry, communication and finance ( The activated carbon and adsorption resin are widely used as adsorbent in recovering gold procedure ( D301 styrene macroporous weak basic anion exchange resins are used widely to remove and separate the toxic substance ( In this study, PGMA was grafted onto the surface of the weak basic D301 resin. Then, two new adsorbents, D301- D301 styrene macroporous weak basic anion exchange resin was purchased from Wandong Chemical Co., Ltd. (Anhui, China). GMA was purchased from Ruijinte Chemical Ltd. (Tianjin, China, AR grade) and purified by distillation under vacuum. Chloroauric acid was purchased from Nanjing chemical reagent Co., Ltd. (HAuCl Instruments used in this study were as follows: Prodigy ICP-AES (Leeman Labs, America), FTIR-8400S infrared spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan), PHS-3 acidimeter (Shanghai INESA Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd., China), and SHZ-C water-bathing constant temperature shaker (Shanghai Boxun Medical Biological Instrument Co., Ltd., China). 1 The preparation process is expressed in Batch adsorption experiments were performed using about 0.01 Usually, there are a certain concentration of metal ions coexisting with AuCl Selectivity coefficient ( Repeated usability (regenerability) is an important factor for an effective absorbent. Desorption experiment was also studied by batch experiment using the mixture of acetone and hydrochloric acid (1 FTIR spectra of the D301, D301- In the infrared spectrum of D301- In the infrared spectra of D301- The kinetic adsorption curves of D301, D301- The adsorption reached equilibrium at 5 It can be seen that D301- Additionally, it can also be seen that the adsorption capacity of D301- In The linear regression equations, rate constant and the correlation coefficient are summarized in Compared with the pseudo-second-order kinetic model, the correlation coefficient (R The adsorption isotherms of D301- It can be seen that the R To avoid forming hydroxide precipitates, the adsorption was conducted at pH below 3. In the solutions only one form of Au(III), AuCl These two adsorbents also show a pH-dependent adsorption behavior that is similar to other containing N/S adsorbents ( It also can be seen that the influence of pH on adsorption capacity of D301- Additionally, low adsorption capacity at pH of 0 indicates that the exhausted absorbent can be regenerated in a strong acidic solution. The influence of adsorbent dosage on adsorption capacity and extraction rate is shown in It can be seen that the extraction rate of these two adsorbents for AuCl Competitive adsorptions of D301- It can be seen that the D301- Good desorption performance of an adsorbent is important for its potential practical applications. In order to show the reusability of the D301- The result clearly shows that the D301- In this study, two new adsorbents, D301- The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this work by the