The reduction of occlusal dimensions in early Homo is often proposed to be a functional adaptation to diet. With their smaller occlusal surfaces, species of early Homo are suggested to have reduced food-processing abilities, particularly for foods with high material properties (e.g., increased toughness). Here, we employ chewing efficiency as a measure of masticatory performance to test the relationships between masticatory function and food properties. We predicted that humans are more efficient when processing foods of lower toughness and Young's modulus values, and that subjects with larger occlusal surfaces will be less efficient when processing foods with higher toughness and Young's modulus, as the greater area spreads out the overall bite force applied to food particles. Chewing efficiency was measured in 26 adults using high-speed motion capture and surface electromyography. The dentition of each subject was cast and the occlusal surface was quantified using dental topographic analysis. Toughness and displacement-limited index were negatively correlated with chewing efficiency, but Young's modulus was not. Increased occlusal two-dimensional area and surface area were positively correlated with chewing efficiency for all foods. Thus, larger occlusal surface areas were more efficient when processing foods of greater toughness. These results suggest that the reduction in occlusal area in early Homo was associated with a reduction in chewing efficiency, particularly for foods with greater toughness. Further, the larger occlusal surfaces of earlier hominins such as Australopithecus would have likely increased chewing efficiency and increased the probability of fracture when processing tough foods.Differences in craniodental morphology between early Reconstructing the functional and ecological implications of masticatory reduction in The primary function of the masticatory system is to reduce food items to a size suitable for swallowing. Smaller food particles are digested at a faster rate in the gut, resulting in greater energy extraction ( Chewing efficiency is influenced by changes in the size and shape of the dentition and masticatory morphology. Viewing the masticatory anatomy as a simplified third-class lever system, the force exerted by the adducting masticatory muscles, Variation in craniodental morphology may also affect efficiency by changing the ratio of Chewing efficiency is also influenced by the food's material properties (FMPs)—fracture toughness ( The relationships between qualitative measures of diet and occlusal morphology in primates are well established (e.g., In this study, we test whether variation in size and shape (topography) of the occlusal surface affects chewing efficiency for different FMPs in a sample of modern humans. We test the hypothesis (H1) that humans chew foods of lower FMPs and FIs more efficiently (i.e., with a greater reduction in food particle size per unit of chewing work). Foods with higher FMPs and FIs are expected to require greater amounts of work, either through increased time spent chewing or greater bite force, resulting in lower efficiency. We then test two competing hypotheses for occlusal surface area. The first (H2a) is that larger occlusal surfaces are less efficient for all foods, as larger surface areas may reduce the stresses (force/area) exerted on food particles. Alternatively, larger surfaces may improve chewing efficiency by providing greater surface area for grinding food particles (H2b). The results of these tests have implications for reconstructing the evolutionary pressures shaping changes in tooth shape and size in the hominin lineage ( Twenty-six human subjects, 7 men and 19 women, were recruited for this study. Subjects were between ages 21 and 36, had no history of chronic mastication problems such as temporomandibular joint pain, and had intact upper and lower I1-M2 dentition. Three subjects had third molars in occlusion. All subjects were screened for recent dental work, and none had received dental work within the past six months. The influence of previous dental work on measures of occlusal topography or efficiency was assumed to be minimal as subjects had time to wear fillings and to proprioceptively adjust to any occlusal changes. All trials took place at the Hunter College Human Evolution and Energetics Lab. The use of human subjects in this project was approved by the New York University Committee on Activities Involving Human Subjects: project number 11-8561 and Hunter College Human Research Protection Program: project number 11-08-165-4471. All subjects provided informed consent before participating. Chewing trials consisted of the following foods: almonds (five almonds per trial), sunflower seeds (10 seeds per trial), celery (3 cm stalk), cooked peeled sweet potato (3 cm cube), uncooked peeled sweet potato (3 cm cube), and cooked chicken (3 cm cube). These foods were selected to cover a range of FMPs and FIs and to be familiar to the subjects. For each food, subjects completed chewing trials of 4, 6, or 8 s, after which they expectorated the particles. Particles from the 4, 6, and 8 s chewing trials were separated, photographed, and the mean two-dimensional area of the three largest particles was calculated in ImageJ using particle analysis. The average area of these particles represents the minimum probability of fracture. The effects of digestive enzymes on particle size were assumed to be minimal given the short mastication time ( Mechanical work is the product of (force × distance); chewing work for a given trial was therefore calculated as the integral of (bite force × adduction distance [ Bite force was estimated from the intensity of superficial masseter and anterior temporalis activity measured using surface electromyography, EMG, collecting at 4 kHz (Delsys, Inc). Surface electrodes were adhered to the skin overlying the respective muscles. Electrode placement was determined by palpating the muscle during jaw clenching and confirmed by observing EMG signal during a series of jaw clenches. While the deep masseter, posterior temporalis, and medial pterygoid contribute to bite force production, this study specifically measures work of the anterior temporalis and superficial masseter muscles because these muscles account for the majority of bite force production, are routinely used to measure masticatory muscle activity, and can be measured using surface EMG ( Adduction distance was measured using high-speed motion capture (Vicon, 200 Hz). We simultaneously recorded three-dimensional movements of reflective markers adhered with double-sided tape to each subject's jaw and head. Reflectors were placed on the skin overlying pogonion, nasion, right and left condylion laterale, and right and left gonion. The change in distance for the work equation (see above) was calculated using the three-dimensional distance between nasion and pogonion. Adjustments for individual differences in upper facial length were made trigonometrically using a separate trial capturing the coordinates of jaw and head reflectors, in addition to a reflector held at the right M Each subject's maxillary and mandibular dentition were molded using Jeltrate Fast Set casting material and cast using Castone White. Casts were scanned using a NextEngine three-dimensional HD desktop scanner ( We quantified toughness ( Because food particle fragmentation is commonly defined by a combination of toughness and Young's modulus measures, we calculated displacement-limited ( All data analyses were performed in R ( We used a combination of reduced major axis (RMA) regressions and linear mixed-effect (LME) models to test our hypotheses. To test for differences in FMPs between foods, RMA regressions were used as each datum point was an independent observation. Variation in chewing efficiency across all food types contained multiple measures from each subject, as each subject contributed an efficiency measure per food, so we tested our hypotheses using nested linear mixed-effect models fit by maximum likelihood in the R package ‘nlme’ ( Chewing trial foods ranged in mean toughness ( For all foods, particle size (measured as a percentage of original particle size) was negatively correlated with the amount of chewing work performed ( Total chewing efficiency and each FMP and FI were negatively correlated, meaning that subjects were less efficient when chewing foods of higher FMPs and FIs. However, there was substantial variation in these relationships. The LME models for both toughness ( Linear mixed-effect models were analyzed to test the effect of each measure of occlusal topography on chewing efficiency. Occlusal surface area ( Reduced major axis models were fit for the relationships between efficiency and each measure of occlusal topography area for individual foods ( Differences in the slopes of two-dimensional and surface area with chewing efficiency for each food (from In sum, we found that chewing efficiency was negatively correlated with food toughness and the displacement-limited index. As expected, foods with higher values of these properties require greater work to reduce food particle size. Larger values of occlusal surface area and two-dimensional area resulted in higher chewing efficiency. In this study, we developed a new method for measuring chewing work and efficiency. We defined chewing efficiency as the amount of food particle reduction per unit of chewing work from calibrated EMG and motion capture. The advantage of calibrated EMG activity is that it allowed us to compare chewing work and efficiency between subjects and among a range of foods, including foods with highly force-limited or displacement-limited indices. Additionally, by measuring efficiency using chewing work, we are directly able to compare masticatory strategies in which particle breakdown depends on greater force per cycle versus a greater number of cycles. A limitation of using bite force calibration to estimate force is that the calibration trials measure isometric contraction, while the chewing trials necessarily employ concentric contractions. However, muscle shortening velocities during the ‘slow-close’ phase of the chewing cycle are by definition low, such that the effect of shortening velocity on force and force per unit of EMG are likely to be minor and similar across subjects. Thus, there is likely to be limited bias introduced by the simplifying assumption that the ratio of force to EMG intensity during isometric contraction is the same ratio during chewing trials. Our results highlight both the utility and validity of our approach in modern humans and have implications for the fossil hominin record. Chewing efficiency provides a single, quantitative, continuous measure for comparing chewing performance across a broad range of food types ( As expected, variation in food material properties was related to chewing efficiency. Subjects in our sample were more efficient when masticating foods with lower FMP and FI values, such as cooked sweet potato and chicken, supporting H1. Conversely, foods with higher FMP and FI values required more energy per particle reduction resulting in lower efficiency ( We also found that toughness and the displacement-limited index negatively affected chewing efficiency, albeit with modest effects on efficiency. These results stand in contrast to our findings for Young's modulus and the force-limited index, which did not affect efficiency. These results are consistent with previous work showing that measures of food toughness are consistently better predictors of masticatory function, cycle frequency, ingested bite size, and EMG activity compared to food elasticity ( One notable exception to the overall pattern of FMP and efficiency was sunflower seeds. Despite having among the highest tested FMP and FI values, sunflower seeds were similar in efficiency to raw sweet potato and celery. This divergence between FMPs and efficiency suggests a significant increase in chewing efficiency during the mastication of numerous small food items may result from a higher probability of fracture during each masticatory cycle, as proposed by Increased two-dimensional area and surface area resulted in greater chewing efficiency for all foods (H2b), allowing us to reject the alternative hypothesis (H2a) that greater occlusal surface areas decrease efficiency ( The positive relationship between occlusal surface area and efficiency is consistent with previous suggestions that bite force applied over a larger occlusal area results in greater food fragmentation ( As with any laboratory tests in living humans, application of these results to fossil hominins is inherently extrapolative. Compared to the range of occlusal morphology evident in the hominin lineage, our human sample has a relatively narrow range of variation in occlusal form. The effect sizes for occlusal area are correspondingly modest. Nonetheless, despite these limitations, results here indicate that naturally occurring variation in occlusal area, evident within a living population, leads to small but measurable differences among individuals in chewing efficiency. While chewing performance may not have important fitness consequences in living humans, such small, individual differences in performance are precisely what natural selection acts on over evolutionary time to shape species differences in morphology. Given that fossil hominins completed many thousands of chewing cycles over the course of a lifetime, the small biological effect observed here in a limited number of cycles could potentially have a significant influence on fitness. With these considerations, the results of our study hold several implications for masticatory variation in the fossil hominin record under non-adaptive and adaptive scenarios. Decreased occlusal size in Decreased occlusal size in early Results of this study may also be relevant to dietary adaptations in The goal of the present study was to address the relationships between occlusal topography, chewing efficiency, and FMPs and FIs in modern humans. Our results demonstrate that chewing efficiency varies with food properties and is positively correlated with occlusal surface area and two-dimensional area. However, the relationships tested here are by no means exhaustive. Additional analyses are needed to test how relative chewing efficiency of individual foods or distinct properties change with occlusal topography. The amount of variation within each of these variables in humans, particularly subjects with highly processed diets, is limited. However, as significant relationships exist within our present sample, the addition of variation in occlusal topography or masticatory morphology from chimpanzees or other primates will further the results of this study. Adding interspecific comparisons will also test whether the correlations in this study fit across species with different evolutionary histories and selective pressures. Building from the decades of important work on masticatory function in non-human primates, analyzing chewing efficiency in non-human primate taxa will help to elucidate dietary form-function relationships. Financial support was provided by The following is the Supplementary online material related to this article: Supplementary online material related to this article can be found at