Percutaneous fixation technique for the management of pelvic and acetabular fractures is gaining wider acceptance in the orthopaedic trauma community. The development of new surgical techniques for antegrade and retrograde placement of pelvic and acetabular columnar screws, and the increased access to advanced imaging and navigational tools have resulted in an increased application of the technique. With its increased use in tertiary trauma centers, newly trained traumatologists are rapidly embracing the advantages of percutaneous fixation perhaps at the cost of a decreased emphasis on the traditional exposures and approaches. Furthermore, consensus on what constitute definitive indications or contraindications remains unclear. Although the technical aspect of percutaneous fixation can have a steep learning curve, the technique may offer advantages over traditional open reduction and internal fixation in certain specific situations. This review discusses evolving indications in the treatment of certain fracture patterns and patient populations.Pelvic and acetabular fractures most commonly result from high-energy trauma in younger populations and low-energy falls in elderly patients with osteoporotic bone. Posterior ring injuries including the ilium, sacroiliac joint, and the sacral ala or body are often amenable to percutaneous reduction and fixation. The iliosacral screw, first described by work performed by Routt et al Care should be taken to avoid the risk of neurologic injury during placement of sacroiliac screws. A possible contraindication to percutaneous fixation of posterior pelvic ring injuries is sacral dysmorphism. Anterior ring disruptions such as a symphyseal disruption are ideally suited for anterior plating, but some anterior ring fractures involving the superior rami are amenable to rami fixation with retrograde rami screws ( Some geriatric pelvic fractures patterns normally treated with nonsurgical care, such as the common low-energy lateral compression type 1 (LC1) pelvic fracture, can be amenable to percutaneous fixation in patients with severe pain-limiting early mobility. A recent study suggests that the outcome of the LC1 pelvic fractures in the elderly are associated with a significant mortality that has previously been underappreciated. With the increased longevity of our population, pelvic and acetabular fractures in the elderly are of increasing occurrence. Low-energy trauma related to a fall from standing, in conjunction with osteopenic and osteoporotic bone, may result in pelvic or acetabular fractures. Patients with marked comminution or impaction of the articular surfaces associated with a displaced fracture of the acetabulum often progress to degenerative arthritis necessitating subsequent total hip arthroplasty (THA). The gold standard of displaced acetabular fractures in the nonelderly and nonpediatric population is ORIF with the goal of anatomic articular surface restoration. Minimally displaced or nondisplaced acetabular fractures can be treated nonsurgically at the discretion of the treating surgeon, an approach that avoids exposing the patient to the risks of surgery but necessarily mandates an initial period of non–weight bearing and limited mobility, followed by progressive weight bearing over a period of 8-16 weeks. For acetabular fractures that are minimally or nondisplaced, or amenable to closed reduction, percutaneous fixation may be a worthwhile option under some conditions. Anterior column or anterior column posterior hemitransverse fractures that are fixed percutaneously as opposed to nonsurgical treatment may allow for better pain control and earlier mobilization or weight bearing. Pathologic pelvic fractures and impending fractures can be amenable to percutaneous stabilization. Large lytic lesions in the columns, even when not fractured, are associated with pain and inability to mobilize. Intracolumnar fixation in the form of Kirschner wires to support spacers and antibiotic-impregnated reconstruction has been well described in the orthopaedic oncology literature. The pediatric pelvic skeleton is more resilient to fractures owing to its elasticity and thick periosteum. Skeletally immature pelvic fractures are associated with less blood loss than in adults partly owing to the vasoactive capability of children and their elastic periosteum providing a tamponade effect. Percutaneous columnar fixation with antegrade or retrograde anterior column and posterior column screws methods may prove useful for stabilization of acetabular rotational osteotomies for the management of hip dysplasia. The classically described fixation after osteotomies has not always involved full columnar fixation. The use of columnar screws can minimize the risk of columnar nonunion in pelvic osteotomies, especially those that use full column cuts, such as the Bernese periacetabular, triple innominate, Pemberton, and Chiari osteotomies. Although rare, a hypertrophic columnar or rami nonunion after acetabular osteotomies has been described and can be difficult to treat. Management of a patient with a transplanted kidney in the pelvic basin that then sustains an acetabular fracture is rare but exceptionally challenging. The transplanted organ and unpredictably coiled ureters are at a high risk of damage if treatment is carried out with an ilioinguinal approach to ORIF. Percutaneous intracolumnar techniques would be indicated in this situation even at the expense of a difficult reduction. In all patients with a suspected pelvic fracture, conventional anteroposterior (AP), inlet and outlet radiographs of the pelvis are obtained to visualize the zone of injury, patterns of displacement and potential anatomical variations. The various intraoperative imaging modalities used to guide percutaneous fixation include conventional fluoroscopy, computer-based 2D/3D navigation, and CT-based navigation. The fixation device most often used is the cannulated screw. Depending on the anticipated bone quality, age, constitution of the patient, fracture pattern, partially threaded, or fully threaded, 6.5, 7.3, or 8.0-mm screws can be used from various manufacturers. Depending on the commercial system chosen, a guidewire of 2.8-3.2 Although most percutaneous pelvic and acetabular screws can be applied with the patient resting on a radiolucent table, a Judet-type table can provide multidirectional traction if needed. Other accessories such as a reduction frame can also be useful. Fixation of the anterior column can be approached in an antegrade fashion from the lateral iliac surface using an entry point proximal to the acetabulum aiming toward the pubic symphysis. Structures at risk are the gluteal vessels as the guidewires traverse the gluteal muscles and are moved about to properly identify the ideal entry point. Once the wire is inserted in good alignment with the anterior column, as judged by a combination of obturator oblique, AP and inlet views, it is carefully advanced avoiding the acetabular joint as well as penetration into the pelvis. Inlet views are useful to assure that no penetration toward the bladder has occurred. Also, a single image demonstrating the wire is proximal to the acetabulum suffices to guarantee with mathematical certainty that there has been no penetration of the joint. Alternatively, an anterior column screws can be placed in a retrograde manner by originating at the pubic tubercle and directing laterally and proximally over the acetabular dome. Structures at risk include the femoral neurovascular structures and the spermatic cord in men. Fluoroscopic inlet, AP, and obturator oblique views aid accurate placement of guidewires. If directed too inferiorly, the neurovascular structures traversing through the obturator canal can be compromised when performing a retrograde screw placement. In a pelvis with a curved anterior column, as often occurs in female anatomy, the entry point must be lateralized considerably to avoid missing the joint. Sometimes overdrilling the entry point and the tight hourglass section of the anterior columnar intramedullary canal will allow additional freedom to advance and maneuver the guidewire and successfully avoid the joint. A useful and easily applied screw that allows securing a coronal plane fracture involving the supraacetabular dome is inserted from the anterior-inferior iliac spine toward the posterior-superior iliac spine ( Percutaneous fixation of the posterior column is most easily achieved through a retrograde approach. The posterior column sits in an oblique orientation through the AP, and coronal planes׳ careful visualizing of the anatomy and pelvic tilt is crucial to successful placement. Palpation of the ischial tuberosity with the hip flexed approximates the starting point, which can be difficult to find depending on the patient׳s body habitus. A reliable starting point is a few millimeters posterior to most distal prominence of the tuberosity. Wound issues can occur given the proximity of the entry point to the perineal area and the pressure at the wound site that occurs when sitting. Rarely, a prominent screw head causes discomfort. Fluoroscopic obturator and iliac oblique views are used to help direct the guidewire. Although the retrograde insertion requires an assistant to flex the hip and keep the limb elevated during insertion, it remains more convenient than the antegrade approach in morbidly obese patients as it spares the surgeon from performing a lateral ilioinguinal window approach that is required to insert this screw in an antegrade manner. The antegrade approach requires a small lateral window ilioinguinal exposure to properly identify the entry point in the inner pelvic table. Additionally, in obese patients, the presence of a pannus makes it difficult to achieve the right inclination angle to guide an antegrade screw toward the ischial tuberosity. Most pelvic fractures are stable requiring only nonsurgical management. Percutaneous fixation is suitable for many clinical situations. Indications are evolving as the surgical techniques, intraoperative improvements in imaging, and navigation become more accessible. Anatomical reduction is required before fixation of significantly displaced acetabular fractures and therefore will always require open surgical treatment. Careful judgment should be practiced to avoid overextending the indications for percutaneous techniques. Some displaced acetabular and pelvic fracture patterns may still be amenable to percutaneous fixation if reduction can be performed aided by smaller accessory approaches with assisted reduction methods. Sacroiliac joint disruptions, isolated sacral or iliac fractures, and combined sacroiliac fractures can be managed by percutaneous fixation even when significantly displaced as proper reduction can usually be achieved with careful imaging and manipulation. In general, percutaneous acetabular fixation is preferred for minimally displaced, potentially unstable fractures involving single-column (posterior or anterior), anterior column posterior hemitransverse fractures, or transverse-type fractures. Percutaneous fixation can also be used supplementary to open reduction in more complex patterns of acetabular fracture. Although learning curves can be steep, less residual displacement, better functional outcomes, and early pain relief have been reported in patients treated by percutaneous fixation compared with traditional methods.