The work describes various physical and chemical treatments to eliminate the deleterious effects of impurities in phosphogypsum on the delayed setting time and impaired strength development behaviour of cement to which it was added as a set regulator. The physical treatments included washing, milling, and ultrasonic treatment of the material, while the chemical treatments dealt with acidic and basic additions to the phosphogypsum during the washing stage. It was found that chemical treatment with a milk of lime solution, which is often recommended in literature, was ineffective in reducing set retardation. Treatment with ammonium hydroxide or sulphuric acid was more effective in this regard. Intergrinding phosphogypsum with slaked lime improved its effectiveness in reducing set retardation, but the use of unslaked lime was less effective and also resulted in marked reductions in compressive strengths. A combined treatment of wet milling phosphogypsum with a lime slurry in a ball mall was derived from these experiments and is recommended for full-scale plant applications.There are various ways to treat phosphogypsums for utilisation in the cement industry. The treatment methods can roughly be divided into three different types, namely, chemical, physical, and thermal methods of treatment. Sometimes a specific process employs a combination of these different approaches to treat the phosphogypsum and convert it into a suitable product for use in the cement industry. Chemical treatments to render phosphogypsum suitable as a set retarder are fairly simple and easy to employ on a large scale in an economical way. The most common one that has already been referred to in the Other methods of chemical treatment of phosphogypsum include treating it with a mixture of sulphuric acid and silica or hot aqueous ammonium sulphate In the so-called Cerphos process The purpose of both milling and ultrasonic treatments is to physically break the gypsum crystals up into smaller particles. The rationale of this approach is that impurities will at the same time be released from the crystal lattice and thus to a large extend be removed, similar to the sieving process described above. In South Africa, major gypsum deposits are located far from cement-producing plants. Increasing transport costs have forced cement companies to seriously consider the replacement of natural gypsum with close by phosphogypsum resources. An investigation was therefore carried out to determine the effect of various treatments of phosphogypsum on the performance of cement made with it. The investigation focused specifically on setting times and strength development of cements containing phosphogypsum instead of natural gypsum. A sample of by-product gypsum was split in two equal parts, one-half being dried in an oven at 50 °C. Two kilograms of the other half was stirred for 10 min in 10 l of water, allowed to settle, and the water decanted before also being dried at 50 °C. The first unwashed and second washed parts were subdivided and subsequently given different treatments before being used as set regulators in cement. The different treatments included stirring 2 kg each time for 30 min in a 10-l solution of milk of lime, 5% and 10% ammonium hydroxide, and 1% hydrochloric acid and sulphuric acid. After exposure to these solutions, the gypsum was filtered and washed twice with 10 l of tap water before being dried again at 45 °C. In all cases, the gypsum obtained after various treatments was interground with clinker to obtain a final SO In the second instance, different amounts of unslaked and slaked lime were milled together with phosphogypsum containing about 1.1% total P All setting times were measured with Vicat needles, while compressive strengths at various time intervals were measured with EN 196-1 prisms. These measurements were performed according to the standard EN 196 specification methodology The setting time and EN 196-1 prism strength values obtained for the various chemical treatments of the phosphogypsum are summarised in The cement samples containing phosphogypsum milled together with unslaked lime showed longer initial and final setting times compared with the material containing natural gypsum, as the results in Ultrasonic treatment of the phosphogypsum before mixing it with the clinker gave similar setting times and strength developments behaviour in the final cements as was observed with the materials prepared with the phosphogypsum milled with hydrated lime. Both unwashed phosphogypsum samples treated ultrasonically had shorter initial and final setting times than the sample containing the washed material. It also seems as if a shorter ultrasonic treatment period of 15 instead of 30 min is more beneficial, as can be deduced from the data in Provided that the longer initial and final setting times can be tolerated, these results indicate that phosphogypsum can be rendered suitable for use as a set retarder by subjecting it to washing with dilute acid solutions or dilute basic solutions. The milling of phosphogypsum with small quantities of hydrated lime definitely seem to have beneficial effects on the strength development of the final cement. It is surprising that the most common method of washing with a milk of lime solution that is often recommended did not yield promising results in terms of reducing the setting time retardation. From this observation, as well as the results obtained when milling the phosphogypsum with 1.25% of slaked lime, one can conclude that the phosphate responsible for the setting time retardation is most probably present mainly in the coprecipitated form that is incorporated in the crystal structure of the gypsum rather than in the water-soluble form. Therefore, a treatment consisting of combined milling with a slurry of slaked lime is recommended to render phosphogypsum suitable as a substitute for natural gypsum as a set retarder in cement. Follow-up work in this regard has been reported in a subsequent communication