The densification is a measure of deformation in upset forming of Powder Metallurgy (P/M) processes. A complete experimental investigation on the deformation behaviour of aluminium–3.5% alumina powder composite has been discussed for the case of triaxial stress state condition. Cold upsetting of aluminium–3.5% alumina composite with and with no annealing having different initial preform relative density and with different aspect ratio was carried out and the densification behaviour of the preform under triaxial stress state condition was determined. A new true strain considering the effect of bulging was taken into account for the case of determination of the hoop strain. Plots made for different preforms were analyzed for the densification behaviour of preforms considering the effect of both geometrical work-hardening (GWH) and the matrix work-hardening (MWH).Powder metallurgy (P/M) products are widely used from the automotive industry through to aerospace, ordnance, power tools, electronics, business machines, household appliances, garden equipment and much more. Moreover powder metallurgy has become widely recognized as a superior way of producing high-quality parts for a variety of important applications. This success is due to the advantages the process offers over other metal forming technologies such as forging and metal casting, advantages in material utilization, shape complexity, near-net shape dimensional control, among others. These, in turn, yield benefits in lower costs and greater versatility. The process of producing powder metallurgy (P/M) components is basically a combination of two conventional processes, namely powder metallurgy and forging. The vast application of powder materials in various branches of industries stipulates the increase of interest to analysis of powder performs behaviour under the forming process. The P/M preform has a subsequent lateral flow of material during any upsetting operation as a result of the induced height strain. However, a spherical pore would undergo flattening and simultaneous elongation in the direction of the lateral flow, i.e. normal to the direction of loading. This leads to the situation where a relative motion between the opposite sides of the collapsed pore, due to the presence of shear stress, becomes feasible and the mechanical rupturing of the oxide film takes place. Virgin metal is now exposed for bond formation across the collapsing pore surfaces. It has been established The strain-hardening exponent is the parameter which explains about the behaviour of strain-hardening of materials, which is the phenomenon that takes place at room temperature because of the plastic deformation of metals. The characteristics of stress strain curves such as work-hardening exponent and stress ratio are expected to play a vital role in carrying out the plastic deformation of porous material. Narayanasamy and Pandey Selvakumar et al. Porous P/M material during cold working not only experiences the usual strain hardening but also experiences ‘geometrical work-hardening’, due to a continued increase in density which leads to the enhancement in area of the cross-section. Thus, the total work-hardening in P/M preforms is due to densification as well as cold working of the base material surrounding the pores Workability is a term used to evaluate the capacity of a material to withstand the induced internal stresses of forming prior to the splitting of material occurs. It is a difficult technological concept that depends not only on the material but also the various process parameters such as stress, strain rate, temperature, friction, etc. The uniaxial state of compressive stress using aluminium alloy and the yield surfaces for the various density levels were generated in a three-dimensional principal stress space with the help of computer graphics. Workability criterion of P/M compacts was discussed by Abdel-Rahman et al. Gouveia et al. Adoption of latest technology for evaluating the parameters of ductile fracture is a common one. Ko et al. The present investigation deals with densification behaviour of aluminium–3.5% alumina powder composite with and with no annealing considering the effect of both geometrical work-hardening (GWH) and the matrix work-hardening (MWH). The densification behaviour during cold upsetting under triaxial stress state condition has been evaluated and used for the discussion. Atomized aluminium powder of −180 The sintered preforms were cleaned of the ceramic coating residues and measurements such as initial height, diameter and densities were carried out before and after each deformations, the latter being carried out between two flat dies heat treated to Rc 52-55 and tempered to Rc 46-48. The die surfaces were mirror polished. During the cold compression test, molybdenum disulphide lubricant was used at both of the die contact surfaces, which ensured the absolute minimum friction, resulting in quite homogeneous deformation. In general, each preform was subjected to compressive incremental loading in steps of 0.02 MN until fine cracks appeared on its free surface. After each interval of loading dimensional changes in the specimen such as height after deformation ( The present investigation is based on the analytical determination of the deformed density, strains, stresses, a new version of Poisson’s ratio, formability stress index and strain-hardening index. In the present investigation, the material under consideration is porous. As explained elsewhere This equation is based on the volume-constancy principle. However, the same is not the case for porous preform upsetting, instead the mass-constancy principle is employed. Applying the mass-constancy principle before and after deformation, Eq. Taking natural logarithms of both sides of Eq. However, Eq. Since the ratio According to Narayanasamy et al. From the above Eq. In the above Eq. (For axisymmetric). The hydrostatic stress is given by The Eq. The effective stress can be determined from the following expression as explained elsewhere Since The Eq. As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture, Vujovic and Shabaik This index determines the fracture limit as explained in the reference The axial true strain ( The hoop strain ( Since the radial strain ( The strain-hardening exponent value ( It is assumed that the consecutive compressive loads were specified as 1, Now by dividing Eq. Taking natural logarithms on both sides of Eq. Using Eq.  The variation of instantaneous strain-hardening index (   The variation of instantaneous strain-hardening index (  As shown in  The parameter     As observed in  As shown in The following conclusions can be drawn from the above results and discussion: The matrix work-hardening may be dominant when initial preform relative density is 0.9 and aspect ratio is lower (0.35). As the initial preform relative density decreases to lower value, the geometrical work-hardening is dominant and the matrix work-hardening is almost nil. The rate of densification depends on the amount of matrix work-hardening (if the preforms are annealed or not) particularly when initial preform relative density is 0.9. The rate of densification is lower when initial preform relative density is in the order of 0.72 and 0.8, due to the reason that only geometrical work-hardening is dominant. The plasticity range for stage-2 depends on the initial preform relative density and the nature of deformation (annealed or not) which depends on the nature of matrix and geometric work-hardening values.