A method for the extraction of both Pb and Mo from molybdenite flotation tailings associated with galena is described. The flotation tailings were pre-roasted and then alkaline leached. The effect of temperature, initial concentration of sodium hydroxide solution, alkali to total calcine mass ratio, leaching time and stirring speed on the leaching of Pb and Mo were systematically investigated by experiment. Optimum conditions were identified as: pre-roasting at 600°C for 1h, alkaline leaching for 1h at 130°C with an alkali to total calcine mass ratio of 1.2:1, initial NaOH concentration 30%, and a stirring speed of 600rpm. Under these conditions 98% of the Pb and 98% of the Mo in the flotation tailings were extracted.Molybdenum is a strategic metal which has a broad range of applications and uses. Approximately 80% of the world's molybdenum is used in metallurgical applications such as alloy steels, stainless steels and cast irons, and the other 20% is used in chemical applications. The main commercial source of molybdenum is molybdenite (MoS Over the past few years work to recover Mo from low-grade and complex ores has proceeded apace ( The commercial process for producing metallic lead from galena concentrates involves two stages: feeding to a sintering machine where, by contact with air at an elevated temperature, turning the lead concentrate into lead oxide; heating the lead oxide in a blast furnace with coke to yield metallic lead ( Although there are many reports on dealing with molybdenite, galena and wulfenite respectively, there is little information concerning the treatment of low-grade molybdenum mineral associated with galena. Only The molybdenite flotation tailings associated with galena used in this study were obtained from the molybdenum concentrator plant location within Henan province, China. The molybdenite flotation tailings were enriched by flotation in Pb (to 20–25%) and had a Mo content of up to 2.4%. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the flotation tailings is shown in All the reagents used in chemical analysis, including sodium hydroxide, citric acid and hydrochloric acid, were of analytical grade. And all solutions were made with deionized water. Pre-roasting and leaching studies were carried out on the laboratory scale. Pre-roasting was performed to determine whether new phases were formed and how this influenced leaching efficiency. All experiments were carried out using 80 Comparison of the metal extractions by alkaline leaching with and without the pre-roasting shows that only 25% of the Mo and 11% of the Pb were extracted without pre-roasting, whereas 96% of the Mo and 97% of the Pb were extracted from the pre-roasted flotation tailings. Moreover, these results were obtained using harsher conditions for the non-pre-roasted leach: 180 Within the molybdenite flotation tailings associated with galena, the Pb and Mo mainly occur as sulfides. Whereas the oxides of Pb and Mo leach easily with NaOH, the sulfides leach very slowly until they are converted into the oxides. Therefore, the purpose of pre-roasting is to oxidize the sulfides to either oxides or sulfates. As seen from The effect of the temperature of the pre-roasting on the extraction of Pb and Mo was studied from 550 to 850 After pre-roasting under optimum conditions, the Mo and Pb minerals formed are easily leached with sodium hydroxide solution in an autoclave. The chemical reactions of the leaching were assumed to occur as: The effect of temperature on the extraction of Pb and Mo was studied at different temperatures (between 40 and 150 The effect of alkali to total calcine mass ratio on the extraction of Pb and Mo is shown in The effect of the initial concentration of NaOH solution on the extraction of Pb and Mo was studied by varying concentrations of sodium hydroxide over the 10 − The effect of leaching time on the extraction of Pb and Mo is shown in The chemical compositions and the XRD pattern of the leach residues after leaching (30% NaOH, 130 Pre-roasting with subsequent NaOH leaching can improve the extraction of Pb and Mo from the molybdenite flotation tailings associated with galena. Temperature, alkali to total calcine mass ratio and initial sodium hydroxide concentration all have strongly influenced the leaching of Pb and Mo from these flotation tailings, while leaching time and stirring speed have less influence. Under the optimum conditions of preroasting at 600 The authors acknowledge the financial support by the