The main purpose of current study is development of an intelligent model for estimation of shear wave velocity in limestone. Shear wave velocity is one of the most important rock dynamic parameters. Because rocks have complicated structure, direct determination of this parameter takes time, spends expenditure and requires accuracy. On the other hand, there are no precise equations for indirect determination of it; most of them are empirical. By using data sets of several dams of Iran and neuro-genetic, adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), and gene expression programming (GEP) methods, models are rendered for prediction of shear wave velocity in limestone. Totally, 516 sets of data has been used for modeling. From these data sets, 413 ones have been utilized for building the intelligent model, and 103 have been used for their performance evaluation. Compressional wave velocity (Vp
                     ), density (γ) and porosity (n), were considered as input parameters. Respectively, the amount of R for neuro-genetic and ANFIS networks was 0.959 and 0.963. In addition, by using GEP, three equations are obtained; the best of them has 0.958R. ANFIS shows the best prediction results, whereas GEP indicates proper equations. Because these equations have accuracy, they could be used for prediction of shear wave velocity for limestone in the future.Nowadays, using dynamic methods for quick and precise estimation of elastic constants is common in rock engineering. The nondestructive characteristic of these tests makes them, mostly usable In order to predict shear wave velocity, neuro-genetic, ANFIS and GEP methods are used in this study. Three models were built according to these three methods. The first model was made based on only one input parameter, Various methods were introduced to obtain shear wave velocity. Researchers have studied on this subject, like Gassmann et al. Equations of velocity-porosity are used in most rock physics issues; they are even utilized in seismic and pore fluids analyses. The equation between shear wave velocity and porosity was introduced by Gassmann Christensen cited that the increase of the amount of density can increases the shear wave velocity Equations between compressional and shear waves velocity are main tools for recognition of lithology and pore fluids. Various investigations were carried out in order to study equations between compressional and shear waves velocity. Generally, the velocity of shear waves is 2/3 of compressional ones Numerous researchers have used intelligent methods such as artificial neural networks, fuzzy systems, genetic algorithm, and so on for prediction of shear wave velocity Neuro-genetic is a combination of artificial neural network (ANN) and genetic algorithms (GA). Having high learning capability and flexibility enables artificial neural network to estimate and predict complicated engineering problems. These networks are utilized in various fields of geotechnics. Researchers use them as appropriate predictor to anticipate different problems. Multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) are perhaps the best-known type of network. MLP has a layer structure, consists of at least three hierarchical layers of neurons: an input layer, one or several hidden layer(s) and an output layer The first step in training an ANN is to design the network architecture. Design of ANN is specified by the network topology (such as number of hidden layers, number of neurons, and type of transfer functions) and learning rules. These rules specify an initial set of weights, biases, momentum coefficients and learning rates and indicate how they should be adapted during training to improve network performance. Both topology and learning rules are very important and the good selection of those will get better the performance of the network Fundamental theories of GAs were established by Holland in the early 1970s At first, genetic algorithm of a neuro-genetic system works with an initial population of random chromosomes (neural network). Then, main and sub-operators of current generation form the next one in each stage. Chromosome eligibility for transferring to subsequent generation is evaluated target function. By increasing the number of generations, the number of individuals in each generation decreases. Finally, only one chromosome remains, which has the best characteristics The function of artificial neural networks has direct relationship with number and quantity of training data In 1993, Jang utilized linguistic power of fuzzy systems and train of neural networks, and rendered a strong system known as “adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS)” An adaptive neuro fuzzy inferencing system constructs a FIS whose membership function parameters are adjusted using a backpropagation algorithm either alone or in combination with a least-squares type of method. This adjustment allows the fuzzy systems to learn from the data that they are modeling Ferreira suggested a new algorithm according to genetic algorithm and genetic programming. This was called as “Gene Expression Programming or GEP”, a new evolved algorithm being used to overcome on most restrictions of GA and GP GEP is a new sub-field of GP If input parameters were correctly selected in modeling, having sufficient data set for training, the model would be learned complex equation between input and output as well. In other words, the output of the model is affected by input parameters. By considering training data, the best relationship is maintained between parameters, and the appropriate answer is estimated. Some of the effective factors on the velocity of sound waves’ propagation in a rock are elastic properties of the rock constituents, rock type, cement type, texture, rock density, pore fluid, density, crack content in rocks, porosity, anisotropy, stress level, humidity percentage, temperature and so on Many researchers have rendered various equations for prediction of shear wave velocity based on parameters such as porosity, density and compressional wave velocity. Compressional wave velocity ( Three models were created based on the various inputs by using the neuro-genetic system. The first model was made on the basis of only one input parameter ( Only one input ( As Three various models were built by using ANFIS method. Matlab software was also used to create ANFIS. In order to decrease the variation interval of input and output parameters, all parameters were normalized in the interval of −1 and 1 before modeling. ANFIS structure including number and type of membership function, training algorithm and training epochs is on the basis of error and trial. In order to build the first ANFIS model having one input, 43 membership functions of Gaussian. 2 were obtained by using grid partitioning for each input. Optimum parameters of them were calculated by neural network of the hybrid algorithm a combination of back propagation (BP) and the least squares (LS). The system includes five layers and 43 if-then rules, which are related with AND function ( As GenXproTools 4.0 software was utilized in order to use GEP method. A set of setting were carried out to develop shear wave velocity model and obtain the best model for problem-solving ( Three equations are rendered on the basis of one, two and three input parameters by using 413 data set (80%) by GEP method (  As Three methods, including neuro-genetic, ANFIS and GEP networks, have been used in order to predict shear wave velocity of limestone. One, two and three parameters were considered as input ones for modeling. 516 data set have been collected from several dams of Iran within various formations. 80% of data has been utilized for construction (training), and the rest has been used for testing (evaluation) of models. Data sets used for modeling had considerable variation range and size. On the other hand, the type of formations was not equal. These characteristics provide an appropriate data set. Therefore, the intelligent models have high accuracy and well generalization capability. This is well understood during modeling test phase. Intelligent models had proper function in both training and test phases. This indicates the generalization capability of models. Finally, according to the results, intelligent methods are the appropriate tool to solve problems having complex mechanism and numerous effective factors such as shear wave velocity. There is no limitation for the number of input parameters in these methods for prediction of rock mechanic parameters. In comparison with other methods, this method is beneficial. Totally, all intelligent models could recognize the relationships between input parameters and their effect on the output ones. These models are well generalized for new data and are ready to act as a predictor for anticipation of shear wave velocity in limestone.