This study prospectively evaluated closed reduction (CR) outcomes in non-displaced, non-dislocated high-condylar and condylar-head fractures (Class VI after Spiessl and Schroll) and open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of displaced (Class III) or dislocated (Class V) fractures.
                  Thirty-eight patients with 54 fractures (16 (42%) with bilateral fractures, 14 (37%) CR, 24 (63%) ORIF) were enrolled in a 1 year follow-up that 18 patients with 33 fractures completed.
                  
                     Condylar translation in Class VI fractures recovered to 11mm for vertical opening, 8mm for protrusion and 10mm for mediotrusion; Class III synonymously 8mm, 8mm and 6mm; and Class V 7mm, 6mm and 7mm; incisal movements recovered to 38mm, 8mm and 8mm in Class VI; 55mm, 7mm and 10mm in Class III with 1 (8%) malocclusion, 1 (8%) impaired vertical opening and 55mm, 7mm and 9mm in Class V with 2 (18%) malocclusions.
                  
                     Fragment-reduction versus the non-fractured condyle was −0.3mm to +1.3mm and +3° to +9° in Class VI, −1mm to −0.2mm and +3° to +2° in Class III, −3.3mm to +3.1mm and −11.2° to +1° in Class V.
                  Malocclusion and joint locking were unreliable determinants for a treatment decision, being forged by concomitant fractures. Joint movements were within normal range at 1-year follow-up except Classes III and V vertical opening translation. After predefined criteria, 92% successful outcomes were attained. Multiple factor analysis should be used to prospectively evaluate the unacceptable clinical outcomes. Class VI fractures with intact vertical support should prospectively be evaluated whether these benefit from ORIF.The treatment modalities for high condylar fractures and condylar head fractures, with intra- and, or extra-articular course are under discussion Based upon the evidence in the literature, this study compromised to operate displaced and dislocated fractures with ORIF, as CR did not show sufficient reduction against the lateral pterygoid muscle's anteriomedial pull. Full randomization was not considered ethical or reasonable after the evidence in the literature had been reviewed. When no displacement of the entire condylar roll, dislocation or loss of vertical support was found, CR followed similar to Part I of this article For 42 months, all patients treated between June 1999 and November 2002 were offered a participation in this prospective study. They were informed of the need for 1-year follow-up. Inclusion criteria were unilateral or bilateral condylar-head and high-condylar fracture, no previous history of TMJ dysfunction and sufficient dentition to reproduce the occlusal relationships, no severe pre-traumatic dysgnathia and the patient's consent to participate. All patients had to be operable even if they were treated conservatively in the end. Patients who were not fit for general anesthesia because of severe systemic diseases were excluded. The total number willing to participate was 83, and of these, 38 patients had high condyle and condylar head fractures, the remainder had low condyle fractures. Fifty-four fractures were examined because 16 (42%) patients had bilateral fractures, 24 (63%) had ORIF, and 14 (37%) patients CR. The remaining 45 patients had condyle fractures or fractures at the sigmoid notch or subcondylar location, which were addressed in Part I  Class I non-displaced condyle/subcondylar fractures, see Part I. Class II displaced condyle/subcondylar fractures, see Part I. Class III displaced high condylar and condylar head fractures, see For Class IV dislocated condyle/subcondylar fractures (condyle not within the temporal fossa), see Part I. Class V dislocated high condylar and condylar head fractures included by definition a condylar fragment dislocated from the condylar neck, see Class VI non-displaced high condylar and condylar head fractures, see Class VI fractures were submitted the same day to CR, Classes III and V were operated the following day or when traumatic oedema had diminished and the general status permitted the procedure, but latest on the fifth day. A pre-auricular approach was chosen in all cases and the osteofixation was performed with Microplus Two weeks inter-maxillary guided occlusion via two mandibulomaxillary rubber bands suspended over 14 Physiotherapy and follow-up, see Part I of this article. The maximum incisal movement and condyle translation's moving averages were calculated and compared to normal values. The contralateral joint's translation was measured for comparison. Vertical and angular fragment deviation of the fractured, versus the non-fractured side were assessed for post-therapeutic rectification, similar to Part I The treatment decision for CR versus ORIF was based upon the radiological degree of displacement or dislocation and not upon malocclusion or a locking joint, which showed to be frequently falsified by concomitant mandibular fractures. Therefore, in deviance to the original protocol, we analyzed the outcomes by classes, differentiating non-displacement, non-dislocation (Class VI, initially Class VI fractured individuals 7 (64%) presented after 3 months, 6 (55%) after 6 months and 5 (46%) after 12 months follow-up. Class III recall was 12 (92%) at 3 months, 7 (53%) at 6 months and 8 (62%) at 12 months of follow-up. Class V recall occurred in 6(55%) after 3 months, 2(18%) at 6 months, and in 5(46%) after 12 months follow-up. Therefore, 38 patients with 54 high condylar or condylar head fractures were enrolled, three patients with four fractures were excluded, 18 patients with 33 fractures completed 12 months follow-up ( From the individual follow-up translation, moving averages were assessed separately for Classes III, V and VI, see Class VI non-displaced fractures had 10.5 Complications included 1 (9%) with joint pain up to 3 months, 2 (18%) with decreased vertical opening at 3 months, 1 permanent (<35 For Class III displaced fractures the 12 months’ postoperative translation for vertical opening was 8 Complications included 1 (8%) malocclusion, 1 (8%) restricted vertical opening, 1 (8%) paresis of the facial nerve's frontal branch up to 6 months, and 1 (8%) wound infection. One patient from this group did have unacceptable clinical function after 1 year and was offered arthroplasty, which was so far not done. Class V dislocated fractures evinced the lowest postoperative 7 Complications were found with 2 (18%) malocclusions treated by orthodontics and prosthetics and 2 (18%) transient nerve pareses, therefore two unacceptable outcomes occurred in this group. Globally, translation and incisal maximum distance was impaired in Class V, less so in III, and normal in VI, the recuperation of mobility antidromic. Protrusion and mediotrusion reached normal values, but vertical opening translation in Classes V and III did not. Insufficient translation was compensated by rotation during incisal vertical opening. Bilateral fractures did show comparable results when all Classes III and V fracture sides had ORIF and non-displaced sides CR. High condylar and condylar head fractures were followed-up in identical fashion as in Part I.    There was an  In our collective, most patients below 14 years did have non-dislocated fractures in contrast to S Transient Authors who evaluate CR in Class V and VI fractures, find these to have 35–70% medium to severe clinical joint dysfunction Comparing the results with more detail, all Class V The main differences to our results are not in the Class V group merely confirming superior results of ORIF, but in Class VI: inclusion of dislocated low capitular fractures (i.e. with loss of vertical support), named Class VI “B” which we judged as “high” dislocated Class V fractures. With focus on dislocation, even in the low head fracture case we considered this nomenclature more practical in differentiating loss of vertical support and whether the fracture line is situated in the lower condylar head or high neck since it mostly has an intra-extra-articular combined course. Whenever the complete condylar roll was dislocated with loss of vertical support we classified the fracture as Class V, without need for VI “A or B”. Certainly loss of vertical height is a predicator for malocclusion, neo-arthrosis with the articular eminence and asymmetry and therefore the literature and the findings support ORIF in all cases of vertical loss of support. A greater fragment dislocation is the result of a stronger traumatic impact leading to capsular rupture and scar formation The compliance for postoperative physiotherapy in our patient group was low: 30% had assault injuries and a background of socioeconomic problems and therefore were less compliant with physiotherapy. These cases were typically slower in the restitution of translation and reluctantly came to follow-up. Only after re-motivation and >6 months follow-up did they developed normal mobility. Class I, II and IV fractures treated in Part I included 54% of all patients, and Class III, V and VI included 46% of the patient population. This distribution underlines the importance of further evaluation of treatment outcomes in high condylar and condylar head fractures. Generally the rate of disk dislocations and joint degeneration was 11% at 1 year follow-up sonographic evaluation and comparable to the standard population The results of this study indicate a 92% primary successful management of condylar fractures with the practical approach of gradual differentiation: non-dislocated, non-displaced—conservative treatment versus displaced and dislocated—operation. Bilateral fractures can be treated with the identical approach of ORIF on the displaced and dislocated side, CR for the non-displaced sides for comparable results. The operation risks although minor can be obviated in non-dislocated fractures by maintaining the anatomic basis for function via CR. On the other hand, displaced and dislocated fractures have a smaller risk of facial asymmetry, locking and occlusal imbalance with open reposition and fixation.