Objective
                  The aim of this study was to compare clinical and radiological outcomes of elder and younger patients with comminuted proximal humerus fracture treated with osteosynthesis with locking plate.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 70 patients (30 males and 40 females; mean age 65.4 years) operated on for Neer 3- or 4-part proximal humeral fractures between 2010 and 2016 and followed for at least one-year were included in the study. The reduction was achieved through intraosseous window to minimize soft tissue stripping in all patients and structural allograft at metaphyseal diaphyseal junction was used aggressively to resist varus force. Group 1 consisted of 32 patients aged 70 or older (14 males and 18 females; mean age: 77.8 ± 5.1), while Group 2 consisted of 38 patients younger than 70 (16 males and 22 females; mean age: 58.2 ± 9.3). The groups were compared for their clinical and radiological outcomes.
               
                  Results
                  There was no significant difference in clinical outcomes by Oxford score (54.8 ± 2.7 vs 56.6 ± 3.4, p = 0.13) and ASES score (89.7 ± 5.7 vs 90.8 ± 8.2, p = 0.68). Two groups had similar radiological outcomes regarding neck shaft angle, greater tip height and offset. However, group 2 had better final shoulder forward elevation (162.6 ± 8.7 vs 135.4 ± 14.7ß, p < 0.05) and shorter duration to achieve maximal range of motion (4.37 ± 2.37 vs 8.14 ± 3.25 months, p < 0.05) than group 1. Two groups had similar complication rates (9.4% vs 7.9%). All the complications were related to greater tuberosity including mal-reduction and avulsion.
               
                  Conclusion
                  With the prerequisite of good alignment with robust medial cortical support and untouched soft tissue over medial metaphysis area via intra-osseous reduction, comminution of proximal humeral fracture can achieve satisfactory result and low complication rate by osteosynthesis with locking plate system, regardless of age. In addition, we suggested to use structural bone graft for comminuted medial cortex fracture with multiple fragments or bony defect more than 2 cm.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III Therapeutic study.Along with increase of incidence and aging of the affected population, proximal humerus fractures have been gaining more attention and debates regarding the optimal treatment in the past decade. Nonetheless, most of the reported complications with locking plate system were related to surgical technique and inadequate bony support, which could be prevented or enhanced. The authors hypothesized that with prerequisite of nearly anatomical reduction, structure allograft for medial support restoration, rotator cuff integrity, and supervised early rehabilitation, elder patient can achieve good outcomes with current locking plating system. Furthermore, by adhering to reduction technique through intraosseous window, less soft tissue stripping could decrease the incidence of avascular necrosis. The purposes of this study are to compare clinical and radiologic results after osteosynthesis with anatomic locking plate system for comminuted proximal humerus fracture between young and elder patients, and report complications. This is a retrospective cohort study had been conducted through a consistent surgical technique and rehabilitation protocols from January 2010 to January 2016, to collect all adult patients with Neer 3- or 4-part proximal humerus fractures under a single surgeon. They were all treated, regardless of age, with open reduction and fixation with locking plate system (PHILOS Synthes). Patients refrained from early and coherent rehabilitation exercise due to multiple fractures, polytrauma, neuromuscular disorder or other conditions were excluded. The study protocols were approved by the local ethics committee. All surgeries were done through anterolateral incision which starts from the mid-point between coracoid process and anterior corner of acromion and is carried 8–10 cm distally and laterally toward the insertion of deltoid. The raphe between anterior and middle third of deltoid is split in line with muscle fiber. The fatty streak embedding the terminal branch of axillary nerve can usually be identified at around 6 cm distal to acromion. Greater tuberosity is firstly found and tagged with sutures. Through the window between two tuberosity and shaft fragment, humeral head is pushed inner and upper-ward with a finger or blunt end of an elevator while the greater tuberosity is brought anteriorly and inferiorly with the sutures ( There were two indications for structural allograft. First, medial cortex fracture was comminuted and failed self-support after reduction. Second, a metaphyseal-diaphyseal defect was larger than 2 cm. A 4–6 cm of structure allograft from proximal radius, distal ulnar or fibular can be used to support reduction. The plate is positioned lateral to biceps and 0.5–1 cm distal to the upper edge of greater tuberosity. Calcar screws are emphasized to support medial metaphysis and resist varus load. Lesser tuberosity can be reduced and secured either by sutures or a free screw. Nearly all the soft tissue stripping are limited to the bare area lateral to the bicep tendon sheath. Soft tissue envelope over medial metaphysis is left untouched. Rotator cuff, especially supraspinatus, are repaired or prophylactic attached to the side holes of plate with non-absorbable heavy sutures. Passive forward elevation starts from the next day after surgery followed by active assisted motion one month later. Fully active motion is only allowed from third month. Early active forward elevation is prohibited to prevent upward migration of greater tuberosity. Monthly follow-up is arranged for first three months and then every 3 months in the first year. Regular yearly follow-up is encouraged for all the patients. Patients with age 70 years or elder were designated to group I, and those under 70 years old were designated to group II. The Oxford shoulder scores and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score (ASES) were evaluated for functional outcomes by a nurse specialist during each follow-up. Telephone interview were applied instead after one year when patients could not attend in person. Radiologic outcomes were evaluated regarding the initial reduction quality and interval change afterward. Parameters included neck shaft angle, humeral head height and offset of greater tuberosity. The images were blindly reviewed by a senior resident surgeon. The charts were reviewed by another resident surgeon. For all the patients, Paired Student's From 2010 to 2016, a total of 81 patients with Neer 3- or 4-part fracture undergoing ORIF with the locking plate by the senior surgeon with identical protocol were included in this study. Eleven patients were excluded because of pathological fractures in three and multiple trauma in three and loss of follow-up in five. Among the 70 patients enrolled, 42 cases were Neer 3-part and 28 were 4-part fracture. Thirty-two patients who were 70 years or elder were designated to group I. The group I contained 19 patients with Neer 3-part and 13 patients with 4-part. The other 38 patients who were younger than 70 years old were in group II. The group II contained 23 patients with Neer 3-part and 15 patients with Neer 4-part fractures ( From demographic data, there are no statistic differences regarding gender, fracture pattern distribution and length of follow-up between groups. There were neither significant differences in final clinical scores nor significant interval change of radiological parameters between 2 groups. The only two clinical factors which had significant difference between two groups were post-operative shoulder maximal range of motion and the timing achieving maximal range of motion (P < 0.05) ( Structure allograft augmentation was applied on 15 patients by using femoral head in 10, proximal radius in 2 and fibula shaft allograft in 3. Eleven grafts were applied in the group I ( There were totally six complications in our serials including 4 situations related to greater tuberosity, one related to hardware penetration and one malunion ( Age is usually a concern in treatment planning for patients with proximal humerus fractures because of more osteoporotic bone, less physiological reserve, lower demands and higher medical comorbidity in elders. There are more and more surgeons preferred surgical management for proximal humerus fracture by open reduction and locking plating for patients elder than 65 years old. The results from previous studies encouraged the application of osteosynthesis for elders. Jung et al Surgical complications were remained as the main concern for locking plate osteosynthesis in elders. Published studies have reported some implant-related complications associated with locking plate fixation—most commonly, intra-articular screw penetration, postoperative fracture displacement, and avascular necrosis. Reported negative predictors of loss reduction after plating include osteoporosis, displaced varus fracture, medial comminution fragment, insufficient medial support and inadequacy of reduction. There was no case of AVN in current study, unlike to previous study. Heavy non-absorbable sutures fixation is a common technique to resist deforming forces and stabilized rotator cuff. Multiple studies have reported on suture use with locked plating for proximal humeral fractures. The present study has several limitations. First, the number of patients was relatively small and maybe not enough to find difference in some parameters. A larger number of subjects conducted prospectively could add more power on this issue. Second, owing to its retrospective design, selection bias and measurement bias could not be avoided. However, all the patients were treated and followed under a similar protocol by one surgeon. The authors also tried to diminish their influence by blinding the radiology measurement to the patients’ data and clinical results. In conclusion, this study revealed that locking plating could achieve satisfactory results in elders with Neer 3- or 4-part fractures. It is not a panacea for proximal humerus fractures, but many of the complications could be avoid by careful surgical handling. Good alignment with robust medial cortical support, untouched soft tissue over medial metaphysis area via intra-osseous reduction and aggressive structural bone graft are the essential techniques. Institutional Review Board of Taipei Veterans General Hospital. 