The evacuation of liquid metals or mattes from metallurgical furnaces presents many operational challenges due to safety issues and the fast destruction of tapping blocks. Particularly, a continuous smelting and converting processes requires continuous tapping out with a precise control of the liquid metal or matte flow. Siphons are used in numerous metallurgical reactors including shaft furnaces for copper concentrate smelting and the Mitsubishi electric furnace.
                  A new technique for the precise tapping out of metals or mattes has been developed. It is based on the apparent change of specific gravity of conducting liquids placed in a cross of a constant electric field and a permanent magnetic field. Additionally, the Lorentz’ force in uniform electric and magnetic fields can be controlled by the magnetic flux and current intensity. This allows for a precise temperature control of the metal or matte.
                  Fluidodynamic and heat transfer modeling, supported by low temperature physical modeling, allowed for the design of a large laboratory scale device. The test results demonstrated the ability for very precise control of temperature, level and flow rate of copper matte tapped out from the furnace.electric field intensity (V volumetric Lorentz’s force (N difference of the liquid levels (m) liquid height (m) magnetic field intensity (T) current intensity (A) current density (A density of conducting liquid (kg thermal conductivity (W gravitational acceleration (m pressure (Pa) velocity (m potential (V) temperature (K) time (s) siphon (electrodes) width (m) thermal expansion coefficient (K electric conductivity (Ω liquid viscosity (Pa liquid density (kg Flowsheets of the pyrometallurgical production of heavy non-ferrous metals consist of continuous smelting, batch slag cleaning, matte converting and metal fire refining processes. Synchronization of the processes requires the precise tapping out of liquid metal or matte and their transfer by ladles or lounders. Strong trends in the development of continuous slag cleaning, matte converting and even fire refining processes make the problem, of well controlled continuous or semi-continuous tapping out of metals or matte, very important. The classical operation of tapping out based on the opening of a tapping hole by an oxygen lance and closing with a clay stopper is one of the most hazardous operations in pyrometallurgy. Additionally, frequent operation of the oxygen lance shortens the service time of the tapping blocks. The frequent exchange of tapping blocks results in excessive production loss. Controlled evacuation of a liquid metal or matte from the furnace requires the simultaneous control of two different factors: the metal level, determining its flow rate, and the temperature, preventing its solidification. The objective of this work is to utilize the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) phenomena to perform the controlled tapping out of metals or mattes from metallurgical furnaces. Various applications of the MHD phenomena in pumping, intensive stirring and casting of liquid metals ( The Lorentz’ force acting on conducting liquids placed in crossed magnetic and electric fields is proportional to the product of current density and magnetic flux, e.g., When the vector of magnetic field is perpendicular to the vector of electric current and the plane of both vectors is perpendicular to the gravity vector the change of the level of the conducting liquid is equal: The increased level of conducting liquid inside the siphon permits for its overflow and controlled evacuation. If the product of vectors of the electric and magnetic fields produces a Lorentz force directed upwards, the apparent decrease of the liquid specific gravity results in the rise of the liquid level inside the siphon and leads to its overflow. The liquid flow rate is proportional to the difference of levels inside the vessel and siphon, and inversely proportional to the fluidodynamic resistance of flow through the hole and channel. If the level inside a siphon is a little higher than channel, the thin film flowing through a channel represents the majority of the resistance. With an increased siphon level the major resistance controlling the flow rate is the size of the tapping hole. Hence, the diameter of tapping hole together with the difference in fluid levels are the key factors determining the liquid flow rate. CFD modeling allows the evaluation of flow rate for determined volume forces, system geometry and physical properties of the liquid. The commercial CFD software FEMLAB 3.1 was used to calculate the velocity field for conditions of room temperature physical modeling and high temperature tests with a liquid copper matte. The incompressible Navier–Stokes equation is defined by the formulation of three volume forces: hydrostatic force related to the difference of levels, buoyancy force induced by temperature gradients and Lorentz’s force. At the solid/liquid interface the non-slip conditions and at liquid/gas interfaces the slip conditions have been fixed. The distribution of current density needs to be defined in order to solve the potential distribution for a known conductivity. Electric current passing through an electrolyte or through a liquid matte liberates Joule’s heat, which can cover heat loss and maintain the temperature at the desire level. Generated heat is a function of current density and the liquid electric conductivity and states the heat source in heat transfer equation, concerning conduction and convection. The experimental setup is illustrated by the photograph shown in When the electric current was switched on the electrolyte temperature increased, but it did not result in measurable increase of solution level. An increase of the magnetic field caused an increase of the solution level inside the siphon. A series of measurements were taken at a constant magnetic flux (0.3 At the maximal difference in levels (13 An installation of the magnetohydrodynamic siphon in large laboratory scale is illustrated in After heating the furnace and siphon with burners up to a temperature of 1200 The level of siphon overflow was 180 Later (from 70 to 110 The Lorentz’ volume force acting on the liquid metal or matte, determining the increase of its level and the rate of tapping out from the siphon, can be controlled precisely by varying the intensities of the crossed electric and magnetic fields. The range of fluctuation in electric field intensity is restricted by Joule’s heat liberation affecting the metal or matte temperature. Thus, the siphon design and geometry, determination of heat losses, current density, width of electromagnet gap and fluidodynamic resistance are of great importance. Fluidodynamic and heat transfer modeling in 2D coordinates of the installations allows for a deeper understanding of the complex phenomena and helps in optimization of device design. Examples of modeling results are shown in Based on experimental and modeling results the MHD siphon for evacuation of copper matte from the Teniente Converter has been designed. The drawing in Precise matte temperature control in the siphon allows smooth operation without any intervention. The only required operation is the replacement of electrodes due to its oxidation above the melt. The electrode protection or the use of another type of electrodes as silicon carbide/silicon nitride should allow for the long service time.  Application of crossed permanent magnetic and constant electric fields onto metallurgical conducting liquids, such matte or metal, induces an apparent change of the liquid’s specific gravity, which results in the change of the liquid level against the level inside the furnace. The magnetohydrodynamic siphon permits precise control of the temperature and the rate of tapping out of a liquid metal or matte from the furnace without any manual operation. Stable tapping block and siphon temperatures and the lack of destructive operations with oxygen lance should allow for long service time and undisturbed furnace operation. The authors express their appreciation to FONDEF CHILE (Fondef Project No. D97I1043: “Utilization of Magnetohydrodynamic Phenomena in Pirometallurgy”) for financial support and granting permission to publish this paper.