During mechanical activation, disorder in the crystal structure of olivine has been recognized as one of the most important factors for enhancing the reaction rate of downstream carbonation processes. This paper investigates the detailed microstructure of olivine after mechanical activation in a SPEX 8000 mill using the X-ray diffraction technique. In order to successfully extract information from the microstructure using X-ray diffraction patterns, various models were applied and compared, including the Scherrer method, Williamson–Hall method, Multiple Whole Profile fitting method, and Rietveld method. Results show that with 120min of milling, the media particle size initially decreased dramatically, and then increased slightly, the BET surface area and amorphization degree increased, the lattice was initially compressed and then expended, the crystallite sizes decreased, and strains increased. The strain value for 120-min mechanically-activated olivine, calculated by the Scherrer method, Williamson–Hall method, Rietveld method, and MWP method, was 2.15×10−3, 1.64×10−3, 0.73×10−3, and 0.28×10−3, respectively. The Rietveld method was found to be the most accurate method and therefore most suitable method for characterizing the microstructure of olivine and mine waste materials containing olivine.the degree of amorphization the cosine Fourier coefficients of the peak profile  the lattice parameters a parameter in the Williamson–Hall plots, where the background of the diffraction peak for a non-activated mineral and the background of the diffraction peak for the mechanically activated mineral the Burgers vector of dislocation the average dislocation contrast factor the crystallite size the volume weighted crystallite size the lattice spacing of an unstrained sample the change in 10% passing size 50% passing size 90% passing size the BET size a parameter in the Williamson–Hall plots, where the full-width at half of the maximum height of a XRD peak the diffraction vector Miller indices of diffraction planes the intensity of background the maximum height of a XRD peak the integral intensity of a diffraction peak for a non-activated mineral the integral intensity of a diffraction peak for the mechanically activated mineral a unit cell geometry-dependent constant in Scherrer equation the Fourier length the edge length diameter of a crystallite multiple whole profile fitting method the arrangement of dislocations the median of the log normal crystallite size distribution calculated by the MWP method the order of reflection ( the residual value of the figure-of-merit function in Rietveld method the weighted profile residue in line profile fitting method the effective outer cut-off radius of dislocation granulometric surface area the BET surface area the time of mechanical activation the volume of a lattice the coefficient in the specific milling energy input the calculated intensity at the measured intensity at the integral breadth of a XRD peak the Cauchy components of the Gaussian components of the Cauchy component of size-integral breadth the Gaussian component of size-integral breadth the Cauchy component of strain-integral breadth the Gaussian component of strain-integral breadth the total-size-integral breadth the integral width of the sample the total-strain-integral breadth the strain, which is defined as the mean square strain the root mean square strain (RMSS) the variance of the log normal crystallite size distribution calculated by the MWP method the diffraction angle, and 2 the wave length the average dislocation density the density of olivine Mechanical activation by high intensity milling has been commonly used as an effective pretreatment method in various areas, such as mining, metallurgy and materials engineering. Mechanical activation is one of the three broad catalogues for grinding, the other two being coarse grinding and fine grinding ( Olivine is an industrial mineral composed of an independent SiO In recent years, mechanical activation on olivine has been a popular object of study, and specifically the importance of crystal structure changes for downstream reactions ( To quantify the structure changes X-ray diffraction patterns were widely applied in many studies. The crystal structure of olivine has been presented using several parameters from peak geometry, such as full width at half maximum (FHWM) ( The aim of the present study is the quantitative and qualitative characterization of microstructural changes in olivine in response to dry mechanical activation, based on X-ray diffraction pattern. Various models for microstructure characterization are discussed, including the Scherrer method, Williamson–Hall method, Multiple Whole Profile fitting and Rietveld method. The olivine foundry sand (olivine) used in this study was purchased from Ward’s Canada Limited, and was from the Twin Sisters ultramafic complex in northwest Washington State, USA. The chemical composition of olivine was analyzed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) at Acme Analytical Laboratories Ltd. The major oxides of olivine powder were 50.94% MgO, 40.7% SiO Mechanical activation tests were carried out in a commercial Spex Mixer/Mill mod. 8000 (SPEX Industries, Inc., Edison, NJ). The vial of SPEX 8000 has a lateral, back-and-forth shaking motion. In each test, 10 The particle size distribution and granulometric surface area of samples were measured by a particle size analyzer instrument (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern, U.K.) using the laser diffraction method in the liquid mode. Ultrasonic vibration for 5 X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a powerful tool for characterization of material with crystal structures. Proper analysis of the XRD profile allows for qualitative and quantitative analysis of the material. The changes in the microstructure of the material structure produced by prolonged grinding conditions and high-energy ball mills can be characterized as well ( The XRD profile contains several types of key information about the crystals in a material. The key components in an XRD profile include peak position (2 The 2 The plane-spacing equation for the orthorhombic forsterite crystal systems is expressed in Eq.  Since the peak shape of an ideal crystal has a negligible width, the measured FWHM or Line profile fitting on the X-ray diffraction profile is the primary step for the extraction of microstructure information. The measured X-ray diffraction profile was fitted using PANalytical X’Per HighScore Plus v3.0e (  The Scherrer method assumes that the line broadening is entirely due to the effect of crystallite size. This method is suitable to estimate the crystallite size less than 100 When only considering the strain effect for the line broadening, the strain ( Williamson and Hall proposed a simple method for resolving both size-induced broadening and strain-induced broadening based on their order dependence. The approximate results are capable of giving a qualitative indication of sample microstructure. The Williamson–Hall plots can be applied to a Gaussian profile (Eq. Multiple whole profile (MWP) fitting method is a set of complex analytical functions, which could give finer details of sample microstructure ( The Assuming the crystallite size follows a log normal size distribution function, the MWP method calculates the median ( The MWP method also provides two dislocation structure parameters, Rietveld method estimates the value of crystallite size and strain from the width of refined profile, based on full pattern fitting method ( Rietveld refinements were done with refinement software DIFFRAC plus Topas Version 4.2 (Bruker AXS GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) ( In the Rietveld method, integral breadth  As seen in During the whole process, the  When  According to the geometry of (0  To obtain more details about the crystallite size distribution and microstrain structure, the MWP method, using Fourier transforms, was applied to analysis on the XRD pattern of pristine and mechanically-activated olivine. The changes in the lattice parameters were evaluated using the Rietveld refinement method. In order to determine a better model for solving crystallite size and strain for mechanically-activated olivine, we compared the average value obtained from the Scherrer equation, Williamson–Hall method, MWP method using the eight most intensive reflections, and Rietveld method by taking all diffractions into account. The variation in the quantitative results of crystallite size and strain is mainly due to the differences in the underlying assumptions of the individual methods. The Scherrer method assumes that line broadening is due to only size effect or only strain effect, which is not the case of mechanically-activated samples. The other three methods separate the broadening into the two components of crystallite size and strain, but differently. The Williamson–Hall method plot and Rietveld method express the maximum lattice strain. The results show that the Williamson–Hall method dedicated less broadening portion to crystallite size than strain, compared to the Rietveld method. The MWP method calculates the root mean square strain (RMSS), assuming the limited random distribution of limitless long parallel screw dislocations. Due to the difference definition of parameter, the maximum strain and RMSS are not comparable. As observed in the Williamson–Hall plot, the crystallite size in various reflection directions shows slight difference because of the anisotropy in the XRD. The selection of diffraction peaks for the analysis will accordingly affect the analytical results. The results displayed in Except for accurate analysis of the crystallite size and strain values, the Rietveld method can accurately split the overlap peaks from material containing various minerals, especially when each mineral contains several diffraction peaks, such as olivine containing mine waste. The only drawback is that due to its limited capability for analysis, the Rietveld method cannot provide the information of crystallite size distribution and strain structure. However, the Fourier transform method could combine with the Rietveld method to overcome these disadvantages. This study analyzes the changes in olivine due to mechanical activation with special focus on the characterization of microstructure. Microstructure parameters were obtained from several commonly used models based on the XRD pattern. The following findings were observed: The surface area and the degree of amorphization for particles increases as the specific milling energy input increases, with rapid change evident in the early stages of milling. With deep mechanical activation, the crystallite size continuously decreases, strain increases, and lattices are initially compressed, then expanded. The dislocation density of olivine obtained by mechanical activation is comparable to the sample treated at extremely high temperature and pressure. The strain value calculated by the models, from large to small, follow the order of the Scherrer method, Williamson–Hall method, Rietveld method, and MWP method. The Rietveld refinement method for characterizing the microstructure of olivine is in good agreement with the MWP approach, and is the most promising method for characterizing the microstructure of olivine containing mine waste materials. The research presented in this paper was supported by a