The nano-porous hydrosodalite was produced from a poor kaolin containing quartz, as major impurity, via the hydrothermal modification with boehmite and sodium aluminate. The physico-chemical characteristics of products were evaluated by XRD, SEM and BET techniques. The obtained results indicated that the direct reaction between poor metakaolin and sodium hydroxide leads to the zeolite compound formation in which the partially crystallized hydrosodalite and remained quartz were embedded in amorphous phase. Different trends were observed in crystallinity of produced materials with aluminum source content revealed the predominantly crystalline structure for hydrosodalite fabricated via use of sodium aluminate. There is an inverse relationship between the boehmite content and crystallinity whilst the increase in the sodium aluminate content led to production of a well-crystalline hydrosodalite. Although, the dense cabbage-like particle structure was successfully created by hydrothermal reaction between metakaolin and sodium aluminate, NaAlO2/MK: 0.36, and the nano-porous hydrosodalite can be fabricated at limited content of boehmite, AlOOH/MK: 0.20. Moreover, the hydrothermal reaction in the presence of boehmite causes the generation of nano-porous structure with average pore size of 8.0 nm, accompanied with negligible co-crystallization of cancrinite. This change in porous structure could be useful in engineering applications like water and wastewater treatments.The nano-porous hydrosodalite which is member of zeolite family has been found extended applications in the selective adsorption Kaolin or china clay predominantly consists of kaolinite, Al Different methods were reported for fabrication of hydrosodalite from kaolin including hydrothermal route When the purified kaolin is available, the production of zeolites from poor kaolin is It seems that the both of mentioned aluminum resources could provide the AlO The processed kaolin manufactured by Iranian China Clay Company was employed as aluminosilicate precursor to prepare hydrosodalite. To examine the effect of aluminum source on product structure, the sodium aluminate was supplied by Behtaj Company, Iran. The pure boehmite, having a AlOOH grade higher than 99.8%, was purchased from Mineral Research Center of West Country in Iran. Methylene blue powder (MB, 6045, Merck, Germany) were provided to prepare dye solution stock. The deionized water was used in all steps of experiments for production of zeolite compounds. In order to prepare metakaolin, MK, 100 g of selected kaolin was heated in an electrical kiln from room temperature to 850 °C with the rate of 10 °C.min In the first process, different content of sodium aluminate was mixed with 100 ml sodium hydroxide solution, 4 mol l The X-ray diffraction patterns for starting materials and produced zeolites were obtained with use of a Brucker diffractometer (Model D8-Advance, Brucker, Karlsruhe, Germany) equipped with Cu-Kα irradiation and a Ni filter, with a scanning speed of 0.02 s The mineralogical components of selected kaolin determined based on XRD diffractogram are represented in The XRD diffractograms of products obtained from poor kaolin and those modified by sodium aluminate were presented in The X-ray diffraction patterns were also recorded for powders modified by different contents of boehmite and compared with the zeolite compounds produced in the absence of aluminum source, as shown in The extension of cancrinite depends on boehmite/MK ratio exhibited a partial crystallization compared to that prepared with higher content of boehmite. The only observable change in the powder phases with rise in boehmite content was the dissolution of cancrinite and decrease in hydrosodalite peak intensities. Although the magnitude of this change in peak intensities is significant, the amorphous phase is not completely converted to crystalline state. In order to compare the crystallinity of produced hydrosodalite with the commercial reference, the intensity of major XRD peaks were considered and the relative crystallinity factor was calculated as follows: When NaAlO The average crystallite size, D, of hydrosodalite was calculated by Scherer’s equation described as: According to data given in The Si/Al ratio in the used metakaolin is about 4.0 which is decreased to 1.3 and 1.2 by adjusting the NaAlO The micrograph represented in The semi-spherical particles were partially re-crystallized and the metastable hydrosodalite agglomerates were formed due to excessive content of boehmite, BR: 0.40, as shown in Combining with the XRD patterns illustrated in The MB number was selected as surface response versus the change in inorganic agent/MK ratio, as shown in In The nano-porous hydrosodalite can be fabricated through the modification of natural kaolin, as a cheap precursor, in association with appropriate aluminum sources. Not only the higher crystallinity is preferable for engineering proposes but also the specific surface area is a determining factor. Although there is a direct relation between crystallinity and methylene blue adsorption, it was proven that the MB titration can be taken into account to quantify the hydrosodalite porosity. The difference between the MB adsorption number may be attributed to different textural properties. The porous structure of hydrosodalite obtained by lower content of boehmite is mainly responsible for enhanced MB adsorption. The results offer an important limitation for production of hydrosodalite via the employment of sodium aluminate and boehmite. Regardless the technical specification, the control of aluminum agent content at appropriate level is critical to reach porous or dense structure with the same crystallinity. The sodium aluminate corporation in hydrothermal reaction is effective in reaching the zeolite with dense structure whilst the employment of boehmite leads to hydrosodalite formation with higher specific surface area and pore volume. The use of boehmite in limited content, BR: 0.20, is favorable to inhibit the collapse of mesopores consequently, development of surface area, at least 6 times, by reducing the average pore size down to 8 nm. The authors thank the