The breakage probability of different materials can be described well by a single mastercurve comprising the breakage performance of various materials. The function which is obtained when the Weibull statistics is applied to particle breakage depends on the mass-specific impact energy, a minimum energy required to cause any particle fracture at all, the initial particle size and a material parameter which describes the material-specific breakage behaviour. The material parameters are determined by single particle experiments. This procedure under well known stressing conditions gives reproducible results. A second approach to determine the material parameters from more practicable and less time consuming labscale milling tests is presented.Different materials perform differently in milling processes. This is due to the diverse grinding characteristics of each material. Therefore, a systematic and quantitative characterisation of the grinding performance of different materials is highly desirable. A systematic and practicable characterisation would simplify the design of new grinding processes or reduce the expenditure in time and manpower during the optimisation of existing grinding steps. The experimental effort involved in frequent changes from one product to another could be reduced, too. A first step towards the quantitative description of the grinding performance has been shown in ( This approach has been developed further ( From dimensional reasoning, For the case of impacting particles which is the focus of this paper the deformation velocity From the similarity of the breakage pattern two more immediate functions describing the breakage behaviour directly can be derived: the breakage probability (or selection function)  For impacting elastic spheres, the In Eq. It can be assumed from Inserting the above two equations into Eq. The initial size of the particles under investigation in this work lies for the polymers in the range of 2–3 mm, for the glass spheres between 0.095 and 8 mm. It is assumed that for these sizes the initial flaw size of the particles is not yet influenced or limited by the initial particle size. Therefore, the parameter In Eq. When experimental results (e.g. The main result of this fracture model is the dependency of the breakage portion When Eq. Comparing Eq. Based on both approaches, the similarity considerations and the fracture mechanical model, a correlation for the two main characteristics of the size reduction process, the breakage probability and the breakage function is derived. Simplifying both approaches leads to the same main parameters determining the particle breakage, namely the product of impact energy The main characteristics of single particle tests are the well-defined stressing conditions. They allow for a systematic investigation of the particles' grinding performance independently from mill-specific features. The particle concentration in single particle tests is small enough to ensure that particle–particle interaction can be neglected. The stress intensity (here impact velocity) is known and because of the shape of the target ring the impact takes place with good approximation at the ideal angle of 90°.  Five different polymers (polymethyl methacrylate: PMMA G55, G7 and G88 from BASF AG and Agomer and polystyrene: PS 168N and 144C from BASF AG) were used. They differ in the distributions of the molecular weight which results in different mechanical properties. Narrow size fractions of the feed material in the size range between 2 and 3 mm were produced by sieving. In each experiment, approximately 2500 particles were stressed in order to obtain statistically reliable results. Eq. In the diagram on the left-hand side, If  The energy threshold Fitting Eq. For all materials under investigation, i.e. three PMMA, two PS, limestone ( As shown above, it is possible to determine two material properties Eq. In order to realise a practicable comminution test, a commercially available lab scale impact mill (Fritsch Pulverisette 14) which promised to fulfil the requirements above was tested. The objective was the determination of the grinding relevant material properties Four different polymers (polymethyl methacrylate: PMMA G55 and G88 and polystyrene: PS 168N and 144C) were tested. Narrow size fractions of the feed material in the size range between 2 and 3 mm were produced by sieving. The rotor velocity was varied between 11,000 and 17,000 l/min (equivalent to 41.9 and 62.1 m/s) and two successive passages through the mill were carried out. After the stressing event, the particles rebound from the hammers. Due to the acting centrifugal forces, they will most likely be accelerated radially outwards, leaving the grinding zone. But the rebound from the grinding elements can also cause them to move back inwards again and enter the grinding zone for a second time. This leads to the possibility of multiple impacts and as a consequence to a possible distribution of the stressing number. The impact velocity of the particles will surely be related to the circumferential velocity of the grinding elements. But as the particles move towards the hammers with an unknown velocity component the resulting relative velocity between particle and hammer which gives the impact velocity is generally unknown. A component of the particle velocity in the direction of the circumferential velocity of the hammers will reduce the resulting impact velocity, any other component will increase it. This leads to a possible distribution in impact velocity, too. The resulting impact velocity can be expected to be in the range of the circumferential velocity of the grinding elements, but at the moment no prediction can be made whether its value is smaller or larger in size. More information about the particle movement inside the mill can be expected from computational fluid dynamics simulations. Modelling and simulating particle trajectories would lead to the unknown impact velocity and its distribution. The simulation of impact grinding in two technical mills ( It is obvious that the benefit of a more practicable, quicker and commercially available grinding test is paid for with presumably less defined stressing conditions. The reduction in experimental time is mainly gained by the abandonment of the vacuum, which avoids the disturbing influence of airflow. For the rather coarse materials under investigation here, which are hardly affected by the gasflow inside the mill the assumptions above are reasonable. The smaller the feed particles become in size the more influence will have the airflow inside the mill and a difference between single particle tests and labscale mill might occur.  In order to ensure that the parameters determined above work for other materials, too, and that the achieved agreement is not material-specific, three more polymers were tested in the labscale mill. Again, a very good agreement can be observed between the well defined single particle tests and the practical approximation by the lab scale mill. Thus, the labscale mill is characterised correctly by the determined stressing parameters and can be used as a practicable test for the determination of the grinding performance of different materials. In The achieved saving in time and experimental effort is considerable. The required time for a single particle test (without sample preparation and determination of the particle size distribution after the experiment) is approximately 30 min. The time for the equivalent labscale milling test comes up to approximately 2 min. In order to determine the material parameters, the breakage probability should at least be covered with 4, better with 8 data points in the range between 10% and 90%. This leads to a total experimental time of 8 min compared to 2 h, or for the more reliable analysis of 16 min compared to 4 h, respectively, while no loss of accuracy can be observed so far. Two approaches describing the influence of material properties, particle size and external load on the result of impact comminution have been presented. It is shown that both lead to the same influencing parameters namely the product of initial particle size It has been shown by the results of single particle impact tests that Rumpf's approach based on a similar breakage pattern cannot only be applied to the increase in specific surface but also to the more immediate breakage probability which is determined by the product above. The breakage probability is described by a single mastercurve comprising the breakage behaviour of different materials (polymers, limestone, glass) of various sizes (95 μm to 8 mm). Measurable material properties describing the comminution performance of different materials have been derived and determined experimentally by single particle tests. These material parameters allow for a quantitative differentiation between various products and enable a comparison of different materials of different size. Furthermore, a simplified and practicable labscale milling test, based on a commercially available hammer mill has been presented. It allows for the determination of the material parameters in a more efficient way. For the materials under investigation here, the experimental simplifications did not lead to a loss in accuracy. In future, it has to be examined if experimental results for the breakage function can be explained by the product This project is sponsored by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, grant AiF-No. 12680 N. The authors appreciate the given support. The authors would also like to thank the Fritsch GmbH (Idar-Oberstein, Germany) for temporarily providing the labscale mill.