Direct chlorination of toxic cyanobacteria cells can occur at various stages of treatment. The objectives of this work are to determine and model the extent of Microcystis aeruginosa cells lysis, toxins and organic compounds release and oxidation, and quantify the subsequent disinfection by-products formation. Chlorine exposure (CT) values of 296 and 100 mg min/L were required to obtain 76% cell lysis and oxidation of released cell-bound toxins at levels below the provisional World Health Organisation guideline value (1 μg/L MC-LR). Toxin oxidation rates were similar or faster than cell lysis rates in ultrapure water. This work presents much needed unit M. aeruginosa cellular chlorine demand (5.6 ± 0.2 pgCl2/cell) which could be used to adjust the chlorination capacity to satisfy the total chlorine demand associated with the presence of cells. Furthermore, a novel successive reaction kinetics model is developed using the kinetics of the chlorine reaction with cyanobacterial cells and cell-bound toxins. Chlorination of dense cell suspensions (500,000 cells/mL) in ultrapure water at CT up to 3051 mg min/L resulted in modest concentrations of trihalomethanes (13 μg/L) and haloacetic acids (below detection limit).Toxic cyanobacteria have been increasingly detected in drinking water sources and treated water ( The concentration of MCs in drinking water is regulated by different water authorities across the globe ( Recent intensive monitoring of cyanobacterial cells inside drinking water treatment plants (DWTPs) in Quebec (Canada) has evidenced the breakthrough and accumulation of toxic cells, with a dominance of MCs producing Chlorination is highly efficient for the oxidation of major dissolved MCs analogues under various water quality conditions and its kinetics can be predicted ( Early laboratory testing suggested that doses required to maintain a residual in the distribution system (0.5 mg/L after 30 min of contact) at water temperatures ∼20 °C with pH values under 8, resulted in the oxidation of total MCs below detection limits ( Most laboratory based results converge in support of a predictable rapid loss of cell integrity and subsequent release and oxidation of dissolved and cell-bound toxins that can be described by first-order apparent rate constants with respect to chlorine exposure. The toxin oxidation rate constants calculated from spiked dissolved conditions in ultrapure water are significantly higher (2–24×) than those estimated from the chlorination of released cell-bound toxins from cells suspensions ( It has been suggested that the chlorine demand of cyanobacteria cell-bound compounds and the consequent DBP formation potentials varies ( Systematic studies are needed to better quantify the chlorine demand per cell and DBP formation associated with cell materials in conditions representative of DWTPs operation. The objectives of this research were: (1) to determine and to model the A toxic strain of Water was sourced from the Mille-Île River (MIR) in Quebec, Canada. Samples were collected from the St-Rose DWTP intake prior to any treatment. Untreated MIR water was filtered over pre-rinsed Binder-free glass microfiber 1.2 μm filter (GF/C – Whatman, UK) prior to inoculation with the culture. The water had a DOC concentration of 6.3 mg/L, UV absorbance (at 254 nm) of 0.191 cm Chlorine stock and chlorine residual concentrations were determined using the DPD-FAS titration method described in Standard Methods ( Cultured    MCs analyses were conducted using an Abraxis Microcystins ADDA ELISA Plate (an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay – Abraxis LLC, Pennsylvania, USA). The analyses of MCs concentrations were measured as μg/L of MC-LR equivalent (MC-LR eq.). The accuracy of the plate was validated using standard toxin materials ( Samples taken for DBP detection were analyzed for four THMs (bromoform, chloroform, bromodichloromethane, and dibromochloromethane) as total THM (TTHM) and six HAA (bromoacetic acid, bromochloroacetic acid, chloroacetic acid, dibromoacetic acid, dichloroacetic acid, and trichloroacetic acid) as HAA6. THMs were extracted by liquid/liquid extraction with hexane as described in Standard Methods 6232B ( Reactions between chlorine and the The definitions of chlorination rates (     Free chlorine decay and cell lysis experiments were conducted within Chlorine decay data were used to calculate the CT values by fitting a two pathway integration model to a two phase decay curve: fast (<1 min) and slow ( The response of three The assumption of a first-order reaction with respect to chlorine reaction and the The   Kinetics models can express the chlorination of released cell-bound and dissolved MCs ( When using dense suspensions of 500,000 cells/mL of The observed apparent rate constant Our experiments support previous observations of rapid oxidation of cell-bound toxins upon release from damaged or lysed cells. In most cases, chlorination causes a fast release of cell-bound toxins as shown by the The loss of cell integrity (and by inference toxin release) and toxin degradation as a function of chlorine exposure (CT) can be described by first order processes and can be considered as consecutive reactions, as shown in Equation The results of 1st Cl For both cyanobacteria species, the model outcome for the oxidation of total toxins fits better than for dissolved toxins, at the lower range of CT values. This difference in the oxidation of dissolved toxins could be explained by: (1) the impact of the presence of cells on the oxidation of dissolved toxins; and (2) the short term variation in the release rates attributable to the physiological status of the cyanobacterial cells. Although general fit of the model show acceptable agreement, the variability in describing the sequential release and oxidation at very low CTs could be improved by additional intensive testing. However, the close agreement of predicted and measured values after a minimum CT of 10 mg min/L show the applicability of this approach to estimate operational boundaries for chlorination.  DOC variations after chlorination of The potential contribution of cyanobacterial cells to the formation of chlorination by-products has been quantified as minor compared with that of background NOM in surface water ( The third chlorination experiment (3rd Cl The results of this study contrast those from The Results of this research demonstrate that chlorine doses of 2–10 mg/L cause the rapid release and subsequent oxidation of dissolved and cell-bound MCs from The cellular chlorine demand in addition to the toxin chlorination kinetics in the presence of cellular debris are key parameters to allow the operators of DWTPs to adjust the chlorination practice to maximize cell lysis and toxin oxidation. It is possible to model the fate of total toxins during chlorination of toxic cyanobacterial cells using both cells and toxin chlorination kinetics. This paper provides a simple model to predict the release of cell-bound toxins by the action of chlorine on the cells, and the subsequent degradation of dissolved toxins by chlorine. This information is relevant to water authorities and DWTPs operators to validate the efficiency of chlorination barrier. It can be used to assess potential responses to toxic cyanobacterial breakthrough events based on historic and climate change scenarios. Our results show that chlorination of 500,000 cells/mL of This study was financially supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at