The distribution and characteristics of surface cracking (i.e., sub-surface damage or SSD) formed during standard grinding processes have been measured on fused silica glass using a surface taper polishing technique. The measured SSD depth distributions are described by a single exponential followed by an asymptotic cutoff in depth. The observed surface cracks are characterized as near-surface lateral and deeper trailing indent type fractures (i.e., chatter marks). The length of the trailing indent is strongly correlated with a given grinding process. It is shown that only a small fraction of the abrasive particles are being mechanically loaded and causing fracture, and most likely it is the larger particles in the abrasive particle size distribution that bear the higher loads. The SSD depth increased with load and with a small amount of larger contaminant particles. Using a simple brittle fracture model for grinding, the SSD depth distribution has been related to the SSD length distribution to gain insight into ‘effective’ size distribution of particles participating in the fracture. Both the average crack length and the surface roughness were found to scale linearly with the maximum SSD depth. These relationships can serve as useful rules-of-thumb for non-destructively estimating SSD depth and for identifying the process that caused the SSD.Hertzian crack depth growth constant (unitless) lateral crack depth growth constant (unitless) radial crack depth growth constant (unitless) mean crack depth (m) mean particle size causing surface fracture (m) mean crack length (m) Auerbach’s constant for initiation of Hertzian fracture (N/m) contact zone radius for a Hertzian indent (m) friction effect constant for trailing indent fracture (unitless) Hertzian crack depth (m) lateral crack depth (m) maximum crack depth (m) radial crack depth (m) trailing indent crack depth (m) abrasive particle size (m) mean abrasive particle size (m) mean particle size of abrasive used during polishing maximum particle size causing surface cracking (m) diameter of optic/workpiece (m) Young’s modulus of optic/workpiece (GPa) Young’s modulus of abrasive particle (GPa) fill fraction of particles between lap and workpiece cumulative distribution of crack depths fractional distribution of crack depths cumulative distribution of particle sizes participating in causing surface cracking fractional distribution of particle sizes participate in causing surface cracking cumulative distribution of crack lengths fractional distribution of crack lengths fraction of particles being loaded for various crack depths (unitless) instantaneous fractional distribution of crack depths created number of increments of material removal (unitless) material constant for Poisson’s ratio and modulus of indenter and substrate (unitless) fracture toughness of optic/workpiece (MPa fracture toughness of fused silica proportionality constant between crack length (m) maximum crack length (m) length of a trailing Indent crack (m) number density of cracks at the surface (cm number of abrasive particles being loaded total number of particle between workpiece/optic and lap cumulative obscuration of cracks fractional obscuration of cracks normal load (N) fracture initiation load for Hertzian cone crack (N) fracture initiation load for lateral crack (N) fracture initiation load for radial crack (N) fracture initiation load for trailing indent crack (N) load/particle that leads to the maximum SSD (N) total load on sample (N) radius of curvature for indent indenter (m) shape factor relating the radius of curvature of contact of the particle with the vertical dimension of the particle time of grinding or polishing (sec) crack width (m) coordinate describing amount of material removed during grinding/polishing (m) wedge depth (m) root-mean-square surface roughness surface roughness using ( surface material removal increment (m) proportionality constant between crack length and depth (unitless) fracture initiation constant for radial cracks (unitless) Poisson’s ratio of optic/workpiece (unitless) Poisson’s ratio of abrasive particle (unitless) Sub-surface mechanical damage (SSD) consists of surface micro-cracks created during grinding and/or polishing of brittle materials surfaces, such as glass. These surface cracks, typically identified macroscopically as scratches and digs, are often hidden below an index-matched Bielby layer or have closed (i.e., healed); hence they are all not detectable by visual inspection or standard optical microscopy until exposed by chemical etching The creation of SSD can be thought of as the repeated indentation of mechanically loaded hard indenters (abrasives) sliding on the surface of an optic during various cutting, grinding and polishing processes. The initiation and growth of the three basic types of cracks (lateral, radial, Hertzian) resulting from a single, static indenter as a function of load, material properties of the indenter and substrate are known (see In the following study, we use a taper polishing method, where various ground, fused silica surfaces are subsequently treated by an advanced finishing technique (magneto-rheological finishing or MRF), known not to induce SSD, to create a shallow surface taper over relatively large areas to determine the statistical distribution of SSD Twelve round fused silica glass (Corning 7980) samples (10  Image analysis was performed by first thresholding the microscope images to create binary renderings such that the cracks on the surface were dark pixels and the background was white. For the crack depth distribution data, the cumulative crack obscuration (fraction of the area that is composed of cracks) was calculated by counting the fraction of dark pixels in each image at various distances along the wedge (i.e., corresponding to the depth into the original sample surface). Multiple images were often utilized in the analysis at a given distance along the wedge when the number of observed crack features was low to establish better statistics (i.e., to reduce the error bar). To determine the crack depth at various distances along the wedge, needle profilometery (KLA Tencor P-10 surface profilometer) was performed along the wedge surface relative to a previously laser inscribed reference point on the sample surface. The wedge profile was found to be linear, and the crack depth ( For the crack length distribution, the obscuration of each of the individual, isolated cracks (not cracks that intersected each other) was determined. The crack length distribution was then calculated by dividing the obscuration of each crack by the average crack width. The crack width is only a function of the etch time, and hence constant for a given sample. Also, the crack length distribution was found to be independent of the crack depth or distance along the wedge; hence the lengths of the isolated cracks were calculated at all depths along the wedge. Between 300 and 12 The error in the obscuration was calculated by repeatedly measuring (3–5 times) a single sample at different locations and determining the repeatability of the obscuration measurement. The variability in the data is different for different obscuration ranges, since the measured obscuration often spans six orders of magnitude. At high obscurations (0.1–1), the repeatability is ±2%; at medium obscurations (10 On a separate polished fused silica surface, a series of Vickers (sharp) indents were applied on fused silica at different loads ranging from 0.1 to 20    Grinding of glass can be described by brittle fractures caused by an ensemble of normally-loaded, hard-indenters (abrasives) sliding/rolling across the surface of the glass workpiece. The brittle fracture will lead to both material removal and development of SSD. There are three basic types of fractures that can occur by static indentation: (1) Hertzian cracks The relationships that govern the depth of the fractures ( The above description assumes a static indent (i.e., a non-moving particle on a frictionless interface). When considering grinding processes, sliding/rolling must be taken into account and friction between the particle and the glass surface becomes important. For a sliding sphere, which has been analyzed by Lawn  The indentation fracture relationships described in Section The fraction of particles being loaded for given fracture depth ( It is likely that the larger particles in the tail end of the abrasive particle distribution are the load bearing particles. Two major factors that determine the Assume at some time ( For the present discussion we will assume that This fundamental distribution of cracks ( Because cracks are not all the same depth, it is clear that the load for a given particle varies. It is sensible to assume that the larger abrasive particles bear a larger load (see Section For this analysis or engineering model, all the observed cracks leading to SSD are assumed to be trailing indent fractures with the geometry outlined in As a means to test the above formalism, the measured crack length distribution will be used to describe the crack depth distribution. First, the process of converting from cumulative crack length distribution ( The process described above for converting from To check the consistency of the above formalism, we fit the measured SSD depth distribution using Eq. Using the engineering model described above, the ‘effective’ particle size distribution participating in fracture can be calculated. Substituting Eqs. The calculated ‘effective’ particle size distribution is shown in Remember, the ‘effective’ size distribution differs from the real abrasive size because of all the factors listed in the beginning of this section. Also, the ‘effective’ size distribution assumes all the particles are spherical. In fact, most abrasives are not spherical, but more oblate (plate like). Hence, the size of the particle is related to the radius of curvature by some shape factor   The relationship between surface roughness and SSD depth can be thought of in terms of the relationship between lateral crack depth and trailing indent crack depth (see Substituting in values for     The SSD depth and length distributions for various grinding processes have been directly measured and statistically evaluated. The observed surface cracks are characterized as near-surface lateral and deeper trailing indent type (i.e., chatter marks) fractures. The length of the trailing indent is strongly correlated with a given process. The SSD distributions are typically described by a single exponential distribution followed by an asymptotic cutoff in depth ( The authors would like to thank Wayne Whistler and James Embree for their assistance in performing the grinding processes on the samples. This work was performed under the auspices of the US Department of Energy by the University of California, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory under Contract No. W-7405-Eng-48 with the LDRD program.