This paper presents the results of the support capacity estimation for the diversion tunnel of the Uruş dam site in highly weathered tuff and weak zone. Tunneling in weak rock requires some special considerations, since misjudgment in support design results in costly failures. There are several ways of estimating rock support pressure and selecting support. However, all systems suffer from their characteristic limitations in achieving objectives. Thus, it is more useful to use different methods for estimating support pressure and type of support. The support pressure p
                     i was established by three different methods. These methods are the (1) empirical methods based on rock mass rating (RMR) and rock mass quality index (Q-classification systems), (2) ground support interaction analysis (GSIA) and (3) numerical methods, namely, Phase2 finite element (FEM) program. Rock masses were characterized in terms of RSR, RMR, Q-system and GSI. Drill-core samples were tested in the rock mechanics laboratory to determine physico-mechanical properties. Rock mass strength was estimated by empirical methods. Finally, the required support system is proposed and evaluated by different methods in the highly weathered tuff and weak zone of the diversion tunnel.Uruş dam site is located in the central part of Turkey This paper estimates the support capacity of the rock by using both empirical and theoretical approaches. The diversion tunnel will be driven in moderately to highly weathered tuff, slightly to moderately weathered andesite and basalt rock units. The properties of the rock masses surrounding the openings, the tunnel size, geometry and the support characteristics to be used are the basic input parameters for a safe tunnel design The study area known as the Uruş Magmatics is part of the Galatia province described by Andesite rock unit, which is pinkish to dark gray in color, is composed mainly of quartz, plagioclase and orthoclase, and less chloride, sericite and opaque minerals. Basalt rock unit, which is dark grayish and black in color, is composed of mainly of quartz, plagioclase, amphibole and secondary epidotes, calcite, pyrite and chlorite. Tuff rock unit, which is grayish to white in color, contains mostly biotite minerals and also rock pieces such as andesite and basalt. Both the engineering properties of the rock masses along the diversion tunnel alignment and the borehole data were examined in accordance with Basalt and andesite are slightly to moderately weathered, joint spacing mainly ranges from 20 to 200 mm and with medium persistence (3–10 m). Discontinuity aperture is between 0.5 and 2.5 mm and mostly filled by limonite. Tuff is moderately to highly weathered with rock faces brown to brownish-yellow in color. Weathered and fractured zones were also observed during examination of the cores. A total of 27 discontinuities were measured on the diversion tunnel alignment. Two dominant discontinuity sets (dip direction/dip) ( Laboratory experiments were carried out to determine physical and mechanical properties of andesite, basalt and tuffs including unit weight, porosity, uniaxial and tensile strength. Triaxial compressive strength tests are conducted on core specimen to determine cohesion, Rock mass classifications can serve as a powerful design tool in underground construction, when used in conjunction with observational, analytical and numerical methods. RSR Since both squeezing and rock bursting phenomena occur as a result of overstressing in rocks, it is important to characterize the strength of rock mass for predicting its behavior in underground excavations. Rock mass strengths of andesite, basalt, moderately weathered tuff and highly weathered tuff and weak zone are found by using empirical methods based on RMR and By utilizing the Hoek and Brown criteria, The input parameters are Formula for calculating The safety factor is taken as the ratio between the rock mass strength and the stress around the underground opening. To maintain stability, the acceptable factor of safety should be greater than one. Since highly weathered tuff and weak zone are incapable of sustaining high differential stress level, hydrostatic stress condition is considered. On the excavation profile, the maximum principal stress is the tangential stress, Overburden pressure and tangential stresses are calculated as 0.846 and 1.692 MPa, respectively, for 45-m depth of the diversion tunnel and unit weight, A criteria based on the The safety factor, SF, is calculated as SF= From the results of the safety factor, it is concluded that highly weathered tuff and weak zone needs to be supported to increase safety factor. To calculate the support capacity and to determine the most suitable support type, several methods are used together. The reliable prediction of support capacity is one of the most difficult tasks in rock engineering. Since Empirical methods are based on rock mass quality index (  Another approach is proposed by Support pressure is calculated as 0.33 MPa according to To select the rock support required for limiting and stopping deformation, a useful tool is the ground support interaction curve or characteristic line by To draw the ground reaction curve, it is assumed that tunnel is circular with If internal support pressure, In cases where internal support pressure, Spreadsheet for the calculation of To perform analysis, we assume a circular tunnel with radius to reduce head loss due to friction at the tunnel boundary to reduce water loss through seepage and to stabilize broken rock mass adjacent to the excavation By using Lame's theory as proposed by The support characteristic curves are drawn by using the equations of For the concrete, the following formulas are utilized to calculate maximum support pressure of concrete, In the case of combined support, the stiffness of combined support system, It is assumed that concrete lining is closed ring and bolts are installed in a regular pattern that completely surrounds the tunnel. The properties of support system is given in The computer program Phase Figures from Phase Stresses and displacements before and after the support placement are given in Same support types and properties with GSIA are used in FEM analysis to decrease deformation and to stabilize the tunnel. The support consists of a combination of concrete and rock bolt. After support installation, the tunnel deformation decreased significantly to 0.2 mm and the strength factor increased considerably. In addition, the yielded elements disappeared. Deformation obtained from GSIA is greater than FEM. However, the pressures from FEM are greater than GSIA. These differences occur due to the support installation time and the distance between the face and support installation place. Based on the information collected at the dam site, the rock mass and material properties were defined. By using empirical approaches, the support requirements in the diversion tunnel in highly weathered tuff and weak zone were determined. In accordance with the calculated safety factors, it is concluded that beyond the highly weathered tuff and weak zone, no stability problem exists for diversion tunnel. However, the weak zone and the highly weathered tuff show instability problems, which are verified by the numerical method. When the results from different methods based on parameters found by using GSI are examined, it is seen that GSI gives consistent results irrespective of the evaluation method. Deformations from numerical methods are lower than from GSIA. This difference may be due to the support installation time. In the numerical method, the support is placed just after the excavation. However, in GSIA, support is placed after occurrence of certain deformation. The earlier installation of support causes the deformation to be lower, but the required support pressure can be increased. In this respect, both GSIA and numerical methods reliably estimate tunnel deformation and support requirements. 