The operational variables of an industrial autogenous mill were embedded in a low-dimensional phase space to facilitate visualization of the dynamic behavior of the mill. This was accomplished by use of a multivariate extension of the method of delay coordinates used in nonlinear time series analysis. In this phase space, the controlled states of the mill could be visualized as separate regions or clusters in the phase space.
                  Comparison of the correlation dimension of the state variable of the mill (the load) embedded in phase space suggested that the dynamic behavior of the mill could not be represented by a linear stochastic model (Gaussian or otherwise). The low dimensionality (⩽2) of the correlation dimension further suggested that the mill load depended on a few variables only and that the underlying generative process had a significant deterministic component.
                  In addition, the operational variables could be used as reliable predictors in a neural network model to identify the controlled states of the mill. As a complementary approach to visualization of the operation of the mill, a different neural network model could be used to reconstruct a corrected power load curve by compensating for the effect of varying operating conditions.Meaning threshold values used by expert control system (–) scaling parameter (–) diagonal eigenvalue matrix (–)  frequency (–) correlation matrix (–) correlation count (–) correlation dimension (–) Fourier transform (–) mutual information of two random variables average mutual information of two random variables embedding lag of phase space (–) embedding lag of normalized load (–) average load (ton) maximum load (ton) minimum load (ton) load rate of change (ton number of variables (–) embedding dimension of phase space (–) embedding dimension of number of samples in a time series (–) number of rows in an embedded time series matrix (–) probability density function of random variable joint probability density function of random variables normalized mill power consumption (–) average mill power consumption (kW) maximum mill power consumption (kW) minimum mill power consumption (kW) mill power rate of change (kW number of eigenvectors in a reduced dimensionality principal component model (–) eigenvector matrix (–) loading matrix with time (s) score matrix with matrix of embedded variables (–) vector of fine ore feed rate (ton coarse ore feed rate (ton power consumption (kW) mill load (ton) water inlet rate (ton time series observation at time random variable at time surrogate data observation at time discriminant functions (linear combination of variables Energy consumption in ore milling processes constitutes up to 40% of the energy expenditure in concentrator plants, but is not more than 15–25% efficient, depending on the approach used to calculate the energy required to reduce the size of the ore particles ( Energy efficient operation of mills is known to depend to a large extent on the behavior of the mill load ( This is especially the case with autogenous and semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mills, which are popular in new plants, owing to their favorable capital and operating costs. SAG mill operation, in particular, is strongly affected by the type and size of the ore being ground, which makes stable control difficult. In these mills, grinding is driven by the mill load ( One approach to mill control is based on the use of power–load curves ( In this context, for example, current control strategies are aimed at the maintenance of maximal mill power draw at or near the top of the power load curve ( In this paper, analysis of the dynamic behavior of an autogenous mill is considered, based on reconstruction of the mill variables in phase space, which allows time series variables and their history to be considered simultaneously within a state space context. It is shown that most of these states can be predicted from the operational variables of the mill. The milling circuit analyzed here consisted of a fully autogenous closed-loop mill with a recycling load that overflowed from a screen unit, as indicated in Each individual time series (x In The mill variables were embedded into a phase space to facilitate analysis of the mill dynamics, as described in more detail in the next section. It is generally accepted that the space in which to view the structure of the dynamics of a system is not that of the one dimensional observations, or time series, but rather a space of higher dimensionality ( Optimal lags The mutual information ( In Eq. The ideal time lag was selected to correspond with the sample lag The false nearest neighbor (FNN) algorithm assesses whether or not neighboring points in the phase space are close to one another owing to their dynamic origins, in which case they are considered true neighbors, or whether they appear to be neighbors, owing to the suboptimal unfolding of the phase space attractor as a result of an incorrect embedding dimension. If so, these points are considered to be false neighbors. The ideal embedding dimension is chosen as the dimension at which the percentage of false nearest neighbors reaches a minimum. As indicated in the last two columns of The aggregate trajectory matrix Following this, the eigenvectors Finally, the principal component scores constituting the phase space are calculated using principal components As indicated from the eigenspectrum ( The reconstructed state space of the mill can be augmented by superimposing the controlled states of the mill onto the plot. This is shown in In To complement In order to better understand the dynamic behavior of the primary state variable of the mill, i.e. the load, this variable was also embedded into a phase space by itself. The embedding was based on a lag of Hypotheses about the nature of the underlying model that have generated the mill data can be tested by means of surrogate data analysis ( The hypotheses can be tested by generating surrogate data that preserve the linear correlational structure of the original time series, as well as its marginal distribution. With the iterative amplitude adjusted Fourier transform (IAAFT) algorithm originally proposed by More formally, if { For discrete frequencies, Fourier transform surrogates construct new time series ( After generation of the AAFT surrogates, the periodogram values are replaced by the periodogram of the original time series and the phases are retained. The amplitudes are subsequently adjusted in the time domain and the two steps are iterated until the periodograms and the amplitude distributions of the original time series and its iterated AAFT surrogate are approximately equal. When embedded in phase space, the topology of these time series can be represented in a robust way by their correlation dimensions ( A plot of the correlation dimensions of the original load time series data (solid curve) and 20 IAAFT surrogate time series (broken curves) derived from the original load time series is shown in It is also interesting to note that the correlation dimension of the load (the solid curve in Moreover, the identities of the dominant variables cannot be inferred from the analysis, and it can only serve as a guideline to the construction of models. Such a low dimensionality could also be indicative of a strong deterministic component in the data. Although this would need to be confirmed by more extensive analysis beyond the scope of the present study, the predictability of the load behavior supports the indication of a deterministic system. The mill states were predicted from the operational variables in A breakdown of the results are given in  The effect of disturbances on the power–load curve in More specifically, the model used to generate this smooth power–load curve had six logsigmoidal units in its single hidden layer and a tansigmoidal output unit and was trained with the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) gradient descent algorithm and a sum of squares error criterion, as before. A random sample of 70% of the data was used as training data set, while the remainder of the data was used to test and validate the model. Of these additional variables, the water inlet had the most important influence, as shown in The solid black curve in In this study, the dynamic behavior of an autogenous mill was analyzed by embedding the mill variables in a multivariate phase space where all the variables could be simultaneously considered together with information on the operating states of the mill. In addition, the mill load was also embedded in the phase space by itself. Based on qualitative (visualization) and quantitative (surrogate data) analysis of the phase space embeddings, the following conclusions can be made. The controlled states of the mill could be visualized as separate clusters in low-dimensional (2D or 3D) mappings of the phase space that consisted of multivariate embeddings of the operational variables of the mill. This validates the labels in the mill controller assigned to the different states. These controlled states of the mill could be predicted with a satisfactory degree of accuracy by multilayer perceptron neural networks. Comparison of the correlation dimensions of the load time series data with random time series that had the same power spectrum and marginal distribution as the load data suggest that the load data do not conform to a linear stochastic model. Instead, the data could have a significant deterministic component and were influenced by relatively few (perhaps as few as two) dominant variables. Neural network models were constructed that could predict the power load curve with a high degree of accuracy ( The authors gratefully acknowledge: Anglo American Platinum’s Advanced Process Control Group for their inputs, as well as making plant data available to the authors. The Anglo American Platinum Centre for Process Monitoring at the University of Stellenbosch in South Africa for use of their computational infrastructure.