The aim of present study is to propose new superior equations and introduce novel techniques for TBM performance prediction. To this end, correlations between the Rate of Penetration (ROP) and rock mass properties are investigated using four simple regression analyses. Based on these analyses, two non-linear multivariable equations are introduced and optimized by the Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA). Then, two other distinct models are examined by using the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) and Genetic Expression Programming (GEP) techniques. The aforementioned methods are applied on a dataset from the Queens Tunnel, in New-York City with complex geology conditions. It was found that the models proposed by ICA, CART and GEP techniques have determination coefficient of 0.76, 0.82 and 0.72 for training data, and 0.62, 0.69 and 0.65 for testing data, respectively. The results showed the noticeable improvement of the predictions compare to previous studies.The prosperous era of tunnel boring machine (TBM) started since its successful applications in the early 1950s. Then, companies introduced various types of TBMs, which were also applicable to adverse geological conditions and hard rocks. Considering TBM drilling in hard rocks, the most important aspect of its operation is the prediction of its rate of penetration (ROP). In fact, TBM performance prediction has become one of the most sophisticated problems in the field of geotechnical engineering in the past forty years, as mentioned by Robbins “ A number of attempts have been made to propose some models to estimate TBM performance on difficult grounds since the 1970s In the past two decades, the Computer aided models were developed with various algorithms, such as Artificial Neural Network (ANN) (e.g. In recent years, various types of linear and non-linear regression analyses have been combined with computer algorithms to improve the accuracy of models for manufacturer companies and site managers of tunneling projects The literature review shows that there is no comprehensive agreement on the quantitative or qualitative influence of various variables on the TBM penetration rate, but the degree of accuracy in its prediction has been improved in recent years through using computer algorithms. Hence, in this study, novel models using computer algorithms are introduced for the ROP prediction. First, two non-linear multivariable equations with different mathematical functions are proposed and optimized by the imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA). Afterward, Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is employed as a different technique to develop models for the ROP prediction. In continue following, The Queens Tunnel No. 3 was excavated in about 7.06 m diameter, at a depth of almost 200 m below sea level in Queens County in New York City. This tunnel will supply 90% of consumed water in the city in 2021 (see The obtained 151 datasets from the second stage are used in this study, which were published by Yagiz Rhyodacite dike rocks (2.6%), Granitoid (felsic) gneiss and orthogneiss (29.2%), Massive garnet amphibolite and larger mafic dikes (7.3%), Mafic-to mesocratic orthogneiss (19.9%) Mafic-to mesocratic gneiss, amphibolite and schist (41%). The datasets include the ROP (m/h), three intact rock properties (i.e. the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), the Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) and the brittleness index (BI)), and two rock mass properties (i.e. the angle between planes of weakness and tunnel direction (α) and the average distance between planes of weaknesses (DPW)). Since 2008, Many papers have been published using the Queens datasets One of the most popular applications of evolutionary algorithms is to solve and optimize the multivariable equations. Some of the evolutionary algorithms (e.g. the Genetic Algorithm (GA) The Imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA), with an inspiration from a social-political process, due to its greater capability of solving problems and shorter run time, has been used in different engineering problems in recent years In each optimization problem with N number of variables ( The cost or fitness of each country (amount of power) is assessed using the evaluation or fitness function (f) In this paper, the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is used as the fitness function, meanwhile, other functions such as the Mean Square Error (MSE), the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), etc. could be also used. In countries scoring process, some of them are chosen as imperialist ( During the optimization process in the ICA, the colonies are propelled toward imperialists. Therefore, it is possible for a colony to be replaced as an imperialist and to generate a new emperorship (See The power of each emperorship can be calculated using Eq. In the ICA, the colonies transfer from a weak emperorship to a better one and after a while, the weak imperialists are eliminated from the population. A Classification and Regression Tree (CART) is a data mining technique. It has been considered as a powerful and popular technique in recent years, due to its simplicity, interpretability, low cost of implementation, and a high degree of accuracy In this study, the regression tree (RT), a suitable alternative to the common multivariable regression analyses, is used. This tree consists of a root node, decision (or interior) nodes and branches and leaf (or terminal) nodes. The RT performs the regression by splitting the data of the root node (that includes all of the training data) into mutual sub-nodes, called decision nodes. Subsequently, by considering each decision node as a root node, the tree will be grown until the stopping criterion is met. Finally, the result is a tree-like chart that is fitted to each node to give a predicted value for observations (See One of the major performance parameters of CART is the tree depth, which is defined as a length of the longest path from the root to the leaf node. The tree depth plays an important role in preventing the tree from overtraining and overgrowing. However, in this paper, a Matlab The other important issues in the data mining are the detection of outlier data as well as identification of principal parameters. Some algorithms have been presented for these issues; however, the CART inherently uses the Principle Component Analysis (PCA) in modeling Since the Genetic Algorithm was introduced by Holand, its different forms have been developed Among a large number of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), only the GEP and GP are able to produce a mathematical equation between some independent and dependent parameters of a certain problem. The GEP is applicable for Classification, Logistic regression, Function finding, Time series prediction and Logic synthesis issues. As well, by using several sub programmes, it develops more complex programmes which are associated with its multi-genic nature. The GEP chromosomes are able to contain one or more genes, where each gene contains two different types of individuals, called functions and terminals (see where “L” represents the natural logarithm function and a, b, x, y, m and z are variables and constants. It should be noted that in any genome (chromosome), each gene starts with a zero. As shown in    Before performing this study, for the Queens datasets, several different equations were developed to predict the ROP by employing different techniques To evaluate the relationship between TBM penetration rate and rock mass properties, some single variable regressions including the Fourier, polynomial, power, and exponential regressions are developed between them. The effect of Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) was considered in the previous studies The mathematical form of non-linear regressions is available in Although the Fourier regression gives the greater DC than the other regression types (See To optimize Eq. The Queens Tunnel datasets were randomly divided into the training (80% of all dataset) and testing (20% of all dataset) sub-sets. The generated code is tested about 100 times and finally, seven top models are selected. Model No. 7 is chosen as the best model for TBM performance prediction. It has the best training and testing results among the other developed models using the ICA. However, its prediction power is evaluated using all of 151 datasets. ( DC, RMSE and MAPE values of testing datasets indicate the models which did not overtrain and are reliable. Hence, the TBM penetration rate (m/h) could be predicted by Eq. Khademi Hamidi Eq. The developer code of RT model is written in MATLAB software package In some of the previous studies, the tree depth was considered as a criterion to choose the best tree among the others. However, in this study, the tree depth, the number of nodes and the DC of the trees are considered as the tree performance criterion. In fact, these three parameters represent the model’s capability of prediction and complexity. Using trial and error procedures, four numbers from 10 to 13, as the maximum number of splits and five numbers, from −3 to +1, as the number of parents, are chosen to develop 20 different models (trees). Considering the efficiency of trees and their complexities, the model No. 17 was selected as the best model for TBM penetration prediction (See Armaghani et al. In this way, 80% of the whole datasets are considered as the training set and the rest as the testing set to ensure that the algorithm does not overtrain during the development process. Although different parameters of a GEP model are regulable in this software (e.g. fitness function, linking function, number of chromosomes, number of genes, etc.), there is no specific criterion for their regulation. Hence, some trial and error procedures are applied to obtain the optimum values of these parameters (See To get the best models for TBM performance prediction, more than 20 models are established using the GEP software. At the end, the best model is chosen with R The model consists of five genes which link together using a linking function (additional operator, see The efficiency of the models presented in this paper can be evaluated by comparing their results with those of old previous models developed using the same datasets (see One of the defects of previous models is that their performances in the prediction were evaluated using their own calibration results rather than their test results. Hence, it is not appropriate to compare the performance of presented models with the previously published models (in which various datasets in quantity and quality had been used). Therefore, the prediction power of all previously published models and the currently proposed models are recalculated using all of the Queens Tunnel datasets. As observed in Note that there are some other studies, which employed the black-box techniques, for the penetration rate prediction (See e.g., After the publication of the Queens Tunnel datasets in 2008, different analyses were performed on them and several models were developed for TBM penetration rate prediction. This new study tried to analyze these datasets more deeply and introduce new models with higher accuracy. To this end, in initial steps, the effects of rock properties and their relationships with the ROP were investigated. As well, for the first time, the Fourier Transform was used as a regression technique, which showed impressive results compare to the other conventional regression techniques. It was concluded that the BI and BTS have the greatest and the least effect on the ROP. However, predicting ROP by using only one or two parameters is not possible because of the complexity of the problem and meaningless trend of the ROP graph respecting the graphs of rock properties. In the next steps, by using computer algorithms, four different models were developed for the ROP (m/h) prediction. Therefore, two non-linear multivariable equations were proposed using the Fourier Transform and conventional regression techniques. Then, they were optimized by using the imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA). Another model was also developed by using the genetic expression programming (GEP), which is interpretable as an equation due to the use of mathematical functions. Finally, a model was developed by using Classification and Regression Tree (CART), due to its robustness in problem-solving in different scientific issues. Comparing the developed models and previously published models showed the following distinguished results: The CART has the lowest errors in the ROP prediction; The NLMR equation, which was developed using the Fourier transform, outperform the conventional NLMR and GEP models; and Although the GEP model which is introduced in this study had lower accuracy compare to the CART and the NLMR with Fourier terms and its accuracy is much higher than the models introduced for the ROP prediction. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 