Depending on their physical and chemical properties and the amount of replacements with cement, fly ashes may provide an economical production possibility in concrete industry and improve the mechanical and durability performance of concrete. In recent years, ultrafine fly ash has become one of the necessary ingredients of high-performance concrete. However, many of the fly ashes are coarse in nature, hence grinding is necessary to obtain sufficient performance in concrete production. In this study, the effect of grinding on strength activity of ground high-calcium fly ashes was investigated. Physical characteristics such as sieve fineness, grain particle size characteristics and Blaine specific surface area were also determined and compared with raw fly ash. Some case studies and possible interactions between fineness of fly ash, strength and water demand of mortars were discussed. The optimization of fineness coupled with the adjustment of water content were found as the key parameters of effective utilization of high-calcium fly ashes from the view point of strength maximization of cement mortars.There has been a substantial amount of studies related with the performances of fly ashes in mortar mixtures at different substitutions In addition to particle shape characteristics, surface porosity of fly ashes play a major role in determination of water demand. Deviation from spherical particle morphology and/or increased surface porosity may significantly increase the water demand of fly ash incorporated mortars or concretes. In recent years, ultrafine fly ashes have become one of the necessary ingredients of high-performance concrete. However, many of the fly ashes are coarser, hence grinding is necessary to obtain sufficient performance in concrete. Another alternative to achieve higher performance can be the separation of fly ash into various fineness Kiattikomol et al. Depending on the quality and particle size of fly ash and the amount of cement replaced, fly ash may change the mechanical properties of concrete. This change may be both positive and negative depending on many parameters. In addition to physical and chemical properties of fly ash, the most important parameters affecting the mechanical properties are the amount of substitution with cement and influence of fly ash on water demand for a desired workability. The amount of substitution is out of the scope of this paper, because strength activity index of all fly ashes was determined at a constant substitution rate (20%). However, the amount of substitution is extremely important in the case of HVFA applications. Due to differences between specific gravities of cement and fly ash, it is important, whether the substitution has been made by weight basis or volume basis. Influence of grinding fly ash on water demand of mortars for a desired workability is the main parameter that will be discussed in this paper. In parallel to this, the effect of fineness on strength activity of ground high-calcium fly ash has been systematically investigated. It was aimed to find out whether the strength activity of coarse fly ash can be improved by grinding. The water demands of grounded fly ashes to maintain constant consistency were determined. The effect of grinding on fly ash characteristics such as grain particle mean size and specific surface area was also determined and compared with raw fly ash. In order to better understand the possible relationships, some case studies and possible interactions between fineness, strength and water demand were proposed. An ordinary Type-I Portland cement (CEM I 42.5N) was used in all compositions. Fly ash from Soma B power plant is a C-type ash according to ASTM C618 In order to characterize the fineness and particle structure of raw and grounded fly ashes three different methods were employed: the Blaine values fly ashes were tested in accordance with ASTM C204 As expected, Blaine fineness of fly ashes increased and the amount of fly ash particles retained on 45 Five mortar mixtures, one is control (including 100% cement) and others containing fly ashes at different fineness, were prepared. In commercial practice, the dosage of fly ash is usually limited to 15–20% by the mass of the total cementitious material Strength activity index of fly ashes was also calculated and presented in Strength activity index of both includes physico-chemical characteristics that increase the compressive strength of mortars (by pozzolanic reaction supply of additional CSHs, by inert physical pore filling effect increase the particle packing of system, increase and accelerate the hydration rate by supplying nucleation fields to the hydration products). In recent years, comprehensive studies have been conducted in order to characterize the physical and chemical properties of mineral admixtures that contribute to strength development The water contents presented in The compressive strength development of fly ash incorporated mortars are presented in At 7 In order to clarify the effects of grinding on fly ash characteristics, some simplified case studies are presented. Each case was illustrated with a simple graphical representation. The impact of grounded fly ash substitution by cement on fresh state behavior, water demand and mechanical performance of mortars has been systematically modelled and discussed. Let us assume that the substitution rate of cement with fly ash, Grzeszczyk and Lipowski They also claimed that grinding of the high-calcium fly ash, e.g. to 393 However, they did not discuss the yield value change by incorporation of grounded fly ashes. Yield value graph has been plotted in In this study, to clarify the situation and to give no possibility to misunderstand the consistency will be described by mortar spread-flow value which can be related with yield value from the view point of rheological parameters. The above-mentioned exception have revealed that there are some other factors affecting the fresh state rheological behavior of grounded fly ash incorporated systems, i.e. the particle shape and surface characteristics that are hard to characterize significantly. The effect of these properties on water requirement will be studied in Case At constant consistency, two major parameters affect the compressive strength (   Assume that the shape and surface characteristics are constant. In this case there will be only one factor affecting the water requirement. That is the specific surface area which increased the water requirement. The effect of initial particle shape and surface characteristics and their change by grinding on water requirement will be discussed in Case In some studies, it was claimed that fly ash substitution will reduce the water requirement of the mortar to maintain constant consistency The initial particle shape and surface characteristics significantly affect the performance of grounded fly ashes, in particular water demand. The particle shape and surface characteristics of fly ashes are not unique and complex. To simplify the situation, two types of particles were assumed to represent the shape of fly ashes. In The fly ash shape presented in the first model is initially irregular and rough ( On the other hand, as can be seen from the curvature of water requirement related with specific surface area increase, the water requirement will significantly increase by reduced particle size (upper graph in It should be noted that similar assumptions can be accepted in case of porous particles. Due to grinding, the porosity of particles will reduce and hence water demand to maintain constant consistency will also decrease (keeping in mind that decrease in particle size due to grinding was separated and neglected in this case). The fly ash shape presented in the second model is initially spherical and smooth ( Similar tendency can be observed from the curvature of water requirement related with specific surface area increase. Net result of these effects is plotted at the bottom of Particle shape and surface characteristics of fly ash particles changed by grinding. The rheological performance of fly ash in mortar depends on the particle to particle interactions. The concept of “intrinsic viscosity” can be related with the interparticle friction between fly ash particles. The change in “intrinsic viscosity” affects the rheological properties. In Finally, there is a another well-known way of maintaining the flow values at the same Achieving the highest compressive strength of fly ash substituted mortars primarily depends on the fineness of fly ash incorporation. However, increasing the fineness may result with higher mixing water demand due to the increase in surface area of fly ash particles. Thus, optimum fly ash fineness is the function of mixing water content for a constant workability. Another important parameter is the initial particle shape characteristics of raw fly ashes which control the water requirement of mortars prepared. In this study, the optimum fineness of fly ash, which has the maximized 7, 28 and 90 If any other type of fly ash with different fineness is considered, by using the methodology presented in this study, it is possible to find the optimum fineness of fly ash to reach maximum compressive strengths.