Measurements of the concentrations of total CO2 (CT), O2, H2S, NO2
                     −, NO3
                     −, and NH4
                     + were performed between 2003 and 2007 during intervals of 2–3months in the deep water of the Gotland Basin (Baltic Sea). The data were used to determine mineralization and denitrification rates in four sublayers below 150m during a period of stagnation. To account for the vertical mixing at the boundaries of the sublayers, mixing coefficients were determined based on the temporal changes of the salinity profiles. Mass balances were established for each measured variable and yielded the sink/source rates in the individual sublayers for each time interval. The seasonality of mineralization rates was confined to water layers that were in close contact with the sediment surface, indicating that the mineralization took place mainly at the sediment surface. Moreover, it was shown that the mineralization rates did not depend on the redox conditions in the water column. The total mineralization rate in the basin was found to be 2.0molm–2
                     yr–1, thereby implying that about 80% of the particulate organic carbon input occurred by lateral transport. A redox balance indicated that manganese dioxide and possibly iron oxides contributed to the oxidation of organic matter by about 13%. Intense denitrification was observed during the transition from oxic to anoxic conditions. A value of 456mmol–Nm–2
                     yr–1 was found, which included a possible anammox contribution of about 5%.The Baltic Sea is a semi-enclosed brackish sea that is characterized by a low water exchange with the adjacent North Sea and the North Atlantic. A characteristic feature of its central parts is the existence of a permanent halocline at a depth between 60 In addition to toxic effects, the formation of anoxia affects the nutrient budget of the Baltic Sea. Large amounts of nitrate are removed from the nutrient pool by transformation to elemental nitrogen due to denitrification at the oxic/anoxic interface (redoxcline). In contrast, the release of dissolved phosphate during organic matter mineralization is favored under anoxic conditions, which inhibit the formation of iron-hydroxophosphates. In the long-term, these processes also affect the concentration of the surface water nutrients. Indeed, low NO The Baltic Sea is one of the few marine regions where a pelagic redoxcline exists. This facilitates the investigation of the dynamics of organic matter (OM) mineralization (oxidation). OM mineralization is the key process for the development of anoxic conditions and is associated with biogeochemical transformations such as denitrification. The eastern Gotland Sea ( Previous investigations on OM mineralization and related nutrient transformations were based on observations of O The use of C We already used C In the present study, we present time series data for C Samples for the determination of C The determination of C O A prerequisite for the reliable determination of biogeochemical transformation rates is the occurrence of longer periods of stagnation. A necessary criterion for the existence of stagnation is that temporal changes in the salinity and temperature profiles are consistent with the direction of the corresponding gradients and that the temporal changes can thus be explained entirely by vertical mixing. This constraint was almost perfectly fulfilled at depths below 150 In order to calculate the rates of the different redox reactions in the stagnant deep-water, mass balances were established for four sublayers (SL) below 150 The salinity gradients were obtained from the differences between the mean of S for two neighboring SL divided by the distance between the centers of the SL. They were calculated at the start and end of each time interval. The temporal mean gradients for each time interval were then used for the determination of The salt flux calculations were based on mass conservation equations since no salt sinks/sources exist. For SL1 (bottom water), the salt fluxes into the adjacent SL2 ( Salt conservation for SL1 (bottom water): Salt conservation for SL2–SL4: As a result, we obtained the salt fluxes across each SL boundary for each time interval. These results, together with the corresponding gradients, yielded spatially and seasonally resolved To determine the rates of biogeochemical transformations, mass balances were established for the different chemical variable for each SL and time interval: Similarly to the processing of the salinity data, mean concentrations for each SL were calculated from the values at the interfaces of the SL and used to calculate the gradients between the SL. Using The C In order to characterize the mineralization of organic matter, the rates During the stagnation period, the development of anoxic conditions started in the bottom water in July 2004 and propagated upwards during the following months. The mean slope of the accumulated The mean mineralization rate for the entire basin below 150 Taking into account the organic carbon burial in the sediments of the Gotland Basin, which according to Ammonia and nitrate are the most important inorganic nitrogen compounds in seawater. They play a major role in fuelling the primary production of organic matter. Therefore, the transformation of NO Different microbial pathways for the transformation of NO The sinks/sources for NO Averaging NO NH The NH The total conversion of DIN to elemental N To estimate the oxidant demand for the mineralization of POM, we used the bottom water data (SL1) from February 2005 to July 2006 when the water was permanently anoxic and there was no O Since the mineralization of organic matter and the conversion of DIN to elemental N Another process that could have contributed to the OE deficit in our budget is related to the iron chemistry at the sediment surface. In contrast to manganese, iron does not accumulate in the water column during anoxic conditions, but is deposited as FeS in the sediment. During the inflow of oxygen-containing water before the onset of a new stagnation period, FeS in the upper sediment layers can be oxidized to Fe In our approach, the determination of The calculation of the OE deficit in our redox balance also remained unchanged after a +/−50% increase/decrease of Our mean mineralization rate for the Gotland Sea basin below 150 By analyzing the data for individual time intervals and water layers, we were able to detect seasonal signals for both the vertical mixing coefficients and the mineralization rates. A clear seasonality was observed in each sublayer for According to the increase of Mn While the obtained mineralization rates can be widely generalized within the limits of the involved uncertainties, this is not the case for the denitrification rates. During a stagnation period, denitrification only takes place during the transition from oxic to anoxic conditions and stops after the redoxcline crosses the upper boundary of the considered basin, which was set at 150 This study was supported by the Baltic Sea Monitoring Programme performed by the Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research on behalf of the German Bundesamt für Seeschifffahrt und Hydrographie. We thank the monitoring staff for their steadiness during sampling and chemical analysis. We particularly thank H. Kubsch for performing the total CO  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at