Background
                  Surgical fixation of Jones fractures is often recommended to facilitate recovery and achieve union. Iatrogenic fracture displacement during intramedullary screw fixation is a commonly encountered technical issue. This may be related to fracture location in relation to the surrounding ligamentous attachments, namely the robust intermetatarsal ligaments found at the proximal articulation of the 4th and 5th metatarsals. This study examines the relationship between fracture line and its location in regards to the surrounding ligamentous structures and its effect on Jones fracture displacement, reduction and fixation in a cadaveric model.
               
                  Methods
                  Eighteen fresh-frozen cadaveric feet were dissected with preservation of all ligamentous attachments. Given the similar anatomic distal extent of the dorsal and plantar intermetatarsal ligaments on the 5th metatarsal, measurements were obtained detailing the anatomic position of the dorsal intermetatarsal ligament (DIL) only. The specimens were divided into two groups with modelled fractures created at the 4th & 5th metatarsal articulation proximal to the distal extent of the DIL (Group 1) or just distal to the DIL (Group 2). Fractures were fixed in standard fashion with serial fluoroscopic images obtained to study fracture gapping and rotation.
               
                  Results
                  There was approximately 5 mm of fracture gapping created iatrogenically during tapping with no statistically significant differences between Group 1 and Group 2 (4.53 mm versus 5.25 mm, p = 0.5430). The distal aspect of the DIL was anatomically located 2.77 mm (Range 1.58 mm–4.46 mm) distal to the 4th & 5th metatarsal articulation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Considerable iatrogenic fracture gapping occurs during intramedullary screw fixation of Jones fractures in a cadaveric model regardless of fracture location in relation to the intermetatarsal ligamentous attachments. Specific techniques may be required to maintain anatomic alignment during tapping and screw fixation to prevent iatrogenic displacement.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  V, Expert Opinion.Proximal 5th metatarsal fractures occurring near the articular facet of the 4th and 5th metatarsals (Jones fractures) are prone to delayed union, nonunion, and refracture [ Intramedullary screw fixation of Jones fractures was first described by Kavanaugh, et al. in 1978. Presently, a single partially-threaded intramedullary screw, typically 4 mm or greater in diameter, is the most commonly used fixation for these fractures [ Placement of a large intramedullary screw (relative to 5th metatarsal diameter) into a short and curved medullary canal, with local anatomy often encumbering the desired entry point, can be technically challenging [ Anecdotally, iatrogenic fracture displacement during intramedullary screw fixation is a commonly encountered technical issue [ Eighteen thawed fresh-frozen non-osteoporotic cadaveric feet, with an average age of 54 years, were utilized for this study. All dissections were overseen by an experienced, fellowship-trained orthopaedic foot and ankle surgeon. The skin and subcutaneous tissues were carefully removed from the lateral foot to expose the entire lateral midfoot while preserving all ligamentous attachments. Given the similar anatomic distal extents of the dorsal and plantar intermetatarsal ligaments on the 5th metatarsal, measurements were obtained detailing the anatomic position of the DIL only [ Specimens were then divided into two groups with gross size and laterality split as evenly as possible. In Group I, a fracture line was created using a thin blade oscillating saw entering the articulation of the 4th and 5th MT well proximal to the distal extent of the DIL. In Group II, an analogous fracture was created but just distal to the distal most extent of the DIL and typically several millimeters distal to the articulation of the 4th and 5th metatarsal. All fractures were fixed using a single partially-threaded intramedullary screw (Wright Medical Group, Inc., Memphis, TN). Standard surgical technique was used, beginning with placing a guide wire in line with the medullary canal at the base of the fifth metatarsal tuberosity under fluoroscopic guidance [ Fracture gapping during tapping of each specimen in Group I and II was measured radiographically. For the purposes of measurement, fluoroscopic images were obtained in the oblique position with the x-ray beam perpendicular to the long axis of the metatarsal and orthogonal to the fracture site. The difference between fracture gapping was compared using a two-sided Foot length was measured from base of heel to tip of great toe using a ruler. The fibers of the DIL were found to run perpendicular to the metatarsal shafts and covered the articulation of the 4th and 5th MT. The average gross anatomic distance from the most proximal aspect of the tuberosity to the distal extent of the DIL insertion was 31.58 mm (Range: 25.0 mm–38.9 mm). The average radiographic distance from the distal most aspect of the 4th and 5th MT articulation to the distal extent of the DIL insertion was 2.77 mm (Range 1.58 mm–4.46 mm) ( The maximal overall fracture gapping with the largest used tap was 4.98 mm across all cadaveric models. In Group I, the average fracture gapping was 4.53 mm (range 2.8 mm–7.3 mm) versus 5.25 mm (range 2.5 mm–13.0 mm) in Group II. However, this difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.5430) (see As first described in a case series by Sir Robert Jones in 1902, in which he included his own injury, a ‘Jones’ fracture was an acute fracture at the proximal 5th metatarsal metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction [ Surgical fixation of Jones fractures is unique and challenging. These injuries are subject to bending and torsion at the fracture site without the natural compressive effect of weight-bearing and gravity due to the metatarsals being loaded perpendicular to their long axis. Therefore, they may be less forgiving to non-anatomic reduction and rely more heavily on the mechanical compression generated by screw fixation to achieve successful union. Given this, it becomes critical to examine reduction and fixation techniques along with local anatomy that may affect fracture reduction. Anecdotally, iatrogenic fracture displacement during intramedullary screw fixation is a commonly encountered technical issue. This small amount of diastasis can persist despite applying appropriate torque to final screw tightening with all screw threads distal to the fracture. In examining these fractures clinically and now in a cadaveric model, we believe that the tap Rotational malalignment at the fracture site after screw compression can be associated with persistent fracture gapping. Qualitatively, we observed that during tapping and screw fixation of Group II fractures, there was grossly more rotational deformity produced by the clockwise torque on the distal fragment with relative supination of the 5th toe on this right foot specimen. While this study did not focus on a technique to improve reduction or prevent the initial displacement during tapping and fixation, other studies have demonstrated promising results with percutaneous fracture reduction using a clamp and provisional K-wire fixation is another alternative (see Limitations of this study include those inherent to cadaveric modeling without correlation to clinical data. While using a denuded specimen was necessary for anatomic study of the ligamentous structures, the skin and subcutaneous tissues may impart some additional stability which was lost in our study. Furthermore, we present an experimental series of cadaveric samples for a descriptive analysis, and thus, are not powered in our sample size for statistically significant conclusions. Regardless, the principles of fracture distraction and rotation still apply and warrant careful consideration in each surgical case to optimize success, and our findings can assist with hypothesis generation and further technique modifications. Focus on new techniques and technologies to minimize fracture gapping to achieve a better anatomic reduction and compression with intramedullary screws may be beneficial. Considerable iatrogenic fracture gapping occurs during intramedullary screw fixation of Jones fractures in a cadaveric model regardless of fracture location in relation to the intermetatarsal ligamentous attachments. Increased rotational deformity may occur with more distal fractures. Specific techniques to maintain fracture reduction during intramedullary screw fixation are warranted. The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.