Synergistic solvent extraction of Ca and Mg from concentrated Ni sulfuric solutions was assessed using extractants Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, and naphthenic acid. D2EHPA has a strong preference for extracting Ca; however, Ca was crowded out by Ni at pH>3.5. Cyanex 272 has a higher affinity for Mg at pH>5, while both earth alkaline metals are rejected by naphthenic acid at pH=2–6 as well as by the system Cyanex 272+naphthenic acid. The system D2EHPA+naphthenic acid has affinity only for Ca. The system D2EHPA+Cyanex 272 can extract Ca and Mg simultaneously; however, selectivities Ca/Ni and Mg/Ni are dependent on the liquor pH and D2EHPA concentration in organic mixture solution. In this system, a strong synergistic effect was found for Ca and Mg, whereas contradictory behavior was observed for Ni. To avoid crud formation, the selective extraction of Ca and Mg should be performed at pH<6. Ni can be selectively stripped from the loaded D2EHPA+Cyanex 272 using diluted H2SO4 solution, whereas Ca and Mg can be completely stripped with concentrated H2SO4 solution.The recovery of Co and Ni from HPAL (High Pressure Acid Leaching) liquors after precipitation of Fe, Cr, and Al ( In the industrial plants of Bulong (Australia), Murrin Murrin (Australia), Voisey's Bay (Canada), Kasese Cobalt (Uganda), Votorantim (Brazil), Tati Nickel (Botswana), and Hartley Platinum (Zimbabwe), the Co/Ni separation is done by solvent extraction using Cyanex 272 (bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid) as an extractant ( Several investigations have revealed significant improvements in the Co/Ni separation and/or recovery of Ni by using synergistic solvent extraction systems (    Despite largely used for Co/Ni separation, the synergistic solvent extraction method is not fairly investigated to purify Ni solutions containing Ca and Mg. As verified previously, promising results were obtained when dilute Ni solutions containing Ca and Mg were treated, as is the case of DSX solutions ( The aqueous phase used in the extraction tests was a synthetic multicomponent sulfuric solution containing [Ca] The organic solutions were prepared by dissolving the following extractants in Exxsol D80 (ExxonMobil, aliphatic kerosene, aromatic content Extraction tests were performed by contacting equal volumes (200 Kinetics extraction tests were conducted following the same experimental procedure of the extraction tests to evaluate the occurrence of crowding out effects during multicomponent metal extraction. Based on preliminary experiments, the necessary amount of NaOH solution (10 The concentration of Ca, Mg, and Ni in the aqueous phases was analyzed quantitatively by atomic absorption (GBC, model XplorAA dual). The content of the metal species in the organic solution was determined by mass balance. The formation of crud in the loaded organic solution was verified under particular experimental conditions. It was filtrated and dried at 60 The extraction of Ca, Mg, and Ni from sulfuric media with D2EHPA, Cyanex 272, or naphthenic acid is shown in The order of metal extraction by D2EHPA is strongly dependent on the pH of the aqueous phase. As evidenced in previous studies ( The crowding out effect is clearly observed in the kinetic tests shown in Cyanex 272 has revealed a higher affinity for Mg at greater pH values and rejected Ca as shown in The results shown in It can be inferred that Ca could be extracted by D2EHPA at pH The improvement in the selective extraction of Ca and Mg over Ni with binary mixtures of D2EHPA, Cyanex 272, and naphthenic acid was evaluated using the synergistic enhancement factor (R Very low extractions of Ca (< As shown in The effect of D2EHPA addition (5, 10, and 20% v/v) in an organic phase containing 20% v/v of Cyanex 272 is shown in According to Crud was formed in all organic systems tested at pH Stripping tests were performed to assess the behavior of Ca, Mg, and Ni stripping from the loaded D2EHPA (20% v/v) Synergistic solvent extraction using extractants Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, and naphthenic acid was evaluated in the present work to selectively remove Ca and Mg from concentrated Ni sulfate solutions like those obtained in MHP route before Ni electrowinning step. The main conclusions are as follows: D2EHPA has shown affinity to selectively extract Ca at pH D2EHPA plays a decisive role in the metal extraction behavior when mixed with naphthenic acid and Cyanex 272. The system D2EHPA The selectivity Ca/Ni and Mg/Ni with system D2EHPA Crud formed in all organic systems was tested at pH Selective Ni stripping can be operated using diluted H Semi or fully countercurrent continuous runs are suggested for future work in order to increase the batch extraction performance of Ca and Mg with a minimum of undesirable Ni co-extraction, as well as to improve the metals selective stripping step. The authors wish to acknowledge