The objective of this study was to estimate the elastic wave velocity of an unsaturated soil slope, and to verify its applicability. The elastic wave velocity in a silty sand was measured. The individual influence of the volumetric water content and the tilt angle on the normalized wave velocity through unsaturated soil were investigated through a series of varied slope model tests. The relationship function of the normalized wave velocity-volumetric water content-tilt angle was established. To verify the proposed estimation function, a series of fixed slope model tests was carried out. The relationship functions were used to estimate the behaviors of the wave velocity in rainfall-induced slope failure model tests. The applicability of the proposed relationship functions for the wave velocity behaviors was also presented. It was found that the estimation function is highly consistent with the measurements for the wave velocity behaviors through unsaturated soil slope in the presented test conditions. In addition, the effects of the rainfall duration/initial water content, density, slope angle and surface layer thickness on the decrease rate of the normalized wave velocity with the volumetric water content and the tilt angle within the test conditions in this study were seen to be small.The water flow through soil can significantly affect the stability of a slope during rainfall ( The elastic wave velocity characteristics of soil contain a great deal of information related to the soil properties. Nondestructive analyses of soil mechanics using information carried by elastic waves are increasingly being employed in geotechnical applications for determining the soil properties ( More recently, the elastic wave velocity is also being used to derive rheological states and the solid-fluid transition in soil ( Estimating the elastic wave velocity is of pivotal importance for describing soil stability. The available studies were generally carried out independently and explored the estimation of the elastic wave velocity by considering either the water content ( Laboratory model testing is regarded as the most reliable method for studying rainfall-triggered landslides. In such tests, the soil properties and boundary conditions can be controlled by the possibility of the continuous monitoring of the water content inside the slope and the deformation. To gain a better understanding of the phenomenon related to elastic wave propagation in a soil slope during wetting and the failure process as a result of rainfall, two types of slope model tests were performed in the laboratory. They comprised varied and fixed slope model tests. The varied slope model tests were conducted to yield the relationship functions of the elastic wave velocity with the volumetric water content and the shear deformation, providing a basis for estimating the elastic wave velocity in the soil slope. Moreover, the fixed slope model tests during rainfall were carried out to study the effect of the initial dry density, thickness and slope angle on the wave behaviors. Furthermore, the wave data from the fixed slope model tests were used to verify the proposed relationship functions. From the comparison and statistical analysis, it is found that the proposed relationship functions provide good estimation for the wave evolution. Edosaki sand, with a mean particle diameter ( A solenoid serving as a wave generator was housed by a small plastic cylinder box and buried into the shallow surface of the base layer. A solenoid is a coil of wire with a corkscrew shape wrapped around an iron plunger. It is used as an electromagnet to generate a magnetic field when an electric current is passed through the wire. The electric current activates the solenoid by converting electrical energy to magnetic energy, which, in turn, causes the plunger to move forward to strike the iron frame of the solenoid. Consequently, an elastic wave is created. This plunger moves backward by a return spring twined at the end piece of the plunger when removing the electric current, which is what makes it useful for switches and valves and allows it to be entirely automated. Piezoelectric vibration sensors (Model: VS-BV201), developed by NEC TOKIN Corporation, serve as wave receivers to record the elastic wave signals. A high-performance data logger (NR-500 by Keyence Corporation Ltd.) was used to observe the continuous recording of the wave signals with a sampling rate of 50 kHz. Data acquisition was implemented using a software NR-HA08 hi-speed measurement unit. In order to eliminate the random signal noise and to enhance the signal to noise ratio, a microcontroller (MSP430 by Texas Instruments) was designed to generate 20 repeated pulses at a single electric input. Thus, the final observation was a stack of 20 received signals obtained in a very short span of time. An example of the wave measurement from different sensors on the slope is shown in The elastic wave velocities in the slope model tests were compared with those from triaxial tests. A numerical relationship was devised to normalize the wave velocities obtained during the triaxial tests to the stress levels in the model tests. A comparison revealed that the wave velocity recorded in the slope model tests is most likely to be of an S-type in nature ( The volumetric water content at any time during the test was determined by means of soil moisture sensors (Model: EC-5 by Decagon Devices, Inc.) installed at various locations on the slope surface. In addition, tilt sensors based on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) ( The artificial rainfall equipment comprised an air compressor, pressure regulator, water tank, spray nozzle and pipeline. The applied air pressure drove water to eject from a spray nozzle (SSXP series by H. IKEUCHI & Co., Ltd.) which produced a full cone spray pattern with a square impact area and uniform distribution ( The main purpose of the model tests was to study the processes of rainfall infiltration and slope failure, and the influences of different factors on the elastic wave velocity. Two types of slope model tests were conducted on the slope models prepared with Edosaki sand. The first type of slope model tests was named the varied slope model tests because the slope model in these tests would be inclined manually to investigate the individual effect of the water content and the shear deformation on the wave velocity, as shown in To isolate the effect of the water content and the deformation on the wave velocity, a series of varied model tests was carried out. The shape and size of the model slope with the arrangement of measurement accessories are shown in The side walls of the container were made of wooden plates on which the friction angle was found to be 14°, whereas the friction angle on the interface between the dense and the loose layers was found to be 45°. Hence, the friction to support the soil in the upper layer was mainly provided by the dense soil layer, rather than the side walls. The effect of the side wall friction was further explored by conducting tests with model widths ranging from 5 cm to 35 cm; it was found that the effect of the side wall friction could be ignored for slopes with widths larger than 15 cm ( The box housing solenoid was buried close to the surface of the base layer. The direction of the movement of the plunger was kept vertical. Five wave sensors were installed in the slope to receive the elastic wave signal. Wave sensor Ch0 was fixed adjacent to the solenoid, while the other four sensors (Ch1 ~ 4) were installed at the superficies of the surface layer to measure the wave travel time. Four tilt sensors and moisture sensors were arranged on the slope to monitor the tilt angle and the volumetric water content, respectively. Two stages of the test scheme were applied. At the 1st stage, rainfall was continuously applied for 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or 10 min. In this stage, only the water content was changed, with little variation in the shear deformation of the soil. Hence, the variation in wave velocity in the rainfall stage resulted completely from the increase in water content. At the 2nd stage, the rainfall was stopped. Subsequently, the slope was raised slowly by a chain block until its inclination became 40° at which time no failure occurred. The shear deformation in the samples was designated in terms of the relative inclination which was calculated as the difference between the tilt angles monitored by the tilt sensors, Nos. 1–4, installed in the soil and No. 5 attached to the model container. Thus, the shear deformation increased with the model inclination under a constant water content. That is, the change in wave velocity at the inclined stage was totally attributed to the increase in inclination (i.e., shear deformation). The wave signal was recorded during both test stages. This type of model test was performed to separately investigate the evolution in elastic wave velocity with the increase in water content as well as the deformation. The slope model was 40 cm high and 30 cm wide, as shown in The box housing solenoid was buried in the shallow surface of the base layer. The direction of the movement of the plunger and that of the box were kept perpendicular to the slope. Five wave sensors, one placed next to the solenoid in the base layer and four installed at the superficies of the surface layer, were applied to measure the elastic wave velocity. Four tilt and moisture sensors were arranged on the slope to monitor the tilt angle and the volumetric water content, respectively. Observations for changes in soil moisture and slope deformations were made every 1 s, whereas the elastic wave velocity was recorded every 30 s during the entire course of the tests. Rainfall was applied until the failure of the slope. The failure was induced in the slope by rainfall through a nozzle installed above the container. Due to the similarity in the results from each test case, the results from just one case are discussed in detail herein. During the rainfall phase, the wave velocities decreased by around 12%. This decrease can be attributed to the change in moisture content only, since negligible tilting was observed during this phase. After 10 min from the start of the experiment, the rainfall was stopped and the model was lifted to an inclination of 40°. During such an inclined stage, the moisture content remained essentially constant, whereas the tilt angles increased rapidly. The elastic wave velocities decreased by around 16% during this stage and this decrease could essentially be attributed to the shear deformation only. This indicates that shear deformation had a more significant influence on the elastic wave velocities.    The decrease in normalized wave velocity was noted to be independent of external factors like surface layer thickness, initial water content, rainfall duration, etc. This infers that the decrease in normalized wave velocity with the volumetric water content and the tilt angle may perhaps be attributed to internal factors, including soil type, grain size, compaction state, porosity, effective stresses, etc. For a given soil and compaction, the wave velocity is a function of the water content and shear deformation. Combining Eqs. The verification of the proposed estimation function has been performed through a series of fixed slope model tests. Due to the similarity in the results of the tested cases, the results of only one group of test cases, i.e., 2-45-10-1.2/1.3/1.4, is herein demonstrated. Changes in the volumetric water content, tilt angle and normalized wave velocity ( As the rainfall progressed, the volumetric water content exhibited a gradual increase. The tilt angle first started to increase slowly and then at a rapid rate. As a result, the elastic wave velocity decreased gradually, followed by a large drop as slope instability began.  The decrease rate of the normalized wave velocity with the volumetric water content was quantified as the slope of a straight line connecting the initial value to the hollow point (corresponding to the tilt angle of 0.4°), as shown in Within such a small tilt angle range, the change in wave velocity was mainly due to the volumetric water content. The decrease rate of the normalized wave velocity with the volumetric water content reflected the effect of the volumetric water content on the wave velocity. Similarly, the decrease rate of the normalized wave velocity with the tilt angle was quantified, as shown in The effect of soil density on the decrease rates of both normalized wave velocities is depicted in As shown in Discussions based on By using Eq. According to the results of this study, the changes in the elastic wave velocity are closely related to the volumetric water content and the shear deformation and, in fact, could be estimated with the measured volumetric water content and measured shear deformation. The changes in wave velocity in an unsaturated soil slope can be obtained by the proposed estimation equation using only the moisture and tilt sensors, which is simple and economical. Two types of slope model tests, namely, varied and fixed slope model tests, were carried out. By means of the varied slope model tests, the relationship functions between the normalized wave velocity-volumetric water content and the normalized wave velocity-tilt angle were established and used to estimate the behaviors of the wave velocity in the fixed slope model tests. In addition, the effects of the surface layer thickness and the rainfall duration in the varied slope model tests, and the effects of the surface layer thickness, slope angle and density in the fixed slope model tests on the behaviors of the wave velocity were studied. The following conclusions can be drawn: The effect of the water content on the wave velocities was limited. It just decreased the normalized wave velocity by 12% from the nearly dry condition to the nearly saturated condition. The effect of the deformation, on the other hand, was found to be much more significant compared to that of the water content. The relationship functions of the normalized wave velocity-volumetric water content and the normalized wave velocity-tilt angle were established as parabolic functions. The functions could be used well to estimate the behaviors of the wave velocity in the rainfall-induced slope failure model tests. The effects of the rainfall duration/initial water content, density, slope angle and surface layer thickness on the decrease rate of the normalized wave velocity with the volumetric water content and tilt angle seem to be small within the test conditions in the present study. It needs to be emphasized that the findings in this paper were limited to Edosaki sand. The results can provide a reference for research on the behavior of elastic wave propagation. More experimental studies on different soil types and stress conditions should be carried out in the future. This research was supported by the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research of the