MSU-type mesoporous silica prepared with nonionic surfactants according to the two-step pathway, exhibits a specific feature that makes its structure sensitive to the synthesis temperature. Until now, this factor had been demonstrated to affect the pore structure in the mesoporous range, between 2 and 5 nm. We describe in the present report that this parameter affects drastically syntheses of MSU-3 silica made with the block copolymer Pluronic 123 within a temperature range of 5–75 °C. Depending on the synthesis temperature, the pore size can vary from microporous (below 2 nm) to mesoporous (close to 9 nm) in a steady-like evolution. However, two properties of block copolymers must be addressed for a full understanding of this evolution: the solubility limit of nonionic templates at higher temperatures, which prevents the formation of micelles because a too high hydrophobicity, and the Critical Micelle Temperature (CMT) at lower temperatures, which prevents the formation of micelles because a too high hydrophilicity. These results confirm that the assembly mechanism that leads to mesostructured materials requires a fine balance of interactions, not only between inorganic and organic reagents but also between the organic templates themselves.As researches in advanced materials are more and more focused on controlling both nanostructure and morphology, they get their inspiration from nature, especially from bio-mineralization processes where weak interactions in aqueous medium at room temperature, between dissolved inorganic precursors and organic molecules lead to complex topologies Among the different families of surfactants used to achieve these syntheses, polyethylene oxide (PEO) nonionic surfactants as well as polyethylene oxide–polypropylene oxide–polyethylene oxide (PEO–PPO–PEO) triblock-copolymers were used at first as assembly agents for the preparation of materials named as MSU-X In this domain, we developed from our side a new approach for the synthesis of MSU-X silica, based on the intermediary formation of hybrid micelles, that are further condensed by the addition of fluorine as a silica condensation catalyst MSU-3 hexagonal mesoporous silica was prepared according to the two-step reaction process All materials were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction and nitrogen adsorption at 77 K. SEM micrographs were obtained on a Hitachi S-5400 FEG microscope operating at 5 kV. The samples were covered with Au to increase conductivity. The X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded with a Bruker D5000 diffractometer in Bragg-Brentano reflection geometry. Cu L3,2 radiation monochromatized by a graphite single crystal, was employed. Nitrogen adsorption isotherms were measured at 77 K on a Micromeritics 2010 sorptometer using standard continuous procedures, and samples were first degassed at 150 °C for 15 h. Surface area were determined by BET method in the 0.05–0.2 relative pressure range and pore diameter distribution by a polynomial relationship based on the Kelvin equation developed by Broekhoff and Boer (BdB) The SEM observations of the MSU-3 silica prepared at different temperatures, are displayed in Since the first synthesis of mesoporous silica with nonionic templates The self-assembly properties of block-copolymers differ by various aspects from those of nonionic surfactants To understand why Pluronic P123 leads to the formation of hexagonally mesostructured silica, one must bear in mind an additional factor: the behavior described above will appear if the copolymer is mostly hydrophobic. Two families of copolymers were defined according to their enthalpy of micellization Δ Finally, one must take into account how the synthesis temperature may control the global reaction. It can act through various mechanisms like changing the solubility of organics, increasing dynamics by Brownian motion, providing additional energy to overcome energy thresholds between different shape configurations and modifying the reactions kinetics, especially those between the organic/inorganic species assembly and the silica condensation. Our process provides a unique feature that allows us to overcome this last factor. All the syntheses described in this study start from the same aqueous solution of hybrid micelles (H.M.), prepared and let overnight at room temperature. This solution is then placed in the thermostated bath and the catalyst (sodium fluoride) is added as soon as the solution is equilibrated with the bath temperature. The self-induced silica condensation is then totally prohibited and the silica condensation will freeze a structure that arises from the concomitant influence of the H.M. structure evolution with temperature and the growth of the silica framework interacting with the micelles. At lowest temperatures, the hydrophobicity of PPO chains is low. The hybrid micelles are destabilized and all species (silica oligomers and copolymer molecules) dissolve. The addition of fluoride will induce the condensation of the silica oligomers containing dispersed single copolymers. These latter generate the microporosity observed at least up to 10 °C. Since there is no long-range order, the X-ray diffraction pattern is flat. As the temperature increases, the hydrophobicity of PPO increases and the hybrid micelles are stable in solution. The formation of mesostructured silica is then observed from 25 to 55 °C. Above this temperature, the parallel trend to the hydrophobicity of the PEO chains increases with temperature. Once again, the hybrid micelles are destroyed but for an opposite reason due to the phase separation between hydrophobic copolymer and water The morphological modifications are also explained by the variation of the interactions between silica and copolymer. Below 25 °C, the material is amorphous, microporous and presents a spherical particle shape. The addition of fluoride creates silica seeds that will grow in a homogeneous medium as they are fed with silica oligomers and single P123 molecules dissolved in water. P123 molecules become trapped in the silica network because their hydrophilic character promotes strong interactions with silica (amorphous microporous silica gels were obtained with PEO polymers). The spherical shape arises from a nucleation and growth process of silica promoted by the fluoride ions that was described previously Synthesis of MSU-X type silica through the two-step process that involves the preliminary preparation of stable hybrid micelles allowed us to modify its pore size through the monitoring of the synthesis temperature M.M. thanks CAPES for scholarship funding.