The mixing characteristics of large-size industrial flotation equipment, consisting of banks of mechanical cells and pneumatic columns, has been observed using non-invasive experimental techniques, such as a radioactive tracer to measure the residence time distribution of the liquid and solid. The classical tanks-in-series model showed a good fitting to describe the operation of industrial banks with a different number of flotation cells in series. On the other hand, results for large-size pneumatic flotation columns were also close to well-mixed and can be well represented using a simple model of one large mixer in series with two small mixers plus a dead time, which can be related to the physical phenomena occurring inside a flotation column. The column mixing model is shown to compare well with tracer data from a variety of column designs from different industrial operations. A comparison with the axial dispersion model considering a closed–closed boundary conditions is presented.Effective mixing is relevant to flotation because it is required for particle suspension, fine bubble generation and dispersion in order to promote particle–bubble collisions. Thus, a single mechanically agitated flotation cell is typically well mixed. For this reason, flotation cells are commonly arranged in banks of 8–12 cells in series in order to avoid the pulp short-circuiting. Mineral species recovery in continuous industrial flotation equipment can be described by the general equation ( The main objective of this work was to evaluate the mixing characteristics and the effective residence time of liquid and solid particles, of different size classes, in industrial flotation equipment such as rougher and scavenger flotation banks of mechanical cells, as well as in cleaning pneumatic flotation columns. A second objective was the modelling of the mixing characteristics of industrial flotation equipment. In order to characterize the metallurgical behaviour of mechanical cells arranged in banks, the residence time distribution “RTD” has been typically represented by a model of Other more complex models can include a large number of parameters, such as dead zones, pure delay or backmixing ( Since the first mathematical description of the column flotation operation, the axial dispersion model has been frequently used for design and interpretation of flotation column performance ( If a liquid or solid tracer is injected at the feed entrance of a flotation column, considering that mixing occurs only along the axis of the column, the mass transfer equation which describes its concentration at an axial distance from the injection point Eq. ( To find the numerical solution Eq. ( According to this, two extreme cases of mixing are determined by For a closed vessel with a pulse tracer injected at In modelling the RTD of flotation columns using the axial dispersion approach, the choice of solutions, boundary conditions and fitting routines is important and has been largely discussed ( For closed–closed boundaries in a flotation column, the analytical solution for the dimensionless residence time distribution of an impulse tracer feed is described by the following expression ( According to In chemical engineering literature there are a large number of models and correlations developed for bubble columns, mainly related to the axial dispersion model and parameter correlations (i.e., On the other hand, data on RTD of large flotation columns is rather scarce and there are few examples of application of the axial dispersion model at this scale. The first most successful application of commercial flotation columns was reported at the beginning of 80s at Mines Gaspé, Canada ( Some authors claim that even if the RTD model is not realistic in representing transport in large columns, which are well mixed, they consider that strictly in terms of the ability to fit the RTD the axial dispersion model is adequate, provided that On the other hand, the liquid RTD of industrial flotation columns can also be described by the tanks-in-series model, Eq. ( Now, considering new experimental evidence, it will be shown later that a better fit can be obtained using a simple alternative approach to model the RTD of large flotation columns. The model consists of one large perfect mixer (residence time  The analytical solution for this model is given by the following equation (Appendix A): Large-size columns are divided by vertical baffles in order to promote a good contact between pulp and air, a good wash water distribution, to avoid macro-circulation and short-circuit of pulp and air, and also for structural reasons. Thus, single open sections of 1–1.5 The numerical solution for the axial dispersion model with closed–closed boundaries was developed in Matlab 6.5. Fitting the numerical results from models to the experimental results was conducted using standard routines based on least-squares method. Mathematically, this is expressed, Industrial data is typically noisy. In order to improve the model fitting the estimation of the actual mean residence time was included in the optimum search routine, together with the model parameters, instead of using a fix residence time calculated from rough data. This approach allows for obtaining a more reliable mean residence time from smooth data. However, numerical comparison between both empirical and adjusted mean residence time, as well as visual comparison between model and experimental data is recommended to confirm the validity of these results. The mixing characteristic of industrial flotation equipment was evaluated from residence time distribution measurement using radioactive tracers. This technique allows for non-invasive tracer detection, and is also adaptable to different kinds of equipment ( Radioactive tracer experiments were conducted at El Salvador Division, Codelco-Chile, in self-aerated mechanical cells of 42.5  Small changes around the corresponding value of the The mean residence time calculated from the RTD data for 4 and 9 cell banks was 11.8 and 36  Also, the effect of particle size on solid mixing was evaluated. Tests were developed on the rougher flotation circuit at Salvador Division, Codelco-Chile. Activated tailing was used as a solid tracer in three size classes.  On the other hand, in the rougher operation it was found that the difference between mean residence time of liquid and overall solid, having a content of 25% (w/w) with particle sizes The RTD of different industrial flotation columns has been measured under normal plant operating conditions, using radioactive and conventional tracer tests. The main flotation column design and operating characteristics are shown in Recently, the residence time distribution of flotation columns in the cleaning circuit at El Salvador Division, Codelco-Chile, was determined. The circuit consists of two rectangular columns,  The liquid residence time distribution of flotation columns in the cleaning circuit at Andina Division, Codelco-Chile, was determined using NaCl in solution as the liquid tracer (   These results confirm that despite the presence of baffles, the mixing condition in industrial columns is close to well mixed, due to the counter-current bubble swarm/pulp contact, at normal superficial air rates of 1–3 Results from Salvador showed that the vessel dispersion number was similar for both liquid and solid particles, which is in good agreement with the previous work ( The large values of the effective vessel dispersion number, Also, it was observed that small changes in the relative values between It was found that liquids and solids are reasonably well mixed in industrial flotation columns. However, solids segregation by gravity was more significant than in mechanical cells, with an overall solids residence time 11% smaller than the liquid, despite the fact that the average particle size was finer, having a content of 25% (w/w) with particle sizes  The maximum superficial gas rate in flotation columns is critically limited by the loss of the pulp/froth interface which significantly decreases the column upgrade (cleaning), because of increasing the non-selective gangue entrainment into the froth. From experimental tests it was found that the RTD of large-size industrial mechanical cell banks are well described by a number of perfect mixers in series equivalent to the actual number of cells in the bank. Thus, for metallurgical purposes, the simple tanks-in-series model can be used with confidence in order to identify the flotation kinetics of a mineral in a bank of cells. It was found that despite the presence of baffles, the mixing condition in industrial pneumatic columns is close to well mixed. Thus, a simple model considering two small and one large perfect mixer in series, plus a dead time, showed the best fitting for the liquid RTD in large-size industrial flotation columns. Also, it was shown that the RTD in large-size flotation columns can be predicted reasonably well using the numerical solution for the axial dispersion model with closed–closed boundary conditions. In flotation banks of mechanically agitated cells it was found that the mean residence time of solid, 25% (w/w) The effect of superficial gas rate on the mixing characteristics of industrial columns was evaluated and it was observed that liquid short-circuiting decreased significantly by increasing the superficial gas rate in the range of 2–3  The authors are grateful to El Salvador Division Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by Conicyt, project Fondecyt 1020215, and Santa María University, Project 270322. The analytical solution for the LSTS model in the time domain, Eq. Here,