Blast-induced ground vibration is one of the most severe and complex environmental problems associated with blasting operation. The scaled-distance approach is the common method of estimating the magnitude of the blast-induced ground vibration. However, the prediction of this approach is inaccurate as evident in the literature. Therefore, this study proposed an artificial neural network model for the prediction of blasting operations in five granite quarries in Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria. The distance from the measuring station to the blasting point (D) and a charge per delay (Q) were the two input parameters into the model while the peak particle velocity (PPV) was the targeted output. 100 datasets were used in developing the model. The datasets were divided into training, testing, and validation. The ANN model was trained using backpropagation algorithm with the Levenberg-Marquardt training function. The weights and biases obtained from the trained ANN architecture were extracted and transformed into a simple mathematical equation for the computation of PPV. The obtained results from the ANN model was compared with the prediction of multilinear regression (MLR). The coefficient of determination (R2) of the proposed ANN model is 0.988 while that of the MLR model is 0.738. The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), root-mean-squared error (RMSE), and variance accounted for (VAF) were also used to further evaluate the performance of the models. The MAPE, RMSE, and VAF of the ANN model are 7.14, 2.90, and 98.74 while that of the MLR model is 40.90, 13.35, and 73.76. Therefore, the proposed ANN model can give a reasonable prediction of the PPV.Blasting is the major means of rock breakage in mining and civil engineering projects worldwide. This is due to its effectiveness in breaking the hardest of rocks or materials at a relatively cheaper cost as compared with other means of rock breakage. As a result, various large projects have become technically and economically feasible because of blasting Among the detrimental effects of blasting operations, ground vibration is of the major concern to the mine planners, designers and environmentalists [ Various efforts have been made by the researchers to quantify the magnitude of the blast-induced ground vibration based on the PPV. These efforts can be categorized into three: field measurement, empirical equations and computational methods (i.e. finite element and artificial intelligence). The field measurement is carried out through measuring vibrations resulting from blasting operation using seismograph [ Thoenen and Windes The finite element model has also been developed by Torano To ameliorate this problem, the researchers usually resolve to the use of multilinear regression (MLR) approach to come up with an empirical equation that can be used for PPV predictions by the field engineers. However, MLR predictions are usually inaccurate and in many cases, they show very little or no relationship between the input and output parameters [ The traditional empirical equations are based on the scaled distance approach. In this approach, the PPV is expressed as a function of the scaled distance ( The main objective of this study is to develop an ANN-based formula for predicting the PPV by incorporating the explosive charge used per delay and distance from the blast face to the monitoring point. These two parameters are considered to be input data, whereas the PPV is taken as an output of the network. The source of data used in developing the ANN model is discussed below. In the present study, 100 measured ground vibration from five granite quarries (Ladson, 7.37°N, 3.97°E; Offa, 7.38°N, 3.95°E, Seedvest 7.32°N, 3.92°E; Wetipp, 7.35°N, 3.87°E and Ratcon, 7.33°N,3.87°E) in Ibadan, Oyo State provided by Hammed The ANN model used to derive the proposed mathematical equation was developed using the multilayer perceptrons (MLP) that are trained with the back-propagation training algorithm for feedforward ANNs [ The optimal ANN geometry was determined by the trial-and-error method in which the ANN models were trained with one hidden layer with several neurons ranging between 2 and 7 respectively. A model with 5 neurons was selected for the formulation of the proposed model. Tan-sigmoid transfer function as stated earlier was used in both the input and output layers. The performance of the selected model and the regression plots are shown in A trained ANN network can be transformed into a mathematical formula through the weights and biases in conjunction with the transfer function. The mathematical equation relating the input and output parameters can be generally expressed as in In the proposed mathematical model for predicting ANN in this study, the normalized input variables are two (i.e. i=2), the targeted output variable is one, the number of neurons connecting the input and hidden layer is five (i.e. The general equation in However, the The The normalized variables Since Therefore, the required ANN-based mathematical model is presented in Multilinear regression is a method for establishing a linear relationship between the dependent and one or more independent variables. It is based on the principle of minimizing the sum of the squares of the disparity between the dependent and independent variables [ The multilinear regression model has been used in various aspects of sciences and engineering for establishing linear relationships among variables. MLR model has also been used in predicting the blast-induced ground vibrations [ The obtained PPV from the ANN-based mathematical model (Eq. 16) and the MLR model proposed in this study are compared with the field measured value ( The proposed The obtained results from The performance of the proposed model is evaluated using the statistical parameters such as mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), root mean squared error (RMSE), and variance accounted for (VAF) as presented in The outcome of the performance analysis is presented in Blast-induced ground vibration is acknowledged to be one of the most critical environmental hazards of blasting operations in mining and civil engineering projects. Various empirical models have been used in predicting blast-induced ground vibration and they have been found inaccurate though simple to implement. ANN model has also been used to predict the blast-induced ground vibration and ANN predictions are satisfactory. However, they are not in the form of a tractable mathematical model and hence difficult to implement. Therefore, this study proposed an ANN-based mathematical model for the prediction of blast-induced ground vibration in selected granite quarries in Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria. Existing field data found in literature was used in developing the ANN model and the output of the ANN model was used in developing the mathematical model. The proposed model was compared with the multilinear regression model developed in this study. The proposed ANN-based mathematical model was also used to predict the blast-induced ground vibration in four different quarries with the data sets outside those used in the model development. The performance of the proposed model was evaluated using some statistical parameters such as coefficient of determination, mean percentage error, mean absolute error, and variance accounted for. From the results of the analysis, the following conclusions can be drawn: The proposed mathematical model outperformed the multilinear regression model with the regression coefficient of 0.988 as against 0.738 of the regression model. The mean absolute percentage error and mean-squared error of the proposed model are smaller than that of the MLR while its variance accounted for is higher. The proposed model can reasonably predict peak particle velocity to a reasonable extent without resolving into the use of site constants as in the case of scaled distance approach or repeat the simulation as in the case of many existing ANNs. The proposed model will perform best for the range of the parameters shown in The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: