The tendency of water-soluble organics to be photomineralized under microwave and UV irradiation was examined using model substrates bearing alcoholic (methanol, ethanol 1-propanol, ethylene glycol and glycerin) and carbonyl functions (acetone, formic acid and acetic acid). Trends were seen from the decrease of the kinetics of loss of total organic carbon (TOC) with irradiation time. Microwave thermal and specific (non-thermal) effects were probed for the photomineralization process on irradiation of TiO2 suspensions with 2.45-GHz microwaves and UV irradiation with conventional heating under otherwise identical temperatures, and relative to UV irradiation alone to assess the thermal (TH) and microwave (MW) factors. Dielectric properties of each substrate were also determined under the experimental conditions used.Recent years have witnessed reports of studies in which microwaves were shown to enhance the degradation of organic pollutants in the presence of the metal oxide TiO The current study examines microwave specific effects in relation to the chemical structure of low molecular weight compounds, whose photoassisted mineralization in the presence of titanium dioxide yields formation of CO Titanium dioxide was Degussa P-25 grade. High-purity grade methanol, ethanol, 1-propanol, ethylene glycol, glycerin, acetone, formic acid and acetic acid, used as the model substrates, were obtained from Tokyo Kasei Kogyo Co. Ltd. Temporal changes in the loss of total organic carbon (TOC) during the degradation of these substrates were monitored with a Shimadzu TOC-5000A analyzer. Continuous microwave irradiation was achieved using a 2.45 To the extent that dielectric factors might play a role in the degradation of substrates, we determined experimentally the dielectric loss factors ( An aqueous solution of a substrate (30 Different protocols were examined to achieve the mineralization of the model substrates: (i) photoassisted degradation of air-equilibrated TiO The temporal losses of total organic carbon on irradiation of the various dispersions by the TiO The rate of mineralization of methanol by the TiO Adding one C atom to methanol caused no changes in the kinetics of the photoassisted mineralization of this substrate by the TiO With the addition of two C atoms to methanol, both the TH and the MW factors no longer seemed to play a role in the mineralization of this substrate. The kinetics of mineralization were practically identical. Relative to methanol, this substrate contains an additional C atom as well as an additional OH function. The data in The structure of glycerin contains three C atoms and three OH functions, i.e. one additional –CH The TH effect and the MW effect had only a small influence on the dynamics of mineralization of acetone, whereas the rate of the photoassisted mineralization by the TiO Of all the substrates examined, formic acid was mineralized faster by UV irradiation of the aqueous TiO The rates of mineralization of acetic acid were about twofold slower for both the TiO It is interesting to note that, except for ethylene glycol and acetic acid, the sum of the TH effect and the MW effect do not correlate with the combined TH–MW effect. The difference is particularly significant for methanol. There is a positive synergistic effect between the TH and MW factors in the mineralization of methanol, ethanol and glycerin. In the case of 1-propanol, acetone and formic acid the synergistic effect is negative. That is, the TH–MW factor is greater (positive) than the sum of the TH and MW factors for methanol, ethanol and glycerin, whereas the TH–MW factor is smaller (negative) than the sum, in the latter cases. For the primary alcohols methanol, ethanol and 1-propanol, the decomposition rate induced by the TH effect decreased threefold as the number of carbon atoms increased from 1 to 3. No similar trend was observed for the MW effect. We deduce that the thermal effect is the major factor under microwave irradiation on increasing the carbon number. Comparison of the dynamics of mineralization of ethanol versus ethylene glycol in The dielectric loss factors of the model substrates reported in Dielectric loss factor data show that alcoholic substrates in an aqueous medium are heat-energized by priority absorption of the microwave radiation. As such, their oxidative degradation is promoted by directed localized dielectric heating. Thus the OH function may be an important key to examine and speculate on the microwave specific effect(s). By contrast, no trends were evident in the case of substrates bearing a carbonyl function, at least for the limited number of substrates examined in this study. Nonetheless, the mineralization of a substrate that bears a carboxyl function seems to be facilitated by the assistance of microwave radiation relative to a substrate that bears only a ketone function (e.g. compare the dynamics for acetic acid versus those for acetone). The microwave non-thermal effect was seen in all cases with MW factor ranging from 1.2 for 1-propanol to 4.1 for ethylene glycol.