Joint Roughness Coefficient (JRC) is one of the principal parameters used to calculate the shear strength and conducting aperture of discontinuities. Originally, 10 standard discontinuity profiles were commonly associated with JRC values. However, as the original profiles provided a rough estimation of joint roughness, many researchers attempted to investigate different methods of analysis to determine JRCs accurately. In the current study, we are proposing a new method for accurate JRC estimation. Firstly, we introduced a new roughness index (λ) using a Root Mean Square method, which considers inclination angle, amplitude of asperities and their directions. Secondly, the logistics function between λ and JRC was derived after locating the mean line, which is the line between maximum and minimum points of asperities. Finally, three formulae were developed to calculate upper-bound, suggested and lower-bound values of JRCs in relation to the variation of λ for two-dimensional discontinuity profiles. Comparison of our experimental test results with data available in the literature showed that the proposed roughness index, λ, can be used to determine JRC values accurately resulting in better estimation of discontinuity shear strength and conducting apertures. In addition, the sensitivity of JRC, shear strength and the ratio of mechanical aperture to conducting aperture (E/e) with respect to λ were also investigated. The results revealed that trends of JRC, shear strength and E/e ratios are similar. These parameters are found to be most sensitive when λ is in the range of 0.05–0.20.One of the challenging tasks in rock mechanics is to characterize discontinuities (e.g., their apertures, roughness, properties of infill, persistency) and the mechanical behavior of jointed rock masses. For example, joint roughness has a strong influence on the mechanical properties and behavior of rock joints, and needs to be characterized accurately Barton and Bandis Over the past four decades, many researchers and engineers studied rock joint roughness due to the fact that it has a critical influence on the shear strength of rock joints. The most widely used formula for estimating the shear strengths of rock joints was proposed by Barton In his comprehensive review of the shear strength of rock joints, Barton described the important influence of surface roughness of joints on the shear strength  Rock joint surface roughness can be directly measured by simple methods. The most commonly used methods are mechanical profilometry The visual comparison method proposed by Barton Myers Tse and Cruden They found that A number of researchers have applied the concept of fractal dimension (self-similar and self-affine fractal models) to rock joint surfaces  Tatone and Grasselli The most popular method for evaluation of In order to demonstrate how the maximum amplitude ( It is evident that the ratio of amplitude of asperities ( Maximum amplitude ( An arbitrary horizontal reference line passing through any points in between Mean vertical distance between reference line and the points on the roughness profile was calculated by subtracting height of the reference line from corresponding height of each point on the roughness profile in the horizontal direction. Then average of heights, An iterative process was applied to locate reference line in between maximum and minimum points in the roughness. In this study, we used 1000 iterations. Based on the iterative process we determined the minimum average height from 1000 iterations. We called the minimum average height as the mean height, Finally, mean line based on mean height was located. The average height can be calculated as The mean line can be located at any point in which Eq. Joint roughness is an anisotropic property of rock joints, i.e., it varies directionally. The results of shear box tests in forward and reverse directions are different, which indicates that the If the profile is divided into equal incremental widths in the horizontal direction, then Eq. As mentioned earlier, according to Barton׳s graphical method accounting scale effect, the relationship between The proposed roughness index ( In order to develop Eq. The ranges of In order to test the accuracy of the In order to further verify the effectiveness of the method, we tested rock joints from Jiweishan Mountain rockslide. On June 5, 2009, Jiweishan Mountain rockslide, a huge catastrophic rockslide fragment flow, took place under a mass up to 60 The size of JW02-1, JW02-2, JW03-1, JW03-2 and JW03-3 are 57.0×49.6, 62.9×53.8, 53.8×49.7, 62.6×50.1 and 54.8×46.9, respectively (size of the blocks are in mm). Because all shear tests were along the  Financial assistance from the