Clay minerals impose deleterious impacts on mineral processing. In this study, bentonite consisting primarily of montmorillonite and kaolin consisting primarily of kaolinite, were used to characterise the effect of clay minerals on copper flotation. It was found that bentonite and kaolin caused different issues in the process of flotation. Increasing the proportion of bentonite reduced the amount of froth on the top of slurry and decreased the copper recovery. On the other hand, increasing the kaolin content mainly decreased the copper grade with little effect on copper recovery and the bubbles on the top of froth became smaller with higher froth stability. The different roles of bentonite and kaolin in the flotation were associated with their unique properties. The findings in this study suggest that to mitigate the negative effect of clay minerals, different approaches might be applied according to specific problems caused by different clay minerals.In the mineral processing industry, an increasing volume of low grade ores containing different types and amounts of clay and other gangue minerals are currently being processed with the depletion of high quality ores. Different operations are characterised by the presence of different clay minerals. The Chilean porphyry copper ores operated at Disputada plants contain mainly illite and chlinochlore as clay minerals ( Most investigators attribute the negative effect of clay minerals in flotation to slime coating ( Clay minerals are phyllosilicate and non-phyllosilicate minerals comprising silica tetrahedral (T) sheets and octahedral (O) sheets joining together in certain proportions, based on which two structural units are classified for most clay minerals: 1:1 (T–O) and 2:1 (T–O–T) layer structures ( The copper–gold ore from Newcrest Telfer mine with 0.43 A bentonite sample and a kaolin sample were purchased from Sibelco Group, Australia. The bentonite sample contains 63% montmorillonite, 25% albite and 12% quartz, while the kaolin sample contains 85% kaolinite Q38 with 4% quartz and 11% muscovite. The previous study has shown that the variation in the purities of bentonite and kaolin samples does not affect the experimental interpretations ( Industrial grade potassium isoamyl xanthate (PAX) obtained from Orica, Australia Pty Ltd, was used as the collector. Plant frother DSF004, an aliphatic alcohol based mixture from Newcrest Operation, was used in laboratory tests. The pH value of slurry in flotation was controlled by analytical grade hydrated lime (Chem-Supply, Australia). Brisbane tap water was used throughout the flotation process. Telfer clean ore was crushed to a size of − The slurry was firstly conditioned for 3 Rheology measurements were conducted by an Ares rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., U.S.). All tests were conducted with a 42 When flotation commenced, the froth was measured in-situ by using VisioFroth software. The camera was set up directly above the flotation cell and connected to a laptop device. The camera recorded the froth stability every 5 The effects of various amounts of bentonite and kaolin on copper flotation are shown in In contrast to bentonite, increasing kaolin content in Telfer clean ore slightly lowered the flotation recovery, but reduced the copper grade substantially. In The increase in clay content was also associated with the increase in the slurry viscosity, in particular for bentonite. The apparent viscosity of Telfer clean ore slurry as a function of the clay concentration is shown in For bentonite, both the aggregate structure and swelling property contributed to the dramatically elevated apparent viscosity. Bentonite with a 2:1 structure is more reactive than kaolin with a 1:1 structure. The larger interlayer distance of bentonite makes it easier for water molecules to penetrate between platelets, resulting in intercrystalline and osmotic swelling of bentonite, which facilitate strong interaction and formation of aggregate structures ( With regard to kaolin, the general trends indicated that, in contrast to bentonite, increasing the kaolin content had little influence on slurry viscosity and hence on copper recovery. However, it was found that an increase in kaolin proportion correlated with a decrease in copper grade ( During the flotation process, the presence of clay minerals also influenced the froth performance. Froth structure and stability play critical roles in determining mineral flotation recovery and selectivity ( Meanwhile, the froth structure became completely different with an increase in clay concentration. Generally, with an increase in clay content, the number of large bubbles declined, resulting in the increasing number of medium bubbles in the case of bentonite. The bubble size decreased sharply in The decrease of bubble size was also related to the increase of gas residence time which is an indicator of froth stability ( The presence of bentonite and kaolin exacerbated the flotation of Telfer clean ore. Specifically, the copper recovery decreased with an increase in bentonite content in flotation because of the high slurry viscosity that reduced the frequency of bubble–particle collisions and the mobility of bubble–particle aggregates, resulting in a lower amount of froth. The copper grade was reduced with an increase in kaolin proportion. The addition of kaolin had little effect on slurry viscosity and the mobility of bubbles and particles was not affected. Due to the fine size of kaolin and the low-density aggregate structure, kaolin particles moved upwards to the froth layer reducing copper grade. The increase of kaolin content also caused severe entrainment characterised by smaller bubble size and higher froth stability. These observations are important in the industry, as different actions need to be taken in order to deal with clayey ores, according to the essence of the issue. For high bentonite content ores, the pulp viscosity should be reduced firstly to improve the flotation recovery, while for high kaolin content ores, increasing the concentrate grade is of vital importance in flotation, either by dealing with the fine size of particles or the low density of aggregates. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this study from the