 Preetanshu Pandey (Bristol-Myers Squibb) Rahul Bharadwaj (Rocky-DEM) Dr. Preetanshu Pandey obtained his Bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India. He holds M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in chemical engineering from West Virginia University. He is currently working as a Principal Scientist at the Drug Product Science and Technology Department at Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS). At BMS, he is primarily involved with developing oral solid dosage drug products. Prior to joining BMS, he worked at Schering-Plough/Merck for over 3 years on drug product development of inhalation products. He is actively involved with American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists (AAPS) and the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) organizations and has chaired symposiums and open forums in previous annual meetings. He serves as a reviewer for multiple journals and has authored over 40 peer-reviewed publications, three patent applications, and three invited book chapters. Dr. Rahul Bharadwaj is the Vice President of Engineering and Business Development at Rocky-DEM, Inc. Dr. Bharadwaj has over a decade of experience in the development, validation, and application of computational tools such as discrete element modeling (DEM), computational fluid dynamics (CFD), and finite element analyses for industries such as pharmaceutical, chemical, agriculture, mining, oil, and gas. He received his M.S. in mechanical engineering from the University of Kentucky in 2003 and his Ph.D. in mechanical engineering from Purdue University in 2006. He has since then held positions as a senior scientist at Pfizer R&D and as a consulting engineer at Jenike & Johanson, Inc. He is also an active member of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE), American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists (AAPS), and is the founder and past-chair of its Process Modeling and Simulation Focus Group. Dr. Xiaodong Chen received his Ph.D. from Ohio State University and joined Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) in 2012. He works as a Research Investigator in the Drug Product Science and Technology Department. He is developing and implementing innovative computational models to pharmaceutical processes such as powder compaction, freeze drying, and fill/finish manufacturing of late-stage candidates for both oral dosage forms and sterile/nonsterile liquid formulations. Dr. Chen has served as an invited reviewer for many international scientific journals in the area of pharmaceutical science and chemical engineering. He is currently advising two National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded projects and serving as an organizing committee member for international conferences such as American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) Annual Conference and American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists (AAPS) National Biotechnology Conference. Dr. Thomas O’Connor is currently Manufacturing Science Team Leader for the science staff within the Office of Pharmaceutical Quality. His work at the FDA is focused on regulatory research in the area of emerging technologies such as utilizing models to aid the risk assessment of continuous manufacturing processes. He is an experienced practitioner of advanced process control techniques including statistical process control and holds patents related to the development of statistical monitoring systems for industrial plants. Dr. O’Connor earned his B.S. in chemical engineering from the Cooper Union and his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Princeton University. Dr. Xiaochuan Yang is a Visiting Associate on the Science Staff Manufacturing Science team on Advanced Manufacturing Technologies. He received his B.S. degree in chemical engineering from Tsinghua University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His research is mainly focused on crystal/polymorphism, chiral compounds, various analytical tools, novel formulation methods, and advanced manufacturing science. Geng Tian joined the FDA as an ORISE fellow in the Office of Pharmaceutical Quality in 2014. He is currently working on modeling of processes for the continuous manufacturing of solid-based pharmaceutical dosage forms. Dr. Tian has worked at Virginia Commonwealth University to develop novel techniques and inhaler devices for the efficient aerosol drug delivery. Dr. Sharmista Chatterjee is currently serving as the Acting Division Director in Division of Process Assessment II, within the FDA’s Office of Process and Facilities (OPF). Chatterjee has been with the FDA since 2006. During her tenure, she served as the CMC lead for Quality by Design (QbD) in the Office of New Sau Lee is a Senior Biomedical Research Scientist and serves as the Associate Director for Science of the Office of Pharmaceutical Quality (OPQ), the Team Leader of the OPQ Botanical Review Team, and the chair of the OPQ Emerging Technology Team. Lee and his OPQ Scientific and Research Staff are leading the effort in advancing OPQ research and in manufacturing science, complex drug substances, and products containing nanomaterials, as well as in developing the regulatory policy, scientific standards, and computational and modeling tools supporting quality review and inspection in OPQ. Dr. Atul Dubey is a Senior Scientist at the Aditya Birla Science and Technology Company Pvt. Ltd., Navi Mumbai, India, and is involved in several R&D activities involving granular materials. He received his doctoral degree in mechanical engineering from Rutgers University in 2007. Since then, his interest has been in the application of mechanistic modeling methods on manufacturing processes involving granular materials. He has authored several peer-reviewed journal articles and book chapters and his work has been presented in several international conferences. His primary focus has been on developing models for the optimization of powder mixing, tablet coating, and material handling with applications in pharmaceutical, cement, mining, food, and confectionary industries. Dr. Abderrahim Michrafy has an M.Sc. and a Ph.D. in applied mathematics from the University of Bordeaux, France. He has also a Habilitation in the field of mechanical engineering. He joined the CNRS (the French National Center for Scientific Research) as a research engineer in 1989 and worked successively for three French laboratories in chemical and mechanical fields. His research is focused on the development of finite element modeling (FEM) for engineering processes. During the last 15 years. Michrafy spent in the research center of Particulate Solids and Processes of Ecole des Mines (Albi, France), he developed research work on die and rolling compaction processes for pharmaceutical and mineral applications. Dr. Antonios Zavaliangos is the A. W. Grosvenor Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University. He received his Diploma in mechanical engineering from the National Technical University of Athens in 1986, his M.S. from Columbia University in 1987, and his Ph.D. from MIT in 1992. He served as Department Head of Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel from 2007 to 2014. His research interests are in the areas of constitutive modeling of the mechanical behavior of materials, with emphasis in the processing and properties of solids made from powders. Prior work includes reactive sintering, semisolid processing, electric current aided sintering, and pharmaceutical tableting. He has consulted and lectured extensively for several industries, including Merck, J&J/Janssen, Genentech, Amgen, and Corning. Dr. John C. Cunningham joined Johnson and Johnson in 2005 after working at Merck from 1989 to 2004. He received his B.S. in 1986, M.S. in 1989, and Ph.D. in 2006 in materials science and engineering from Drexel University. Dr. Anwesha Chaudhury graduated with a Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Rutgers University in 2015. Her doctoral thesis focused on developing mechanistic mathematical models and optimization tools to describe wet granulation processes. She has also developed efficient numerical techniques for solving hyperbolic partial differential equations, e.g., population balance equations. She has worked extensively on building predictive and analytical mathematical frameworks during her research career, and is an expert in systems engineering. She has authored multiple book chapters and journal articles that are published in reputed international peer-reviewed journals. Her doctoral experience has been focused on process systems engineering, but she is currently pursuing her postdoctoral training at Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School in the Department of Systems Biology. Dr. Dana Barrasso completed her Ph.D. in chemical engineering at Rutgers University in 2015. Her doctoral research focused on modeling drug product manufacturing processes, with a particular interest in wet granulation. Her dissertation, titled, “Multiscale modeling of wet granulation processes,” involved the development, verification, and application of mechanistic models describing wet granulation processes. In this work, she developed multiscale models combining the capabilities of discrete element method (DEM) models and population balance models, and she applied these hybrid models to simulate twin screw granulation processes. Following her Ph.D., she joined Process Systems Enterprise (PSE) as a consultant on the Formulated Products team. Dr. Daniel A. Pohlman, Ph.D. is currently a Lead Engineer of Process Development at Alkermes in Waltham, MA. He received his Bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the University of Notre Dame in 2010, and worked as a research engineer in the Notre Dame Energy Center for one year before starting graduate studies. Dr. Pohlman received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Purdue University in 2015 and joined the process development team at Alkermes in 2016. Jim Litster is Professor and Head of the Chemical and Bioengineering Department at the University of Sheffield. His research area is particulate products and processes. He is an international leading expert on wet granulation with over 25 years of experience in the field. His key contributions include the development of key regime maps for granulation processes and the development of mathematical models for engineering design and scaling of granulation processes. He is the coauthor of the well-known monograph in this area ( Dr. Rohit Ramachandran is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Rutgers University. His research interests are in modeling, control, optimization, and experimental validation of pharmaceutical and chemical processes. He has published more than 60 peer-reviewed journal articles and has presented his work at numerous national and international conferences, and at invited seminars at various universities and industrial companies. His work is supported by the National Science Foundation, the U.S. FDA, Rutgers University research council, and various industrial sources. He has won several awards such as the NSF Career Award for young faculty, NIPTE Young Investigator Award and the Chemical Engineering Outstanding Faculty Award. Dr. Rajan Gupta is Principal Investigator at Celgene, Summit, New Jersey. He was formerly with GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Schering-Plough, and Cargill, where he worked in various pharmaceutical and food product development groups. He received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from City College of New York. Prior to his Ph.D., he worked at the Computer Aided Design Center at the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay, India, focusing on modeling of chemical Dr. Ecevit Bilgili is an Associate Professor and Associate Chair of the Chemical Engineering Department at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). His Particle Engineering and Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology Laboratory conducts research in designing formulations and processes for high-value-added products with enhanced functionalities. Dr. Bilgili has authored 60 peer-reviewed journal articles, three U.S. patents (one recently filed), two provisional patents, and several invention disclosures and delivered more than 70 national/international presentations and more than 20 invited talks. He is currently the leader of Project A1: Particle Formation at the Center for Structured Organic Particulate systems, a National Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering Research Center. Dr. Bilgili is one of the United States editors of the Elsevier journal Advanced Powder Technology. He also served as an elected Executive Committee Member of the Particle Technology Forum of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and the Chair of AIChE Area 3a: Particle Production and Characterization. He received the Best Ph.D. Thesis in Particle Technology Award from AIChE and NJIT’s Excellence in Teaching Award. Dr. Bilgili’s research has been funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), FDA, IFF, and several pharmaceutical companies including Boehringer-Ingelheim and Catalent. Dr. Maxx Capece graduated from the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) in 2014 with a Ph.D. in chemical engineering. His dissertation, “MultiScale Modeling of Dry Milling Processes: Influence of Mechanical Multiparticle Interactions” won NJIT’s Newark College of Engineering Outstanding Dissertation Award. His graduate work resulted in fourteen peer-reviewed journal articles and nineteen international/national presentations. Dr. Capece is now a senior scientist in the Formulation Sciences Department at AbbVie. His research is mainly focused on modeling particulate processes and understanding the relationship between material properties and pharmaceutical formulation manufacturability/performance. Dr. Afolawemi Afolabi is currently a Visiting Researcher at the Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering at Purdue University. He was recently a senior engineer and formulation process scientist at Dow Agrosciences LLC. Dr. Afolabi conducts particle science and engineering research on various liquid and dry formulations and their manufacturing processes for food, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, chemicals, and electronic materials. Dr. Afolabi has authored/coauthored ten peer-reviewed journal articles and several invention disclosures. He has also Dr. Keirnan LaMarche is a Senior Research Investigator for the Drug Product Science and Technology Department of Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS). He has worked on innovative approaches to formulation and process development for solid dosage forms at BMS since 2008. While at BMS, he has focused on developing material sparing approaches to understand the mechanisms of tablet compaction. Dr. LaMarche received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Rutgers University in 2008. While at Rutgers University, he studied the impact of electrostatics on the flow of granular materials. Dr. LaMarche also received his Master’s degree in chemical engineering from Rutgers University in 2005 and his Bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in 2002. Dr. Jasmine Rowe earned her Ph.D. in chemical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin. She is currently a senior research investigator at Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), working in the area of drug product development for both small and large molecules. She is an active member of the American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists, currently serving as the Chair of the Process Development Focus Group. Dr. Faranak Nikfar is a Research Fellow in Drug Product Science and Technology at Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS). She has over 25 years of experience in the pharmaceutical industry and she has been responsible for formulation and process development for small molecules, and evaluation of new drug delivery technologies. She has extensive experience in developing a range of dosage forms such as hard and soft gelatin capsules, film-coated single- and multilayer tablets, and powders for pediatric use. She is a registered pharmacist and earned her Ph.D. in pharmaceutics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Dr. Alberto Aliseda is Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Washington. Before joining the faculty at the University of Washington in 2006, he completed his Master’s degree and Ph.D. in aerospace engineering at the University of California, San Diego in 2000 and 2004, respectively. He also worked as a postdoctoral research associate in the Mechanical and Dr. Mary am Ende is a Research Fellow in Drug Product Design at Pfizer in Groton, Connecticut. She received her B.S. in chemical engineering from the University of Iowa in 1988 and her Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Purdue University in 1993. Dr. am Ende’s research interests are in the field of process development and use of predictive tools to streamline commercial development and scale-up through process modeling. She has published over 20 papers, five patents, and 40 presentations. Her current responsibilities include the development and use of process models and engineering technologies to support dosage form development and commercialization. Dr. am Ende is a member of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). Alfred Berchielli is a Senior Principal Scientist at Pfizer in Groton, Connecticut. He has been working at Pfizer in Drug Product Design for 21 years with a total of 26 years of experience in the pharmaceutical industry. He received his M.S. in industrial pharmacy from the Arnold and Marie Schwartz School of Pharmacy at Long Island University, New York. His areas of expertise include development and scale-up of drug delivery systems (e.g., sustained release osmotic and matrix tablets). His new product development work has focused on IR/CR combinations, application of active ingredients in tablet coatings, controlled release functional coatings, and modeling of coating processes. Dr. Pankaj Doshi is a Senior Principal Scientist in Drug Product Design at Pfizer in Groton, Connecticut. He received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Purdue University in 2003, which was followed by a postdoctoral position at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His research interest includes scale-up and modeling of pharmaceutical processes and unit operations, mathematical modeling of fluid and powder flow, polymer processing, and interfacial flows. He has published 25 papers and delivered over 30 presentations. Dr. Ben Freireich is a Research Scientist in Engineering and Process Sciences—Solids Processing at the Dow Chemical Company in Midland, Michigan. He received his B.S. in mechanical engineering from the Milwaukee School of Engineering in 2006, and his Ph.D. in mechanical engineering from Purdue University in 2010. At Dow, he has been involved in many products and processes, Dr. William (Bill) Ketterhagen is a Senior Principal Scientist in the Process Modeling and Engineering Technology Group and also leads a Materials Assessment Lab within Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development in Groton, Connecticut. In this role, he works to develop and implement predictive models and engineering solutions in support of pharmaceutical drug product development, leveraging materials characterization and small-scale experimentation to ensure models are parameterized and validated with robust experimental data. He has published 25 peer-reviewed papers and delivered nearly 50 presentations at national and international conferences. Prior to his time at Pfizer, Ketterhagen completed his B.S. in chemical engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and his Ph.D. in chemical engineering at Purdue University. Andrew Prpich is a Senior Scientist in Drug Product Design at Pfizer in Groton, Connecticut. He received his B.S. and M.S. in chemical engineering in 2005 and 2007, respectively, from the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada. Prpich’s research interests are in the field of process development, multiparticulate development for pediatric dosage forms, and tablet film coating scale-up through process modeling. His current responsibilities include leading the drug product development efforts for two pediatric multiparticulate programs. He has authored nine publications and presentations. Yu Guo received his M.Sc. degree from Tsinghua University in Beijing, China, in 2006 and his Ph.D. from the University of Birmingham, England, in 2010. He was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Florida in Gainesville, USA, from 2011 to 2014 before he worked as a research engineer at Jenike & Johanson, Inc. in Massachusetts, USA, from 2014 to 2015. Since January of 2016, Dr. Guo has been a Research Scientist in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Florida. Dr. Guo has extensive experience in the development of computational methods (discrete element method (DEM) and computational fluid dynamics (CFD)) for the modeling of complex particulate systems with nonspherical particles, flexible fibers, and fluid-particle two phases. His research work has been published in multiple high-impact scientific journals and presented in many influential conferences. Dr. Chuan-Yu (Charley) Wu obtained his B.Sc. and M.Sc. from Huazhong University of Science and Technology in China in 1994 and 1997, respectively, and his Ph.D. in finite element analysis of particle impact problems from Aston University in Birmingham, England, in 2002. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate in the Department of Engineering at the University of Leicester in England and at the Pfizer Institute for Pharmaceutical Materials Science under the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy at the University of Cambridge, England. In 2005, Wu was awarded an EPSRC Advanced Research Fellowship and joined the University of Birmingham. He was appointed as a senior lecturer in the School of Chemical Engineering at the University of Birmingham in 2008 and a professor in chemistry at the University of Surrey in 2013. He has expertise in discrete element analysis, multiscale modeling and simulations, pharmaceutical engineering, particle technology, and granular dynamics. Wu has been working closely with global pharmaceutical companies over the last 10 years and has run industrial collaborative research projects with Pfizer, AstraZeneca, and Sanofi to develop advanced numerical modeling techniques for pharmaceutical application. He is currently coordinating an EU FP7 Initial Training Network (ITN) consortium (€3.8M), IPROCOM, on the development of in silico models for roll compaction, which consists of ten full partners and four associate partners from eight EU countries. Yanxia Li received an M.S. in pharmaceutical sciences from the College of Pharmacy at the University of Illinois at Chicago and an M.S. in physical chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. Her expertise includes formulation and process development and modeling in pharmaceutical packaging. She is currently working at AbbVie, Inc. in formulation sciences, and serving as a subject matter expert on packaging evaluation and selection for drug products. Dr. Yisheng Chen earned his Ph.D. in 1994 from the College of Pharmacy at the University of Iowa. His expertise includes formulation and process development, material characterization, and modeling of moisture uptake by packaged products. Previously, Dr. Chen worked in Burroughs Wellcome and Abbott Laboratories in new and generic drug product development, and served as an expert member of both the PQRI Container Closure Working Group and the USP <671> Containers—Performance Testing Expert Panel. He is now Vice President of Novast Laboratories, responsible for product development. He has published numerous research articles, book chapters, patents, and patent applications. He is a frequent speaker at various conferences. Don Clancy graduated with his B.S. and M.S. in chemical engineering from Texas Tech University, with a focus in process control and modeling. Clancy’s first years of experience were with Mobil Oil doing thermodynamics and flowsheet modeling, Dr. Marc Horner is currently working as Lead Healthcare Specialist at ANSYS, Inc. Dr. Horner joined ANSYS after earning his Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Northwestern University in 2001. Dr. Horner began by providing support and professional services for biomedical and pharmaceutical clients, primarily in the areas of cardiovascular devices, orthopaedic devices, drug delivery, packaging, microfluidics, and fluid mixing. During this time, Dr. Horner developed numerous modeling approaches that can be used to establish the safety and efficacy of medical devices. Dr. Horner now helps coordinate ANSYS business and technology development for the healthcare sector in North America. This includes managing collaborative research projects between ANSYS and industry, academia, and the U.S. FDA. Dr. Horner is a member of the ASME V&V 40 Subcommittee (which is establishing V&V best practices for the medical device industry) and the American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists (AAPS) Process Modeling and Simulation Focus Group (which focuses on the application of physics-based engineering and mathematical modeling techniques to better understand, control, develop, and improve pharmaceutical manufacturing processes). Dr. Horner is also an Associate Editor of the ASME Journal of Verification, Validation, and Uncertainty Quantification. Shitalkumar Joshi is currently working as Senior Technology Manager at ANSYS India. He joined ANSYS in 2001 after completing his Master’s degree in chemical engineering from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Joshi has expertise in the field of fluid dynamics and multiphase flows simulations. Joshi has worked extensively with healthcare and pharmaceutical companies in the United States and India to deploy numerical modeling tools in the design process. Over the years, Joshi has developed several numerical methods and best practices aimed at advancing simulation modeling practices of bioreactors and mixers. He also has been instrumental in embedding state-of-the-art modeling methods into easy-to-use software for adoption by a wider biopharmaceutical community. Dr. Yogesh Waghmare, Ph.D., is currently Senior Scientist in the Bioprocess Development Organization at Sanofi. Dr. Waghmare has almost a decade of experience in the field of fluid dynamics and process modeling. He specializes in the application of mathematical modeling tools, including computational fluid dynamics (CFD) for process development, scale-up, and optimization of bio/pharmaceutical processes. Additionally, his research interests include bioreactor characterization and the control and role of modeling in quality by design (QbD). Dr. Waghmare received his Ph.D. in chemical engineering in 2008 from Louisiana State University, researching in the field of mass transfer and multiphase flows. Before joining Genzyme, he was a research chemical engineer at Bend Research Inc., one of the pioneers in using CFD for pharmaceutical process development. He has published several research articles and has presented at a number of conferences in his area of expertise.