The adsorption of poly(1-vinylimidazole) (PVI) on Na-bentonite from aqueous solutions was investigated as a function of some parameters such as pH, ionic strength, and temperature. The adsorption of PVI increased with increasing pH and decreasing ionic strength and temperature. The electrophoretic mobility of Na-bentonite dispersions was measured at different PVI concentrations and pH. The results have shown that Na-bentonite can be used for adsorption of PVI from aqueous solutions. The second-order kinetic equation best fit the experimental data.The use of polymers to control the stability of clay dispersions and their flocculation is of great technological importance ( Bentonite belongs to the 2:1 clay family, the basic structural unit of which is composed of two sheets of silicon atoms tetrahedrally coordinated with oxygen sandwiching a sheet of aluminum atoms octahedrally coordinated with oxygen. The isomorphous substitution of Al Due to tertiary amine groups, poly(vinylimidazole) (PVI) is a polybase and its positive charge density depends on pH as well as on the concentration and the type of electrolyte in which it is immersed. At pH 9 and above, the polymer is uncharged ( In a previous study ( Additionally, the electrical and dielectric properties of PVI‐adsorbed Na‐bentonite were investigated. Current–voltage studies show that the conductivity can be enhanced at 25 The present study addressed the factors controlling the adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite. We also studied the kinetics of adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite and the electrophoretic mobility of Na-bentonite dispersions at different PVI concentrations and pH levels. A Na-bentonite sample was obtained from Zafer Mining (Balıkesir, Turkey). The chemical constituents of Na‐bentonite were analyzed by XRF as shown in PVI was synthesized by free-radical polymerization in benzene using azobisisobutyronitrile as an initiator, according to a previously reported method ( Adsorption experiments were carried out by shaking 0.05 The pH of the dispersions was adjusted to values between 8.5 and 11.5 with NaOH or HCl solutions. Adsorption studies were carried out at 25, 35, 45, and 55 The electrophoretic mobility of the Na-bentonite particles in the presence and absence of PVI was determined with a microelectrophoresis apparatus, Zeta Meter 3.0 (Zeta Meter Inc.) ( The adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite was carried out in aqueous solutions of PVI. As in a previous study, the time required to reach stationary concentrations was approximately 8 The adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite increased with increasing pH ( The effect of ionic strength on the adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite was tested using NaCl. Increasing the ionic strength decreased the adsorption of PVI. The amounts of PVI adsorbed ( The electrophoretic mobility of Na-bentonite particles coated with different amounts of PVI at an initial pH of 8.5 is shown in The adsorption isotherms fit the Langmuir and Freundlich models. The widely used Langmuir isotherm ( The effect of temperature on adsorption is important not only because it affects the rate and extent of adsorption but also because the temperature dependence of adsorption provides information about possible adsorbate–adsorbent interactions. A study of the temperature dependence of adsorption provides valuable information about the enthalpy change during adsorption. In this study, the effect of temperature on the adsorption isotherm was investigated again by carrying out a series of isotherms at 25, 35, 45, and 55 In a previous paper (  Among many mathematical models, the first-order reaction rate model, known as the Lagergren kinetic equation, is widely employed. The pseudo-first-order equation is generally expressed as follows ( The pseudo-second-order equation is expressed as follows ( The values of This indicates the applicability of the second-order kinetic model. We also calculated The pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models cannot be used to identify the diffusion mechanism; thus, the kinetic results were analyzed using an intraparticle diffusion model ( The initial rate of intraparticle diffusion is obtained by the following equation ( The rate parameter ( The slope of the linear portion of the curve ( The multilinearity of the A comparison between the adsorption capacities of Na-bentonite and other adsorbents under similar conditions is presented in We investigated the adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite. The adsorption increased with increasing pH and decreased with increasing ionic strength and temperature. The high adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite is caused mainly by electrostatic interactions at pH 8.5, although there is a specific attractive interaction between PVI and Na-bentonite, possibly hydrogen bonding, pH values ranging from 9.5 to 11.5. The adsorption data fit the Langmuir model. The thermodynamic parameters indicate spontaneous and exothermic adsorption. The kinetic principles of adsorption of PVI onto Na-bentonite are described by a second-order kinetic model. Thus, Na-bentonite is a suitable adsorbent of PVI. This work was supported by the