Fractures of the distal humerus are uncommon injuries, constituting between 0.5% and 7% of all fractures and 30% of all elbow fractures. A number of well-described approaches are at the surgeon’s disposal for exposure of the distal humerus. These include the olecranon osteotomy, Cadaveric studies have quantified the percentage of articular surface exposed with the various surgical approaches The databases of PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register of Clinical Trials, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were searched by use of the broad search term of “distal humerus” to capture the maximum number of relevant articles, given the variety of descriptive terms applied to this fracture (ie, intra-articular, intercondylar, bicondylar, and AO type C) on December 6, 2010. There were 1796, 8, and 6 abstracts returned for these databases, respectively. The 1796 resultant citations of the PubMed search were each reviewed for relevancy to the study topic. Articles in languages other than English, animal or cadaveric studies, case reports, investigations limited exclusively to children or to the elderly, and articles unrelated to the fracture of interest were excluded immediately. Full abstracts were reviewed for 87 citations. The same exclusion criterion as listed previously was applied again. Review articles and articles that did not report functional outcomes were also excluded. The complete article was obtained for 31 abstracts for further review. Articles that did not specify the surgical approach used for an individual patient’s result and those that reported on experience with only a single approach were excluded, because these did not allow for comparison of outcomes between approaches within a study’s overall cohort. Only 4 articles met our inclusion criteria of adult human studies, in English, that allowed for comparison of the functional outcomes of ORIF of closed intra-articular distal humeral fractures by the approach used ( Four studies met our inclusion criteria. Three articles were retrospective case series comprising level IV evidence, and one was a retrospective comparative study meeting criteria for level III evidence ( Chen et al McKee at al Soon et al Athwal et al In total, functional outcomes of 133 intra-articular distal humeral fractures were reviewed: 15 were approached by triceps splitting, 35 by the Bryan-Morrey approach, 5 by the paratricipital approach, 12 with the TRAP approach, and 66 with an olecranon osteotomy. Pooling of functional outcomes among studies was possible only for ROM, because it was the only consistently reported outcome variable. Results from the study of Athwal et al This investigation aimed to examine all the existing literature regarding distal humeral fractures to determine whether there is indeed a difference in functional outcomes depending on the surgeon’s choice of approach. Unfortunately, the literature relevant to this query is very limited. A single study was identified that had been designed to look at differences in functional outcomes based on approach used. Three others reported their data in a way that some comparisons between approaches could be made, although that had not been the original goal of those studies. All were retrospective and had relatively small sample sizes. Approaches used included olecranon osteotomy, Bryan-Morrey, triceps splitting, TRAP, and paratricipital. Outcomes measures reported among the 4 studies included ROM, MEPS results, strength testing, DASH scores, and SF-36 scores. Such heterogeneity of outcome measures, selection of different pairs or groups of approaches, and variations in surgical technique as well as in postoperative management, made it very difficult to compare results between studies. Numerous functional outcome measures for the elbow exist and the relative merits of various scoring systems have been well debated in the literature, An olecranon osteotomy group was common to all studies, but only Chen et al Although all fractures included in this review were intra-articular (AO type C), only Soon et al Given the lack of a gold standard for elbow outcome measures and the lack of prospective randomized trials comparing functional outcomes of various approaches to the distal humerus, it is very difficult to recommend one surgical technique over the other. A well-designed randomized study comparing olecranon osteotomy and the Bryan-Morrey approach would help address this question. These 2 approaches would be well suited for comparison as the difference in amount of articular exposure between them is insignificant, The limitations of this investigation include those inherent to any review. The results can only be as good as the data that can be collected, which are, in this case, quite limited. The studies were all retrospective, unblinded, small, and of low-quality level III or IV evidence. Patient questionnaires are subject to recall bias, and surgeons grading their own patients for outcome studies are subject to expectation and selection bias. According to the current limited comparative data to date, there do not seem to be superior functional results associated with any one surgical approach to the distal humerus. Many factors beyond the approach used, including complexity of the fracture itself, quality of reduction, choice of implant, and rehabilitation protocol may affect outcomes, making conclusions difficult to draw. We are unable to recommend one approach over another based on functional results. Systematic review of the literature yielded 4 studies that allowed for comparison of functional outcomes for ORIF of intra-articular distal humeral fractures based on approaches used in the study cohort. No significant difference in outcomes between groups was identified in any study. The similarities in results obtained by various approaches, coupled with the weak evidence level offered by these studies, suggest that the surgeon should continue to use whichever approach is deemed most likely to achieve a good outcome. Future well-designed, randomized, controlled trials are necessary to provide evidence-based guidance for this difficult clinical question. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.