We studied 40 patients treated with locked volar plates for unstable distal radial fractures. Outcome was assessed at a mean of 59 weeks, both radiologically and functionally using the Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire, range of motion and grip strength.
                  The complication rate in our series was 48%. In 11 cases, screw penetration into the radiocarpal joint occurred as a consequence of postoperative collapse. Of these, 25% had malunited and 12.5% ruptured their extensor pollicus longus (EPL) tendon. Functionally, when compared with the contralateral side, 74% of extension, 67% of flexion, 91% of pronation and supination and 81% of grip strength were regained. The mean DASH score was 23.
                  Although locked volar plates can achieve good results in the management of unstable distal radial fractures, there remains a high major complication rate. They should be used with caution particularly in fractures with significant metaphyseal comminution.Fractures of the distal radius are the most common of all fractures seen in our accident and emergency departments. The metaphysis of the distal radius in those who sustain this fracture is often osteopenic or osteoporotic. As a consequence, a simple fall may result in metaphyseal comminution and an unstable configuration. Treatment methods vary greatly, but all aim to achieve anatomical reduction, stable fixation and early mobilisation in the fit patient. Functional outcome has been shown to correlate closely with maintenance of the reduced position until union occurs. Numerous methods of stabilisation have been used to maintain correction of the reduced position in distal radius fractures, including manipulation with percutaneous Kirschner wires, bridging and non-bridging external fixators and dorsal plating. All can be used successfully but dorsal plating has had a high incidence of soft-tissue problems, especially extensor tendon irritation or rupture. All patients with unstable distal radial fractures treated with locked volar plating at our institution from January 2004 until December 2005 were included. The method of treatment was chosen based on surgeon's preference. There were 46 cases whose initial data were recorded prospectively. Six patients were lost to follow-up (two died, two moved out of the area and two declined to attend), leaving 40 patients available for review. Of these, one patient had suffered a contralateral distal radius injury and was excluded from the functional tests, leaving 39 patients with functional results and 40 with radiological results. Of the 39 patients undergoing functional testing, three completed the Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score incorrectly, leaving 36 patients for analysis of the DASH score. Final review was undertaken at a mean of 59 weeks from injury (range: 28–106 weeks) and included clinical, functional and radiological assessment. There were 35 females and five males with a mean age of 59 years (range: 18–84 years). The most common mechanism of injury was a fall from a standing height in 32 patients (80%). Four fractures were sustained falling from a height, three in sporting injuries and three in motor vehicle accidents. Six patients had concurrent injury, one contralateral distal radius fracture, one contralateral elbow dislocation, two ankle fractures, one metatarsal fracture and one tibial fracture. The fractures were classified by the senior author using the OTA classification. There were 15 A3.2 fractures, 11 C2.1 fractures, eight C3.2 fractures, two each of A3.3 and C2.2 fractures and one each of C3.3 and C2.3 fractures. There were, therefore, 17 extra-articular fractures and 23 intra-articular fractures, although only one of these had intra-articular displacement. One fracture was Gustilo grade 1 open. The average time from injury to surgery was 10 days with a range from 0 to 25 days. Indications for surgery included re-displacement in plaster (21 patients), predicted instability A standard distal Henry approach to the distal radius was used. The Synthes Ltd, Welwyn Garden Cuty, UK 3.5 Radiological assessment included measurement of dorsal angulation, radial shortening and carpal alignment after injury, manipulation and surgery and at final review. Dorsal angulation was measured using the technique of Van der Linden and Ericson Pain at rest was evaluated using a 10-cm visual analogue scale (VAS). The range of movement was measured using a standard full-circle goniometer. Flexion, extension, pronation, supination and radial and ulnar deviation were each measured in triplicate and the mean of the three measurements was recorded to minimise intra-observer bias. Each measurement was expressed as a percentage of the opposite unaffected side. The mass grip strength was measured using a JAMAR hand dynamometer (Therapeutic Equipment Corporation, Clayton, NJ, USA). In accordance with the guidelines for the use of the JAMAR dynamometer issued by the American Society for Surgery of the Hand, The ability to perform the activities of daily living was assessed using an adaptation of a validated functional assessment scoring system. Clinical review recorded the occurrence of complications. The radiological results are detailed in At final review, there remained a mean volar tilt of 2°, but with a much wider range of 20° of volar tilt to 30° of dorsal tilt. Some radial shortening had occurred during the period of review with a mean of 1 Of the 40 fractures, six lost carpal alignment during the period of review. Ten were considered to be malunited at final review. The mean range of wrist motion at the final follow-up appointment was 43° (range: 5–75°) extension, 36° flexion (range: 5–78°), 80° (range: 35–90°) pronation, 80° (range: 10–90°) supination, 30° (range: 15–50°) ulnar deviation and 24° (range: 5–50°) radial deviation. The percentage recovery, when compared to the opposite side, is shown in Restoration of grip and pinch strength is detailed in The DASH questionnaire was completed by 36 patients and scored out of a maximum of 100 points. Three patients failed to complete the questionnaire. The mean DASH score was 23 (range: 0–70). The mean activities of daily living (ADL) score was 77% (range: 17–100%) of the non-injured side. The mean pain analogue score was 0.9 (range: 0–9) at rest and 2.9 (range: 0–10) with activities. Nineteen (48%) patients experienced a total of 29 complications. Malunion occurred in 10 cases (25%). In one case the plate broke 4 weeks postoperatively and was revised at that stage. Ten plates (25%) had been removed by the final review either for plate failure, pain or residual stiffness. There were five (12.5%) extensor pollicus longus (EPL) tendon ruptures. One of these cases also had weakness of flexor pollicis longus function. Two patients had a preoperative carpal tunnel syndrome and underwent decompression. There were no cases of infection, complex regional pain syndrome or non-union. We have demonstrated that although fixed-angle volar plating of unstable fractures of the distal radius can achieve good results in many patients, there remain a substantial proportion of patients treated with this method who experience complications. Fixed-angle devices were introduced in an attempt to overcome the problems associated with plating the distal radius through the dorsal approach, which included plate failure and extensor tendon irritation or rupture, requiring removal of the plates in a large proportion of cases. It was also suggested that the fixed-angle nature of the device would improve stability in comminuted fractures or osteoporotic bone. Tendon irritation or rupture remains a problem with locked volar plates. In this series, there was a 12.5% rate of extensor pollicis longus rupture. This compares with other reported rates of 0–38% extensor or flexor tendon irritation or rupture with the use of locked plates. The cause of tendon injury with locked plating varies with extensor or flexor involvement. Too distal placement of the plate distal to the ‘watershed’ has been implicated in flexor tendon damage. Prominent screw tips distally have been cited as a cause of extensor tendon injury. In a clinical and cadaveric study, Fracture reduction was generally very satisfactory with palmar tilt being restored postoperatively in most of our cases. However, some postoperative fracture collapse occurred in varying degrees in 13 of our 40 cases allowing screw penetration of the radiocarpal joint in 11. Loss of correction has been reported by a number of authors in varying proportions from 0% to 57% of cases ( We found two mechanisms of collapse: angular and axial shortening. It has been suggested that this can be prevented by placing the distal screws close to the subchondral bone of the distal fragment. Functional outcomes are comparable to other methods of fixation with the exception of flexion and extension, which only reached 67% and 74% of the opposite side, respectively, by a mean of 11 months after surgery. This contrasts with values of 87% and 86% for bridging and non-bridging external fixation at 1 year. The DASH and functional outcome scores demonstrate that at this time period full subjective and objective recovery is not complete. These scores may improve with a longer review period. This study is limited by its retrospective design, which may have introduced selection bias with the worse fractures being selected for locked plating and variation in outcomes because of variation in surgeons’ experience and length of follow-up. We believe that selection bias is minimal as the demographic profile of the patients included is very similar to the overall demographic profile for fractures of the distal radius in our unit. Variation in surgeons’ experience was minimised by restricting the technique to consultants and trained clinical fellows. We have demonstrated that although fixed-angle volar plating of unstable fractures of the distal radius can achieve good results in many patients, there remain a substantial proportion of patients treated with this method who experience significant complications. In particular, the technique should be used with caution in patients with large metaphyseal defects when augmentation of the plate with bone cement or bone graft should be considered. Careful assessment of screw length and placement of the plate is necessary to reduce tendon irritation or rupture. There are no conflicts of interest in existence by any of the authors. We thank the