In this study, efficient dechlorination and decomposition of chloroform (CF) induced by glow discharge plasma (GDP) in contact with a sodium sulfate solution was investigated. Intermediate byproducts were determined by ionic chromatography and headspace gas chromatography, respectively. Results showed that CF can be effectively dechlorinated and decomposed under the action of GDP. Both removal and dechlorination of CF increased with increasing pH and with addition of hydroxyl radical scavengers to the solution. Addition of H2O2 to the solution slightly decreased the CF removal. Formic acid, oxalic acid and dichloromethane were determined as the major intermediate byproducts. Final products were carbon dioxide and hydrochloric acid. Hydrated electrons were the most likely active species responsible for initiation of the dechlorination, and hydroxyl radicals may be the ones for the oxidation of the organic intermediate byproducts. Hydrolyses of the chloromethyl radicals contributed much in the mineralization of the organic chlorine. Reaction mechanism was proposed based on the dechlorination kinetics and the distribution of intermediate byproducts.Chloroform (HCCl CF is toxic to microbes and is not susceptible to metabolic transformations Glow discharge plasma (GDP) in aqueous solution is also called contact glow discharge electrolysis (CGDE) Previous studies of GDP were mainly focused on the use of Experimental assembly consisted of a DC high-voltage power source and a cylindrical glass reactor. The reactor is shown in The anode was a pointed Pt wire sealed into a glass tube. The cathode was a stainless steel plate placed in another glass tube and separated from the anodic compartment by a sintered glass frit of medium porosity. The reaction vessel was coated by a water jacket, where temperature of the solution in the reactor was maintained at 298 During the discharge, solution in the reactor was stirred persistently with a stirring bar and aliquots were periodically sampled out for analyses. Organic acids and chloride ion (Cl Dechlorination and decomposition of CF proceeded smoothly when the solution containing CF was exposed to GDP. Typical curves for the concentration variations of CF, TOC and Cl As indicated from As shown in  It can be observed from pH often played an important role in water and wastewater treatment. In order to better elucidate the role of pH in CF mineralization, pH variations under different initial pH values (pH As shown in As presented in In GDP of aqueous solutions, liquid water molecules were decomposed by the incoming positive ions (H H When CF is present in the solution, the resulting active species react with CF via the following reactions According to Reactions As shown by Reaction In basic conditions, In basic media, the concentration of In this section, methanol and isopropanol were chosen as the typical Removal of CF and generation of Cl As indicated in In the presence of methanol or isopropanol, Consequently, isopropanol is a more efficient accelerator than methanol in the CF removal and its dechlorination. As also shown in It can be observed from In order to understand the mineralization mechanism of CF, GC and IC were used to monitor the intermediate byproducts. As shown in It should be noted that the direct hydrolysis of OA was yielded by the combination of the In practice, when FA was used as a starting material, OA was also yielded. This means that OA might result from FA via oxidation by DCM was formed as a result of combination reaction between Reaction C And :CCl By comparing The concentration of oxygen in air-saturated solutions is approximately 0.25 It should be noted that hexachloroethane (C No chloromethane (CH When DCM and C Based on the above observations, the probable reaction mechanism for CF dechlorination and decomposition by GDP is proposed in It can be seen from Energy efficiency is an important indicator for comparing different techniques and for evaluating its potential industrial applications. In this study, the energy efficiency for CF removal ( It can be seen that the energy efficiency of CF removal by GDP is in the same order of magnitude to that of ultrasonic oxidation and much higher that those of TiO CF can be efficiently dechlorinated and decomposed by GDP. The removal and the dechlorination of CF increased with increasing pH (from 2.0 to 11.0) and with addition of hydroxyl radical scavengers. Formic acid, oxalic acid and dichloromethane were the major intermediate byproducts. These byproducts can be fully mineralized to carbon dioxide and hydrochloric acid. Hydrated electrons were the main active species for initiation of the reaction, and This work was supported by the