Mining companies rely on chemical analysis methods to determine concentrations of gold in mineral ore samples. As gold is often mined commercially at concentrations around 1 part-per-million, it is necessary for any analysis method to provide good sensitivity as well as high absolute accuracy. We describe work to improve both the sensitivity and accuracy of the gamma activation analysis (GAA) method for gold. We present analysis results for several suites of ore samples and discuss the design of a GAA facility designed to replace conventional chemical assay in industrial applications.Accurate analysis of elemental grade in mineral ores is essential throughout the mining and mineral processing value chain. From the initial exploration for new deposits and delineation of their extent through to mining, metal extraction and final product sales, mining companies need to know the grade of the materials that they are handling. Gold is one of the most important global metals, with mine production in 2015 valued at approximately $US100 billion. Quantitative analysis of gold is complicated by the fact that it is mined commercially at very low concentrations (parts-per-million or ppm), and that naturally occurring deposits are often extremely heterogeneous. The most widely used analysis technique, fire assay, is a complex chemical process that involves melting small quantities of pulverised ore with lead oxide and other reagents, remelting of the resulting lead ‘button’ in a porous cupel to extract a tiny gold prill, dissolution of the prill in acid, and analysis of the resultant solution using atomic absorption spectroscopy. The method is time consuming, highly labour intensive and requires very careful quality control procedures to maintain accuracy ( A large gold mine may generate 150–200,000 samples per year for analysis, and a large central laboratory may conduct one million or more assays per annum. Any competing process must be capable of handling hundreds or thousands of samples per day, which implies that no individual step in the analysis chain can take longer than a few minutes. Sample masses of at least a few hundred grams are preferred to minimise the effects of ore inhomogeneity. Gold can be assayed with high sensitivity using conventional neutron activation analysis (NAA), but the relatively long half-life of the Photonuclear reactions offer an alternative approach; these use an X-ray or gamma-ray source to produce specific radioisotopes from target elements. Both the incident beam and outgoing gamma-ray emissions from activated nuclei are highly penetrating, meaning that large samples can be measured. With appropriate choice of incident energy and irradiation and cooling times, the method can also be made highly selective. Compact, high-energy X-ray sources based around Bremsstrahlung emission from an electron beam are widely used in both medicine and industry. The long half-lives of the The importance of the In this paper, we address the factors that limit both sensitivity and accuracy. We report on results from a series of experiments where we have progressively improved both irradiation and detection apparatus to decrease analysis errors. In particular, we describe the development of the bromine reference foil method and show how this can be used to correct for fluctuations in X-ray source output, sample matrix composition and detector dead-time. We report results for measurements carried out on several large sample suites, including a wide variety of naturally occurring and processed mineral ores. In particular, measurements performed on both commercial and specially prepared standard reference materials provide the best indication of the intrinsic performance of the GAA method. The The desired average concentration, The actual number of detected decay gamma-rays in any particular measurement will be drawn from a Poisson distribution with mean value Systematic factors that affect the accuracy of the gold measurement can also be deduced directly from Eq. The terms appearing outside of the integrals are either well known or can be straightforwardly measured with high accuracy. The half-life of the Systematic errors in the determination of the gold concentration are then dominated by the photon flux and detection probability terms appearing in Eq. Variations in the output of the X-ray source due to changes in current of the electron beam lead to a direct scaling of the photon flux. Variations in the energy of the electron beam will affect both the scaling and the energy spectrum of the photon flux. If the product of the photon flux and gamma-ray detection probability terms is not approximately constant with respect to position, then the inferred gold concentration will depend on the spatial distribution of gold within the sample. Corrections need to be made if the incident photon flux or the gamma-ray detection probability vary as a function of the sample's composition or physical form. These may take the form of ‘matrix corrections’, if due to the bulk composition of the sample, or ‘particle size corrections’ if self-attenuation in large gold nuggets is important. Variations in detection efficiency, for example due to changes in counting dead-time, will directly affect the relationship between the number of detected gamma-rays and gold concentration. A commercial analysis system processing large numbers of samples needs to be designed to either intrinsically minimise or automatically correct for these potential sources of error. Efficient excitation of the isomeric state in The LINAC is capable of producing an electron beam with a peak energy adjustable over the range of approximately 6.5–13  The detector system comprises one or two broad energy germanium (BEGe) detectors of 80 The detectors are read out using a 4-input digital shaping amplifier and multi-channel analyser manufactured by CEAN (model N6781). All data are recorded in list-mode format, with the energy and time-stamp of every arriving gamma-ray individually recorded. Samples were contained in transparent plastic screw-top jars with diameter 80 The entire apparatus is operated in a concrete bunker with a maze entrance to reduce radiation levels for operators to below 1 In this section we discuss how the potential sources of systematic error identified in The use of a high-power industrial LINAC as the activation source presents some challenges. These machines are designed to deliver high dose-rates, but the electron energy spectrum is fairly broad and subject to temporal fluctuations. These variations lead to changes in both the magnitude and energy spectrum of the photon flux inside the sample, which in turn affect the relationship between gold concentration and the detected gamma-ray signal. In principle, the electron beam current incident of the convertor target can be measured directly. Real-time measurement of the electron energy distribution is more difficult however. The dose rate could be measured using an air-chamber dosimeter. However, whilst this method can be used to accurately correct for changes in beam current, the variation in dose output with changes in beam energy will in general not match the variation in the gold activation rate. In conventional neutron activation analysis, correction for changes in reactor flux using simultaneous irradiation of a reference material has been in use for more than 50 years ( We have explored the possibility of applying this method for GAA of gold. The ideal reference element should meet the following requirements: Its activation rate should vary with changes in LINAC electron beam energy in a similar way to gold; in practice this restricts the choice of reference element to one with an isomeric excitation reaction. Any activation products should not emit any gamma-ray rays with energy above that of the gold isomer (279 The half-life of the isomeric activation product should be short enough to allow the same reference material to be reused, and ideally be similar to that of the gold isomer. The elements should rarely occur at significant levels in gold ores.  To determine the relative activation rates of some of these isomers, a sample was prepared containing gold foil and small potassium bromide and zinc selenide optical windows. An erbium sample was not available at the time of these measurements. The sample was alternately irradiated and measured; the peak electron beam energy of the LINAC was varied between runs over the range 6.75–9 The activation rates of the In practice, the reference material stabilisation approach can be implemented by attaching a bromine-containing reference material to the outer surface of the sample jar during the irradiation and measurement processes. Cross-sections for isomeric excitation reactions are poorly known. Excitation proceeds through resonant absorption of an incident photon, with cross-section For excitation with a broad-energy incident photon beam, the most important quantity is the integrated cross-section, given by: The long half-life of the isomeric state itself implies a very narrow width; together with the large spin difference from the ground state, this means that direct excitation of the isomeric state is negligible. The activation is then thought to proceed through excitation and subsequent relaxation of one or more so-called gateway levels, whose properties ensure that they couple reasonably strongly to both the ground and isomeric states. It is commonly assumed ( This conclusion, if correct, would have important practical consequences for a GAA system for gold assay. For such broad levels, Doppler broadening due to thermal motion of the nucleus would have a negligible effect on the resonant excitation cross-section. From Eq. To evaluate this possibility, we measured the self-attenuation cross-section for excitation of the We carried out a series of measurements to determine the activation rate of a small gold foil that was shielded from the direct photon beam from the LINAC by gold sheets of various thicknesses. We find an effective cross-section that is consistent with that expected from atomic processes alone, and place a conservative upper limit of 1 barn on the cross-section of any additional photonuclear interactions. From this null result, we infer that contrary to the commonly assumed model, a very large number of relatively weak (narrow) gateway levels must collectively contribute to the isomeric activation process. This finding is consistent with results reported by For simplicity, we model the excitation cross-sections for the An important characteristic of any analytical method intended for use on unprepared samples is that it should be insensitive to the physical form of the material being assayed. The highly penetrating nature of both the incident X-rays and resultant isomer decay gamma-rays in ore means that the GAA method is largely insensitive to the macroscopic particle size of the sample. However, natural deposits are often highly heterogeneous, with gold present in the form of nuggets or flakes, and the high density of the metal makes it strongly self-shielding to X-rays and gamma-rays. The mean free path (MFP) of the 279 An EGSnrc ( As expected, particle size effects become significant once the particle size approaches the MFP value. The loss of signal reaches 10% for nuggets of diameter 375 In a 500 A second desirable characteristic of any analytical method is that results for the element of interest should not depend on the bulk composition of the sample. For example, a sample with a highly absorbing matrix that reduces the flux of the incident X-ray beam, or strongly attenuates the isomer decay gamma-rays, will reduce the intensity of the gold signal. If uncorrected, this would be interpreted as a lower apparent gold grade. To explore this effect, a detailed Monte Carlo simulation of the irradiation and measurement geometry was performed using the condensed single-history method described by The simulation was repeated for 20 different sample compositions and densities: 7 silicate samples (composition of 95% SiO 8 copper concentrate samples (composition of 90% CuFeS 4 pure quartz samples (composition 100% SiO 1 pure carbon sample (composition 100% C) with a density of 0.72 The sample compositions and densities were chosen to approximate the suites of real materials which are described below. For each of the 20 simulations, two quantities were calculated. The first is the uncorrected The top plots in The lower plots in The implication of this analysis is that normalising the gold gamma-ray count rate using the gamma-ray emission rate from the bromine reference not only corrects for variations in the LINAC output, but that it also reduces errors due to changes in the sample composition to a negligible level. The correction needed to relate the gamma-ray count rate to gold content depends only on the sample mass and not its composition, at least for the broad range of sample matrices considered here. A large suite of test samples was prepared to experimentally evaluate the performance of the GAA system. These included: A wide range of materials sourced from around Australia and prepared for us by a company that specialises in the manufacture of fire-assay standards. These samples included a wide range of matrices, including silicate ores, copper-gold ores and concentrates, and various polymetallic ores Commercially purchased fire-assay standards, comprising finely pulverised and homogenised materials with gold contents in the range 0–35 A variety of gold-bearing copper concentrates from various Australian mining operations. These materials, which are produced during the initial stages of refining copper and gold from ore, contain very high levels of copper minerals (approximately 90% chalcopyrite, CuFeS Dried carbon pulp samples, produced during leaching of gold from ore. These contain gold levels up to several thousand ppm. All samples were packed brimful into commercially available, cylindrical PVC containers fitted with screw-top lids. Samples were left in these containers throughout the irradiation and measurement process. We found that the transparent containers gradually darkened and became opaque on repeated radiation exposure, although their structural integrity was unaffected even at exposures up to several hundred thousand Sv. Samples were measured for a number of cycles, each comprising 20 The list-mode data from the CAEN multi-channel analyser were initially processed to identify events in either of the BEGe detectors that had no corresponding coincident energy deposition in the other BEGe detector, or in either of the plastic scintillator veto detectors. Rejecting events with coincident energy deposition in two or more detectors helps to reduce background under the 279 A dead-time correction was performed next. This is complicated by the fact that the total count-rate, which is dominated by gamma-rays from the The full-energy peaks of the The measured areas of the gold and bromine peaks are then corrected for any variations in the irradiation, cooling and measurement times. The corrected gold peak area is then normalised by dividing by the bromine peak area. As noted in the previous section, this corrects for any variation in the LINAC power or energy, and for any residual small effects of gross sample composition. In the last step, the effect of sample mass is corrected using the results of the Monte Carlo simulation described in The output of this process is a number which is directly proportional to the mass of gold present in the sample. From this, the gold concentration can be determined straightforwardly by dividing by the sample mass. The constant of proportionality cannot be easily calculated, as it depends on a number of factors including the mass of bromine in the reference material and the activation cross-sections of both gold and bromine, which are not accurately known. Rather, we determine its value empirically using commercially-purchased fire-assay reference samples of accurately known gold content. The value of the constant of proportionality is determined by minimising the root-mean square deviation between the GAA-determined and reported gold concentrations for a suite of samples with grades in the range 0–35 More than 350 measurements were performed on approximately 200 different samples. Unless noted otherwise, in this section we present results from our last round of data-taking using the double BEGe and plastic-scintillator veto detector configuration. In this round, approximately 130 separate samples were measured. We find that after application of the bromine standard correction described in the previous section, measurement repeatability is dominated by the statistical fitting error of the gold peak-area determination. This error can be calculated straightforwardly for an individual sample during the fitting process, and provides an immediate indication of the uncertainty of the gold concentration determination.  The measurement sensitivity at very low concentrations is dominated by background, mostly arising from photofission decay products from naturally occurring uranium and thorium (see The introduction of the plastic-scintillator anti-coincidence system significantly improves performance at low gold levels. The zero-gold repeatability error obtained in previous data taking rounds using the single BEGe detector system with no anti-coincidence detectors is around 35–40  The different symbols in For lower-grade samples with gold contents below 3 At higher grades, the contribution of systematic error components becomes increasingly important. Although the agreement for most samples is very good, we observe a significant number (12%) of ‘outliers’, defined as those samples where the GAA and reported laboratory grades differ by more than 5%. For non-outliers, the root-mean square deviation between GAA and laboratory grades is 2.1% relative, making a 5% cut-off equivalent to about 2.5 standard-deviations; less than one sample in the full set of 93 should show such a large discrepancy if the GAA and laboratory errors were normally distributed. We have systematically investigated these outlying samples, including conducting repeat GAA measurements, but have been unable to find any obvious flaws in our results or analysis. In terms of sample mass and matrix composition, the samples are entirely typical and similar to other materials in the calibration suite. We note that materials from the gold/copper concentrate and commercial reference suites do not show any outliers. We tentatively assign the error to the reported laboratory gold grades for the outlier samples, and are working with the sample manufacturer to resolve this question. We are currently designing a GAA system to provide commercial gold analysis for the Australian mining industry; it is anticipated that this facility will be operational by late-2017. It will include a custom-built LINAC X-ray source and gamma-ray detector system, and a fully automated robotic sample management system capable of high throughput rates. Compared to the prototype facility used to obtain the results described above, this system will include several improvements: An increase in LINAC power from 4.5 to 8 Optimised sample container geometry to improve both irradiation and detection efficiency. Optimised irradiation geometry to maximise both the intensity and the uniformity of the X-ray irradiation throughout the volume of the sample. An improved detector system, with a full 4π anti-coincidence veto system. Improved shielding around the LINAC, to allow simultaneous irradiation and measurement of separate samples. The computer model described in Compared to the experimental trial set-up, the optimum configuration increases the number of detected gold counts per irradiation/measurement cycle approximately 6-fold. The number of cycles can then be reduced from 10 to 2, whilst still increasing the number of detected gold counts by 25–30%. The photofission induced background increases only by a factor of 1.6 per cycle, due to improved efficiency of the anti-coincidence detector. Consequently, with the reduction in the number of cycles, the signal-to-background ratio improves 3-fold. These improvements have most effect at low gold concentrations. The projected 3-sigma detection limit is more than halved to 30–35 The reduction in the number of measurement cycles and the ability to irradiate and measure different samples at the same time leads to a projected throughput of 80 samples per hour. At the cost of reduced throughput, the detection limit and measurement precision at low gold concentrations can be further improved by measuring samples for an increased number of cycles. Gamma activation analysis (GAA) has been recognised previously as a potential replacement for conventional chemical assay for the rapid determination of gold in ore samples. However, limited absolute accuracy and sensitivity at gold concentrations below one part-per-million (ppm) have meant that the GAA technique has found limited commercial application. We have systematically explored the factors limiting performance. The ‘reference foil’ method, where an appropriately chosen reference material is irradiated and measured in tandem with a sample, significantly improves accuracy by correcting for variations in X-ray source energy and power, as well as sample matrix and detector dead-time. The use of an optimised irradiation geometry, together with a high-efficiency, high-resolution gamma-ray detection system including anti-coincidence veto rejection, increases sensitivity and improves the signal-to-background ratio. A 3 standard-deviation detection limit of 60–75 parts-per-billion (ppb) has been demonstrated experimentally, with a measurement accuracy of around 2.5% relative at a gold concentration of 3 Detailed computer modelling has been used to evaluate the performance of a full-scale commercial GAA system. This suggests that a detection limit of 30–35 The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Mevex Corporation for making the X-ray LINAC source available to us, and generously hosting us at their Ottawa facility for several trials. The assistance of David Hepworth, David Brown and Kevin Austin was particularly appreciated. We are also grateful for the ongoing work of Adrian Knowles in preparing standards and other test materials.