The cryogenic grinding (cryo-grinding) technique is widely used to obtain the best quality of spice powders. Discrete Element Method (DEM) is one of the advanced numerical methods used to study the mechanical behavior of granular food in complex food processes. In this investigation, DEM simulation was utilized to study the flow characteristics of black pepper seeds in a cryo-grinding system: a precooler and a grinder such as a hammer mill. The calibration test was used to select the complete set of DEM input parameters. Moreover, some of the parameters were measured experimentally. The validity of calibrated set of input parameters was further examined in the cryo-grinding system. The observed qualitative and quantitative results of numerical and experimental approaches were in good agreement. It can be concluded that the calibrated DEM input parameters can be adequately used in the study of complex particle mechanics in the cryo-grinding system. Moreover, the flow behavior and flow pattern in the geometries were visualized with a better insight; those are difficult to understand and visualize by other available techniques.normal component of elastic force acting on particle normal component of damping force acting on particle tangential component of elastic force acting on particle tangential component of damping force acting on particle gravity force acting on particle torque acting on particle rolling friction torque acting on particle normal contact overlap at contact of particle tangential contact overlap at contact of particle normal component of relative velocity acting on particle tangential component of relative velocity acting on particle coefficient of rolling friction, dimensionless particle-particle coefficient of rolling friction, dimensionless particle-wall coefficient of rolling friction, dimensionless particle-wall (acrylic) coefficient of rolling friction, dimensionless particle-wall (stainless steel) coefficient of rolling friction, dimensionless coefficient of static friction, dimensionless particle-particle coefficient of static friction, dimensionless particle-wall coefficient of static friction, dimensionless particle-wall (acrylic) coefficient of static friction, dimensionless particle-wall (stainless steel) coefficient of static friction, dimensionless acrylic damping coefficients in the normal direction, N s/m damping coefficients in the tangential direction, N s/m discrete element method particle diameter, m coefficient of restitution, dimensionless elastic modulus of particle elastic modulus of particle elastic modulus of particle/particle Young's modulus, Pa particle-particle coefficient of restitution, dimensionless particle-wall coefficient of restitution, dimensionless particle-wall (acrylic) coefficient of restitution, dimensionless particle-wall (stainless steel) coefficient of restitution, dimensionless force acting on particle acrylic wall shear modulus, Pa particle shear modulus, Pa stainless steel wall shear modulus, Pa moment of inertia of particle moment of inertia of particle number of particles in contact with particle mass of particle mass of particle radius of particle radius of particle secant stiffness in the normal direction, N/m stainless steel tangential stiffness in tangential direction, N/m Rayleigh time step, s translational velocity of particle translational velocity of particle dissipative term in inelastic deformation of the particles, dimensionless numerical time step, s acrylic wall Poisson's ratio, dimensionless Poission's ratio of particle Poission's ratio of particle particle Poisson's ratio, dimensionless stainless steel wall Poisson's ratio, dimensionless acrylic wall density, kg/m particle density/true density of the particle, kg/m stainless steel wall density, kg/m rotational velocity of particle rotational velocity of particle Black pepper ( The knowledge of the dynamic behavior (macroscopic and microscopic) of a granular system like trajectories, velocities, stress, and transition forces acting on individual particles or between particle-particle or particle-surrounding (wall/fluid) can be helpful in improving the design and operation of the system/machine ( The particulate materials are commonly utilized in food, agriculture, pharmaceutical, energy, powder metallurgy, chemical, mining, cement, and mineral processing industries. Consequently, DEM has been used by many researchers to study a broad variety of granular processes, involving non-food and food granular materials (cereals, seeds, fruits, and grains). Typical processes or applications used are mixing/segregation ( The insight of the microscopic mechanisms concerning flow dynamics of black pepper seeds in the cryo-grinding system may help to improve its design aspects. Even though DEM has been widely used to study different particulate systems as discussed in Section Evaluation of the flow of black pepper in a cryo-grinding system involves calculation of forces and torques on the black pepper particles and material of cryo-grinder as well as individual follow-up of particle trajectories all around the granular system. To accomplish this modeling work, DEM was selected that required accurate input parameters. Examination of the black pepper properties as input parameters of DEM was the initial step of this study. Some of the properties were measured by the experimentations while many parameters were difficult to determine by experiments; hence, the widely accepted calibration approach was chosen to select a complete set of DEM input parameters. Moreover, the calibrated set of input parameters was tested in the cryo-grinding system as discussed in Section Due to practical constraints under cryogenic conditions like breakage of acrylic geometry (brittleness is very high at a lower temperature) and unclear/hazy photograph of the particle mechanics (flow) owing to the presence of gaseous nitrogen (obtained from vaporization of liquid nitrogen when came in contact with the particles) in the geometries. The study was performed under ambient condition (30 ± 1 °C) assuming that the temperature has a non-significant effect on DEM input parameters ( Black pepper (variety The explicit numerical method is the foundation of DEM, in which the granular system is modeled as an assembly of a finite number of singular discrete elements interacting (particle-particle or particle-wall or particle-fluid) by means of contact (tangential and normal) and non-contact forces (van der Waals, electrostatic, and liquid bridge). Each element can move transitionally and rotationally (based on force and torque acting on it), can be described by Newton's second law of motion ( The inter-particle forces are totaled over the The Hertz-Mindlin contact model is theoretically more accurate due to its effectiveness in calculating the forces as compared to those of other models ( Apart from the torques and forces originated from the neighboring element and vicinal fluid, the motion of the element is also affected by the particles and fluid far away from the propagation of distribution wave ( The accuracy and reliability of DEM modeling are strongly dependent on the input parameters (particle/interacting elements properties) and chosen contact model. However, the input parameters are difficult to obtain in real practice. There are two widely accepted approaches available in the literature to find the DEM simulation parameters: (A) experimental approach and (B) calibration approach. In (A) experimental approach: the input parameters are directly measured by experimentations by following the systematic methodologies. However, most of the input parameters are difficult to determine by the experimental approach that depends on size and shape of the particle ( The particle/true density of the particle is the ratio of its mass to its volume. Automatic gas pycnometer (Model ULTRAPYC 1200e, Quantachrome Instruments, Boynton Beach, USA) equipped with a standard sample cell of a nominal volume of 10 cm Young's modulus or elastic modulus ( The coefficient of friction is used to specify the resistance between two bodies sliding over each other and defined by the relationship between the tangential force (occurs between sliding elements) and normal force (keeps both the elements in contact). The particle-wall coefficient of static friction ( Based on the literary knowledge ( The values of the material properties of SS and AC sheets were taken from the earlier works ( The Hertz-Mindlin contact model was selected in the EDEM software (EDEM 2.7.1 Academic Version, DEM Solutions Ltd., Edinburgh, UK) to perform the equivalent DEM simulations. The EDEM software was run on a workstation with quad-core Intel Xenon CPU E5606 (processor) with a processing speed of 2.13 GHz and 16 GB DDR3 RAM. The initial set of DEM input parameters used for the simulation is shown in To measure the angle of repose the slice orientation was set in X direction with 50 mm slice depth (measurements were made close to the center), then the protector tool was selected and direction of the view was set accordingly (+X/−X direction). The protector has three commands which were used to link the particles at (A) start: particle at the lower end/corner of the box, (B) axis: particle at the end of horizontal axis, and (C) end: particle at the top side of retaining wall to measure the angle. Proper care was taken during the measurement such that the slant surface between particles at horizontal axis and top of retaining wall should touch the surface of particles in between them as shown in The results of physical experimentations were compared with the results of DEM simulation to find the most accurate set of parameters ( The calibrated DEM input parameters (set/run 4 for SS in The screw conveyor type precooler designed for cooling the spices before grinding was used for the study of flow properties of black pepper seeds via., DEM simulations. Details of the precooler design are discussed elsewhere ( The Hertz-Mindlin contact model was used to perform the equivalent DEM simulation using the calibrated set of input parameters in EDEM software. DEM simulation started with the filling of black pepper seeds (4600 particles) at a rate of 1.5 kg/h under gravity from the factory plate (virtual plate placed at the feed section of the hopper) and after 100 s simulation time, the screw started rotating at 5 rpm (similar conditions as that of physical experiment). Further, the particle flow pattern (+X, +Y and −Z view) and dynamic angle of repose (+Y view) were analyzed at the feed, mid and discharge sections of the precooler. Moreover, the dynamic angle of repose was measured with an error of 0.3° and compared with the equivalent physical experimental work to test the effectiveness of calibrated DEM input parameters. The calibrated DEM input parameters were also examined by studying the flow characteristics of black pepper seeds in the hammer mill that was used for cryo-grinding of spices ( The flow of black pepper seeds in the hammer mill was examined by placing blank sieve of SS and a front plate made of AC sheet (both of 5 mm thickness) in the SS casing ( The Hertz-Mindlin contact model was used to perform the equivalent DEM simulations using the calibrated set of input parameters in EDEM software. For simulation 6900 seeds: (a) 0.90 m/s and (b) 2.58 m/s peripheral speed of the rotor, separately, were used to study the particle mechanics in the mill for a simulation time of 11 s. The seeds were created and allowed to settle under gravity for initial 5 s. The rotor had started rotating after 5 s of simulation and continued for the next 6 s. Finally, physical experimental results were compared quantitatively (dynamic angle of repose) as well as qualitatively (snapshots) with those obtained from the simulations of DEM. Further, the dynamic angle of repose was analyzed for the similar position of hammers in the mill just after the rotor started rotating (seeds hit the teeth in the casing). The simulated outcomes were analyzed using statistical software SPSS Statistics (Version 20.0, IBM Corporation, Armonk, USA). The differences in the mean values of angle of repose and height of seed retaining the wall were evaluated for statistical significance of observed differences among the average values using analysis of variance with Duncan's multiple range test. Further, the differences in the means of the outcomes between the groups were assigned a level of significance (a–d and u–y) and expressed to be significant if DEM simulation has quantified the influence of DEM input parameters on the flow characteristics of black pepper seeds. Applicability of the calibrated set of input parameters is discussed in the cryo-grinding system as appended below. Typically, all the variables listed in The qualitative (snapshots: shape of granular medium) and quantitative (angle of repose: +X and −X view) outcomes from the successive sets of parameters (runs) for SS ( Applicability of the calibrated sets of DEM input parameters in the precooler is discussed in this section. The design developed for cooling the spices showed that the length of liquid nitrogen distributor (placed on the top of the barrel and at the center of Y axis) from center of the feed hopper to the end point of the distributor was 210 mm ( Applicability of the calibrated sets of DEM input parameters in the hammer mill is discussed in this section. Further, it can be observed from In this study, black pepper seeds were used as the particulate material, and the set of calibrated DEM input parameters for SS and AC sheets were obtained by the calibration test. Further, the efforts of calibration were reduced by obtaining the values of some measurable input parameters by experimentations. The coefficient of rolling friction offered a significant impact on the flow characteristics of the black pepper seeds in different geometries. Black pepper seeds offered the highest resistance to the motion in the discharge section of the precooler. Further, the hammer mill was also examined for the flow pattern at two different rotor speeds; the seeds seemed to offer a higher resistance to the rotary motion at the higher speed. Also, the flow pattern in mill showed that at the higher speed a significant number of seeds were impacting at the teeth present at the periphery of the hammer mill casing. The results presented in this work revealed that qualitative (flow pattern) and quantitative (dynamic angle of repose) analysis of DEM simulations with the experimental outcomes were in good agreement; however, some discrepancies were also observed at 0.90 m/s peripheral speed of the rotor. Hence, DEM simulations can be efficiently used to understand the flow and particle characteristics of the food granules in complex particulate systems. In future, with the knowledge of the calibrated set of DEM input parameters more advanced and complicated studies of particle breakage, granule heat transfer, and fluid-particle interaction can be performed at the laboratory and industrial scale. The authors would like to acknowledge K. CharithKumar (Assistant Professor, Agricultural College, Aswaraopet, PJTS Agriculture University, India) and Gopal Carpenter (Research Scholar, Agricultural and Food Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India) for providing valuable suggestions in conducting this study. We also thank the