Variation between soils in the response to temperature of net nitrogen (N) mineralization and nitrification was investigated in laboratory incubations. The soils, which were sampled from coniferous forests of different regional climates of western Europe, were mixed with 15N-labeled wheat straw and incubated at 4, 10, 16, 23 and 30°C and constant moisture conditions. The accumulation in soil of the extractable NH4
                     +–N and NO3
                     −–N was followed for 550 days. First-order rate equations were fitted to data to estimate net mineralization rate constants and the size of the mineralizable part of straw and native soil N (Nmax). This pool was found to be related to temperature indicating an influence of thermal conditions on the degree of microbial exploitation of organic N sources. The Q
                     10 estimates for the rate constants of mineral N accumulation decreased with increasing temperature but the relationship was less intense for straw than for native soil N results. Optimum temperature for nitrification showed a good correlation with the geographic origin of the soils and it was lower than the highest incubation temperature (30°C) for the soil of the colder site.Soil nitrogen transformations involve biological processes that are temperature dependent. In particular temperature controls on net N mineralization and nitrification have attracted special attention because of the importance of available N for plant growth and for meeting microbial demands for an element that is usually considered as limiting in soils ( The temperature response of N ammonification and nitrification has mainly been determined in laboratory studies to avoid complications by plant uptake, leaching and denitrification. The temperature response of N mineralization has been shown to follow the Arrhenius or Responses of soil N mineralization to climate change may not only be dependent on the global patterns of soil N storage and soil organic matter stability ( Laboratory assay enables estimates to be made not only of the rate of N mineralization but also of the size of the potentially mineralizable N pool. Temperature was considered in earlier studies ( In the present study, representative soil types of conifer forest sites along a climatic gradient of western Europe were utilized. Soils differed greatly in terms of physico-chemical properties, and hence, an amendment with a standard Soil samples utilized in this study were collected from the organic horizons of five coniferous forest sites of western Europe. Some of the site and soil characteristics are shown in The labeled residues used as a standard material were obtained from wheat plants ( The experimental material contained 54.7% of wheat stems (with 42.6% C and 0.76% N) and 45.3% of ears (with 42.8% C and 1.87% N) with net C and N concentrations of 42.7 and 1.26%, respectively, and a C/N ratio of 34:1. The Soil samples were incubated in plastic vials after mixing precisely weighed quantities of soil and ground straw, which depended on soil properties and in which wheat-C corresponded to the same proportion (4%) of native soil carbon ( The concentrations of soil exchangeable NH Mineral nitrogen was extracted by shaking samples with 150 Non-linear least-square regression was used to fit data to a first-order kinetic model (Graphpad Software, Inc., San Diego, USA). Comparison of fits of two models with DF1 and DF2 degrees of freedom and SS1 and SS2 residual sum of squares was carried out using the following variance ratio: The results for mineral nitrogen extracted from the incubated soil samples are presented in The general pattern of results showed a progressive increase in the percentage of mineral nitrogen towards a plateau ( Temperature effects, time effects and temperature–time interaction effects were investigated for both labeled and native N data. For each soil, N mineralization varied significantly as a function of time (df=3, Simple Pearson's analysis showed no significant correlation ( The curves for the following first-order rate equation are shown fitted to N-mineralization data in If For Data for the mineralization of native N were treated in the same way as Based on the above analysis the The slopes of the linear regressions calculated on the The natural logarithm of net mineralization rates (obtained as described in the previous analysis) was plotted against the reciprocal of absolute temperatures in Arrhenius plots. From the straight lines fitted to data in these plots, it was possible to estimate new rate constants for 10, 20 and 30 Considerable nitrification occurred in four out of seven soils in this study. The soils with the lowest pH (Vindeln Oh, Waldstein Of and Oh— The separate analysis of NO The amount of nitrogen transformed into NO In mineralization studies using organic amendments, an initial decrease of total mineral N is frequently observed (e.g. The percentage of initial N that was potentially mineralizable was estimated from the asymptotic value Nmax. The size of this compartment is a function of resource quality and the capacity of microorganisms to exploit different sources of organic N. Estimates of Nmax for native organic N were found to be lower than those of straw ( The highest estimate value of Despite variability between experimental soils and temperature treatments, estimates of It was initially hypothesized that the size of The addition of readily metabolized plant material to soil, results in a rapid development of microbial biomass ( The Traces of nitrate were found at every sampling of the Vindeln Oh and the Waldstein Of and Oh soils. Although no further study of these low nitrification potentials was conducted, it seems reasonable to infer that low pH in these soils is not inhibitory to nitrifiers ( Nitrification in samples of the Thézan site started only after 3 months of incubation indicating the time needed by bacteria to adapt to new environmental conditions or develop after some decrease in the inhibition of nitrification by allelochemical supression ( Soils showed different responses to temperature of their nitrifying microbial populations. The optimum temperature of these responses indicated (with the exception of Thézan Oh) an adaptation to the prevailing climatic conditions of the site of origin, the Haldon A1 soil having a lower optimum than Thézan A1 and La Clape A1 confirming suggestions by This work was supported by the Environmental Research and Development Programme of the Commission of the European Community (VAMOS programme). We are grateful to Dr G. Billès for helpful cooperation throughout the experimental work and to F. Picasso and V. Coûteaux for technical assistance.