The analysis of siliceous matrix samples may adopt a two-step pretreatment, which includes melting with ammonium hydrogen fluoride and redissolving with nitric acid. However, the residual of substrate silicon unfavorable to the determination of trace elements in the samples due to serious matrix effects. Here, a new digestion method using simultaneously both ammonium bifluoride and nitric acid under normal pressure was developed for high-purity quartz sand sample. The digestion pretreatment is a two step process: melting/dissolving with both ammonium bifluoride and nitric acid at 200 °C for 2 h, and evaporating the solution at 250 °C to dryness. As confirmed by XRD analysis, silicates in the sample were converted to (NH4)3SiF6NO3 in the melting/dissolving step. TGA analysis shows that the generated (NH4)3SiF6NO3 could be decomposed and evaporated completely at 250 °C, which ensured a complete removal of silicon by the followed evaporation of the solution at 250 °C. As a result, the followed ICP-OES and ICP-MS analysis needed a solution dilution of only 100 times for the determination of Ca, Mg, Al, Rb, Ba, REE and other trace elements. The new method was applied to the analysis of three certified reference materials, and the results were well consistent with the standard value with RSD% values between 0.62% and 9.73%. Therefore, this method can be applied to the analysis of trace elements in high purity silica-based samples, with the advantages of time-saving, small dilution factor (only 100 times) and low detection limit.Quartz, or crystalline silica, is widely used in both traditional (e.g., glassware, ceramics, and refractory materials) and high-tech (e.g., semiconductor microelectronics, piezo quartz, optical devices, and solar cells) areas [ The purity quotient of quartzites can be assessed by surface measurement or bulk analysis techniques. The distribution of trace elements in quartzites may be determined by solid-state surface analysis techniques such as secondary ion mass spectrometry [ Bulk analysis to obtain accurate impurity information requires the conversion of solid samples to solution samples. The procedures utilized for silicate sample dissolution fall into two major categories, namely pressure digestion with HF or a mixture of HF and other acids (such as HClO Fluorides such as NH In the current study, a method involving NH Nitric acid (GR, 70 wt%), hydrofluoric acid (GR, 49 wt%), and NH Crystalline structures were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; Bruker D8 Advance, monochromatized Cu K The sample (particle size <74 μm, 100 mg) and NH As a pretreatment, the digestion is preferred to be conducted at lower temperatures with short digestion time. To explore the influence of temperature and time on the dissolution of various elements under normal-pressure conditions, we selected a moderately easily soluble element (Rb) and two of hardly soluble elements (Ba, and Th) as the represents. We used 400 mg NH The reaction of NH As shown in  Considering the TGA behaviors of the residual generated in the step of digestion under the selected conditions (NH To evidence the effectiveness of the evaporation step, we monitored the mass changes and observed the corresponding appearance change of the digested solids during the evaporation at 250 °C. As shown in As discussed above, the added nitric acid played an important role in the conversion of digested residual and its evaporation for removing matrix Si. Therefore, we tried to optimize the addition of HNO The necessity of sample to reagent ratio was further confirmed by checking the recoveries of 40 trace elements for analyzing the GBW07835 (100 mg) by keeping the NH As discussed above, we proposed a new method for the determination of trace elements in high-purity quartz samples by ICP-OES and ICP-MS, which included a normal-pressure digestion pretreatment method for eliminating unfavorable substrate Si. The main operation conditions of the integrated analytical method could be summarized as follows: sample mass 100 mg; digestion reagents of 3 mL HNO The developed decomposition method was simply compared with the typical methods reported in the literature. As shown in We developed a melting-based digestion approach to establish a technique for quantifying trace elements in SiO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the