In order to prepare dense B4C–SiC composites under relatively low temperature without any additive, stacking disordered B4C–SiC ultrafine composite powders were fabricated by mechanical alloying firstly. Subsequently, hot pressing sintering was applied to produce a dense B4C–SiC composite under relatively low temperature (1800–1950°C) without any additive. For the samples sintered at 1950°C for 30min, the obtained relative density, Vickers hardness, flexural strength and fracture toughness were 96%, 24GPa, 430MPa, and 4.6MPa.m1/2, respectively. The microstructural characterization showed that the main fracture mode was transgranular. The transgranular facture is caused by the powerful interfacial bonding between B4C and SiC. The density of the samples sintered with composite powders was 13% higher than the density of the samples sintered with mixed powders under the same conditions, indicating that the composite powders had an improved sintering activity due to their disordered structure. Meanwhile, the role of disorder–order transformation-driven sintering of ceramics was demonstrated.B In order to improve mechanical properties and lower sintering temperature of B Mechanical alloying (MA) can offer a simple, practical, economically variable but powerful way to synthesize disordered ultrafine composite powders, because dry powder particles are reduced in diameter after repeated extruding and crushing during mechanical alloying In this paper, in order to prepare dense B B In order to verify the improved sintering activity of CP, B A hot pressing sintering apparatus (916G-G Press, Thermal Technology LLC, America) was utilized to consolidate the B Microstructural investigation was performed by SEM (S3400, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). The crystalline phases were characterized by XRD (Philips X'pert pro, u-u) with Cu K Morphological changes of powders after milling are observed with SEM.  IR spectroscopic analysis is carried out to observe the structure of the milled B   The flexural strength and fracture toughness of the samples as a function of temperature are shown in In order to clarify the fracture mode and toughening mechanism of the composites, a micrograph of cracked polished surface of the samples sintered at 1950  The possible reason is attributed to the role of disorder–order transformation of CP. The existence of the disorder–order transformation can be demonstrated through B The fracture mode of B Order–disorder transformation during MA and disorder–order transformation during sintering can be confirmed. Compared with the samples sintered with mixed powder as raw materials, the density of the samples sintered with composite powder as raw materials has been increased by 13%, which results from the improved sintering activity of composite powders. The stacking disordered B The authors acknowledge the financial support from the