A novel polymeric membrane adsorber with a high density of adsorption sites that can selectively capture Au(III) ions, is proposed as an efficient alternative to recover gold from dilute solutions. Poly-thiosemicarbazide (PTSC), a polymer that contains one chelate site per monomeric unit, was used to fabricate the membranes. This polymer can be easily processed into membranes by a phase inversion technique, resulting in an open and interconnected porous structure suitable for high flux liquid phase applications. This method overcomes the usual low capacities of membrane adsorbents by selecting a starting material that contains the adsorption sites within it, therefore avoiding the necessity to add an external agent into the membrane matrix.
                  The resulting mechanically stable PTSC membranes can operate in a pressure driven permeation process, which eliminates the diffusion limitations commonly present in packed column adsorption processes. This process can selectively recover 97% of the gold present in a solution containing a 9-fold higher copper concentration, while operating at a flux as high as 1868L/m2
                     h. The maximum gold uptake measured without sacrificing the mechanical stability of the membrane was 5.4mmol Au/g. Furthermore the gold can be easily eluted from the membrane with a 0.1M thiourea solution and the membrane can be reused for at least three cycles without any decrease in its performance. Finally, the ability of this membrane for recovering metals from real-life samples, like seawater and tap water, was tested with promising results.Growing demand for gold and high market prices motivate the development of technologies to recover the precious metal from secondary sources, like scrap (electronic, jewelry, dental), industry waste (spent catalyst, alloy scraps, copper anode slime, mine tailing), and seawater A hydrometallurgical process, the preferred method for recovering gold from secondary sources, consists of three main steps: (i) leaching to extract the gold and bring it into solution, (ii) selective recovery of the precious metal by precipitation, ion exchange, solvent extraction or adsorption, and (iii) refining it to improve the purity. The second step, the bridge between the leaching process and the final metal-winning process, is the key step to make hydrometallurgy a more efficient process Out of all the possible processes for concentrating the gold, special attention is directed to the use of solid adsorbents, because they are easy to handle and efficient and they produce less amounts of secondary waste compared to other processes. The ideal adsorbent is one that can selectively adsorb gold very fast, with a high capacity and is easy to regenerate. Several adsorbents with impressive gold uptake capacities ranging from 4 Tuning the morphology of the adsorbent plays a key role in reducing the pore diffusion limitation. However, this must be done in such a way as to retain the available specific active surface area, so the capacity is not diminished. Membrane technology can be used to reduce or even eliminate the pore diffusion limitation; when a solution is forced to pass through a porous membrane the molecules travel by convective flow through the membrane pores, eliminating the usually present long diffusion time that the molecules or ions take to reach the adsorption sites inside the pores In this work we propose the use of poly-thiosemicarbazide (PTSC) for the fabrication of asymmetric membranes to recover gold(III) from a solution by permeating the solution through the membrane. Each monomeric unit of this polymer contains two thiosemicarbazide groups that form a chelate site. This site contains several groups that can contribute to the formation of complexes with metal ions; the structure of PTSC is illustrated in Poly-thiosemicarbazide was synthesized according to literature by the reaction of N,N′-diaminopiperazine and methylenebis(4-phenylisothiocyanate) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). PTSC membranes were prepared by non-solvent induced phase separation ( Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the membrane surface and cross-section were taken with a FEI Nova NanoSEM. Cross-section samples were prepared by fracturing the membranes right after having been exposed to liquid nitrogen for about 2 Three gold solutions (100, 500 and 1000 PTSC squares of 1 For all these experiments PTSC membrane circles with a diameter of 2.5 Four gold solutions were prepared by diluting the Perkin Elmer 1000 A pressurized container (RC800 Mini-Reservoir, Millipore Co.) was added to the set-up illustrated in Copper is usually the most abundant ion present in the gold recovery process. For this reason it is important to evaluate the selectivity of poly-thiosemicarbazide between gold and copper. The following solutions were permeated through the PTSC membranes in order to evaluate its selectivity for Au ions: (i) 10 Recovery of the metal ions for a possible re-use of the membrane was also investigated. Thiourea forms strong complexes with gold The PTSC membranes were able to capture gold ions even from very diluted gold solutions (10 For the second experimental set-up a PTSC membrane with a diameter of 5 After the permeation experiments the membranes were dried under vacuum at 60 The non-solvent induced phase separation process resulted in the formation of an asymmetric membrane with a thin dense layer over a porous support. SEM images of the membrane’s surface and cross-section ( An important parameter to compare different adsorbents is their maximum uptake capacity; the uptake increases with the increase of equilibrium concentration until the adsorbent is saturated. The maximum uptake capacity measured in this work was 5.4 The results of the three batch experiments using different initial concentrations of gold are presented in Pseudo first-order, pseudo second-order, and intra particle diffusion models were tested for the experimental data obtained. Comparing the values of The pseudo first-order and pseudo second-order kinetic models do not account for the possibility of the adsorption being limited by diffusion, and are unable to determine a precise mechanism; hence the need to test for diffusion limitations. Webber and Morris noticed that in several adsorption cases the solute uptake varies proportionally with The permeation set-up achieves much faster adsorption rates than the batch experiment, it recovers more than 99% of the gold present in 10  It is important to know how much gold the membrane can adsorb before it saturates and its performance begins to decrease. For this reason continuous permeation experiments were done for three different initial concentrations, and the resulting curves of relative gold concentration on the permeate ( When a solution of 10 As expected the PTSC membranes saturate faster when more concentrated gold solutions were permeated through them. Such cases are depicted in High permeate fluxes resulted in the gold ions spending a lower residence time inside the membrane, allowing less time for them to react with the adsorption sites. After analyzing Depending on the gold concentration of the feed, the membrane’s area and flux can be adjusted to meet the desired recovery and throughput. The gold concentration in real feeds differs widely depending on their source; however in the vast majority of cases it will be in a range where the membrane presented in this work operates optimally. In the case of gold recovery from electronic scrap, the minimum volume of aqua regia needed per gram of scrap to achieve a complete immersion is approximately two milliliters Due to the fast kinetics of adsorption the selectivity experiments were done at high fluxes and the results are presented in As can be observed in We can observe in There are two objectives for the third step in which we permeated pure water: (i) take out of the system the remaining gold eluted by the previous step present in the hold-up volume of the cell; (ii) clean the system before the next cycle. The flux remained constant throughout the three cycles with an average value of 490 The flux decreased in both cases throughout the experiments. However, for the tap water the decrease was gradual, while in the case of seawater the flux suffered a sharp decrease the first days and then stabilized. The behavior mentioned before and depicted in As shown in The fact that the color changed in both sides on the membrane is evidence enough to state that the change in color was primarily due to the adsorption of metals and to a lesser extent due to the formation of a fouling layer. Qualitative analysis of the surface of the membrane using XRF revealed that the metal recovered in larger quantities was copper, followed by zinc and nickel. SEM images of the membrane used for the permeation of tap water for 100 The metal content of the membranes after the permeation experiments is presented in Poly-thiosemicarbazide membranes were able to recover metals from solutions containing very low concentrations, like tap water and seawater. The concentration of metals captured in larger quantities by the membrane used with tap water was 10.9 After permeating 20 Using chelating polymers to manufacture membranes provides a simple approach to obtain membrane adsorbers with a high capacity and fast adsorption rates. Poly-thiosemicarbazide membranes presented in this work have proven to be a promising alternative for the selective extraction of gold(III) ions from solutions. They can be easily manufactured in current industrial set ups, installed in a very compact module at any point along a process, and can recover gold as fast as needed by controlling the membrane area and flux. PTSC membranes reached gold uptakes comparable to the best adsorbents available, and much higher adsorption rates due to convective mass transport inside the pores, that overcomes diffusion limitations. Additionally, the gold trapped in the membrane can be easily stripped, allowing for the membrane to be used again without any decrease in its performance. The versatility, scalability and easy manufacturing of the process proposed in this work, along with its efficiency and low energy consumption, makes it a real solution to the sustainability issues usually present in the gold industry. Poly-thiosemicarbazide membrane adsorbers applications are not limited to gold recovery, as it can be seen in the initial findings presented in Section The authors acknowledge Dr. Pradeep Neelakanda and Dr. Madhavan Karunakaran for helping with the synthesis of PTSC. The authors also acknowledge Rodrigo Valladares for valuable discussions. Research reported in this publication was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST).