It remains a significant subject on preparing high concentrated coal water slurry (CWS) from low quality coals to address the raw material supply for slurry preparation. The performance and dispersing mechanism of anionic dispersants in slurries prepared by upgraded coal, which was refined from a low quality coal, had been investigated systematically. The rheological behaviors of CWS prepared with each dispersant, i.e. sodium lignosulfonate (SLF), naphthalene sulfonate formaldehyde (NSF) and sodium polystyrene sulfonate (PSS), were studied at first; afterwards the governing factors on slurry concentration improvement and dispersion mechanism of coal particles modified by dispersant were investigated. The results illustrated that the maximum coal loading of CWS prepared with SLF, NSF and PSS were 67%, 70% and 68%, respectively, which suggested that the improvement of slurry concentration by each dispersant was NSF > PSS > SLF. According to the surface tension, yield stress and UV measurement, the effect of dispersants on slurry concentration improvement mainly relied on the adsorption by coal particles instead of surface tension reduction on solvent or its inherent steric hindrance. Subsequently, the contact angle and zeta potential analysis further indicated the excellent dispersing performance obtained by anionic dispersant was mainly attributed to the enhancement of zeta potential instead of wetting property on coal surface. The Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) calculations revealed that the electrostatic repulsion energy was improved significantly among coal particles after dispersant adsorption. A model on dispersion mechanism by anionic dispersants has been proposed. These results demonstrated that the promotion effect on slurry concentration by anionic dispersant in CWS was mainly attributed to enhancement on electrostatic repulsive force among upgraded coal particles.coal water slurry sodium lignosulfonate naphthalene sulfonate formaldehyde sodium polystyrene sulfonate oxidized sulfomethylated kraft lignin apparent viscosity, mPa·s Ultraviolet Spectrum adsorption amount of dispersant on unit mass coal particles, mg/g initial concentration of dispersant solution, g/L residual concentration of solution after adsorption, g/L total volume of solution, L total mass of coal in suspension, g Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek total interaction energy, J van der Waals force attraction energy, J electrostatic repulsion energy, J distance between particles, nm mean radius of coal particle in suspension, m Hamaker constant of coal particles in slurry, J Hamaker constants of coal particle in a vacuum, J Hamaker constants of water in a vacuum, J dielectric constant of water, equal to 80 F/m permittivity of free space, equal to 8.854 × 10 zeta potential of coal particle, V Debye length NaCl solution at a concentration of 1×10 zeta potential Coal water slurry (CWS) seemed to be one of the promising technologies because of its high combustion efficiency, low production cost and easy transportation [ The high-quality bituminous coals were usually employed to produce high concentrated CWS in industry [ Many researchers demonstrated that dispersants could modify the properties of coal surface and enhance particle dispersion, which was beneficial to a high concentrated CWS preparation [ Thus, to reveal the dispersing mechanism of anionic dispersants on coal particles in the slurry, three commercial dispersants, i.e. SLF, NSF and PSS, were applied for CWS preparation. The rheological behaviors and maximum solid content of CWS prepared with each dispersant were studied systematically. Then, the surface tension of solvent, steric hindrance effect and saturation adsorption capacity on coal particles by different dispersant were investigated through surface tension meter, rheometer and UV. Afterwards, the wetting modification and electronegativity changes of the coal particles adsorbed by dispersants were analyzed by contact angle meter and Zeta potentiometer. The purpose of the present study was to identify the critical factors on slurry concentration improvement after dispersant addition. In addition, the Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) theories were employed to calculate the interaction energy among coal particles modified by the different dispersant. The findings might be of great potential to illustrate the mechanism of dispersant action on coal particles and provide a direction on dispersants selection or synthesis. An upgraded coal, which was obtained from a low quality coal (57.71 % of ash content) by flotation, was utilized as raw material for CWS preparation [ The low quality coal with 57.71 % of ash content could be operated to obtain upgraded coal product with the ash content of 6-10% by this process, and the upgraded coal was a high calorific value raw material for CWS preparation. The difference on components and properties between low quality coal and upgraded coal had been listed in The coal water slurries for gasification were prepared by multi-peak grading technology, and the size distribution of coal particle in suspension was identified by a laser particle size analyzer (BECKMAN LS-13-320), as could be seen in The procedure for CWS preparation was as follows: a specified amount of dispersant, such as SLF (Mackin, CAS: 8061-51-6), NSF (Yuanye biology Co. CAS: 9084-06-4) and PSS (MICXY reagent, CAS: 25704-18-1), was mixed with 100 mL deionized water, respectively. The molecular structure of each anionic dispersant was depicted in The apparent viscosity and rheological behaviors of CWS with different dispersants were performed employing a coaxial cylindrical viscometer (NXS-4C, Chengdu Instrument Factory, China). The shear rate was increased from 0 to 100 s The surface tension of dispersant solutions with a different concentration in a range of 0-24 g/L were analyzed by automatic tensiometer (K100, Kruss Co., German) equipped with a platinum piece. Deionized water was utilized to produce the dispersant solution with different concentrations. Each sample was measured for 5 times, and the average was calculated. The precise degree of the tensiometer was 0.01 mN/m. All measurements were performed at 25 °C and neutral pH. The yield stress of CWS with different dispersants at a solid loading of 63 wt.% was analyzed by a rotational rheometer (Haake Mars III, Thermo Fisher Co., Germany). The shear stress of CWS with different dispersants was recorded as a function of shear rate in a range from 0.01 to 8 s The adsorption of dispersant on coal particles was calculated by the subtraction method [ Afterward, the dried coal powder was added into those dispersant solutions, and the proportion of dispersant and coal was consistent with the ratio in the process of CWS preparation. The mixture was stirred at 600 rpm for 8 h to ensure saturated adsorption of dispersant on particles. The adsorbed mass of dispersants on coal particles was calculated by analyzing the residual amount in the solution, which was obtained by filtering the suspensions. The calculation formula was as follows: The wettability of the coal surface with dispersant modification was determined by a contact angle meter (DSA25S by KRUSS Co., German) at 25 °C. The coal particles with a certain mass of dispersant were pressed into discs at 10 MPa for 20 min after being pulverized and dried under vacuum at 40 °C for 48 h. Then, deionized water droplets of 10 u L were dropped onto the surface of every pallet, and the contact angles were performed by the sessile drop method using a goniometer equipped with a digital camera. Five measurements were conducted on each coal sample, and the mean value was recorded as the contact angle for evaluating the wettability. The zeta potential of coal suspension with different dispersant concentration was determined via a Zeta PALS analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments Corp, USA). Dilute CWSs, which was consist of 5 g dried coal powder in 50 ml solution with different dispersant concentrations, were stirred at 600 rpm for 8 h to reach adsorption equilibrium, and the temperature was maintained at (25 ± 1) °C. Similarly, the mass ratio of dispersant and coal particles in dilute CWSs was consistent with the value in the process for CWS preparation. The suspension was placed for 24 h and centrifugalized at 3000 rpm for 30 min, and the supernatant was taken as a stable colloidal system for zeta potential measurement. Each supernatant was measured for 5 times, and the average value was regarded as zeta potential of coal particles in suspension. The DLVO theories were applied to identify the total interaction energy ( Besides, the electrostatic repulsion energy ( In order to identify the optimal dosage of each dispersant on viscosity reduction, the apparent viscosity of 63 wt.% CWS prepared by SLF, NSF and PSS with different addition was compared at a shear rate of 100 s It could be seen from The performance of anionic dispersant in slurries might be depended on effective adsorption on coal particles, which resulted in a sharp reduction on apparent viscosity. Nevertheless, when the dispersant adsorption on coal surface reached the maximum value, the excess dispersants could not coat coal particles and enter into solution, so those dispersants might increase viscosity or have little ability on viscosity reduction [ The rheological behaviors of CWS with different dispersants as a function of solid loading were illustrated in In order to achieve the maximum solid concentration of CWS with each dispersant, the evolution of apparent viscosity on CWS prepared by each dispersant at an optimal ratio with the increasing of solid content were presented in It could be seen from The surface tension of deionized water might be reduced by dispersants, which resulted in the lower interface stress difference between solvent and coal particles, and thus the particle dispersion had been promoted. The surface tensions of solutions prepared by different dispersant concentration were drawn in As the optimal concentration of each dispersant for slurry preparation in Section The steric hindrance effect of dispersants, which was related to the network formation in the slurry, could enhance the dispersion of particles in suspension [ It was quite clear that NSF presented the biggest yield stress value in the slurry. Thus, the steric hindrance effect of NSF was stronger than that of SLF and PSS, and this stable spatial network structure could support the particle dispersion in the slurry. However, the steric hindrance effect of dispersant was NSF > SLF > PSS, which was not consistent with the regular that the slurry concentration of dispersant, i.e. NSF > PSS > SLF. The steric hindrance of SLF was greater than PSS, but SLF had less effect on CWS concentration improvement than PSS, which could be seen from maximum solid content with different dispersant in A hydration film would be generated to prevent agglomeration among coal particles after coal surface modified by dispersant, and a stable dispersion suspension system would be achieved. It had been proved that the dispersion of coal particles in slurry was related to saturation adsorption of dispersant on coal. Thus, the adsorption capacity of each dispersant on coal surface against different concentration was illustrated in The adsorption behaviors of each dispersant on coal particles had the same trend. The concentration of dispersant varied from 0 to 1000 mg/L corresponding to the addition from 0 to 1.0 wt.% in slurry preparation, the adsorption mass increased distinctly and then tended to be constant. An adsorption platform was appeared with excessive addition of each dispersant. The equilibrium mass concentration for saturated adsorption by SLF, NSF and PSS were 0.8, 0.8 and 0.4 wt.% ( In addition, the saturated adsorption amount of SLF on coal particles was 5.9 mg/g, obviously larger than that of NSF (2.5 mg/g) and PSS (1.1 mg/g). Hydrophobic bonding mechanism, which indicated that the hydrophobic groups of dispersants tended to coat the coal particles while the hydrophilic tails stretched into the solvent, were suggested to explicate the difference on adsorption capacity by dispersant [ In general, the influence of dispersant on coal particles, such as wettability modification on coal surface and electrostatic repulsion enhancement among particles, were the prominent factors on improving the rheological behaviors of slurries. In order to evaluate the wetting property of coal particle modified by different dispersant at each optimal dosage, the contact angles of coal samples that had been pressed into disks were analyzed, and the data were depicted in Among the investigated solutions, coal particles that adsorbed NSF presented the smallest contact angle, which was resulted from the substantial carboxyl and sulfonic acid groups in NSF molecular. These structural characteristics made it easier to modify the coal surface hydrophilicity and indicated that NSF possessed the best wettability on the coal surface. In the presence of SLF, the contact angle was bigger than that of NSF, but lower that of PSS. This finding might be ascribed to several oxygen-containing functional groups and the small molecular weight of SLF. For PSS, the density of hydrophilic groups on the coal surface was relatively low because of its linear structure and macromolecule weight. Thus, the contact angle of PSS was bigger than that of other dispersants. The improvement of wettability could solve the contradiction of incompatibility between coal and water, preventing aggregation of coal particles. Nevertheless, the enhancement of wettability on coal surface by dispersant was NSF > SLF > PSS, which was not in accordance with the order of improvement on the slurry concentration by dispersant, i.e. NSF > PSS > SLF. Therefore, hydrophilicity modification by dispersant on the coal surface was not the vital factor for slurry concentration improvement. The dispersing ability of coal particles in suspension was greatly influenced by the electrostatic repulsion, which could be reflected by the value of zeta potential among coal particles [  The zeta potentials of coal particles modified by each dispersant with critical addition were compared in As a result, highly negative charges on the coal surface were the major factors that determined the dispersing performance of coal particles in the slurry. The main reason could be attributed to the electrostatic force resulted from the zeta potential between the particle-water interface prevents coal aggregation [ As demonstrated by DLVO theories, the precondition for particles dispersing in solution was the absolute value of electrostatic repulsion between particles must be greater than that of van der Waals force [ A schematic model on the dispersion mechanism of coal particles modified by anionic dispersant was simulated based on the above investigations. It was well-known that the driving force for dispersant adsorption on the coal surface was mainly attributed to hydrophobic interaction between coal surface and hydrophobic groups in the dispersant [ As demonstrated from the above results, the improvement of slurry concentration by anionic dispersant was mainly attributed to the enhancement of electrostatic repulsion between coal particles instead of hydrophobicity modification or steric hindrance. The Zeta potential of coal surface played a critical role in improving the rheological properties of CWS and dispersion property in coal suspension. When the anionic dispersants, including negatively charged groups, were adsorbed on coal surface, repulsion of overlapping diffuse double layers afforded more potent electrostatic force between coal particles. As indicated in the DLVO calculation, it was suggested that electrostatic repulsion between coal particles had been increased significantly after dispersant adsorption, and van der Waals force had little changes. The aggregation among particles could be prevented effectively due to the strong electrostatic force. Hence, the improvement of anionic dispersants on dispersion performance in CWS mainly depended on the enhancement of electrostatic repulsion force. The influence of anionic dispersants, including SLF, NSF and PSS, on rheological behaviors of CWS had been investigated. The viscosity measurement showed that every dispersant had an optimal ratio in slurries for viscosity reduction, and the maximum solid content of CWS prepared by SLF, NSF and PSS with its optimal concentration was 67, 70 and 68 wt.%, respectively. Surface tension and yield stress results indicated that the enhancement of slurry concentration by dispersant was dependent on adsorption by coal particles instead of reducing surface tension on the solvent or its steric hindrance effect. The saturated adsorption of SLF, NSF and PSS in suspension performed by UV was 0.8, 0.8 and 0.4 wt.% (accounting for dried coal powder in the slurry), which was consistent with the optimal proportion of each dispersant in slurry preparation. The subsequent investigations demonstrated that a higher zeta potential of coal surface caused by dispersant adsorption, instead of the effect on wetting property, was the critical factor for slurry concentration improvement. The DLVO calculation also suggested that electrostatic repulsion energy between coal particles could be enhanced significantly after dispersant adsorption, and the adequate dispersion of coal particles in this system could be achieved and sustained by a higher value of zeta potential. An effective dispersant for CWS preparation should coat coal particles and improve the electrostatic repulsion energy among coal particles. The findings of this study proposed an integrated technology for high concentrated CWS prepared from low quality coal in response to alleviating energy crisis.  The authors report no declarations of interest. The authors thank for the financial supports from