Sesamin, a major lignan in sesame seeds and oils, is well known for its health promotion activity. However, its effects on bone cell functions are infrequently observed. In the study, the effects of sesamin on the differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), osteoblasts, were examined. The differentiation of cells into osteoblasts suggested that sesamin (SE) in combination with osteogenic factors (OS) significantly increased calcium deposition. Although the osteoblastic differentiation markers including bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2), type I collagen (COL1A1) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of each cell donor showed different expressions both in gene type and time point, the increasing trends of COL1A1 and ALP were observed within the condition of OS + SE being compared with OS treatment. Increased ALP activity in OS + SE treatment could mediate the stimulatory effect of sesamin on osteoblast differentiation. Increased phosphorylation of p38 and ERK were related to increasing of ALP activity and mineralization in OS + SE treatment. Hence, it is suggested that sesamin enhanced osteoblast differentiation via activation of those MAPK signalling cascades. All results present that sesamin benefits differentiation of osteoblast progenitors towards functional bone forming cells, osteoblast. Thereby, sesamin would be a potential food supplement promoting bone health.Sesame seed and oil from Bone is an ossified tissue playing a variety of roles in human physiology, including protection, structural stabilization, physical movement, as a haematopoietic reservoir, mineral homeostasis, and in blood pH regulation. In adult life, bone continuously repairs itself through a mechanism of bone resorption by osteoclasts and bone formation by osteoblasts. This repairing mechanism is called the bone remodelling process. This process is tightly regulated by bone cells themselves ( The non-pathological appearance of human trabecular bone was obtained from arthroplasty surgery (of 18–45 year olds) with the patients' consent and approval by the research ethics committee, faculty of medicine, Chiang Mai University (Ethical approved number ORT-12-1089-FB). Cell isolation and characterization was applied from previous descriptions ( Adherent cell culture was used for immunophenotypic analysis. Cells were trypsinized and centrifuged to obtain a cell pellet (5 × 10 Cells at passage 4 were seeded at a density of 3 × 10 After being treated with sesamin at the indicated time, mineralized nodules were observed using alizarin red s staining. The medium was removed, and cell layers were rinsed three times with cold-PBS. After fixing with 95% ethanol at room temperature for 15 min, cell layers were washed twice with deionized water. The fixed cells were stained with 2 ml of 40 mM alizarin red-S (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), pH 4.0–4.5, per culture dish. After incubation at room temperature for 20 min, the cell layers were washed four times with an excess of deionized water, and mineralized nodules were observed both with the naked eye and also using a light microscope. For quantitative estimates, stained cells were extracted and normalized with 10% acetic acid (Labscan Asia Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand) and 10% ammonium hydroxide (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) using the method previously described. Absorbance was measured at 405 nm in triplicate using Thermo Multiskan EX plate reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The percentage of positive stain was calculated relative to the control group. An assay was performed in a 96-well-plate. At confluence, cells were cultured with and without sesamin as previously indicated. For ALP activity detection, cells were washed with PBS and incubated with 100 µl phosphatase substrate solution containing 1 mg/ml phosphatase substrate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 0.1 M glycine buffer, pH 10.4 (0.1 M glycine, 1 mM MgCl The total amount of RNA was extracted using Nucleospin® RNA II (Machery-Nagel, Düran, Germany), following the manufacturer's instructions. The total amount of RNA (1 µg) was reversibly transcribed to cDNA using the iScript Cell lysate was collected on the indicated day of the experiment. Cell lysates were separated by 12% gel SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare Europe GmbH, Freiburg, Germany). The membrane was blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with 5% skim milk (Hardy diagnostics, Santa Maria, CA, USA) in PBS-Tween. Antibodies against p38, phosphorylated p38, ERK, phosphorylated ERK, JNK, phosphorylated JNK and β-actin were used at 1:1000 dilution. Antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology, Massachusetts, USA. Cells were incubated with a primary antibody at 4 °C overnight. Then the membranes were washed and incubated with a secondary antibody at 1:2000 dilution at room temperature for 2 hours. After washing, specific protein bands were developed using the ECL detection kit (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Buckinghamshire, UK) and then visualized by using the Molecular Imager ChemiDoc XRS system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Band density was analysed with TotalLab software. Data graphs show band density as relative to β-actin and normalized against the control group. Significant differences in the mineralized quantitative data were analysed by the SPSS software using independent t-test analysis (p < 0.05). According to the plastic adhesion method, fibroblast-like cells were found attached to the culture flask within 2–3 days of cultivation, whereas un-adherent cells were still showing as circular shapes floating on the culture ( In order to access the osteoblast differentiation capacity under SE treatment, cells were assayed by alizarin red s staining. Calcium deposition was not observed on days 7 and 14 of the culture despite cell morphology alterations in the polygonal shape, which is an osteoblast-like morphology. Matrix deposition was observed under the microscope on day 14 of the culture (data not shown). Using the analysis of the alizarin red s staining data, calcium deposition was not present in the sample treated with only SE or in the control treatment for all time points, whereas a combination of OS + SE treatment resulted in a higher density of mineralization when compared with the OS control groups on days 21 and 28 ( In accordance with the stimulation effect of sesamin on osteogenic factors in the mineralization process, cells from three donors were chosen for examination of osteoblastic gene expressions. Osteoblast markers for each differentiation stage, which consisted of (1) bone morphogenetic protein-2 ( The BMP-2 mRNA expression's response to OS treatment was observed and categorized into two patterns. In the first pattern ( For type I collagen, the highest expression was observed on day 7 and dramatically decreased in all donors for the rest of the 28 days of the culture ( The ALP gene expression in the untreated control group for each donor showed inconsistent expression patterns throughout the 28 days of the culture. In the presence of OS, the ALP expression was at higher levels than the untreated control group for all of the time periods. The gene expression pattern under OS conditions was also similar in all donors. ALP had a high expression on day 7 of the culture. Subsequently, there was down-regulation on day 14 and then another increase on days 21 and 28 ( An assay of ALP activity was taken throughout the 28 days of the experiment period in order to determine a suitable time period for the detection of ALP activity (data not shown). From the screening results, we examined ALP activity of the rest of the experiments on days 3, 7, 10 and 14, which were the periods with high ALP enzyme activity and which coincided with the enzyme's moments of having the most dominant role during osteoblastic differentiation. Without OS ( In a previous study, sesamin was found to enhance the differentiation of human foetal osteoblast cell lines (hFOB1.19), which was caused by an increased stimulation of the MAPK signalling pathway ( In a previous study, sesamin was found to stimulate the osteoblast differentiation of the human foetal osteoblast cell line (hFOB1.19) by increasing the expression of osteoblasts related to the genes as well as alkaline phosphatase enzyme activity. At the same time, the mineralization process was enhanced in adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells, ADSCs ( Concerning the bone marrow aspirate-derived cells through the plastic adherent method, the results of the flow cytometric analysis showed MSCs properties in the cells ( Co-treatment of sesamin with osteogenic factors including β-glycerophosphte, ascorbic acid and dexamethasone significantly increased mineral deposition when compared with osteogenic factor treatments on their own. These data suggested that sesamin had a supporting effect on bone formation by increasing the mineralization process in the presence of OS. Sesamin, in the absence of OS, did not cause mineralization. A lack of mineralization in the condition can be explained by the need for phosphate ions, which are essential for mineral deposition ( The expressions of osteoblastic-related genes during the 28 days of differentiation showed that type I collagen had the highest expression level on day 7, which is an early time for osteoblast differentiation, and dramatically decreased afterwards. The highest expression of type I collagen was found to occur at the same period of differentiation as the one previously reported ( Concerning the ALP enzyme marker, sesamin was able to slightly increase ALP activity on its own, whereas greater stimulatory effects were found in the combination treatment of OS + SE. Remarkably, ALP gene expression patterns did not synchronize in their expressions for the resulting activity. Although there was a report which suggested that ALP expression was increased during the mid-phase of osteoblast differentiation ( Interestingly, though the results of the gene expressions were responded to differently by the donors under the OS + SE treatment, their MAPK signalling responses were similar. A previous study ( In conclusion, it was shown that sesamin increased the effect of OS on the induction of osteoblast differentiation in human MSCs. Up-regulation of Type I collagen and ALP were assumed to be the results of the promoting effects of sesamin on OS. Together, the elevation of ALP activity and the calcium deposition emphasize the enhancing effects of sesamin on OS during osteoblast differentiation. The activation of p38 and ERK signalling were found to be mediator-signalling cascades which play a role in the stimulation of osteoblast differentiation by sesamin. Thereby, sesamin, a major lignan in sesame seeds and oils, was suggested as a good food supplement with a high potential for promoting bone health. The authors declare no conflict of interests. OW carried out all experiments and drafted the manuscript. JK carried out the chondrogenic differentiation assays. PP and TP advised on study protocol, participated in data analysis and aided in interpretation. AL and DP provided all tissue specimens for the study. VR and PK supervised experimental designs and data interpretation as well as corrected the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This research was supported by grant under the program