We analyze the effect of ICT and R&D on total factor productivity (TFP) growth across different industries in Sweden. R&D alone is significantly associated with contemporaneous TFP growth, thus exhibiting indirect effects. Although there is no significant short-run association between ICT and TFP, we find a positive association with a lag of seven to eight years. Thus, R&D affect TFP much faster than ICT-investments. We also divide ICT capital into hardware and software capital. To our knowledge, this distinction has not been made in any previous study analyzing TFP at the industry level. The results show that lagged hardware capital services growth is significantly associated with TFP growth. Hence, investments complementary to hardware are needed to reap the long-run TFP effects from reorganizing production.We are currently experiencing a technological breakthrough in ICT affecting virtually all aspects of our lives including what is produced, how and where it is produced, how production is organized, what skills are required, the enabling infrastructure and the regulations required to sustain or even allow the ongoing transformation ( Investments in ICT and R&D have arguably been important engines of growth throughout the world. Economists have used models derived from production theory to estimate the impact of ICT and R&D. For example, In addition to the direct effects there may also be indirect effects. These effects are the impact on value added and productivity growth in excess of the direct effects via capital accumulation. This would be an indication that ICT and R&D are also affecting productivity through more efficient organization of production and increased product quality. In this view, ICT has computerized businesses and the economy as a whole leading to increased productivity in ICT-using and -producing sectors ( The purpose of this study is to investigate the indirect effects of ICT and R&D capital on TFP based on Swedish industry data. Sweden is one of the countries investing the most in ICT and R&D ( Is there any evidence of indirect effects from ICT and R&D based on Swedish industry-level data? Are there any differences in how ICT and R&D affect TFP growth at the industry level? Do investments in hardware and software affect TFP growth differently? We find that only R&D is positively associated with contemporaneous TFP growth, thus industries investing in R&D exhibit effects on productivity through more efficient organization of production and higher product quality in the short run. This suggests that at the industry level only investments in R&D results in additional productivity gains beyond capital accumulation. When we use longer time periods, as suggested by Based on panel data with smoothed five-year moving averages we find that the ICT coefficient becomes increasingly positive and significant after seven years. A further disaggregation shows that the lagged positive effect on TFP emanates from hardware rather than software investments. This suggests that hardware investments require complementary investments to reap the full productivity effects from a reorganization of production. Thus, the productivity effects from new innovations such as IoT will by no means be instantaneous and require complementary investments. These findings also suggest that even if firms replace or update their current hardware with newer and more powerful versions, this cannot substitute for the need to continuously reorganize production around the new technology. The paper is organized as follows. In  ICT primarily consists of combinations of hardware and software, while R&D is made up of time spent by employees in order to increase the stock of knowledge available to the firm. ICT is considered a general purpose technology (GPT), characterized by pervasiveness, inherent potential for technical improvements and innovational complementarities ( ICT and R&D can have both a direct and an indirect effect on value added and productivity growth. The direct effect is linked to capital accumulation and thus driven by investments in ICT and R&D, leading to changes in capital services. The indirect effect is the impact on value added and productivity growth in excess of the direct effect via capital accumulation. We define indirect effects as the contribution from ICT and R&D to TFP at the industry level in each specific industry. The direct contribution from ICT and R&D can be measured through growth accounting, which assesses the contribution of the various inputs to value added. Assuming competitive markets and constant returns to scale the output elasticities of each input is equal to each factor's income share. Alternatively, the output elasticity of each input can be estimated econometrically ( Neoclassical theory predicts that rapidly falling ICT prices have direct effects on investment, input substitution and capital deepening ( It is possible to use data at the aggregate, industry as well as the firm level to estimate indirect effects. Here we use industry-level data, investigating whether changes in capital services of ICT and R&D are associated with TFP growth. Thus, we would expect faster TFP growth in industries where the ICT and R&D capital stocks grow more rapidly as firms in these industries are able to use these inputs to reorganize production more efficiently. It is important to keep in mind that industry-level data consist of the average for the firms in the respective industries. Hence, we measure whether firms that invest more in ICT and R&D, on average, also experience a higher average TFP growth. We are not able to test whether firms investing in R&D and ICT on average have higher TFP growth with industry-level data ( There is an extensive literature investigating indirect effects from ICT and R&D. Most studies have been focused on measuring the effects from either ICT or R&D, primarily due to the fact that R&D until recently was not capitalized in the National Accounts in many countries. Micro studies have often identified indirect effects of ICT on TFP, while it has been more difficult to identify such effects on the industry or macro level (  At the firm level, In addition to the empirical literature exploring the effects of ICT, there is also a large literature investigating indirect effects from R&D. There are also a number of studies including both R&D and ICT in the analysis. The method used to measure indirect effects from ICT and R&D is based on the neoclassical production function model ( Assuming an augmented Cobb-Douglas production function, we have the following equation: By taking natural logarithms of Eq. One way of measuring the indirect effects from ICT and R&D is to test whether there are any indirect effects by regressing ICT and R&D capital services on TFP. We base our TFP estimates on the growth accounting methodology ( Growth accounting assesses the contribution of inputs to value added assuming constant returns to scale and that each factor receives compensation equal to its marginal product ( Based on the assumptions of competitive markets and constant returns to scale it is possible to let the elasticities ( This gives us a TFP measure, where we control for the direct contribution from ICT and R&D based on each factor's income share with constant returns to scale In In addition to the specification in Eq. The data used are based on the National Accounts provided by Output is measured as value added in SEK and labor input as quality adjusted hours worked. The variables used to estimate labor quality are average income, age, education and ethnicity. Capital services are preferred to capital stock data, since that measure accounts for the substitution between assets with different marginal products. As a result, the weights will not be too large for long-lived assets such as industrial real estate. Statistics Sweden does not provide any official estimates of capital services for industries. Capital services were estimated based on data on investments, capital stocks and investment prices for the different industries. Capital services were calculated for ICT, R&D and other capital. Based on our specification in Eq. When we make a distinction between software and hardware ICT, it becomes clear that software is significantly and negatively associated with TFP growth, while the coefficient of hardware is not significantly different from zero. One explanation could be that the introduction of new software requires reorganization, new skills and new production methods, which has a negative impact on productivity in the short run. Finally, we exclude ICT-producing industries in order to test whether the results are robust when only basing our sample on ICT-using industries. The R&D coefficient remains approximately the same and significant at the five percent level, and the results for other explanatory variables remain unchanged. The initial analysis indicated that there are considerable indirect effects from R&D, but not from ICT. One reason could be that the effects from investing in ICT materialize with a lag. This is also what the GPT literature predicts ( Brynjolfson and Hitt (2003) proposed to test whether the effect of ICT would change if regressions with longer time differences than one year were used. Changing the length of the periods investigated may not always suffice to identify the delayed indirect effects from ICT. An additional method is to include lagged periods in the analysis. Inspired by  In the second regression in  The data based on two different periods showed that there exist lagged indirect effects from ICT, while indirect effects from R&D are primarily contemporaneous. In order to test the robustness of these results we set up regressions and run them based on panel data. Thus, we first smooth the variables by creating 5-year moving averages based on period   We have shown that there is a positive contemporaneous association between the change in R&D capital and TFP. According to One possibility is that TFP growth is measured incorrectly at the industry level. This implies that value added or capital services are mismeasured, perhaps because depreciation rates are uncertain, especially for R&D ( The quality of ICT has improved enormously over time. In some countries this is accounted for by quality-adjusted hedonic price indexes. The rapid increase in computing power, as captured in the hedonic price indexes, may overstate the amount of computing power actually used ( An additional problem may be that productivity is incorrectly measured in the ICT-producing industries due to hedonic prices and double deflation ( In order to allow for heterogeneous slope coefficients among industries, we introduce the mean group (MG) estimator based on Finally, the association between R&D and TFP could be the result of simultaneity. Input choices would then be affected by productivity shocks. This implies that firms are believed to respond to productivity shocks by increasing inputs when marginal products rise, i.e., productivity shocks could promote ICT-investments. This problem can be dealt with by instrumental variables. However, we have not been able to find valid instruments. An additional approach that is often proposed is to use lagged variables as instruments ( An alternative to introducing lagged variables would be to use the lagged values as instruments in 2SLS and GMM estimations. However, this is only an efficient estimation strategy if the lagged values do not themselves belong in the respective estimation equations and if they are sufficiently correlated with the simultaneously determined explanatory variables ( We have analyzed whether ICT and R&D-investments are associated with TFP growth based on industry-level data for the Swedish business sector. Indirect effects are defined as contributions from ICT and R&D to total factor productivity (TFP) in each specific industry. The results show that, in the short run, only growth in R&D capital is positively associated with TFP growth, thus exhibiting indirect effects. Hence, ICT capital growth is not significantly associated with TFP growth. This suggests that at the industry level R&D capital only has additional contemporaneous productivity effects beyond capital accumulation and further implies that new knowledge gained through R&D activities is rapidly translated into improvements of product quality and/or more efficient production processes. When we use longer time periods, we still do not find any positive association between ICT capital and TFP growth. However, when we divide our sample into two time periods and introduce a lagged ICT component, we identify a significant association between lagged ICT capital and TFP growth. Specifically, the change in ICT capital services made in 1993–2003 is associated with TFP growth in the period 2004–2013, while the lagged R&D coefficient becomes insignificant. Furthermore, we use panel data with smoothed 5-year moving averages and include lagged variables. Then the ICT coefficient becomes increasingly positive and turns significant after seven years. Likewise, the R&D coefficient grows smaller and is insignificant as we extend the lag length. Hence, the indirect effects from R&D investments materialize more rapidly compared to ICT investments, which also is consistent with the literature on General Purpose Technology. When ICT is divided into hardware and software we find that the lagged effect of hardware is significantly associated with TFP growth. Thus, the long-run productivity effects from reorganizing production are associated with hardware investments. Investments in hardware require additional and complementary investments in skills and know-how to reap the full productivity effects from reorganization. These findings also suggest that even if the hardware is replaced or updated with newer and more powerful versions, the process of reorganizing production around the new technology continues. The delayed effects of hardware investments on TFP are consistent with the literature on general purpose technologies and experience from earlier technological breakthroughs such as electrification. Electrification required additional investments and processes of learning-by-doing to achieve the long-run benefits from reorganizing production. These findings suggest that it may take a long time before the full productivity effects from new ICT-innovations such as the “Internet of things” are realized. Hence, the long-run effects are likely to be achieved by focusing on complementary hardware investments. TFP growth is crucial for long-term economic development. Our findings point to the importance of implementing incentives for R&D investments, but also suggest that policy should be focused on establishing institutions that encourage firms to have a long-term perspective on investments. Since there is a substantial delay before the positive productivity effects can be reaped, firms that are heavily focused on short-term performance are likely to underinvest in ICT. This is so, despite the fact that ICT investments, both in hardware and software, are likely to be of critical importance for performance for a period extending beyond the current business cycle. We are grateful for useful comments and suggestions from Wen Chen, Craig Donovan, Peter Goodridge, Jonathan Haskel, Almas Heshmati, Leonard Nakamura, Christer Törnevik, two anonymous reviewers and the participants at our presentation at the 34th IARIW General Conference. Dresden, 21–27 August 2016. Funding: This work was supported by the There are different types of capital such as buildings, vehicles and software. Statistics Sweden publishes figures for these different types of capital in terms of capital stocks. However, using capital stocks when analyzing the impact of capital is likely to be misleading, since long-lived types of capital, such as buildings, get too high a weight compared to short-lived assets, such as software. The theoretically correct way to measure capital in a production function is by measuring capital services ( In order to estimate capital services it is necessary to estimate the capital stock. We estimate the capital stock based on the perpetual inventory method (PIM). By assuming a geometric depreciation pattern the capital stock (K), for each type of capital ( The depreciation rates used for all types of capital except ICT hardware and R&D are based on ICT hardware includes both communications and computer equipment. According to EU-KLEMS the depreciation rates between these differ. Statistics Sweden only publishes data for the aggregate of these two types of assets. Therefore the depreciation rates in EU KLEMS have been weighted based on the average share of each type of capital in total gross fixed capital formation (GFCF). The data on GFCF for communications and computer equipment separately was made available by Statistics Sweden. Finally, the depreciation rate used for R&D has been set to 16.5% and should be close to the one used by Statistics Sweden. Based on the estimates of the capital stocks and investment price indexes ( The internal rate of return ( Rental prices can be used to calculate capital compensation for each type of capital and industry: Finally, the change in capital services for industry This method is used to calculate capital services for ICT, R&D and other capital. Finally, the initial base year is 1993, where estimations of the levels of capital stocks are provided by