This study has investigated different visible-light irradiation's effect on the formation of silver nanoparticles from silver nitrate using the culture supernatant of Klebsiella pneumonia. Our study shows that visible-light emission can significantly prompt the synthesis of silver nanoparticles. Also, the study experimentally investigated the liquid mixing process effect on silver nanoparticle synthesis by visible-light irradiation. This study successfully synthesized uniformly dispersed silver nanoparticles with a uniform size and shape in the range of 1–6nm with an average size of 3nm. Furthermore, the study investigated the mechanism of the reduction of silver ions by culture supernatant of K. pneumonia, and used X-ray diffraction to characterize silver chloride as an intermediate compound. Silver chloride was prepared synthetically and used as a substrate for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles by culture supernatant of K. pneumonia. The silver nanoparticles have been prepared from silver chloride during this investigation for the first time.Silver nanoparticles have many applications; for example, they might be used as spectrally selective coatings for solar energy absorption and intercalation material for electrical batteries, as optical receptors, as catalysts in chemical reactions, for biolabelling, and as antimicrobials Colloidal Ag–NPs solution was prepared using the following previously described method The reduction of the Ag The synthesis of silver nanoparticles in the solution was monitored by sampling the aqueous component (2 To investigate the possibility of silver nanoparticle synthesis from AgCl, the following method was used. A suspension of silver chloride (13.5 The synthesis of silver nanoparticles by culture supernatant of The silver nanoparticles produced in the presence of various visible-light intensities were characterized by UV–vis spectroscopy at different intervals. The technique outlined above has proven to be very useful for analyzing nanoparticles The reduction of Ag The right illustration of Liquid mixing's effects on silver nanoparticles’ formation and size distributions were investigated under a visible-light density of 1000 The formation of the silver nanoparticles from the prepared silver chloride in the presence and absence of culture supernatant of The upper left illustration of Certainly, this investigation confirms our proposed mechanism involving intermediate AgCl and its conversion into Ag nanoparticles. We could not detect other insoluble silver salts such as silver sulphate or silver manganate by XRD method ( This research has synthesized silver nanoparticles using silver nitrate and culture supernatant of Our previous investigation has demonstrated that piperitone can partially inhibit the reduction of Ag Several hydroquinones with excellent redox properties have been reported that could act as electron shuttles in metal reductions This investigation of visible-light's effect on the reduction process was supported by a grant from the Deputy of Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. The National Iranian Copper Industries Company (NICICO) also financed the second part of this research. We would like to thank the NICICO for its partial support of this work.