In order to better understand the acoustic performance of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam at medium-frequency bands. In this paper, we propose a method that used the Radial Basis Function Neural Network to predict the sound absorption coefficient of the given structure at medium-frequency bands. The condition of the method is that the acoustic performance of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam is determined by some structural parameters which can be easily measured.
                  Therefore, in experiment section, 16 composite structure open-cell aluminum foam are designed with three types of NO.1 open-cell aluminum foam and 3 types of NO.2 open-cell aluminum foam firstly. Secondly, five structural parameters, porosity, pore size, thickness, cavity and density of each layer were measured as the input of Radial Basis Function Neural Network. Thirdly, the sound absorption coefficient of each composite structure at 500 Hz, 800 Hz, 1000 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1600 Hz are measured with AWA8551 impedance tube as the output of Radial Basis Function Neural Network. Finally, the prediction results and the maximum relative error is 5.7% of five samples from no.12 to no.16 show that the method is effective.With the improvement of people’s living standard, more and more attention has been paid to the problem of noise pollution. Noise pollution causes or contributes to not only worry and sleep problems, but also heart attacks, learning disabilities and so on In the medium-frequency bands, the sound absorption coefficient of the open-cell aluminum foam is generally low expect for the maximum peak value in a small range of a certain frequency Most of the existing models are linear and nonlinear regressions. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has been applied more and more. In multilayer feedforward neural network, BP Neural Network is a kind of global approximation network, learning speed is slow, not suitable for real-time occasions. But the Radial Basis Function (RBF) Neural Network is different, its structure is simple, the convergence speed is fast, more important is to be able to approximate any nonlinear function. So we decided to select the Radial Basis Function (RBF) Neural Network. Therefore, the sound absorption coefficients of 16 groups of open-cell aluminum foam below 1600 Hz were measured by standing wave tube method, then, the Radial Basis Function (RBF) Neural Network is used to establish a model that accurately predict the sound absorption coefficients of different open-cell aluminum foam below 1600 Hz. The Radial Basis Function Neural Network was proposed by Broomhead and Lowe in 1988 on the basis of the principle that biological neurons have local response Once the radial basis function network is created, it can be used directly without training. The input sample vector is first multiplied by the weight vector and then entered into the hidden layer node, calculate the distance between the sample and the center of the node. The distance value is mapped by the radial basis function to form the output of the hidden layer and then input to the output layer, the linear combination of each hidden layer node forms the final network output. In this process, the center and standard deviation σ of the node of the hidden layer and the weight matrix between the hidden layer and the output layer need to be determined. Usually the center of hidden layer node can be determined by cluster method. The most common cluster method is K-Means Clustering Algorithm, which divides data points into several categories, the same type of internal have similar characteristics and properties, so that the selected center point is more representative. After the cluster center is selected, the standard deviation can be calculated. The basis function is the gaussian: Then the standard deviation can be calculated by Eq.  There are many parameters may affecting the sound absorption coefficient of the composite structure open-cell aluminum foam, including porosity, pore size, thickness, cavity and so on In this paper, the porosity, pore size, thickness, cavity and density were taken into account as shown in We show a composite structure in Three types of NO.1 open-cell aluminum foam and 3 types of NO.2 open-cell aluminum foam are selected respectively and they are correspondingly coded as A The distance of the cavity behind each layer of aluminum foams is indicated in the specific combination The sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam can be measured in an impedance tube named AWA8551 that is made by Hangzhou aihua instrument Co.Ltd. Adopt the international standard ISO 10534-2:1998 describes what has come to be known as the transfer function method of measuring absorption and impedance of acoustical materials. The whole measurable frequency range of AWA8511 is from 20 Hz to 10000 Hz. In this data measurement, we will pay more attention to the acoustical properties of the composite structure at 500 Hz, 800 Hz, 1000 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1600 Hz. The sound absorption coefficients of the specifically designed composite structure open-cell aluminum foam absorbers are listed in This paper aims to establish an effective Radial Basis Function Neural Network model for the prediction of sound absorption coefficients of the composite structure open-cell aluminum foam. Because the predicted value is the medium-frequency bands sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam, so the output result is a scalar, therefore, the number of neuron nodes in the output layer is 1. The number of hidden layer neurons is related to the nonlinear mapping ability, generally speaking, the more the hidden layer nodes, the stronger the nonlinear mapping ability of the network. However, when the “right” number of nodes is reached, the addition of neuron nodes is not much help to improve the accuracy of the network, but increases the amount of computation, therefore, the number of neurons in the hidden layer needs to be determined by experience and experiment. In this paper, the number of neuron nodes in the hidden layer is 10. The number of input neuron nodes is related to the mapping model. In this paper, ten factors affecting the sound absorption capacity of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam are used as independent variables, they are porosity, pore size, thickness, cavity and density of two open-cell aluminum foams, form a functional relationship as shown in Eq. The prediction steps of sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam by Radial Basis Function Neural Network are shown in In order to predict the sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam. First, should define the sample, according to the data given in According to the above five graph, it can be found that the prediction results and the measured results are very close under the five frequencies of 500 Hz, 800 Hz, 1000 Hz, 1250 Hz, 1600 Hz. By calculation, the relative error between the prediction results and the measured results is shown in The maximum relative error is 5.7%, therefore, it is reasonable to believe that the network has good performance and can accurately predict the sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam. This paper initially introduces the Radial Basis Function Neural Network is used to predict the sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam at medium-frequency bands. The experimental results and the maximum relative error is 5.7% of 5 test samples indicate that the prediction ability of Radial Basis Function Neural Network model is very satisfactory. Another conclusion is that some easily measured parameters, such as porosity, pore size, thickness, cavity and density, provide an effective method for predicting the sound absorption coefficient of composite structure open-cell aluminum foam at medium-frequency bands, as well as its acoustic modeling. Therefore, the design of a specific composite structure aluminum foam can be achieved only by providing some easily measured structural parameters of the raw material. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: