The paper presents the study of electrocoagulation (EC) of aqueous dye solutions of two different industrial dyes in a batch stirred cell. Experiments were carried out with 200mg/l individual concentration of methylene blue (MB) and eosin yellowish (EY) in presence of NaCl as electrolyte. Effect of operating time and current density on the decolorization of dye solutions, reduction of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and variation in conductivity, pH during treatment has been studied. Small difference between color diminution and COD reduction has been found with the progress of treatment. First-order rate equation for dye removal has been developed from the experimental results. Sludge formation during EC and problems associated with this solid waste generation and disposal has been assessed. Energy consumption in KWh/m3 with reduction of COD (kg) during treatment has been reported. Electric power consumption of 1.5KWh reduces 0.21 and 0.11kg COD from 0.24 and 0.14kg of initial COD for MB and EY, respectively, starting from 200mg/l dye concentration.Organic colored wastewaters are common in various industries like textile, paper, plastic, leather, food, and mineral processing industries. The organic compounds in these effluents undergo chemical as well as biological changes, consume dissolved oxygen (DO), and demolish aquatic life. Some dyes and their degradation products are also carcinogens and toxic Adsorption is often used to remove dyes from aqueous solutions Others treatments with more sophisticated technologies like reverse osmosis/ultra-filtration have the disadvantages of high cost and low throughput Successful electrochemical oxidation/electrocoagulation (EC) treatment of various organic effluents have been reported by many authors Therefore, the focus of the present study is on decolorization of aqueous solutions of methylene blue (MB) and eosin yellowish (EY), reduction of chemical oxygen demand (COD), variation of conductivity during electroprocessing, power consumption, and the quantity and quality of sludge production. Methylene blue and eosin yellowish of AR grade obtained from M/s Loba Chemie, (India) were used for the experiments. Their physical and chemical properties are shown in Mild steel electrode pairs with 15 SPEKOL-1200 spectrophotometer (Germany) having operating range of 200–1100 Theory of electrocoagulation has been discussed by a number of authors Cathodic reaction: Anodic reactions: Overall reaction: Progress of dye decolorization efficiency during electroprocessing is shown in Up to current density 24 The plot of rate of EC versus time of treatment of EC is shown in Dye concentration results reported so far were based on the spectrophotometric analysis of the dye solutions. Diminution of color does not necessarily imply reduction of COD. Color removal may be due to (1) degradation of the dye, (2) formation of organic/organometallic complexes, and/or (3) a combination of two. Complete degradation of a dye is expected to reduce the COD most effectively. Experiments were conducted with 200 Difference in percentage reduction of COD and color diminution of the dye (measured spectrophotometrically) with mild steel electrodes are observed ( Textile wastewaters have a broad variation in conductivity. Higher conductivity increases current density for the same potential difference applied. To enhance the conductivities of the dye solutions, NaCl was added (400  Amount of sludge produced during electrotreatment is of industrial relevance. It points to the problem of solid waste generation and disposal associated with the process. Sludge contains large amount organics that may be carcinogenic. It also contains metals, which may have originated from use of metal electrodes. Investigation of the quality and the quantity of sludge generation during EC of MB and EY using mild steel electrodes was, therefore, carried out. ‘Sacrificial electrodes’ get dissolved during EC and require regular replacement. Oxide film formed on the electrodes leads to loss of efficiency of the cell. Sludge formation per kilogram of COD reduction of solution during EC is presented in COD reduction has been plotted against power consumed. Energy consumption in KWh/m In the scales of operation investigated, electrocoagulation time up to 5 and 15