The incidence of fractures is increasing in the United States, in part due to increases in lifespan, urbanization, and trauma. It is estimated that the US population carries a 40% lifetime fracture risk, with 6 million fractures occurring annually. There are many factors that influence fracture healing. This article addresses multiple aspects of fracture repair, including the stages of healing, factors that facilitate or impede healing, several potential complications, current and emerging treatments, and the role of the nurse practitioner.In the United States, the incidence of fractures has been increasing due in part to increases in lifespan, urbanization, and trauma. Six million fractures occur on an annual basis and it is estimated that the US population carries a 40% lifetime fracture risk. Bone is one of the few body tissues that can regenerate/restore itself to its preinjury structure and composition without developing a scar. Fracture healing is complex, and encompasses multiple steps that involve the integration of growth factors, cells, and the extracellular matrix. Fractures are defined as breaks in bone continuity, and are described according to the extent and type of injury. A fracture occurs when bone is subjected to a force greater than what it can absorb. This can occur in a normal bone subjected to excessive force (eg, crushing injury, direct blow) or a bone that has insufficient integrity to sustain normal forces (eg, osteoporotic fracture, insufficiency fracture). Adjacent tissues or structures may also be injured at the time a fracture occurs (joint, tendon, blood vessels, body organs, etc.). There are many factors that influence fracture healing, including: comminution (the presence of bone fragment[s]); adjacent injuries; level of displacement; contamination; and treatment method. This article addresses multiple aspects of fracture repair, including the stages of healing, factors that facilitate or impede healing, several potential complications, current and emerging treatments, and the role of the nurse practitioner (NP). Bone is dynamic and continually renews itself, a process that involves osteoprogenitor cells, osteoclasts, and osteoblasts. Osteoprogenitor cells are adult stem cells capable of differentiation into bone cells. They are believed to remain dormant during adult life, and activate in response to injury to facilitate repair. Osteoclasts are derived from the hematopoietic system, seal themselves to the bone, and digest bone minerals on the bone surface and free-up molecules. Osteoblasts are located on the surface of bone and initiate mineralization and arrange and transport matrix proteins. Both osteoclasts and osteoblasts are differentiated from mesenchymal stem cells. Bone renewal involves communication and coupling between osteoclasts and osteoblasts. Bones must be able to absorb energy conducted during loading, and must have adequate stiffness to resist fracture. The type of fracture that occurs depends on the magnitude and direction of the force as well as the quality of the bone. Fractures are described as either incomplete (the break extends through only a portion of the bone cross-section) or complete (the break extends across the entire cross-section). They are further described as either comminuted or noncomminuted, open (a wound extending from the skin to the bone) or closed (no skin break). Open fractures that are caused by high-energy impact often pose complex problems, but are outside the scope of this article. A stress fracture develops over a period of time in which the bone is subjected to repetitive loads that exceed the ability of the bone to remodel. A fracture that occurs after minimal injury or spontaneously through an abnormal bone is considered a pathologic fracture. Typical symptoms of fracture can include diminished function, pain that increases with movement of that bone, local swelling, and discoloration. A diagnosis is made based on symptomatology, signs, and diagnostic testing. Initially, the fracture fragments should be restored to their proper anatomic alignment, either through open or closed reduction, depending on the type of fracture present. After reduction, the bone should be immobilized until bony union occurs. Fracture healing involves an ongoing progression that is highly regulated and is both reparative and inflammatory in nature. This process is still not completely understood. The initial phases are primarily anabolic in nature, followed by a prolonged period with a predominance of catabolic activity. These processes result in the development of cartilage and bone, with immature bone evolving into mature bone over time. From a histologic perspective, fracture healing is classified as either direct (primary) or indirect (secondary). Direct fracture healing facilitates faster healing than indirect healing, but does not occur commonly. It is the most important goal after open reduction and internal fixation surgery. This type of healing requires a stable fixation as well as no bone gap and proper anatomic reduction between the fracture ends. Direct healing can then proceed through direct remodeling of lamellar bone and blood vessels without any callus formation. This type of healing is completed after several months to years after injury. Most fractures involve fragments that are close to each other and heal through indirect (secondary) fracture healing, which involves a combination of intramembranous and endochondral ossification. This type of healing typically occurs either with nonoperative treatment or with certain operative treatments that allow for some motion at the fracture site (eg, external fixation, internal fixation of comminuted fractures, or intramedullary nailing). In areas that are mechanically unstable adjacent to the fracture and external to the periosteum, endochondral ossification occurs. Intramembranous ossification forms a hard callous internal to the periosteum. Generally, healing of most fractures takes 6-8 weeks. The stages of fracture healing are overlapping, and can be categorized as inflammatory, repair, and remodeling. The events occurring in each stage are outlined in the Initially, after a fracture occurs, hemorrhage and hematoma develop, and an inflammatory exudate is created to fill the fracture gap. This phase is characterized by low oxygen and pH levels as well as high concentrations of lactate, all of which are reported to be important determining factors of healing outcome. For the first several days after a fracture, the exudate surrounding the site consists primarily of neutrophil polymorphs, which are those white blood cells that are the hallmark of inflammation. They follow a chemotaxic pathway to the site of injury. During this period, osteoclast activity accelerates, digesting and removing minerals as well as freeing up bone molecules. This is followed by osteoblasts initiating early woven bone formation through the transportation and arrangement of bone matrix proteins through a mineralization process. By the end of the first to second week, the ends of the fractured bone begin to develop a bridge. This tissue is referred to as “procallus” or “soft-tissue callus,” and it is during this phase that the most rapid osteogenesis occurs. This callus anchors the fractured segments but does not provide the structural stiffness required for weight-bearing. It must become large enough to compensate for the relative weakness of the newly forming bone. Limiting the movement of the fractured bone improves the quantity and quality of the callus and significantly improves healing time. Excessive movement of the fragments during this phase can contribute to delayed union or nonunion. If a fracture is uncomplicated, the reparative tissue reaches its maximum size after 2-3 weeks, stabilizing the site. The new cartilage that has developed forms a bony network beneath the periosteum, thus bridging the fracture ends through a “bony callus.” This final bridging improves both bone strength and stiffness so that some weight-bearing can be initiated, and to some degree imitates embryologic bone development through proliferation and differentiation of cells that lead to expanded matrix deposition and cellular volume. The cells that predominate during this stage include osteoclasts, osteoblasts, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts. Vascularization is required to form new bone. Many growth factors are both angiogenic and mitogenic, thus facilitating vessel growth and cell division. Growth factors are intended to support bone progenitor cell recruitment, proliferation, and differentiation. Bone remodeling occurs to remodel the callus into a lamellar structure that is highly organized and mechanically strong. Lamellae are aligned parallel to the axis with greatest force, and sufficient loading is necessary to direct the proper geometric alignment of osteons as well as to facilitate osteogenesis. Stress fractures are usually stable and incomplete, and heal through direct remodeling of the site, requiring minimal callus formation. If a bone has impaired bone quality (eg, osteoporosis or prolonged bisphosphonate administration), stress fractures can occur with normal loading. Many of these fractures are slow to heal or may progress to complete fractures without treatment. Very few stress fractures are visualized on X-ray, and a diagnosis is made by MRI or nuclear bone scan. Bone scans are very sensitive for stress fractures, but have lower specificity because they also identify areas affected by other causes of inflammation (eg, infection). Many factors can impact fracture healing, and can be categorized into Fractures that occur in more vascular areas of bones (ie, the end of a long bone) or in a flat bone, such as the scapula, tend to heal more rapidly than those in less vascular areas (eg, midshaft). In normally healing bone in a lower extremity, progressive weight-bearing of stable fractures can help stimulate healing once a callus has been established. Mechanical stability is a major factor that positively influences healing of fractures. This encompasses both fracture immobilization and fixation. With less stability more stem cells will differentiate into cartilage, and increased stability promotes stem cell differentiation into bone tissue. Initial immobilization of a fracture site is recommended, with gradual increases in loading once a callus has been established. Many conditions affect skeletal integrity, and their coexistence during fracture repair can impact the healing process. One of the more commonly known conditions is osteoporosis, which occurs when bone breakdown exceeds bone generation, and is diagnosed by a bone mineral density of ≤ 2.5. It is estimated that many older people with osteoporosis are undiagnosed and thus untreated. Even after sustaining a fracture, very few patients are evaluated for the presence of osteoporosis. Infection is a particular risk with open fractures and must be addressed before healing. An in-depth discussion of infection and fracture repair is beyond the scope of this article. In general, there is a positive correlation between age and healing time. In children and younger adults, almost perfect restoration can be expected. Children have thicker periosteums that contain many mesenchymal stem cells, and they rarely have nonunion of fractures. Fracture healing is affected by nutritional status. When someone has a fracture, caloric demands are estimated to be 2-3 times that of a person without a fracture. Even a 10- to 20-gram increase in daily dietary protein has been shown to improve fracture healing. Nutrients can affect fracture healing. Calcium is key to increasing bone formation and reducing bone resorption, and it stabilizes bone. Calcium significantly reduces risk of fracture ( Persons with diabetes can be affected by diminished bone formation. In older diabetics, hyperglycemia can precipitate an increase in bone resorption and resultant osteopenia, with a net increase in fracture risk as well as risk of delayed or nonunion. Several meta-analyses have reported increased fracture risk for both type 1 and 2 diabetics, suggesting that factors other than vascular changes or hyperglycemia may be responsible. The exact mechanisms are unclear, but may be linked in part to decreased osteoblast formation and function. Glycemic control is important during fracture healing, as is medication management. Insulin-mediated diabetic control has been shown to improve fracture healing. Thiazolidinediones, used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, act to reduce insulin resistance. Thiazolidinediones have been shown to suppress the bone anabolic signaling pathway and increase osteoclast development, increasing the risk of impeded fracture healing. Biguanides (ie, metformin) increase insulin sensitivity, and have been shown to have a positive osteogenic effect. Tobacco contains > 4,000 chemicals. Fracture healing is significantly adversely impacted by tobacco use, with the leading causative agents suggested to be nicotine and carbon monoxide. Nicotine may adversely affect early revascularization of the fractured bone. Smokers take 40% longer to achieve union as compared with nonsmokers. Certain classes of medications have been shown to inhibit bone repair, including corticosteroids, chemotherapeutic agents, and immunosuppressants. Bisphosphonates improve bone mass and bone mineral density in those with osteoporosis, but can diminish bone quality over time. For those with osteopenia, bisphosphonates have not been shown to be effective in preventing fractures. Evidence has demonstrated that treatment with bisphosphonates for > 1 year reduces bone toughness, and treatment for > 3 years increases a person’s risk of developing atypical femoral fracture(s). This type of fracture has a ≥ 28% risk of delayed union or nonunion. Low-intensity pulsed ultrasonography was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for fresh fracture healing in 1994 and for treatment of nonunions in 2000. This treatment is provided in 20-minute sessions on a daily basis, but the exact healing mechanism is unknown. Ultrasound has been shown to exert a moderate effect on reduction in time to union, but more research is needed in this area. Several studies have reported a significant reduction in healing time for fresh fractures using this modality ( Electromagnetic field stimulation is used primarily with delayed union or nonunion, and this modality has achieved some success. Benefits are evident 3 months after treatment is initiated. The effective study of both of these modalities has been plagued by small sample sizes and design limitations, and thus the current evidence is weak. Percutaneous autologous bone marrow grafting has been used with uninfected nonunions. Bone marrow aspirate is removed from the iliac crest, and samples are concentrated through a cell separator and then injected into the site of nonunion. This treatment has demonstrated > 85% healing rates in persons with nonunions. Complications can be organized into those that occur earlier or later in the course of healing. Early complications include injury to tissues and major vessels, hypovolemic shock, adult respiratory distress syndrome, deep vein thrombosis, septicemia (with open fractures), and pulmonary embolism. Nonunion and delayed union can be therapeutically treated with one or more mechanism(s), including grafting, electrical bone stimulation, use of teriparatide, internal fixation, or a combination of more than 1 of these modalities. Teriparatide, which is a recombinant human parathyroid hormone, is the first bone anabolic medication used successfully in healing fractures. Osteoblasts contain parathyroid hormone receptors. Teriparatide increases osteoblast proliferation, osteoblast-osteoclast coupling, and remodeling. It increases strength and stiffness, increases both bone mass and mineral content, and has been used successfully for treatment of nonunion or delayed union. Throughout the stages of fracture, NPs can play an important role. Their emphasis on health promotion and disease prevention can facilitate healing and prevent complications. Teaching and counseling may assist the patient with independent self-management in cases of fracture. The NP should evaluate healing. This evaluation can be categorized as clinical or radiographic. Clinical methods can be further divided into 2 groups. One category involves assessments based on physical examination and activity tolerance. The quality, quantity, and duration of weight-bearing and physical activity tolerance along with pain are indicators of fracture healing. For those fractures subjected to secondary healing, clinical judgment is used to determine when a callus can support activities. The second radiographic evaluation category is related to imaging. Plain radiography and computed tomography scans are generally reliable tools (except for imaging stress fractures, as discussed earlier). A fracture line can usually be visualized for 2-3 weeks after initial injury. In those fractures undergoing primary healing (eg, internal fixation), no callus will be visible on X-ray and thus a computed tomography scan may be a useful adjunct. In general, a callus is visible on an X-ray approximately 6 weeks after a fracture occurs (less in children). Health education is an important component of the NP role, and should be multifaceted to facilitate healing. The patient should be educated regarding potential complications and signs and symptoms for which to be aware (eg, increase in edema, changes in coloration, paralysis, signs of infection or embolism, paresthesia). The NP should counsel the patient on the importance of adequate calcium and vitamin D intake to facilitate optimal bone health and to promote healing. The American Geriatrics Society has published a consensus statement regarding vitamin D, including a recommendation for those ≥ 65 years of age to take ≥ 1,000 IU/day of vitamin D, along with calcium. The NP should coordinate a comprehensive supervised rehabilitation program (eg, assistive devices such as crutches or walker), referral to physical therapy, and instruction in and oversight of medication management. Fractures can be financially and emotionally challenging for many, and thus the patient’s perspective and goals should always be incorporated into the plan of care. The NP should review the patient’s use of concomitant prescription and nonprescription medications. Pain should be managed appropriately. For those patients with a stress fracture or incomplete or complete atypical femoral fractures, bisphosphonates should be discontinued. Many fractures are incurred through injuries that are considered preventable. NPs can favorably impact this serious problem by engaging with community leaders and policymakers in development and implementation of effective injury prevention strategies. These efforts can be focused on prevention of some frequent causes of fracture injuries (eg, motor vehicle crashes, falls). In addition, NPs should educate patients individually regarding injury prevention. One of the frequent causes of fractures as people age is preventable falls. The incidence of falls is estimated to be 33% for those ≥ 65 years old, and 50% for those ≥ 80. Interventions that improve strength, balance, and flexibility (eg, Tai Chi and community-based programs such as “Stepping On”) have been demonstrated to reduce falls in the elderly by as much as 33%. The skeleton and muscles are intricately linked, and both are necessary for optimal functioning. Another aging-related phenomenon is sarcopenia, which is the loss of skeletal muscle strength, function, and mass in older persons. Sarcopenia is estimated to occur in 15% of those ≥ 65 years old, and in 50% of those ≥ 80. Many studies have demonstrated strong correlations between bone mass and muscle mass. Therefore, NPs should incorporate into health education strategies measures that will maximize muscle and bone mass to prevent injuries such as fractures in this population. These measures include increased physical activity and exercise, limited tobacco use and alcohol intake, and improved nutrition. The NP should be cognizant of optimal management of concomitant health problems, such as diabetes mellitus, and should strive for optimal glycemic control through insulin administration or other medications that minimize adverse osteogenic effects. The functional endpoint of fracture healing is recovery of bone function, including weight-bearing. This is dependent on the underlying processes that occur postfracture as well as selection of therapies that facilitate return to function through varying processes. Some therapeutic treatments may impact more than 1 biologic process, and the net effect should be considered by the NP as part of management of the course of healing.