In the potash production industry, sylvite is selectively floated from halite with the use of cationic collectors. Due to the high solubility of the KCl and NaCl minerals, the process has to be conducted in saturated brines of these salts and at very high collector concentration. The understanding of the mechanisms involved in this peculiar selective flotation process has progressed well in the recent years and is briefly discussed herein.
                  Studies of the effect of the addition of long chain alcohols on the dodecylamine adsorption and flotation of KCl were undertaken and the results are presented. Potassium chloride flotation with dodecylamine was enhanced by the addition of hexyl and octyl alcohol with the best results in the concentration range of from 6 to 8×10−3 M. Decyl alcohol had a less effective influence on KCl floatability. The surface tension of dodecylamine solution as a function of KCl concentration and the lowering of the amine critical micelle concentration in KCl saturated solution were also studied and the role of the long chain alcohol addition on the flotation recovery of potassium chloride with dodecylamine is discussed.The processing of soluble salt minerals from underground deposits is of great industrial importance because potassium salts together with phosphate rock and nitrogen products form the three basic commodities used in fertilizer manufacturing. Underground salt deposits sometimes present a complex mineralogical composition involving several salt minerals like carnalite (KMgCl Because of the high solubility of KCl and NaCl, the flotation process has to be conducted in saturated brines of these salts. From a fundamental approach, this means that the thickness of the double layer around the salt particles is very small and as a consequence the traditional measurement of the surface charge or zeta potential of these minerals is not easily achieved. Due to their high solubility the equilibrium state of the surface is also difficult to control. In the last decade, however, the measurement of KCl and NaCl nonequilibrium electrophoretic mobility has become possible by the laser-Doppler electrophoresis technique ( A mixed mechanism involving first the adsorption of cationic collector on the negative KCl surface and then the precipitation of colloids on the hydrocarbon chains of previously adsorbed collector species has been advanced by In this work, studies of the effect of the addition of long chain alcohols on the dodecylamine adsorption and on the performance of KCl flotation were undertaken and the results are presented and discussed. The potassium chloride sample used in the experimental work was of analytical grade. Nevertheless, the sample was initially calcined at 450 °C thus eliminating any traces of surface active substances and then stored in hermetically closed vials. Before the microflotation tests and adsorption experiments the salt sample used was again dried for 2 h. Double distilled and deionized water was used throughout the work. Chloroform and bromo-cresol green were used for determination of dodecylamine concentration in salt solutions, and the pH was adjusted with KOH and HCl. All reagents used, including dodecylamine, hexanol, octanol, decanol and dodecanol were of analytical grade. The dodecylamine solutions at different concentrations were prepared using saturated brine solutions of KCl. The final desired volume for dilutions was adjusted with KCl saturated solution. Adsorption studies were carried out by mixing 15 g of KCl, in the size range of 208 The microflotation testwork was carried out in a Hallimond tube, using 5 g of (−295 The surface tension measurements were conducted according to the Du Nouy-ring method using a Cenco tensiometer. The final value adopted in each case was the determination of eight sequential readings. The influence of dodecylamine (DDA) concentration on the KCl floatability in the presence and absence of octyl alcohol is presented in The influence of three long chain alcohols on the floatability of KCl with DDA is shown in The results in The results in Adsorption and microflotation studies conducted in the presence and absence of several alcohols showed that floatability of KCl with DDA is particularly enhanced in the presence of hexanol. Nevertheless, other alcohols like octanol and decanol also presented a positive effect ( Experimental results from other investigators ( However, the enhancement in DDA adsorption on the KCl surface caused by alcohols of intermediate chain length (6–8 carbons) could not be the only reason for the high recovery of flotation observed in It is therefore postulated that dodecylamine adsorption would occur also at the interface between the aqueous solution and organic film on the bubbles, as shown in The steep increase in adsorption at an equilibrium concentration around 10  The adsorption of DDA in the presence of KCl near the DDA critical micelle concentration (CMC) is lower than the value obtained for adsorption from water is apparently contradictory because one would expect a squeezing out effect due to KCl presence. The fact is that due to the lowering of the CMC in the presence of the salt, micelles are formed at much lower bulk concentration hindering the migration of surfactant molecules to the interface. The CMC of DDA is decreased from 10 Studies of adsorption of dodecylamine on KCl surface and Hallimond tube flotation showed that the addition of hexanol could improve significantly the floatability. Other alcohols with shorter or longer chain length presented a less distinguished effect. Surface tension measurement showed that the CMC of dodecylamine is lowered from 1 The authors wish to thank Dr. Claudio Schneider, CETEM, for revising the English text and for his useful suggestions.