The electro-oxidation of molybdenite concentrate in NaCl electrolyte has been investigated. When the liquid–solid ratio is 25, mixing rate, 400rpm, pH=9, room temperature, concentration of NaCl, 4mol/L, then the dissolution rate of molybdenite can achieve 99.97% in 240min. With DSA (dimensionally stable anode) as anode, the polarization curves have been investigated. The results show that molybdenite concentrate cannot be electro-oxidated directly on the anode, chlorine evolution reaction plays a leading role in the NaCl medium, molybdenite concentrate oxidation leaching is by means of liberated chlorine through the anode. The kinetic study showed that the dissolution of molybdenite concentrate is represented by shrinking core model with diffusion through a porous product layer of sulfur. The apparent activation energy (E
                     
                        a
                     ) for the dissolution reaction was calculated as 8.56kJ/mol.Molybdenite concentrates are commonly obtained as a byproduct in the treatment of copper porphyry ores in which the molybdenite is a minor constituent. The commercial route for the extraction of molybdenum from its sulphide mineral molybdenite involves roasting of the concentrate, purification of the resultant calcine, either by distillation of MoO With the development of industry, high-grade and easy-handling Mo mineral is decreasing, while the proportion of low-grade and complex ore is increasing, pressure on the traditional technology will be larger. With the increasingly stringent environmental requirements, the traditional technology gradually shows its shortcomings, Hydrometallurgical processing becomes more attractive especially for low-grade and complex ores. Since the 1970s, research on Mo wet leaching has attracted more attention, the technology on the oxygen pressure process, nitric acid decomposition, sodium hypochlorite, electro-oxidation and bio-leaching method have been developed one after another ( In the literatures, electric-oxidation leaching kinetics analysis by sodium hypochlorite has not been reported. Thus, the purpose of the present work is to examine the electro-oxidation of molybdenite concentrate in NaCl electrolyte system, as well as its kinetics analysis. The molybdenite concentrate (Mo 41.40%, S 31.40%, Cu 2.90%, P 0.04%, Fe 5.00%, As 0.10%, CaO 0.17%, SiO The leaching operations were carried out in a self-made electrolytic bath mounted with pH and temperature detectors. A certain amount of MoS CHI660B Electrochemical Integrated Test System (produced by Shanghai Chenhua Instruments Co. Ltd.) was used to draw The concentration of molybdenum was determined by colorimetry using thiocyanate. The concentration of NaClO and NaClO The data obtained were plotted as a function of conversion, described as  The main chemical reactions can be described by the following equation ( The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio (v/g) on molybdenum extraction was studied using a stirring speed 400 Seen from The effect of stirring speed on molybdenum extraction was studied using a liquid-to-solid ratio 25:1 (molybdenite, 5 Known from kinetics principle of hydrometallurgy, in the process of solid–liquid multiphase leaching, when controlling steps are controlled by fluid film diffusion layer, agitation intensity has great effect on dissolution rate, usually as high as 40–70% ( The effect of concentration of NaCl on molybdenum extraction was studied using a liquid-to-solid ratio 25:1 (molybdenite, 5 The effect of temperature on molybdenite dissolution is given in When leaching molybdenite concentrate by Electro-oxidation, molybdenite concentrate can be leached via two ways: (1) Chemical dissolution; (2) Mine grain were oxidized directly in the anodes. It can be determined that which way is the best one through Linear scan voltammetry was adapted to Survey and draw the anode Linear scan voltammetry was adopted to Survey and draw the anode Linear scan voltammetry was adopted to Survey and draw the anode Linear scan voltammetry was adopted to Survey and draw the anode In hydrometallurgy, the most of reaction is non-reversible, the slowest stage controls overall speed of process. The particle size can stay constant or decrease during the reaction. The rate equations for dissolution models have been introduced in the literature ( The simplified equations of the shrinking core model when diffusion is the slowest step can be expressed as follows ( After the experimental data were analyzed, it was determined that the shrinking core model was suitable for this leaching reaction, the rate of diffusion of the reactants through the particle pore alone is rate limiting. Eq. In this formula, This value clearly confirms that this process was controlled by diffusion. It is approved by In this study, the electro-oxidation of molybdenite concentrate in sodium carbonate buffer system was studied. The results indicate: It was determined that stirring speed and liquid-to-solid ratio did not significantly affect molybdenum extraction compared with other experimental parameters, the dissolution rate increases with increase in temperature and NaCl concentration. When the liquid–solid ratio is 25, mixing rate, 400 It was determined that molybdenite cannot be electro-oxidated directly on the anode, chlorine evolution reaction plays a leading role in the NaCl medium, molybdenite dissolution is by means of liberated chlorine through the anode; Increasing blending speed is favorable to the spread of mass transfer, and ions in the electrolyte move faster lead to the current increase; there is no advantage for anode oxidation to increase the ore slurry concentration. A shrinking core model is presented to describe the dissolution and to analyze the data. It was established that the leaching process is mainly controlled by diffusion through a porous product layer, the apparent activation energy of this dissolution process was found to be 8.56 The authors are thankful to the 11th Five-year Plan of national scientific and technological program of China (2007 BAB22B01).