Heterodimeric bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) consist of disulfide-linked dimeric monomers derived from different BMP members. Owing to this specific constitution pattern, they bear high affinity to both type I and type II BMP receptors simultaneously. Meanwhile, the antagonism efficiency of extracellular antagonists to heterodimeric BMPs is also significantly lower than that to homodimeric ones. All these specific properties confer heterodimeric BMPs with distinct signaling and bio-functions that are characterized by more speediness, lower concentration/dose threshold and higher efficiency than homodimeric BMPs. Consequently, heterodimeric BMPs bear promising application potential in inducing osteogenesis. In addition, they may play indispensible roles in organogenesis. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge of heterodimeric BMPs in their signaling pathways and bio-functions.The discovery of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in the pioneering work by Urist in 1965 The BMP family belongs to TGF-β (transforming growth factor-β) superfamily and consists of more than 30 members Most of the mature BMP molecules (except GDF3, 9, 9B Heterodimeric BMPs consist of two monomers derived from different BMP members. Heterodimeric BMPs were discovered in 1988 by Wang et al. A heterodimeric BMP ligand may contain two monomers derived from the same or different subgroups. It seems that the efficiency by which BMPs exert their activity is associated with the homology between the two monomers: the less gene and protein homology the two monomers bear, the higher osteoinductive efficiency the heterodimeric BMP can exhibit Hitherto, four methods have been reported to produce heterodimeric BMPs: (1) extraction from natural bone tissue Gene transfection technology that has rapidly developed in the past two decades enables the efficient production of heterodimeric BMPs in a large scale Recently, BMP2/7 fusion gene was constructed by connecting BMP2 cDNA and BMP7 cDNA with a (Gly Heterodimerization of different BMP monomers is another method to produce heterodimeric BMPs Heterodimeric BMPs can activate a distinct signaling pattern, that cannot be accomplished by the mixture of homodimeric BMPs. In this section, we try to summarize the principles of their signaling basing on the available evidence derived from human cells, zebra fish and drosophila. Similar to other members in the TGF-β superfamily, BMPs bind to transmembrane serine/threonine kinase receptors on cell surfaces. Thereby, they trigger specific intracellular signaling pathways that activate and influence gene transcription Activated BMP type I receptors phosphorylate Smad1, Smad5, and Smad8 (receptor-regulated Smads, R-Smads), which then assemble into a complex with Smad4 (common-partner Smad, Co-Smad) and translocate to the nucleus to regulate the transcription of target genes, such as Runx2 The expression and oligomerization pattern of receptors are one of the main mechanisms for the versatile and specific functions of different BMPs As a result, heterodimeric BMPs can trigger significantly higher levels of Smad-dependent signaling (e.g., Smad1/5/8) and thus BMP-target genes (e.g., Inhibitor of differentiation 1), than homodimeric BMPs In fact, the modulation mechanism of BMP signaling is far more complicated. The oligomerization pattern and internalization of receptors can play critical roles in modulating the effects of homodimeric BMPs Extracellular BMP antagonists, such as noggin For the signaling of osteogenesis, the differences between heterodimeric and homodimeric BMPs mostly lie in time and magnitude of signaling and functions. This may be due to an overlap in the usage and functions of the receptors. In contrast, only heterodimeric BMPs can activate the signaling of dorsalventral patterning in zebra fish. The two type I receptors Alk3/6 and Alk8 in zebrafish exhibited non-redundant roles. And the signaling for dorsoventral patterning can only be activated by the receptor complex that contains both Alk3/6 and Alk8. Similar to human, homodimeric BMP2 binds the type I receptors Alk3/6 with high affinity and recruits the type II receptor poorly BMP antagonism requires only a bimolecular interaction between one ligand and one antagonist molecule, which is thermodynamically more likely than assembly of the five-molecule ligand–receptor complex required for BMP signaling. Therefore, the signaling will be elicited only from ligands with a robust ability to assemble functional ligand–receptor complexes. The competition for ligand binding between antagonists and receptors combined with the reduced affinity of homodimers for one type of receptor, possibly in conjunction with reduced affinity of heterodimers for some antagonists, might account for the less potency of homodimers and the exclusive requirement for heterodimers in dorsoventral patterning We only briefly summarize the signaling of heterodimeric BMPs in drosophila embryo since the subject has been previously reviewed Similar to homodimeric BMPs, an important application of heterodimeric BMPs is to induce osteogenesis. The functional characteristics of heterodimeric BMPs for osteogenesis are highly consistent with their signaling pathways ( The osseous restoration of critical-sized bone defects remains a challenge in the fields of orthopedics, maxillofacial surgery and dental implantology Heterodimeric BMPs unanimously exhibited significantly higher dose efficiency (from 1.3 to dozens folds) in inducing Another functional characteristic for heterodimeric BMP is the acceleration of cellular events during osteoblastogenesis Consistent with homodimeric BMPs, RANKL is also indispensible for the induction of osteoclastogenesis by heterodimeric BMP2/7 Consistent with their Tumorigenesis can be modulated (induced or inhibited) by BMPs As “body morphogenetic proteins,” BMPs also modulate the roof plate-mediated repulsion of commissural axon during spinal cord development. Analysis of gene-knockout mice indicates BMP7 and GDF7 (BMP12) act coordinately, not redundantly, in the roof plate. Furthermore, GDF7 lacks of activity as a chemorepellent Heterodimeric BMPs possess a high affinity to both types of BMP receptors. They also appear to benefit from the lower affinity to BMP antagonists than homodimeric BMPs. These characteristics of heterodimeric BMPs appear to be beneficial since they modulate processes like bone formation at a much lower concentration, thus enabling a promising application potential in bone tissue engineering. In addition, heterodimeric BMPs play indispensible roles in numerous other processes related to organ formation, such as embryo development. Hopefully, more studies will be performed to further uncover the functional characteristics and signaling pathways of heterodimeric BMPs in near future. All authors have no conflicts of interest. The authors thank Prof. Dr Vincent Everts from Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam, Research Institute MOVE, VU University of Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands for a critical review.