Optimizing the geometrical shape of a wheel plate is one of the key approaches to enhance its use-reliability and fatigue strength. This study analyzed the residual stress, mechanical stress, and fatigue in six types of wheel plate shapes. We found that the residual stress was lowest and highest in the S-shaped and double S-shaped wheel plates, respectively. The former endured the maximum mechanical load. The highest fatigue resistance was achieved with the S-shaped wheel plates, and the least with the straight-shaped ones. Overall, the mechanical stress played a major role in fatigue determination, whereas the wheel plate shape had a minor effect while bearing only a lateral load.In recent years, owing to the increase in the axle weight, and driving speed and the appearance of defects on the outer and inner surfaces of a wheel, there has been an increase in the fatigue failure phenomenon during vehicle operation [ Various research studies have evaluated the fatigue of the wheel plate based on the uniaxial fatigue criteria defined in the International Union of Railway standard (UIC-510-5) [ The effect of manufactured residual stress on a wheel plate during manufacture is similar to applying a static average force of equal magnitude mechanically. In comparison, the wheel-rail mechanical stress is not very large; however, it occurs frequently. Therefore, it can affect the fatigue of a wheel plate. This thesis examines the effect of different shape plates on the residual stress, wheel-rail mechanical stress, and fatigue evaluation of a wheel based on the AAR-S669 standard by employing the ANSYS finite element software. First, we calculate the temperature field of the axisymmetric element of Plane 55 during heat treatment. Then, Plane 55 is transformed into the structure element of Plane 182 that is used to evaluate the stress field during heat treatment. Finally, we obtain the distribution of the residual stress. The residual stress of a manufactured wheel varies significantly owing to the wear of the rim; it is calculated by “killing” the wear element by using a new wheel with the element-kill method of FEM. The parameters employed are (1) heat treatment at a quench temperature of 860 °C (considered as a uniform distribution), (2) dwell time of 52 s after heating, (3) quenching duration of 300 s of the tread water spray, (4) dwell time of 600 s after quenching, (5) temper temperature of 480 °C, (6) temper time of 4 h, and (7) ratio of air cooling to the home temperature. The required wear is set as 25.4 mm of rim thickness according to the AAR-S660 standard. Based on the GE-P3 wheel, the position and size of the rim and the hub and the thickness of the two ends of the plate are maintained. The shape of the plate is modified, and six differently shaped plates of the wheel are designed. The characteristic positions of wheel plates are marked in After heat treatment, the wheel plate produced significant radial and hoop residual stresses.  For the S-shaped wheel plate, the maximum residual tensile stress acts on the front side of the hub-plate fillet(FPH) and the back side of the rim-plate fillet(BPR), while the maximum radial compressive stress acts on the back side of the hub-plate fillet(BPH) and the front side of the rim-plate fillet(FPR). There exists a negative correlation between the numerical magnitude of the radial residual stress and amplitude of the S-shaped wheel. Thus, as the amplitude of the S-shaped wheel increases, the extreme value of the residual stress decreases. When the amplitude value between the two ends of the plate decreases 20 mm(for S For the double-S shaped plate, the maximum radial tensile stress is located on the back side of the middle plate(BMP), and its value is 246.65 MPa, which is larger than that of S For the basin shaped wheel plate, the maximum radial tensile stress is located on the front side of the hub-plate fillet, and its value (210.65 MPa) is more than that ofS For the straight shaped wheel plate, the maximum radial tensile stress is located on the FPH, with a value of 217.65 MPa, which exceeds that of S The abovementioned analysis shows that the distribution form and numerical magnitude of the residual stresses are only slightly affected by the S-shaped wheel plate. The double-s shaped wheel plate causes a significant increase in the residual stresses, which not only affects the distribution form and features, but also the numerical magnitude. The straight shaped wheel plate has a weaker effect on the residual stresses than the former one. In addition, the distribution form and numerical magnitude of the residual stresses of the straight shaped wheel is different from that of S There is a two wheel-rail loading case (V1 + L1, V2) according to AAR-S660 the standard. The method of enduring a non-axisymmetric load is used in the axisymmetric harmonic element of ANYS. It analyzes the mechanical stresses in two-dimensions. The wheel-rail concentrates the load expansion along the hoop direction based on a Fourier series. Then the expansion of the load is applied to the loading area, and the stress is calculated. We finally obtain the stress distribution of different angle sections introduced by the superposition of the loading case. The research shows that, there are more than 36 and 72 expansion terms forth new and worn wheels, respectively, with the equivalent stress of the plate converging to a fixed value. The equivalent stress of the zero-angle section is significantly large compared to the other sections under a wheel-rail loading. From The equivalent stress of the straight shaped wheel plate is significantly higher than that of the wheels of other shapes. The maximum equivalent stress of the BPH of the worn straight shaped wheel plate is 447.10 MPa, under V1 + L1 loading case, exceeding that of S During the lateral loading of a straight shaped wheel plate, the bearing capacity is significantly weakened. Since the axial stiffness of a straight shaped wheel is low, its radial stiffness is high, which is also its weakness. In bearing the V2 loading, the equivalent stress of the worn straight shaped wheel exceeds that ofS For the V1 + L1 loading case, double-S shaped wheel plate, the maximum value of equivalent stress of the worn double-S shaped wheel plate exceeds that of S The basin shaped wheel has the same reasonable stiffness as the S-shaped wheel plate. Therefore, its bearing capacity is second only to the S-shaped wheel. The above analysis shows that the best endurance to the mechanical load is given by the S-shaped wheel, whereas the stress distribution form and numerical magnitude of the different S-shaped plates are not different. Among the wheel plates, the straight shaped wheel plate has the worst endurance to a mechanical load. The fatigue evaluation method of a wheel plate is given by AAR-S669. Its fatigue calculation adopts the Sines multi-axial fatigue criterion. Similarly, the AAR-S669 standards define Sines fatigue value As the mechanical load increases, the The Sines fatigue criterion is used in static strength fatigue analysis. It is assumed that the wheel endures only one wheel-rail mechanical load case in all the services. Therefore, the The fatigue distribution of To analyze the effect of different plates shape on the fatigue strength of the wheel plate, the maximum To analyze the effect of different plate shapes on the components of fatigue value Under V2 load, the wheel plate has a minor effect on fatigue. Under V1 + L1 load, For different S-shaped plates, the difference in the equivalent values of the stress amplitudes of the mechanical load ( The equivalent value of the stress amplitude of the mechanical load ( The equivalent value of the stress amplitude of the mechanical load ( 4)The equivalent value of the stress amplitude of the mechanical load ( The above analysis reveals that the amplitude of the S-shape has little effect on the fatigue value SP. The mechanical loads of P The study presented in this report is based on the AAR-S669 and AAR-S660 standards. It utilizes ANSYS finite element software as the platform, and analyzes the effect of wheel plate shapes on the residual stress, wheel-mechanical stress and fatigue evaluation. The main conclusions of this work are as follows: The amplitude of the S-shape has only a minor effect on the distribution form and the numerical magnitude of the residual stress of the wheel plate. The double-S shape of the wheel has the highest impact on the residual stress, and its radial stress is 43 MPa, which is considerably larger than that ofS The equivalent stresses of the six plate shapes under V1 + L1 loading case are generally higher than those under V2 loading case. The most endurance to the mechanical load is exhibited by the S-shaped wheel, followed by the basin shaped wheel, and the least endurance to the mechanical load is provided by the straight shaped wheel. All the six wheel shapes provide fatigue resistance according to Sines' fatigue criterion. The wheel plate has little effect on fatigue while bearing only vertical load. The straight shaped and basin shaped wheels display the least performance for fatigue resistance under vertical and lateral mechanical loads, and the mechanical stress pays a major role in causing fatigue. The wheel-rail mechanical stresses of P This research was supported by Natural Science Research Major Project for