Most of the mine operators use Non-electric and Detonating cord with cord relay initiation system for blasting in surface mines. The ground vibration predictor equation proposed by United States Bureau of Mines (USBM) using Non-electric or Detonating cord with cord relay initiation system gives erroneous results while predicting the Peak particle velocity (PPV) at point of interest. The predicted values of PPV using the scaled distance equation and actual values shows significant errors in case of blasting with pyrotechnic based delay initiation system. The errors between predicted and actual PPV may be attributed to the fact that the cap scatter in pyrotechnic based delay initiation system varies from ±10% to ±20%. Variation of actual firing time from the designated time delay may result in altered firing order, overlapping of holes and failure of the blasting sequence, which can cause altered maximum charge per delay resulting in high vibration levels. Therefore, it becomes very important to understand the impact of cap scattering on maximum charge per delay and influence of altered maximum charge per delay on blast-induced ground vibration.
                  In this paper, a new concept of modified charge per delay has been developed to predict the blast-induced peak particle velocity for blasts using different initiating systems having varying cap scatter while using the same predictor equation. It is seen that a significant reduction in errors has been obtained between actual and predicted PPV with values of root mean square errors (RMSE) up to 1.361 mm/s.Mining activities remain a time and cost-intensive business, therefore, accurate planning and cost efficiency have been the important factors in excavation operations. In a move to improve overall cost-efficiency in large mining and construction operations, operators are adopting the use of electronic detonators for accurately controlling time delays, to improve rock fragmentation, lower vibration levels, reduce oversize and to lessen the potential of fly-rock The use of Electronic detonators is a latest technological advancement in the field of blasting; it is also proven by many of the researchers that electronic detonators have improved the blast performance Peak particle velocity (PPV) is generally deemed to be the main control target of ground vibration in engineering. It is established that the PPV is mainly affected by the maximum charge per delay which varies with the distance of monitoring and site geology. Maximum charge per delay and distance of monitoring are the major controllable parameters where site geology is uncontrollable. Due to adverse effect of blast-induced ground vibration, accurately predicting blasting vibration velocity and analyzing the attenuation law of the parameter are of great significance It is commonly perceived that the inherent random timing scatters of conventional non-electric initiation systems is a major contributing factor to the inconsistencies observed which may be alleviated through Electronic detonators. Due to scattering (±10–20%) in pyrotechnic detonators the timing of detonation of each hole cannot be accurately predicted, which leads to probability of overlapping of detonated holes The variation of overlapping of detonating holes due to scattering of time delay in initiating system causing varied maximum instantaneous charge influencing blast induced ground vibration in production blasts have not yet studied in detail. In this paper an attempt has been made to develop a concept of modified charge per delay due to different percentage of cap scattering in initiation system. The most acceptable concept of vibration prediction is of Scaled Distance (SD) given by United States Bureau of Mines (USBM) The peak level of ground motion at any given point is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the shot point Earlier many researchers such as To study the effect of delay time precision and cap scattering on blast-induced ground vibration level, trial blasts was conducted at Amalgamate Joyrampur Colliery, Lodna Area, BCCL. The PPV of trial blasts conducted using different initiation systems are recorded at different distances in seismographs. The site selected for the trials blasts is Amalgamate Joyrampur colliery, Lodna area, BCCL. Details of the blasting site Location The Amalgamated Joyrampur Colliery (Mega Project ‘D’) is located in the eastern-central part of Jharia Coalfield in Dhanbad district of Jharkhand. The Mega Project ‘D’ lies between latitude 23° 42′14″ to 23˚43′59″ N and longitude 86˚24′43″ to 86° 26′ 45″E. The area is covered under Topo sheet no- 73-i/6. Accessibility and communication The project area lay in the eastern-central part of Jharia Coal field and located at about 18 KM from Dhanbad Township. The nearest Railway station is Bhaga Railway station which is located at 4 Km from Lodna area. The mines of this cluster are about 11 Km–18 KM from Dhanbad Railway stations. The nearest Town is Jharia which is located about 6 KM from this cluster. The project area is well connected by cemented road with Dhanbad-Jharia-Sindri District Board Road, which runs along the western Boundary of Lodna Colliery. Site and Instrumentation At Amalgamated Joyrampur Colliery (Mega Project ‘D’) the barakar formation, occurring below the soil covers, consists of sandstone, argillaceous sandstone, arenaceous shale, carbonaceous shale, grey shale and coal seams. Trial blasts were conducted on second overburden bench using three numbers of Minimate Plus (Instantel make) vibration monitors. Details of blast design parameters and monitored vibration observations are as shown in Data Collection The blasts were conducted using Electronic, NONEL/Shock tube and Detonating cord with cord relay initiation system with varying maximum charge per delay. To record the blast induced ground vibration, seismographs i.e. Minimate plus (Instantel Inc., Canada) were fixed at a distance of 40 m to 330 m from the blasting point. Total 63 vibration readings were recorded at different distances with Nonel initiating system, 62 vibration readings were recorded at different distances using Electronic initiation system, and 68 vibration readings were recorded at different distances using a detonating cord with cord relay. Vibration data collected with the different initiating system is plotted against the SD on the same graph as shown in The vibration readings collected with different initiation systems are plotted against SD ( Setup with two channel digital storage oscilloscope and microphone was used to test the scattering in detonators. Delay timing of detonators was measured one by one. Two lead wires of detonators were connected to a constant current generator unit. Constant current generator unit connected to channel I of oscilloscope and microphone was connected in channel II of the oscilloscope. After the necessary connections and safety checks, firing button in constant current generator was pressed. Channel 1 of oscilloscope records the firing pulse generated by the constant current generator and channel two records the sound generated due to detonation sound recorded in microphone. The time interval between the start of current supply and detonators detonation time is considered the delay time/scatter. To find out the scattering percentage in both cord relay and Nonel initiating system, eight numbers of cord relays and eight numbers of Nonel detonators were taken randomly for scattering test. The scattering test results are shown in It is observed that while using cord relay an average scattering is ±20% and in Nonel delay detonators the average scattering is ±10%. While using different initiation system, i.e. Electronic Detonators, detonating cord with cord relay and shock tube in same geological condition with same blast design parameters (Spacing, Burden, Depth of hole, the diameter of hole etc.), only thing varies the precision in timing of detonation of each hole It is quite evident and also proven by many scientists that Electronic Detonators are very accurate. It is also claimed by the manufacturers that it has the scattering of ±0.05%. So, the accurate charge per delay is known which can be used to find the site constant values, these values are considered as the actual values of site constants which will remain same for any initiating system while using scaled distance approach While Using NONEL and Detonating cord with a pyrotechnic detonator, due to higher cap scattering overlapping of holes increases resulting in higher charge per delay and higher blast-induced ground vibrations. A different approach is tried here considering the cap scattering effect of pyrotechnic detonators (Both NONEL and D-cord) to predict the ground vibration more accurately. The initiation system used for blasting are Detonating cord with cord relay, Non-electric (NONEL) and Electronic detonators. These initiation systems differ in their accuracy and show a cap scattering in a different level of percentage. The scattering leads to overlapping of holes and hence increase in charge per delay. The overlapping of holes due scattering effect of the initiation system is analysed using a probabilistic approach. A shock tube detonator is a non-electric explosive fuse or initiator in the form of small-diameter hollow plastic tubing used to transport an initiating signal to an explosive charge by means of a percussive wave travelling the length of the tube. The shock wave travels with the speed of 2000 m/s inside the shock tube BLAST DESIGN PARAMETERS: No. of holes = 18 Spacing = 3.5 m Burden = 3.0 m Depth of hole = 5.5 m The blast design ( Using the above equations for the considered blast design ( Length of shock tube used per hole = 3.5 + 5.5 = 9.0 m Time taken by shock wave to travel one hole to another = 9.0 m ÷ 2000 m/s = 4.5 ms A time of 4.5 ms due to travel of shock wave in shock tube is added in designated time to get the actual designated time of detonation of each hole ( Taking a scattering of ±10% in an actual designated time of blast of each hole using NONEL (As calculated in The highest possible time at which the detonation may occur is calculated as: Due to cap scattering, the time of detonation of hole will lie between the lowest possible time of the detonation to highest possible time of detonation and is termed the as the “time window of detonation”. The time window of detonation of each hole for the blast design is plotted on a time line as shown in  Similarly, In the similar manner the probability of Detonation of single hole (P (1)), probability of detonation of two holes together (P (2)), probability of detonation of three holes together (P (3)) and probability of detonation of four holes together (P (4)) is calculated. The probabilities of detonation of holes together are calculated for the blast design ( The probabilities of detonation of single, two, three and four holes together using Nonel/Shock tube initiation system is calculated ( The probability of detonation of single, two, three and four holes together of complete 18 holes blast design ( This is will very random to tell wether single hole will detonate or two, three, four holes will detonate together. Theoretically the expected value of a number of holes detonating together (E) can be calculated by using a probability-weighted average of all possibilities, which can be calculated as:    The theoretically expected value of a number of holes detonating together(E) for the 18-hole blast designed using Nonel/Shock tube initiation system when calculated using the above equation comes out to be 1.57 holes. Hence the expected theoretical value of charge per delay will be modified to 1.57 times the amount of explosive charged in a single hole. Pyrotechnic detonator with Detonating cord, Detonating cord is a thin, flexible plastic tube usually filled with pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN, pentrite). The PETN explodes at a rate of 6000 m/s. It is a high-speed fuse which explodes, rather than burns, and is suitable for detonating high explosives. The detonating cord used while trial blast is having 10gm of PETN per meter of cord. The Scattering time window of 20% (As calculated in In Time taken by detonation front to reach one hole to another travelling along the length of detonating cord is an additional time added in designated detonation time. Time added due to the propagation of detonation front along detonating cord between two holes to find the actual time of detonation of each hole can be calculated as: Using the above equations for the considered blast design ( Length of detonating fuse used per hole = 3.5 + 5.5 = 9.0 m Velocity of detonation of detonating fuse = 6000 m/s. Time taken by detonation front to travel one hole to another = 9.0 m ÷ 6000 m/s = 1.5 ms A time of 1.5 ms due to the propagation of detonation front wave in detonating fuse is added in designated time to get the actual designated time of detonation of each hole. The blast design with an actual designated time of detonation of each hole is given in The time window of detonation of each hole for the blast design ( The probability of Detonation of a single hole (P (1)), the probability of detonation of two holes together (P (2)), the probability of detonation of three holes together (P (3)) and the probability of detonation of four holes together (P (4)) is calculated. The probabilities of detonation of holes together are calculated for the blast design ( The probabilities of detonation of a single, two, three and four holes together using D-cord initiation system is calculated ( The probability of detonation of single, two, three and four holes together for complete 18 holes blast design ( The theoretically expected value of a number of holes detonating together(E) for the 18-hole blast designed using D-cord initiation system when calculated using probability-weighted average comes out to be 2.30 holes. Hence the expected theoretical value of charge per delay will be modified to 2.30 times the amount of explosive charged in a single hole using a D-cord initiation system. Electronic Detonators are known for its Accuracy of timing, and they have the scattering range of ±0.05%. The Scattered time window of detonation is calculated with a scattering of ±0.05% ( The probabilities of detonation of a single, two, three and four holes together using Electronic initiation system is calculated ( As the probability of detonation of a single hole is 1.0, the expected number of holes detonating together(E) while using electronic initiation system when calculated using probability-weighted average comes out to be 1.0. Hence the expected theoretical value of charge per delay will be the amount of explosive charged in a single hole when using electronic initiation system. Modified charge per delay (Q With the above analysis, it is now possible to calculate the theoretically expected number of holes detonating together with different initiation system for different blast designs. While the analysis is done with a specified blast design ( With the emulsion explosive, the cast booster(s) are also present in a hole. Cast boosters contain PETN which is a high explosive used to detonate the emulsion explosive in the hole. The actual amount of explosive charged in a hole(Q) is the amount of emulsion explosive (Q AWS (Absolute Weight strength) of PETN = 1400Kcal/Kg AWS of Emulsion = 880 Kcal/Kg This means 1 kg of PETN releases 1400 Kcal of energy where 1 kg of explosive emulsion releases 880 Kcal, that means it will take 1.6 Kg of the emulsion explosive to generate 1400 Kcal of energy which is equal to 1 kg of PETN. Hence, 1 kg PETN = 1.6 Kg of Emulsion So, if the amount of PETN in the booster is Q Which means the amount of total explosive charged in a hole can be expressed as: Q is the amount of total explosive charged in a hole (kg). Q Q If Q is the amount of total explosive charged in a hole (Kg), then with detonating cord initiation system, the modified charge per delay (Q Q E is the theoretical expected value of detonation of holes together Q is the amount of total explosive charged in a hole (kg) This value of modified charge per delay can be used with scaled distance approach (as discussed above) to calculate the modified scaled distance (SD SD Q K, n is the site constant found with actual data of vibration collected using an electronic initiation system The analysis when repeated with 40 different blast designs (Spacing, Burden, number of holes, scatter percentage, Number of holes in a row and number of rows). The theoretically expected value of holes detonating together(E) varied with different blast designs. When the data of 40 different blast design with a theoretical expected value of detonation of holes together(E) is modelled under linear regression using MATLAB, it is found that the theoretically expected value of detonation of holes together (E) can be expressed as: - [Correlation coefficient = 0.9794] where, E = Theoretical expected value of detonation of holes together S S = Spacing D = Depth of hole V = Velocity of Detonation of Detonating cord/Shock wave speed in shock tube C = No of hole in a Row R = No. of rows Also, Modified charge per delay can be expressed as Q Q E = Theoretical expected value of detonation of holes together Trials were conducted at different mines, and actual value of PPV at a different distance was collected with different initiation system. The site constants were found using Digital/Electronic initiation system and used to calculate/predict the PPV for detonating cord and Nonel initiation system using modified charge per delay in scaled distance approach. The predicted value than compared with the actual value of PPV to validate the concept used. Total 16 no of the trial blast was performed with 62 no of observation of vibrations at different distances ( The value of field constants as per scaled distance analysis is found K = 205.21, n = -1.232 This site constant values are now used in scaled distance equation with a modified charge per delay (using Eq. The values predicted using modified charge per delay for detonating cord initiation system were very close to the actual value of PPV the root mean square error of 1.361 only ( The values predicted using modified charge per delay for Nonel/Shock tube initiation system were also very close to the actual value of PPV the root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.8155 only ( The concept of modified charge per delay was validated on the Dragline bench blast at Jayant mine of Northern Coalfield Limited (NCL) (A subsidiary of Coal India Limited) using different initiation system, i.e. Electronic detonator and Detonating cord. Field trials with different initiation system, i.e. Electronic Detonator and Detonating cord were conducted. Details of data collected are as shown in the table below in Curve Fitting using Electronic detonator reading is drawn to find the site constants value using Scaled distance approach (see The value of field constants as per scaled distance analysis is found K = 43.907, n = −0.739 This site constant values are used to predict/calculate the PPV using a detonating cord with a modified charge per delay in scaled distance equation. The values predicted using modified charge per delay for detonating cord initiation system were very close to the actual value of PPV with the root mean square error of 0.91 only ( Mine operators mostly use non-electric and detonating cord with cord relay initiating systems for blasting in surface mines. The scaled distance predictor equation/site constants are determined using PPV values recorded for blasting with pyrotechnic initiation system for further prediction of blast-induced ground vibrations. The same predicting equation when used for predicting the PPV of the production blasts, significant errors between predicted and actual PPV has been found due to cap scattering in initiating system. A concept of modified charge per delay developed in this study will help the mine operators to achieve the precision in prediction of PPV using different initiating systems (with varying cap scatter) with a single scaled distance predictor equation. The developed concept of modified charge per delay has been validated at Amalgamated Joyrampur colliery, BCCL, where, the predicted values of peak particle velocities came very close to actual value with very less error and root mean square error (RMSE) of 1.361 with detonating cord and 0.8155 with NONEL/Shock tube initiation system. Also, validation is done in Jayant opencast mine with resulting RMSE value of 0.91 with detonating cord initiation system. The lower values of RMSE proves the precision/effectiveness of the developed approach. The developed approach for determination of modified charge per delay (Q