Using Ca(OH)2–H2O–CO2 system and adjusting suitable technical parameters, by a heterogeneous nucleation principle, nanometer calcium carbonate reactants would deposit, nucleate and grow on surface of original mineral host particles (OMHP) with micron grain size produced by pulverization. Kinds of surface nano-structured particles (SNSP) with rough surface and blunt edges had successfully been prepared in this system. SNSP not only exhibit outstanding properties of nano-sized particles, but also improve surface morphology of OMHP. Compared to OMHP, the specific surface area of SNSP can be increased twice or above. After filled in polymer, SNSP could reduce or avoid local stress concentration within composite materials, compared with the result by filling OMHP with sharp edges and flat cleavage plane in polymer. Coinstantaneously, nano-sized particles coated on SNSP surfaces carried by micron-sized particles would evenly be dispersed in polymer matrix. Filling tests show that the polypropylene(PP)–SNSP composites have better mechanical properties and consistency between SNSP and PP matrix than PP–OMHP composites.Almost all plastic and rubber products are composite materials filled by fillers in the polymer. Carbonate, silica and talc powders et al. as inorganic mineral fillers are widely used in plastic, rubber and paint industries. More than 1 million t/a calcium carbonate were used as filler only in plastic industry in China ( Furthermore, well-dispersed nano-powders cannot be easily achieved when filled in polymer, because of their great specific surface energy and intense/strong agglomeration ( This work is to investigate how to prepare SNSP in Ca(OH) Wollastonite–OMHP with 4.89 μm of average size was provided by Beijing Guoli Superfine Powder Company, Beijing, China. Ground calcium carbonate (GCC)–OMHP with 5.20 μm of average size was supplied by Shandong Hongda Cement Ltd., Shandong Province, China. Lump lime was offered by Shijiazhuang Boda Calcium Industry Ltd., Hebei Province, China. Polypropylene (PP, P1340) was purchased from the third Chemical Plant of Beijing Yanshan Petrifaction Plant. The experiments were performed in a thermostated double-wall vessel at 25–35 °C. The total volume of the working solution was 1.5 l for small-type vessel and 50 l in pilot scale. The solutions employed were prepared by mixing slurry of either GCC–OMHP or wollastonite–OMHP with Ca(OH) The mixed gas of air and CO Particle morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopes (SEM, JSM-6301F and CSM-950 type). Crystalline phases were evaluated by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/max-RB, with Cu Ka radiation). Quantitative element composition within particle surfaces was monitored by an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, PHI5300 type, PIII Company, American). The specific surface area of OMHP and SNSP samples was determined by the BET standard method using the NOVA4000 analyzer. The pH value of the suspension was monitored by a pH meter, PB-10 type, Sartorius Stock Company, Germany.  Extensive optimization to the experimental parameters was conducted in order to produce uniform coating of nano-sized calcium carbonate on the surface of OMHP, since the coating process was sensitive to the experiment conditions and in most of the trials undesirable products were obtained ( GCC-based SNSP were achieved in Ca(OH) At the similar operating conditions, 1:11 of Ca(OH) The differences of either grain size or shape of guest particles on surface of wollastonite-based and GCC-based SNSP would be attributable to different Ca(OH) To evaluate the roughness and particle size, specific surface area, as determined by a multiple-point BET method, was listed in Dolomite-based SNSP had also been successfully prepared in the same system. The specific surface area of the dolomite-based SNSP is as twice high as that of dolomite–OMHP although the experimental details are not shown here ( To examine the binding strength between guest and host particles of GCC-based SNSP, a wet stirring mill is used. The mill is comprised of a static cylinder filled zirconia beads of 1 mm in diameter and an agitator coated by Al Scanning electric micrographs of GCC-based SNSP surface morphology after treatment of 30 min, 45 min, 60 min in the mill are shown in The detailed discussion related to the binding strength between guest and host particle will be published in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to analyze the crystal structure and orientation. The XRD pattern of wollastonite-based SNSP is shown in In addition, XPS analyses show that Ca/Si weight ratio is 2:1 in the surface elementary component of wollastonite-based SNSP. While for wollastonite–OMHP, the ratio is only 1:1. Considering the 346.7 eV binding energy of Ca Pure calcium carbonate has three crystalline forms; calcite, aragonite and vaterite. The conventional morphologies of calcite, aragonite and vaterite are rhombohedral, needle-like and spheroidal, respectively. Aragonite and calcite have very similar crystal structure. The former is slightly less stable than the latter at ambient temperature and pressure ( Preparation of SNSP was conducted in Ca(OH) At the initial stage, consumption of Ca The calcium hydroxide solution is achieved by mixing limestone with 70–80 °C hot water, slaking 6 h above and sieving with 150 μm sizing screen. The filtrate obtained is used in our experiment. There is the following reaction existing in the system. Based on the heterogeneous nucleation principle ( It is understood that the preparation of GCC-based SNSP is by deposition of nano-sized calcium carbonate particles formed in bulk solution because the reaction equilibrium constant, 2.312 During the preparation of wollastonite-based SNSP, the newly formed nano-sized calcium carbonate reactants first adsorbed on the surface of wollastonite–OMHP, and then the CaCO In order to examine the filling performance of GCC–OMHP and GCC-based SNSP, they are filled in PP. The mechanical properties of these two kinds of composite materials were tested under the Chinese national standards of GB1040-92 and GB1843–1996 ( One important factor can be seen from In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that SNSP can be achieved in Ca(OH) The milling tests show that the guest particles are strongly adhered on the surface of the host particles. The adhesion between them was chemical one. Different SNSP of three kinds of minerals in the system had successfully been prepared, suggesting the versatile adaptability of the coating technology to different mineral powders. Compared to PP/OMHP composites, the use of the SNSP in PP improves largely the interfacial coalescence of PP/SNSP composite materials at the same filling amount. The financial support provided by the project (50474003) of National Natural Science Foundation of China for this work was gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to give special thanks to Dr. Hao Xiangyang for assistance with proof-reading of the text.