Low-temperature oxidation of four different-rank Turkish coals was studied in order to assess the effects of temperature, particle size, coal petrography, and coal rank by monitoring CO2 and CO formation rates and calculated CO/CO2 ratios. Coals were classified to −425+212, −212+150, and −150+106μm size groups and oxidized at 40, 60, and 90°C. Temperature has a pronounced effect on the formation rates of CO2 and CO; when the temperature increases, the formation rates of CO2 and CO also increases. Nevertheless, the formation rates of CO2 and CO were found to be independent of particle size, particularly at relatively lower temperatures. Petrographic analysis showed that the coal sample having the highest inertinite group macerals was oxidized more easily, thus, yielding more CO2 and CO. Relatively higher rank coals were oxidized more easily, but oxidation diminishes with time. On the contrary, oxidation progresses with time for lower rank samples especially at relatively higher temperatures.Oxidation of coal has received much attention since it is responsible from the major compositional and structural changes in the weathering of coal Wang et al. The reaction between coal and oxygen at low temperature depends on many factors such as temperature, particle size, surface area, coal pore structure, moisture content, coal rank, and the composition of air. Schmal Petrology of oxidized coals has been investigated to understand the reasons of spontaneous combustion and associated mine fires Vitrain plays a decisive part in the outbreaks of mine fires, whereas the other constituents absorb oxygen much less readily Vitrinite, regardless of rank, is always the maceral group most susceptible to spontaneous combustion, but this depends mostly on external factors The most stable and least sorptive are dull and semi-dull coals. Most oxidizable and sorptive are coal specimens that are tectonically mylonitized (vitrain and vitraino-fusain types). Moreover, the tendency to oxidation varies with time, such that bright coal oxidizes more rapidly than the dull coal in initial oxidation, but the oxidation of the bright coal is retarded at a later stage When coals are weathered at lower temperatures, i.e. up to 150 Temperature has a pronounced effect on low-temperature oxidation of coals. Winmill General findings of the experimental studies on low-temperature oxidation indicate that there is a relationship between particle size and rate of oxidation This paper presents results of the low-temperature oxidation experiments performed at 40, 60, and 90 The samples used in the study were collected from Mengen-İncesu (Bolu), Western Lignites Enterprise (GLI) Tuncbilek panel No. 7C/2 (Kutahya), Amasra (Kalin Seam), and Uzulmez (Acun Seam) Collieries of Turkish Hardcoal Enterprises (TTK), Zonguldak Basin, Turkey. For practical reasons, Mengen–Incesu, Tuncbilek panel No. 7C/2, TTK Uzulmez, and TTK Amasra samples will be denoted as MEN, GLI, UZM, and AMS throughout the article, respectively. Samples were ground and sieved to three different size groups as −425 Proximate and ultimate analyses were carried out for original samples and size groups by using a high temperature furnace, an adiabatic calorimeter, Leco-CHN 600 organic element analyzer, and a Leco-S132 sulfur analyzer ( Petrographic analyses were carried out under incident light by using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope equipped with a photometer, a point counter, and a mercury fluorescent light source. Blue light excitation, when applicable, was used to differentiate liptinite macerals from mineral matter and molding resin. Maceral group analysis was carried out on mineral-free basis, but the amount of pyrite is given since it is regarded as important for oxidation and spontaneous combustion of coal. Sample preparation for petrographic analyses is described in detail elsewhere Although MEN and AMS samples seem to have the same rank according to ASTM classification, All samples were obtained as fresh blocks (approximately 5-kg each) from the working faces of mines to minimize pre-oxidation before the experiments. Samples were crushed and ground using a jaw crusher and a sealed ball mill, respectively and then sieved to three different particle size groups as −425  Before commencing an experiment, 125 For each oxidation test, 20 consecutive analyses were performed using GC. Each analysis took 22.5 The data belonging to the first analyses in GC were removed from the graphs since it was observed that it takes nearly 60  CO/CO Experimental results showed that the temperature has a pronounced effect on the oxidation of coal samples. It was assessed that when the medium temperature increases, the formation rates of carbon oxides increase as well for all coal samples. The rates of production of CO CO/CO CO/CO Experimental results showed that the formation rates of CO are more consistent to evaluate the effect of the particle size even though CO The effect of particle size was not clearly observed in this study. It was almost impossible to observe the effect of particle size at 40 The effect of sample petrography on low-temperature oxidation of coal is assessed separately in this section in detail. However, it would be more beneficial to specify some general points related to the relationship between petrographic composition and breakage mechanism. In general, after grinding there might occur some differences between particle size groups in terms of petrographic composition. This may cause to selective beneficiation of coal constituents because of different breakage properties The main structure is composed of collinite, whereas telinite, whose cell structure is preserved, exist. Furthermore, high amount of fine grained, framboidal, and disseminated pyrite is noticeable with most grains containing pyrite ( Although micro-cracks in the sample structure are usually filled, especially for the size group of −425 The main maceral component of this sample is vitrinite. It is observed that almost all particles have mineral bands. Pyrite is abundant in this sample, but in lesser amount than in the MEN sample. In general, pyrite is found as fine grained and disseminated and as veins within the sample structure. For this sample, using vitrinite reflectance ( It can be assessed that micro-crack development is limited for the size group of −425 Vitrinite is the most common maceral for this sample (>90%) while inertinite macerals are rare. In general, inertinite group macerals are found in detrital form within the vitrinite particles, usually in the form of inertodetrinites and semifusinites. Pyrite and mineral matter is very limited for the sample. It is considered that high content of vitrinite is probably the main reason for the fast oxidation of the sample. While micro-crack development in −425 It was observed that vitrinite macerals are not as predominant as in other samples, whereas inertinite group macerals (semifusinite and fusinite) are very common (≈20%). Furthermore, a distinctive feature of this sample is that mineral matter could be found in almost any structure and inter-beddings are composed of layers containing low amount of organic constituents. Grains have banded structures mostly in vitrinite/semifusinite or vitrinite/liptinite type. The high inertinite group maceral content may be the primary reason for the fast oxidation of this sample, as well as banded structure which may form channels for oxygen to pass easily Low-temperature oxidation of four Turkish coals was examined at 40, 60, and 90 The ratio of the CO to CO Coal petrography has also important effects on the production rates of CO Reaction mechanism of coal oxidation is highly complex and a number of factors are effective on the process. Hence, a factor which is responsible for the oxidation of a specific coal sample may not reveal the same effect for another sample. Under different conditions a specific factor or a combination of factors, such as breakage mechanism, moisture content of the samples, or combination of petrographic factors may mostly be responsible for the oxidation. Thus, oxidation characteristics of either coal seams or different samples should be evaluated separately for specific oxidation conditions.