Slime coating is a considerable problem in the flotation of coal. Although many works have been done, there are still some problems that have not been clarified. In this work, the subtle behaviors of montmorillonite coating on coal surface under finely divided slurry pHs (from 2.7 to 10.6) were studied systematically through micro-flotation test, zeta potential distribution measurement, atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. Several interesting findings are summarized below. The flotation of coal even the highly hydrophobic one will be markedly depressed by montmorillonite once when the pH of the slurry is less than 6.5. However, under neutral condition, the degree of inhibition on the flotation recovery is related to the inherent hydrophobicity of coal itself, since only parts of the coal surfaces are covered by montmorillonite due to the unstable hetero-coagulation by the weak adhesion force. A good dispersion between coal and montmorillonite will be achieved when the pH of the slurry is greater than 8.2, which means good flotation performance restores.Coal has always been one of the important fossil energy sources ( In addition, fine slimes can be also adsorbed on the surface of the coal particle by the Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) forces, thereby probably changing the surface hydrophobicity of the coal and making it possible to change the adhesion behavior of the coal particle to the air bubble or the collector ( In fact, the harmful effects of slime coating on coal flotation were observed as early as decades ago ( However, to date, there are still some pivotal problems that have not been explored. For example, the inhibition of coal by slime coating under neutral conditions has not been clarified. In the present work, the behaviors of montmorillonite coating on coal surface under different slurry pHs were studied systematically. The situation of montmorillonite coating on coal surface under a neutral condition was analyzed for the first time. In addition, the relations between the inhibition degree of the flotation and the inherent hydrophobicity of coal were reported creatively. The work conducted in this paper is expected to provide a guiding significance for the efficient flotation of the coal. The raw coal sample used in this work was a coking coal picked from western Canada. Highly purified coal was obtained by using heavy liquid separation with a specific gravity of 1.3 and used as test sample. The proximate analysis results of the highly purified coal are shown in All the flotation experiments were carried out using a micro-flotation cell with volume of ∼150 mL and its schematic has been illustrated by M. Cao etc. ( The zeta potential measurements of coal and montmorillonite under different pHs were conducted using a Brookhaven Instrument (ZetaPALS Zeta Potential Analyzer, USA). The procedures of measurement and material preparation have been described in a former publication by the authors ( The working principle of AFM to measure interaction force between two objects has been elaborated by many researchers ( In order to visually observe the coating of montmorillonite on the surface of coal, the surface morphology of coal particles under different slurry pH was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. The specific measurement steps are as follows. About 3 g of high-purity coal particles (417–300 μm in size) with 100 mL of suspension containing montmorillonite were stirred in a beaker which contains 250 mL 1 mmol/L KCl for 10 min at the desired pH. Then the mixed suspension was filtered by a sieve with diameter of 125 μm to remove these unabsorbed montmorillonite particles. The coal particles remaining on the sieve surface were slightly rinsed with a small amount of deionized water and dried in the air and subsequently analyzed by the scanning electron microscope. The model of the scanning electron microscope used was GeminiSEM 500, the emission voltage was 15 kV, and the secondary electron was used as the signal source with a resolution of 0.6 nm. During the observation, the chemical compositions of the particle’s surfaces were examined by using the X-Max Extreme energy spectrometer in order to identify the type of the particle. The results of the flotation tests are shown in However, the flotation of coal in the presence of montmorillonite exhibits a completely different behavior. The addition of ∼23% montmorillonite results in a substantial recovery loss from 86% to 24% in the pH range of 2.7–6.5. The lowest recovery was observed at pH 2.7 over the tested range, accompanied by the highest ash content in the concentrate at this point, which shows that the floatability of the coal is completely lost. As the pH of the slurry increases, the flotation recovery gradually increases and completely restored at the pH of 6.5. Meanwhile, the ash content of the concentrate quickly drops from ∼25% to ∼14% during this process, indicating a better flotation selectivity is achieved although the ash content of the concentrate is still much higher compared with that of the pure coal. In the pH range of 6.5–10.6, the curve of flotation recovery in the presence of montmorillonite basically overlaps with that of the pure coal, indicating that the montmorillonite no longer depresses the flotation of coal. Meanwhile, the ash content of the concentrate continues to decline (ends ∼13%) but is still much higher compared with that of the pure coal owing to the mechanical entrainment of montmorillonite particles by the water ( To examine whether adding more collectors could increase the flotation recovery of the coal in the presence of montmorillonite, extra flotation tests with different collector dosages were conducted at pH ∼3. As can be seen from In summary, a direct conclusion can be drawn from the above flotation tests, i.e. the flotation recovery of coal in the presence of montmorillonite positively related to the pH of the slurry. It is most likely that the adhesion of montmorillonite to the surface of the coal should be responsible for this due to a fact that the double-layer repulsive force between montmorillonite and coal particle increases with the rising slurry pH which can alleviate the occurrence of hetero-coagulation. Is that true? Additionally, what pH value is the turning point after which the hetero-coagulation does not occur absolutely? In other word, does the hetero-coagulation between coal and montmorillonite still exist when pH is higher than 6.5? Furthermore, what information can be reflected from the ash content curve when the coal is subjected to flotation in the presence of montmorillonite? Answers for these questions will be discussed subsequently. The method based on zeta potential distribution measurement to study hetero-coagulation was reported by Xu et al., which is a pertinent technique to detect the interaction of binary particulate component suspension ( As can be seen from It can be seen from Under Alkaline condition, the individual zeta distributions of coal and montmorillonite locate very close and some parts even overlap as shown in The measurement of zeta potential distribution was able to clearly indicate the agglomeration state between coal and montmorillonite in acidic and alkaline slurry, but it failed in neutral slurry. However, if the interaction force between coal and montmorillonite can be detected, the state of hetero-coagulation in neutral slurry can be judged. In this work, the interaction forces between montmorillonite and coal were measured by AFM at three different solution pHs and the results were plotted as force distributions which are shown in At pH 7.48, the adhesion force between coal and montmorillonite is still present as shown in When the pH of the slurry increases to 10.55, the adhesion force still exists between coal and montmorillonite as shown in It is known that both OH The images of montmorillonite coatings on coal surface under different slurry pHs are shown in Arnold and Aplan investigated the effects of montmorillonite on the flotation of three different coals under different pH conditions in detail ( In this work, it has been confirmed that montmorillonite just partly coats coal surface when the coal is subjected to flotation under neutral conditions. Therefore, it can be concluded that, for highly hydrophobic coal, the residual hydrophobic sites on coal surface can still provide enough space to which collectors or bubbles can adhere, thereby exhibiting no effects on the flotation recovery. However, for coal with poor hydrophobicity, the flotation recovery of coal will be significantly affected even though only parts of its surface are covered by montmorillonite due to an extra degradation exerted on its originally poor hydrophobicity. The work herein draws several interesting conclusions. In a word, the degree of montmorillonite coating on coal surface is negatively correlated to the pH of the slurry. Detailed information is listed below. When the pH of the slurry is less than 6.5, the hetero-coagulation between coal and montmorillonite is serious, which can lead to a substantial loss in flotation recovery even for highly hydrophobic coal since a large area surface of the coal is to be covered by montmorillonite. The degree of hetero-coagulation between coal and montmorillonite in the range of pH 6.5 to 8.2 is relatively weak due to a significant reduction in the adhesion force. Only parts of coal surfaces are covered by montmorillonite, remaining substantial hydrophobic sites on coal surface. In this case, whether montmorillonite will affect the flotation recovery depends on the inherent hydrophobicity of the coal itself. Better hydrophobicity of the coal brings about less negative effect to the flotation performance. The adhesion force between coal and montmorillonite is extremely weak when the pH of the slurry is greater than 8.2, and as a result, no agglomeration occurs between coal and montmorillonite. In this case, the presence of montmorillonite does not affect the flotation recovery of the coal. The authors acknowledge the support by