The interaction between CaOH+ ions and pyrite, marcasite and pyrrhotite surfaces was studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The calculated results show that the adsorption energy of CaOH+ on the marcasite surface is the largest, −384.65kJ/mol; then pyrrhotite, −346.61kJ/mol; pyrite, −276.62kJ/mol. After CaOH+ adsorption, oxygen atom is bonded to one iron atom, calcium atom is bonded to two sulfur atoms of pyrite surface. And there exists a CaFe2 anti-bonding on the pyrite surface. For marcasite, oxygen atom is bonded to one iron atom, calcium atom is bonded to two sulfur atoms of marcasite surface. As for pyrrhotite, calcium atom is only attached to three sulfur atoms of pyrrhotite surface. The charge transfers occur from CaOH+ to sulfides surfaces. The value of charge transfer from CaOH+ to marcasite surface is the largest, then pyrite, pyrrhotite in order. However, formation of CaFe2 anti-bonding on the pyrite surface weakens the reaction of CaOH+ with pyrite.Pyrite, marcasite and pyrrhotite are the most widespread iron sulfide minerals, which often coexist with other valuable minerals, such as Cu, Pb, and Zn metallic sulfides. Therefore, it often need to separate iron sulfides from other sulfides in the practice of flotation. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and lime (CaO) are the most common depressants in the flotation separation of sulfide minerals. The flotation of polymetallic sulfides is general at about pH 12, while at a pH below 12.5, the main components after the dissolution of CaO in water are calcium hydroxyl ion (CaOH The mechanisms of lime depressing pyrite were investigated extensively, but various researchers reached different conclusions In this paper, the interactions of CaOH Based on the DFT, all calculations were carried out using CASTEP program module developed by Payne et al. Common pyrite (FeS All surfaces were obtained from the bulk sulfides with the optimum unit cell volume. The pyrite (1 The adsorption energies of CaOH The adsorptions of CaOH It is observed from   Changes of charge transfer (Δ For all systems, sum changes of electron transfer for CaOH    The interaction between CaOH This research was supported by