Cuprous ion has wide applications in various industries due to its properties to form stable coordination compound of high solubility with different ligands. Compared to extensive R&D work on solvent extraction of cupric ion, the limited work is reported on cuprous ion extraction using organic extractant. Therefore, in the present work, solvent extraction studies have been carried out for the extraction of cuprous ion Cu(I) from chloride solution using extractant tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) diluted in 1-octanol, for application to recover Cu(I) from the etch waste of printed circuit boards (PCBs). Initially, the studies were carried out for the selection of suitable diluent to be used for Cu(I) extraction from chloride solution. The organic 1-octanol was found effective diluent for TBP. The behavior and reaction mechanism of TBP diluted in 1-octanol was also studied for the extraction of Cu(I) from chloride solution. Various process parameters viz. contact time, concentration of chloride ion, hydrochloric acid and extractant, temperature, etc., were also studied. The extractant TBP diluted in 1-octanol was found suitable for the extraction of Cu(I) from the waste chloride solution (containing both Cu(I) and Cu(II)) generated from the plant of PCBs manufacturing. The extraction isotherm plot indicates the requirement of two stages for the complete extraction of Cu(I). The studies revealed the formation of complex [CuCl2
                     −·H+·TBP] in the organic phase. The extraction and stripping studies showed the suitability of the TBP diluted in 1-octanol for the recovery of cuprous ion from the waste chloride etch solution of PCBs.In electronics industries, copper is extensively used as engineering material for the fabrication of micro-electronic components, micro-engineered structures and precision parts. Copper etching is considerably important process for getting smooth surface, particularly in the fabrication of printed circuit boards (PCBs). Due to high etching capacity and easy regeneration properties, the cupric chloride is an acceptable etchant in these industries. In PCBs manufacturing industries, solution composed of cupric chloride and hydrochloric acid is used as an etchant to oxidize and dissolve metallic copper, which results in the generation of a large amount of waste solution containing cupric and cuprous ions. The concentrations of etch solution depends on the etching medium and the material to be leached. Etch waste effluent generally contains high copper contents (40–60 Cementation or electrolytic recovery of copper from etch waste is not advisable in respect to purity of copper recovered Cu(I) is an important oxidation state of copper, which is significant both in the area of fundamental chemistry and industrial applications. Cuprous ions form stable coordination compound with chloride with high solubility. Compared to the research on cupric solvent extraction, the work on the cuprous extraction is limited. Therefore, in the present work, solvent extraction studies have been carried out to extract Cu(I) from chloride solutions using TBP–1-octanol. The effect of different diluents, contact time, acid concentration of solution, and concentration of TBP, etc. has been studied. The behaviors of extraction and stripping have been discussed, and a comparison with other diluents and extractants has also been made. The obtained data will be useful to widen the knowledge of cuprous solvent extraction and in scaling up the process for the treatment of etch waste water. The colorless synthetic solution of cuprous chloride was prepared by using (i) cupric chloride solution with sodium chloride and (ii) cupric chloride with hydrochloric acid. The fine copper powder was added in excess to both of the solutions and then filtered. Freshly prepared solutions were used for the experimental purpose. The solutions were kept in air-tight bottles to prevent the oxidation of cuprous to cupric. The chemical reagents used for the experimental purposes were of A.R. grade. The extractant TBP supplied by M/s Yakuri Pure Chemicals Co., Japan was used without further purification. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out in a conical flask. The organic and aqueous phases were mixed by using shaker. Sodium sulphite was used as reductant to prevent the oxidation of cuprous ions present in the solution. In order to avoid any complexity due to the addition of this reagent, experiments of the liquid–liquid extraction were carried out in a pure nitrogen atmosphere. Conventional titration and atomic absorption spectrophotometer were used for the analyses of the samples. The behavior of TBP mixed with different diluents viz. octane, chloroform, toluene and 1-octanol has been studied for the extraction of Cu(I). The aqueous solution containing 27.2 The studies for the kinetics of copper extraction were carried out by equilibrating aqueous solution containing 15.47 Organic phase of 50% TBP diluted in 1-octanol was mixed with an aqueous solution containing 8.93 The concentration of acid has significant influence on cuprous extraction in solvent extraction. Two different sets of experiments were carried out in high and low concentration range of HCl maintaining a fixed total chloride concentration using 50% TBP diluted in 1-octanol. The O/A ratio was maintained at 1 and the contact time 2 The effect of concentration of extractant TBP on the extraction of Cu(I) has been studied by varying the concentration of TBP from 0% to 100% using 1-octanol as diluent. The aqueous feed containing Cu(I) 16.14 Since, 20th century the studies for cuprous chloro-coordination ions in chloride solution have been an important topic for research. Many chloro-coordination species and their stability and equilibrium constants have been determined and deduced by various methods, and the main ones are CuC1 Based on the analysis of cuprous chloride solution chemistry, the following equation might be a more exact description for the reaction: To study the effect of temperature on extraction of Cu(I), the tests were conducted by mixing 50% TBP diluted in 1-octanol and an aqueous solution containing 9.27 Stoyanov A comparative studies to see the selectivity of TBP towards Cu(I) and Cu(II) were made. Two solutions of different composition (1) 8.93 The studies for the determination of number of required stages for the extraction of Cu(I) from the actual etch waste effluents of PCBs industries were carried out. The part of the Cu(II) present in the solution was reduced by adding copper powder before doing the experiment for the extraction of Cu(I). An aqueous solution of 62.35 Sufficient quantities of copper loaded organics with different Cu The stripping experiment was also carried out using water. Stripping with pure water resulted in the precipitation of cuprous chloride. A loaded organic phase containing 9.73 Based on the Cu(I) solvent extraction studies using TBP following conclusions are drawn: The organic 1-octanol is a suitable diluent for TBP due to its good extractability, high polarity, solvation and dissolution properties towards chloro-cuprous compounds in comparison to octane, chloroform and toluene. The extraction kinetics was found to be very fast and even in 30 There was no synergism found between TBP and 1-octanol. The contribution of each reagent towards Cu(I) extraction is proportional to its concentration in organic phase. The studies made for the determination of the requirement of stages for the extraction of Cu(I) from the actual PCBs etch waste solution indicates that only two stages are sufficient to extract all copper from the solution. Based on the analysis of cuprous chloride solution chemistry, the following equation has been concluded for the extraction of Cu(I) with TBP. From the application point of view, TBP in polar diluents could be a good choice for practical purpose. This paper is based on the work supported by Resources Recycling R&D Centre (South Korea) under the project entitled “Development of total recycling technology for WEEE”. Authors are thankful to Miss Hue-Jin Park for her co-operation during the course of investigation.