In this study, we fabricated and characterized a WCu functionally graded material (FGM) with 11 layers, including a pure copper layer. Samples were prepared by mixing a mechanically alloyed NiMnCu powder with W and Cu powders, stacking the powders, pressing the stacked layers, and finally sintering at 1000 °C. The utilization of a NiMnCu system may reduce the cost but without losing the good sintering behavior and physical and mechanical properties. The composition of the material was analyzed based on scanning electron microscopy images and by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy mapping, which indicated that in the presence of Ni and Mn, the Cu atoms could diffuse into the W particles. All of the layers had a very high relative density, thereby indicating their densification and excellent sintering behavior. We also found that the porosity values in the Cu phase remained unchanged at approximately 2.39% across the FGM. Mechanical measurements showed that the hardness (72%), modulus of elasticity (61%), and ultimate tensile strength (58%) increased with the W content across the WCu FGM, whereas the fracture toughness (KIC) varied in the opposite manner (minimum of 4.52 MPa/m0.5).The development of suitable plasma-facing components (PFCs) for future fusion reactors is a great scientific challenge Functionally graded materials (FGMs) can significantly reduce the mechanical and thermal stress concentrated in many structural components, and they can be developed for specific applications Recently, it was discovered that the powder selected as the starting material (using W bimodal powders) plays a crucial role in enhancing the final properties of W The infiltration technique has also been used widely, where the material undergoes a severe external pressure to initiate infiltration, although controlling the porosity is very difficult The typical liquid-phase sintering temperature for known tungsten heavy alloys varies from 1450 °C to 1650 °C. This sintering temperature range is significantly lower than that for pure tungsten but it is still too high for general powder metallurgy furnaces. These temperatures and processes are beyond the capability of commercial powder metallurgical production furnaces, and thus the increased production costs for the alloys limit the use of alloys produced by this method for many applications. In this study, we developed a novel approach for fabricating W Commercial high-purity W, Ni, Mn, and Cu powders (>99.9% purity) were used as the starting materials. The particle size of W was 7.5–8.5 μm and the maximum particle sizes for Ni, Cu, and Mn were 10, 30, and 63 μm, respectively. The initial powders were examined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using an X'Unique II Ge111 spectrometer (detection limit = 1 ppm) and the results are shown in The Ni, Cu, and Mn metal powders were mechanically alloyed using a high-energy ball mill (SPEX 8000 Mixer/Mill) in order to create a binder alloy (BA). The chemical compositions of the layers are shown in It is important to note that in all 10 of the composite powders, the weight ratio of W to BA was 9:1. In addition, the rotational speed, ball to powder weight ratio, and mixing time were 250 rpm, 1:1, and 45 min, respectively. In addition to the Cu powder layer, the other composite powder layers ( Furthermore, using BA powder and six powder compositions (numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 in In the next step, the sintered samples were prepared for metallographic examinations. The microstructures of the samples were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, XL30, Philips; and field emission SEM (FESEM), MIRA3, TE-SCAN). The compositions in the SEM images were determined using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping and line scan analysis. In addition to their properties, the amounts of W and Cu were measured using a standard image analysis tool. The fracture surfaces were examined using SEM (XL30). Contiguity measurements were performed using a fine square grid and the SEM images, where a few micrographs with the same magnification (× 250) were selected. The numbers of intersection positions between the grid lines and the phase boundaries in the microstructures were recorded as N In the quantitative analysis, SEM micrographs of each layer of the W Hardness measurements were conducted according to the ASTM Sub-sized tensile test specimens ( XRF spectroscopy showed that the purity of the initial powder was 99.9 wt%. In order to determine the optimal compaction pressure, several green compact specimens were prepared using the W-50 vol% Cu composite powder at different pressures. The density of each green compact specimen was calculated according to Archimedes' principle (ASTM B962-14). The relative densities of the green compact specimens were plotted against the compaction pressure (theoretical density = 14.105 g/cm According to    Elemental mapping was conducted to identify the distribution of the elements in the observed phases of the three regions (points 1–3 in As shown in W and Cu have no mutual solubility, but as shown in the Fig. 8m–o shows that Mn atoms were uniformly distributed mainly in the W particles and the Cu-rich phase. Mn was also found in the form of oxide inclusions (average size of 1 μm) and residues covering the pores. The surfaces of the pores located in the Cu-rich phase ( After increasing the content of the Cu-rich phase (layers 1–11), the fracture mechanism changed from a low ductile to a highly ductile fracture mode. The structure of layer 1 comprised particles connected by small quantities of the binder where the particles were in contact. Spherical dimples were observed on the fracture surfaces of layers 7, 9, and 11, which corresponded to microvoids that initiated crack formation. During dimple formation, the failure mechanism is associated with large plastic deformation in the process zone. In particular, microscopic voids form, grow, and eventually coalesce, which leads to a distinctive dimple structure on the fracture surface. Particulate oxide inclusions were formed due to the preferential oxidation of Mn. The evaporation of Mn starts at temperatures above 700 °C. The Mn vapor penetrated the porosities and particle boundaries to enhance its distribution within the microstructure. However, at sintering temperature, Mn reacted with the oxygen and condensed on the pore surfaces in the form of oxides. The addition of Mn decreased the morphological change in the W particles as well as limiting the solubility of W in the BA matrix phase The contiguity of W  The hardness testing results are shown in The mechanical properties of each layer are summarized in The variations in the fracture toughness (which determines the resistance of composites to crack propagation) of layers 1, 3, and 5 are shown in As mentioned above, a higher W content was directly proportional to greater contiguity. The W In this study, we fabricated a W Introducing a mechanically alloyed Ni W and Cu lack mutual solubility but Cu atoms could diffuse into the W particles in the presence of Ni and Mn. Mn atoms were uniformly distributed mainly in the W particles as well as in Cu-rich phase. Mn was also found in the form of oxide inclusions (average size = 1 μm) and residues covering the pores. The contiguity decreased in a linear manner as the Cu content increased throughout the FGM. Thus, the homogeneity was greater in the layers with higher Cu contents. After increasing the content of the Cu-rich phase (layers 1 to 11), the fracture mechanism changed from a low ductile to a highly ductile fracture mode. The minimum porosity value was found in layer 4 (W = 73.5 wt% and Cu = 20.5 wt%) and it increased as the W contents increased. In the Cu phase, the percentage porosity remained steady at approximately 2.39%. Therefore, the porosity also increased as the Cu contents increased (20.5–100 wt% Cu). The hardness, modulus of elasticity, and UTS of the composite layers decreased as the amount of hard tungsten particles decreased. The fracture toughness decreased to a minimum value of 4.52 MPa/m This study did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The first author expresses his gratitude to Mr Reza Bahrami and the late Dr Mohammad Kazem Besharati Givi for their support with the experiments.