With the unfolding shale gas revolution, the literature related to shale gas has grown dramatically, particularly in the past decades. This study aims at providing updated and systemic research information for scientists, researchers, engineers, policymakers, and other stakeholders of shale gas to stimulate wide discussion about the future studies of shale gas through the investigation of shale gas literature cited on the Science Citation Index Expanded Web of Science database between 1990 and 2014. Using bibliometric techniques and the social network method, we attempt to explore three areas of the research profile: (1) country productivity distribution, (2) country collaboration patterns, and (3) research topics analysis. First, the results show that the USA was the largest contributor of the literature on the subject, followed by China and Canada. Moreover, examining overall trends show that the research on shale gas saw a significant growth along with greater participation in the number of countries. Second, the USA was the most frequent partner among all the international collaborative studies. The number of studies in most European countries was not as high as that in Asian countries. However, their collaboration was considerably active in country-to-country collaboration of shale gas. Third, the trend for all research topics is an increasing one, with the exception of Geochemistry Geophysics. Particularly, the areas of engineering, energy fuels, and geology have grown sharply over the past two decades. However, water resources have become an extremely hot topic since 2012. The research topic analysis results indicate that the current shale gas development is closely related to the three hot topics (engineering, energy fuels, and geology), whereas its future hinges on water resources. In conclusion, future studies of shale gas are suggested to stimulate more discussion for the wide community of those interested in shale gas.Natural gas from shale formation is one of the most important energy revolutions of our time and is transforming the global energy market place Existing bibliometric analysis on shale gas has been conducted around patent data. Patent data are widely used to analyze the shale gas field, with patents for shale gas exploitation analyzed using data mining and patent maps. The findings show that shale gas exploitation involves complex technologies and that technological accumulation is a long-term process. For example, the former study is focused on identifying the trends in shale-gas related technologies registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and to the State Intellectual Property Office of the People׳s Republic of China (SIPO), respectively, to cluster shale-gas-related technologies In comparison, few bibliometric analyses on shale gas have focused on literature cited in the Science Citation Index Expanded (SCIE) on the Web of Science database. As we know, it takes roughly one and half-year from application to authorization for a patent. In comparison, much less time is required from submission to publication of literature cited on the SCIE. Furthermore, a patent is a set of exclusive rights granted by a sovereign state to an inventor or assignee for a limited period of time in exchange for detailed public disclosure of the invention. An invention is a solution to a specific technological problem and is a product or a process This study is aimed at providing updated and systemic research information for scientists, researchers, engineers, policymakers, and other stakeholders of shale gas through bibliometric techniques that investigate the shale gas literature cited on the SCIE database between 1990 and 2014. To this end, this research has three main goals: (1) to explore the growth of shale gas literature published and identify the productivity distribution by country on this subject; (2) to identify the scientific collaboration and characteristics of the shale gas literature by country level; and (3) to reveal the hottest topics and anticipate future developmental trajectories, and discover the emphasis of research concentration by leading countries. For the present work, the database of the SCIE, a product of the Thomson Scientific, is utilized to retrieve data from 1965 to 2005 and from 1990 to 2014. SCIE is adopted because it is recognized as the leading English-language supplier of indexing services, providing access to the published information in multidiscipline fields of science and technology Bibliometrics is a set of methods to quantitatively analyze scientific and technological literature A social network refers to a group of people, each of which has connections of some kind to some or all of the other members of the network Collaboration network analysis is a kind of social network analysis. A social network is a network of social relations, reflecting a relationship between actors. In this method, actors in the network are positioned as nodes and the relationships between them are seen as the links between the nodes As an emerging technology, shale gas appears to make good strategic sense, which means there is now a need to better understand the technology development of countries and explore the collaboration among them in this area. However, shale gas research began a long time ago, and it is just recently increasing sharply over the past two decades. In fact, Thomas published the earliest research paper on shale gas in 1951. Before 1990, the number of papers increased slowly, from only one in 1951 to 19 in 1990. The years between 1990 and 2014 saw a period of significant publication on shale gas according to the number of papers cited in the SCIE. Due to national energy strategies, policies and advantages of shale gas, it is obvious that extensive studies on shale gas have been conducted worldwide since 1990. Moreover, the papers on shale gas have increased sharply, reaching 674 in 2014. From 1990 to 2014, countries have devoted research to the field of shale gas. The contribution of the different countries is included on the basis of the country affiliation of at least one author of the published paper. The top 30 countries with more than 20 papers are ranked by their number of published articles, as shown in The cluster analysis of shale gas research across countries shown in The USA was the most-frequent partner among all the international collaborative papers. From The 3407 papers from 1990 to 2014 all over the world cover a total of 65 research topics in SCIE. We use the citespace software Hot research topics represent the area growing sharply or the new research topic that indicates current research opportunities and suggests directions for future development. The top three research topics engineering, energy fuels and geology see the biggest paper numbers and have grown sharply in the last 25 years, and are the focus of research. Specifically, water resources have had an extremely high increase in publication growth since 2012, which indicates that more attention is being paid to water resources. The paper numbers relating to water resources before 2012 was under three and grew to 22 in 2014, due largely to the exploitation of shale gas. Hydraulic fracturing involves the high-pressure injection of water and chemicals into the ground to split rock apart and release natural gas. A series of challenges have been posed for protecting water resources On the basis of the research topic analysis worldwide, the topics need to be further analyzed at the country level in order to understand the emphasis, technology and research development of the countries and their focus on shale gas. The USA has an absolute advantage in the shale gas field. As the analyzed results show, water resources are a hot spot for shale gas research. The USA, Canada and Germany are the biggest contributors in the topic of water resources, followed by China. However, the USA paper number of 30 is six times that of China at 5. Therefore, as a hot research spot, China needs to actively co-operate with the USA Estonia stands out in the chemistry and spectroscopy fields; particularly in spectroscopy where it ranks first. This study takes shale gas as its focus and examines worldwide research activity on it in general and characteristics of shale gas literature from 1990 to 2014 using the database of the SCIE. In this study, we use bibliometric and social network analysis to explore the publication distribution by country, by scientific collaboration, and by research activity, and determine the research trends and hot research topics at the country level. On the basis of the country productivity distribution analysis, country collaboration patterns analysis, and research topics analysis, we address three main areas as follows: (1) We discuss the worldwide shale gas research situation and country productivity distribution. Shale gas research began a long time ago but has just recently been increasing sharply over the past two decades. Thomas published the earliest research paper on shale gas in 1951. Before 1990, the number of papers on shale gas slowly increased, from 1 in 1951 to 19 in 1990. The period of 1990 to 2014 was one of the significant growth, based on the number of papers cited in the SCIE database. There were 30 countries contributing more than 20 papers on shale gas during that time. The results show that the largest contributor, the USA, published 1295 papers (38.01%), followed by China and Canada, which are also energy-rich countries. The subsequent countries include England, Germany, Australia, France, Estonia, Turkey, and Russia in that order, respectively. Most countries are from America and Europe, with just three Asiancountries. (2) We draw a collaboration map and country collaboration patterns are analyzed. The USA was the most-frequent partner among all the international collaborative papers. We can see that for most European countries such as Switzerland, Turkey, Germany, and France, their ranking by the number of papers is not as high as that in the Asian countries; however, their collaboration is relatively considerable, which means they are very active in country-to-country collaboration in the shale gas field. The cooperation between China and Australia is followed by the cooperation between China and the U.S. This is because Australia is a shale gas-rich country and China has many overseas projects in Australia. (3) Research topics are discussed and the hottest topics are examined. The 3407 papers covered a total of 65 research topics in the SCIE database. The publications of the top nine research topics are in engineering, energy fuels, and geology and have been in a lead position over the last five years. We note that only Geochemistry Geophysics has declined quickly, whereas the other research topics demonstrate rapid growth. Engineering, energy fuels, and geology have gradually become the mainstream focus of the shale gas research. In these areas the US, China, and Canada lead. The USA has the absolute advantage in the shale gas field. As the analyzed results show, water resources are a hot spot in shale gas research. In the future, we intend to extend the research profile of natural gas from shale formation at the institution and author levels and make the comparison between the USA and China to reduce the technology gap. Thus, we can better know the research areas, explain the phenomenon, help improve international collaboration problems, and promote the international collaboration and innovation process in the shale gas technology fields, while providing suggestions for policy-making.