The post-cracking behaviour of steel fibre reinforced concrete (SFRC) are significantly influenced by the distribution of steel fibre in the concrete, while steel fibre distribution is further affected by wall-effect and fibre content. A series of three-point bending tests, cube splitting tests, and Brazilian splitting tests were conducted to analyze the influence of wall-effect and fibre content on the post-cracking tensile strength of SFRC. Furthermore, the influence of wall-effect and fibre content on fibre distribution was determined by conducting inductive tests on cubic SFRC specimens. To directly determine the relationship between fibre content and orientation, and the post-cracking mechanical properties of SFRC, this paper proposes a multi-axial cube splitting test (MCST test). Furthermore, this paper also proposes a method which utilizes the MCST test to measure fibre orientation based on the relationship between post-cracking peak load and toughness, and steel fibre orientation. Therefore, MCST method can be adapted for using with any type of fibre reinforced concrete, while the inductive test can only be used for concrete that is reinforced with metallic fibre. The MCST method is verified by comparing the similarity of the fibre orientations that were obtained using the inductive tests and MCST tests.The primary advantages of using fibre reinforced concrete are increased tensile strength and improved toughness Scholars use different testing methods To conduct an in-depth study on the relationship between fibre distribution and the mechanical properties of SFRC, one needs to know the distribution of fibres in the matrix. There are two methods that are currently used to determine the distribution of fibres in SFRC; one method follows a destructive approach, while the other method follows a non-destructive approach. The destructive approach involves breaking off a portion of the specimen, and manually counting the number of steel fibres and manually measuring the steel fibres’ orientation at the damaged cross-section Most tests in this study call for the usage of cubic SFRC specimens whose dimensions are 150 mm × 150 mm × 150 mm, furthermore the inductive test is the optimal test for a cubic specimen with these dimensions Five batches of concrete specimens, with strength grades of C60, were prepared and used to study the effect of differing steel fibre content and wall-effect on the distribution of steel fibre, and the influence of steel fibre distribution on post-cracking mechanical properties of SFRC. One of the five concrete batches was plain concrete, while the other four batches had steel fibre contents of 20, 30, 40, and 50 kg/m When preparing the SFRC specimens, aggregate, sand, and cement were sequentially added to the mixer and uniformly mixed for 2 min. Then half of the superplasticizer was mixed with half of the water and added into the mixer and uniformly blended with the aggregates. The mixture of the remaining superplasticizer and water was then gradually added to the mixer. During the mixing process, the steel fibres were spread evenly in the mixer and blended for 3 min. The fresh concrete test were carried out and the results are presented in All specimens were demoulded after 36 h, and afterwards the demoulded specimens were placed into a curing chamber, whose temperature must be 20 °C ± 1 °C and humidity must be ≥95%, for 28 days in preparation for the tests. The three axes of the prismatic beam specimens were labeled. By default, the Z-axis should be parallel to the casting direction while the X- and Y-axes should be parallel to the short edge and long edge of the mould, respectively. The nomenclature of SFRC specimens follows the notation; SFRC mould shape – steel fibre content – specimen number. For example, P-20-3, CU-30-1, and CY-50-2 represent the third prismatic beam specimen with a steel fibre content of 20 kg/m To study influence of wall-effect on the steel fibre distribution, the prismatic beams of SFRC batches whose specimen numbers are 1–6 were cut into blocks in the manner shown in Three-point bending tests were conducted on prismatic beam specimens of all four SFRC batches with the specimen numbers 7–9 according to the EN14651 Only two cut cubic specimens can be obtained after the three-point bending test because the prismatic beam cracked along the middle and the damaged beams were cut in the manner shown in As shown in Based on the theoretical derivations and experiments conducted by Torrents et al.    The cube splitting test (CST test) and the Brazilian splitting test (BST test) both indirectly measure the tensile strength of SFRC. SFRC is traditionally considered an isotropic material, therefore the traditional CST test is conducted only along a single axis. The distribution of fibre in SFRC is not uniform, therefore the multi-axial cube splitting test (MCST test) should be used for these cubic specimens. The MCST test loading directions are along the X-, Y- and Z-axes and are shown in MCST tests were conducted using a total of 48 moulded cubic specimens and 96 cut cubic specimens. Twelve moulded cubic specimens and twenty-four cut cubic specimens were obtained from each batch of SFRC. Three of the nine prismatic beam specimens were used in the three-point bending test, therefore of the twenty-four cut cubic specimens, six and eighteen cut cubic specimens were obtained from tested and untested prismatic beams, respectively. Furthermore, only six cut cubic specimens (three E-B and three E-N) could be obtained from the tested prismatic beams because the middle portion (E-M) of the prismatic beams were destroyed due to the three-point bending tests. The moulded cubic specimens 1–4, 5–8, and 9–12 from each batch were loaded along the X- ( According to the results of the three-point bending test, Brazilian splitting test, and cube splitting test, a comparative analysis was conducted on the effects of steel fibre content and various specimen shapes on the tensile strength of SFRC. Naturally the fibres that are parallel to the primary direction of tension most significantly affect the tensile strength. The primary direction of tension for the three-point bending test is along the Y-axis, similarly for the fibres that are parallel to the Y-axis would most significantly affect the tensile strength for a cubic specimen that is loaded along the Z-axis ( Three-point bending tests were carried out on notched beams with steel fibre contents of 20, 30, 40, and 50 kg/m The mean flexural tensile strength and the coefficient of variation (C.V.) that corresponds to different CMOD values were recorded in Brazilian splitting test were carried out on cylindrical specimens with steel fibre contents of 20, 30, 40, and 50 kg/m Cube splitting tests were carried out on moulded cubic specimens with steel fibre contents of 20, 30, 40, and 50 kg/m The SFRC specimen data from The tensile strengths of the SFRC specimens of various shapes in order of highest to lowest are prismatic beam, cylinder, and cube as shown in Inductive tests were conducted on all 144 cubic specimens to determine incremental inductance values for all three axes, Fibre orientation ratios The fibre orientation along X- and Y-axes of CU specimens are nearly identical, and are greater than the fibre orientation along the Z-axis. This phenomenon can be explained by the wall-effects being the same along both X-axis and Y-axis in a CU specimen, while the orientation along the Z-axis is lower than along the X- and Y-axes because the orientation of the fibres are also affected by gravity and vibrations. The fibre orientation along the Y-axis of E-B is greater than that of CU, but lesser than that of E-M. Wall-effect is weaker along the Y-axis in E-B than in CU, however wall-effect is even weaker along the Y-axis in E-M than in E-B. Therefore, as wall-effect becomes weaker along one axis, the fibre orientation along said axis increases. One can see from Moulded cubic specimens (CU) were categorized into three groups; group a), group b), group c), furthermore each group contains four specimens from each of the four SFRC batches. The MCST test, as shown in  The cut cubic specimens were categorized into three groups; group a), group b), and group c). E-B, E-N, and E-M specimens of varying fibre contents were placed into groups a), b), and c), respectively. Specimens in groups a), b), and c) were tested following the same experimental procedure as that of CU specimens to obtain the average load-displacement and average toughness-displacement curves, as shown in When loading along different directions, the post-cracking peak load and toughness of SFRC vary even if specimens from the same group, whose fibre contents are the same, are tested. Moreover, the post-cracking peak load and toughness values obtained from the MCST test along the X-axis are lower than the Y-axis, and the Y-axis values are lower than the Z-axis values. If specimens from the same group are loaded along the same direction, the peak load and toughness values gradually increase as the fibre content increases. However, if specimens from different groups are loaded along the same direction, the results are inconsistent. For example, the corresponding F The load-displacement and toughness-displacement curves are depicted in If the same cubic SFRC specimen is loaded along different axes, the resultant mechanical behaviours would differ because the distribution of fibre along each axis is different. Furthermore, the results indicate that there exists a proportionality between the orientation contribution coefficient ( The fibre orientation ratios of moulded and cut cubic SFRC specimens of varying fibre contents were determined using the abovementioned method and the results are listed in This study proposes a novel method of predicting the fibre orientation using the MCST test. To verify the accuracy of this method, the phase coefficient ( Most phase coefficients in A series of curves, The distribution of steel fibre in concrete is affected by a plethora of factors, and the mechanical properties of SFRC are directly related to the distribution of fibre. In this paper, the effect of fibre distribution on the post-cracking mechanical properties of SFRC is investigated via a wide array of mechanical tests. The inductive test and the MCST test were used to study the fibre orientation, while the three-point bending test and various splitting tests were used to investigate the relationship between fibre distribution and post-cracking mechanical properties. Specifically, the following conclusions can be drawn from this study. The tensile strength of the various specimen shapes of equivalent fibre content in ascending order is cube, cylinder, and prismatic beam. The coefficient of variation of the tests for the various specimen shapes in ascending order is BST test (cylinder), CST test (cube), and three-point bending test (prismatic beam). Steel fibre content has negligible effect on the overall fibre orientation of an SFRC, however wall-effect has a significant effect on fibre orientation. As the wall-effect of the cut cubic specimens along the Y-axis becomes weaker, the distribution of fibres along the Y-axis increases. Furthermore, the fibre content of the outer (E-B) cubic specimen is lower than that of either the inner (E-N and E-M) cubic specimens. MCST test results indicate that post-cracking peak load and toughness of SFRC are positively correlated with fibre content. Furthermore, as fibre content increases, the differences between the results from each axis increases. Analysis of the MCST results show that SFRC have a direction from which it can withstand the most load, therefore SFRC cannot be described as an isotropic material. Based on the MCST test results of SFRC specimens, a novel method for determining the orientation of fibre from any direction is proposed. The phase coefficient and the least square method are used to analyze the similarity between the results of the inductive and MCST methods, wherein the validity of the MCST method was verified. Moreover, MCST method has a wider range of applicability. That there exists no conflict of interests. The authors greatly appreciate the financial support provided by the