Branched polyethylenimines (PEIs) present primary, secondary and tertiary amines along their backbone, making this polymer very pH-influenced: in an acid medium, the amines will be protonated to a certain extent and can be called polyelectrolytes. The objective of this work was to study and evaluate the performance of PEI as a flocculant polymer in the treatment of oily water from the petroleum industry. An anionic surfactant, sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate, was used in conjunction with PEI for this purpose. Removal efficiency tests were performed on a Jartest and on a bench scale Dissolved Air Flotation system (DAF). Two PEIs of different molar masses (PEI HW Mn ∼ 60,000 and PEI LW Mn ∼ 10,000) were used as cationic flocculants under acidic conditions for the removal of oil present in the synthetic produced water. Polyethylenimine showed good oil removal efficiencies. It is important to note that no references were found in literature on the use of polyethylenimines in the treatment of oily water from the petroleum industry, and the search for more efficient flocculants in oil removal was one of the motivators of this work.Secondary and enhanced oil recovery generate large amounts of produced water, which is one of the largest waste streams associated with oil production [ One of the steps of treating the emulsified fraction of oily water is the flocculation process, in which colloidal particles are aggregated together by contact between them [ Polyethylenimine (PEI) is a polymer used in various industry segments, for example in the preparation of polymer complexes in pharmaceutical formulations, controlled drug release, in the introduction and transfer of genes from one cell to another, bacterial cell aggregation, in the manufacture of paper, amongst other uses [ Wang et al. [ Given this scenario, this work aims to study and evaluate the action of PEI as a flocculating polymer, increasing its interaction with oil droplets using sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS), an anionic surfactant that tends to be allocated at the interface Oil / water, due to the amphiphilic nature of this class of molecules. For this, tests of removal efficiency were carried out in a Jartest and in a Dissolved Air Flotation system (DAF), built to carry out this work. In DAF, the air is dissolved in water by pressurizing water in a pressure vessel and then depressurized into a flotation chamber. The sudden drop of pressure through the inlet valve in the tank leads to the formation of small bubbles of air (between 20 and 100 μm), that are released from the saturated water, which attaches on the oil droplets and aid in the separation process [ For the preparation of the synthetic oily water, saline water containing 33,000 ppm salts, 441 ppm of potassium chloride (KCl), 708 ppm of calcium chloride dihydrate (CaCl As a flocculant, two samples of Polyethylenimine (PEI), which is a cationic polymer, with average number molar masses (M An anionic surfactant, sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) technical grade, from Sigma Aldrich (São Paulo, Brazil), was used in conjunction with the flocculant. The extraction of the residual oil from the treated oily water was done with toluene ACS, from Vetec Quimica (São Paulo, Brazil), which was distilled and dried with silica in the laboratory before its use. Ethanol from ISOFAR (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil), at 95% purity, was used during extraction in systems where significant amounts of foam were observed in the organic phase. Both Polyethylenimines from Sigma Aldrich (in this work labeled as PEI LW and PEI HW) were characterized by 1H-NMR, with the purpose to identify their functional groups. The samples were prepared solubilizing 15 mg of the respective PEI in 0,8 mL of D Solutions of 0.3% w/v of the polyethylenimines were prepared in distilled and deionized water. The pH of these solutions was adjusted to pH = 6.6, because initially both polyetelinoimines had a pH value of 10.2. This adjustment was carried out with aqueous solutions of 1 M hydrochloric acid and 1 M sodium hydroxide, previously prepared from the received reagents. The concentration and pH of the polyethylenimines were chosen based on [ To determine the zeta potential of the polyethylenimines and the SDBS surfactant, the Zetasizer particle size analyzer (Malvern, NanoZS) was used. Samples of the polymer aqueous solutions (0.3% w/v) and SDBS aqueous solution (10% w/v) were placed in a folded capillary electrophoresis cell (model DTS 1060C, Malvern) using a syringe, to prevent the formation of air bubbles. The zeta potential was measured 5 times and the average values were obtained as well as their respective standard deviations. The absorbance values at the wavelength of 633 nm were obtained by means of a visible ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Cary 50, Varian), equipped with a 10 mm optical path quartz cuvette; and the refractive index of the samples, obtained in the Refractometer (ABBE 32400). Both parameters are requested by the software that comes with the Zetasizer Nano ZS. The SDBS surfactant had its critical micellar concentration (CMC) calculated with the aid of a TD 3 Lauda digital tensiometer equipped with Du Noüy ring. Analysis of the saline water containing the SDBS surfactant was performed at the concentrations: 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 20, 40, 60 and 100 ppm. All tensiometer analyzes were performed in duplicate at room temperature (25 °C). Oil in water emulsions (O/W) - in this work called synthetic oily water - were prepared in the laboratory to simulate the produced water in Oil Fields. This synthetic oily water was prepared in a 5 liters beaker, initially containing 2 liters of salt water composed of 33,000 ppm salts. To ensure dispersion of the oil into the water, a homogenizer (Ultra-Turrax T-50 basic, IKA WERKE) had its shaft inserted into the beaker at a stirring speed of 6000 rpm. A syringe containing 1 mL of the oil was inserted into the water near the base of the homogenizer shaft, and the transfer of the oil to water was performed during one minute. Thereafter, some oily water from within the Beaker was sucked into the syringe and reinjected several times to minimize oil loss on the walls of the syringe and the needle. After adding all of the oil, the stirring speed of the equipment was raised to 10,000 rpm and the remaining three liters of saline water were added over a minute, always keeping the Ultra-Turrax rotor just below the surface, otherwise oily sludges are formed on the surface that directly affect the homogenization and emulsification of oily water. After the addition of the remaining saline water, the oily water was sheared for another two minutes at the speed of 10,000 rpm. The droplet size distribution of recently prepared oil-in-water (synthetic oily water) emulsions was obtained by light microscopy using the Zeiss Axio Vert Optical Microscope, with 10x objective and dark field use. The dissolved air flotation system (DAF) ( The pressure vessel is the location where the water is pressurized with air, until it the water is ready to be released into the flotation chamber. This pressurizing, at a given fixed pressure, causes the water to be saturated with air and its depressurizing in the flotation chamber at ambient pressure releases small microbubbles that aid in the process of removing the oil droplets. The pressure vessel consists of a cylindrical vessel ( The pressure vessel was used without packing (which can be used to increase the saturation efficiency). However, the pressure vessel was constructed with a screw-threaded cylindrical cap, which allows the use of packing in future tests. The Saturation Efficiency of the DAF system was calculated with the aid of a depressurized air volume measuring apparatus constructed in this work ( The water is pressurized at a certain pressure inside the saturator vessel ( As the water is depressurized into the apparatus, the pressurized air begins to nucleate in the form of small bubbles. This air tends to accumulate on top of the apparatus by displacing the liquid present in the cylindrical section of acrylic, decreasing the height of the liquid column. Displaced liquid is collected in a graduated beaker. At the end of the test, the height of the liquid column displaced can be seen from the initial position of the liquid in the cylinder and the final position. The diameter of the cross-section of the cylindrical acrylic Section (3 cm) is known. The volume of the pressurized air can then be calculated using Eq. The 95% confidence limit establishes the limits between which the volume of air released at a certain pressure and flow rate will be, 95% of the time the test is performed. It can be calculated by Eq. The Student parameter used was for a sample space of 4 and relative to 95%, corresponding to a value of 3.18 [ The maximum values of air saturation in water at 20 °C were obtained in the literature [ The experiments were performed on Jartest equipment (ECE compact laboratory mixer, CLM6). The procedure consisted in the introduction of 800 mL of oily water into the six jars of the equipment, divided into three addition stages: 300, 300 and 200 mL. This stepwise addition was intended to minimize the difference between oil concentrations in the Jartest tanks. Then, the anionic surfactant was added at the concentrations of 25, 100 and 150 ppm under agitation of 200 rpm for 2 min. After this time, the flocculant was added at the concentrations of 25, 50, 75, 100 and 150 ppm and again the system was allowed to stir at 200 rpm for 2 min (rapid shaking phase). Thereafter, the spin speed was reduced to 10 rpm for 10 min (slow stirring phase). Finally, the oily water present in the equipment vats was kept at rest for 10 min so that the particles could flocculate. Initially, the pressure vessel, shown in item 2 of The procedure for determination of the flocculation efficiency by dissolved air flotation is analogous to that of the determination of the flocculation efficiency by Jartest, since the flocculation step of the Flotation test also follows the same steps performed in the Jartest until the slow agitation phase. After the slow stirring stage, the pressurized water is depressurized beforehand in the pressure vessel inside the Jartest. The water is depressurized by means of small polyurethane tubes inside the jug of Jartest equipment, in a valve port compatible with the flow rate 2.5 liters per minute. When the volume inside the equipment jug reaches the one-liter mark, the valve of the pressure vessel is closed and the depressurizing is stopped. The process is repeated in the other five jars. Then, the flotation chambers are allowed to stand for 10 min. The extraction process of the residual oil after the flocculation step was performed by removing 20 mL of aliquots from the jartest vats. These samples were placed in test tubes and 4 mL of extractive solvent (toluene) was added to each. These systems were then shaken manually and allowed to stand for two hours, so that the phases could separate from each other completely. If emulsion formation was observed during the extraction process, between toluene and the chemical additives present, 4 mL of ethanol was added, in order to break this emulsion. At the end of the extraction process, 6 samples were obtained representing the polymer concentrations employed in the flocculation and flotation process: 0 (blank), 25, 50, 75, 100 and 150 ppm. The concentration of the residual oil from oily water after flocculation tests was assessed on an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (Varian Cary 50), using quartz cuvette of 10 mm pathlength. For conversion of the absorbance obtained in the ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer concentration in ppm, a previously prepared calibration curve was used. The 1H-NMR Spectra of both polyethylenimines are shown in PEI LW Spectra ( In an analogous way, the PEI HW spectra ( On the work of Wang et al. [ The average zeta potential results for the polyethylenimines and for the SDBS surfactant can be seen in The zeta potential values confirmed that the protonation of the structures of the PEI LW and the PEI HW (at pH 6.6) occurred satisfactorily as they acquired surface positive charges along their structures, increasing the electrical potential of the molecule in unprotonated PEIs (with pH = 1020). The PEI's are influenced by the pH of the medium: its surface charge density depends directly on the pH. The zeta potential of the SDBS molecule is negative, a result already expected to be an anionic surfactant. This indicates that, during the oil flocculation process, the surfactant molecules will migrate to the oil / water interface, with the hydrophobic part facing the oil and the hydrophilic part facing the water. Since the negative charges of the anionic surfactant are located in the hydrophilic part, the oil droplets will acquire a negative surface charge. The electrostatic attraction between PEI molecules and negatively charged oil droplets is required for flocculation to occur efficiently, and the mechanism is the same Bratskaya et al. [ The determination of the critical micellar concentration (CMC) of the saline aqueous solution of the SDBS surfactant was performed by means of the surface tension measurements of the solutions prepared from SDBS, in different concentrations. The CMC is the lowest concentration at which the free surfactant molecules are in equilibrium with the micelles present in the system. Micelles represent a type of structural arrangement of the molecules of the surfactant, which are thermodynamically more stable than if the molecules of the surfactants were free in solution. This means that, below the CMC, increasing the concentration of the surfactant causes an increase in the concentration of its free molecules. Above the CMC, these molecules are organized as micelles, and an increase in concentration represents an increase in the concentration of micelles in the system, whereas the concentration of free surfactants remains constant [ It is shown in [ A possible explanation for why the CMC of the SDBS has a value of 14.5 ppm in this salt water (approximately 10 times smaller than that predicted in pure water), is that the addition of salt reduces the CMC, being able to arrive in an order of magnitude 100 times lower if the surfactant is ionic, and the effect is more sensitive in surfactants having a long hydrophobic chain. The surfactants become even less soluble with the addition of salt, because the molecules of surfactant have to compete for the solvation of the water with the salt ions present [ The synthetic oily waters were prepared in duplicate and the micrographs obtained under an optical microscope are shown in The oil droplet diameter diameters of synthetic oily water 1 and synthetic oily water 2 can be seen in the graph shown in The graph of  With the confidence intervals for the results of depressurized air volume, the graph shown in With this graph it is possible to observe that, for a limit of 95% confidence, the two saturation curves, the first one 3 L/min and the other one 4 L/min are statistically the same, since the confidence limits of both lines overlap each other, so that there is no relevant difference in the use of one of these two flow rates in conducting the tests at this temperature, pressure and depressurizing valve. The saturation efficiencies for each pressure in the temperature of 20 °C were obtained in relation to the maximum saturation curve for the respective pressures tested at 20 °C, and can be seen in The saturation efficiency of the DAF System is between 73.24 and 81.24%, according to the tests performed. In The results show that the oil removal was higher at the 25 ppm dosage of the reference cationic polymer, achieving removal efficiencies of 30%. However, at higher concentrations of this flocculant, the removal efficiency was lower. A possible explanation for this may be the problem of electrostatic repulsion: if the polymer has a high density of positive surface charge and there is excess of it in the medium, it will saturate all the adsorption sites of the oil droplets, forming a positive overcharged system, which will repel other oil droplets in the same situation, increasing the difficulty of forming larger flocs and consequent separation of the oil from the continuous phase. This phenomenon is called electrostatic restabilization and is cited in the work of Bratskaya et al. [ When used in its protonated form, PEI LW and PEI HW achieved near zero removal efficiencies. This is because the oil droplets are not sufficiently negatively charged. The few naturally occurring negative charges on the surface of the droplets are not enough for the polymer chains to adsorb and flocs. Therefore, the polymer chains eventually become dispersed in the solution, and the few chains that can adsorb into the oil droplets may be causing a repulsion effect on the other droplets that are in the same situation. Mutual repulsion between dispersed polymer chains and polymer chains adsorbed on the oil droplets would explain the negative efficiencies results at different dosages. Also the addition of the SDBS surfactant was carried out in the absence of flocculants. The presence of SDBS further increased the stability of the emulsion, since the removal efficiencies were all negative. This may have occurred because of the accumulation of the surfactant molecules at the oil / water interface, increasing the negative charge on the surface of the droplets in such a way that they cannot coalesce and remain efficiently dispersed in the emulsified form. For the LW PEI, the first test was performed with the concentration of 25 ppm of SDBS. The SDBS surfactant concentration selected for this initial test was above its CMC (14.5 ppm) in the saline water prepared for these tests. The choice of this surfactant concentration ensures that the adsorption of the surfactant molecules is taking place in the oil droplets dispersed in the medium as they begin to adsorb at the oil-water interface between the droplet of oil and water. This interface did not exist when the CMC test was performed, since it was performed only in saline water. The high salt concentration in the medium reduces the solubility of the surfactant, causing it to migrate rapidly to the oil / water interface. The amount of cations present in the solution also facilitates the packaging of the surfactant molecules in the oil droplet, preventing them from repelling [ However, the efficiency of PEI LW remained relatively constant at the various flocculant concentrations employed, in the range of 5–7% removal efficiency. This means that a few droplets of oil were efficiently saturated with negative charges, the low concentration of SDBS being one of the limiting factors for flocculation. The PEI LW, with low molar mass, has short chains and cannot attach electrostatically to a satisfactory amount of oil droplets, which is another limiting factor. The neutralized structures end up remaining dispersed without flocculating efficiently, so much that no flocs were observed with the naked eye in the experiment. For the HW PEI used in conjunction with the 25 ppm concentration of SDBS, the removal efficiency was found to be in the range of 16–27%, substantially higher than the PEI LW performance, though still lower than the efficiency of the cationic polymer. A possible explanation for a greater efficiency of the PEI HW in relation to the PEI LW is that the chains of the PEI HW are larger, i.e. the macromolecule of PEI HW presents more positive charges quantitatively than a macromolecule of PEI LW. Thus, PEI HW is able to bind to several oil droplets (although slightly charged negatively) and to form slightly larger aggregates that can rise to the surface, without remaining dispersed as in the case of PEI LW. In the fixed concentration of 100 ppm of SDBS, there is an improvement on the efficiency of the PEI LW, as it reaches an efficiency of 32% in the concentration of 50 ppm. One possible explanation is that as there is a greater amount of SDBS in the system, the oil droplets are more charged and thus the demand for positive charges is greater. The PEI LW, even with a shorter chain, can flocculate with a larger amount of oil droplets because there is a greater supply of negative charges in the medium, allowing the formation of many small flocs that rise to the surface. The performance of PEI HW is similar to that of PEI LW, reaching 30% removal efficiencies at 75 ppm concentration. A possible reason for PEI HW to exhibit slightly better removal efficiency than in the case where 25 ppm of SDBS is used, and a performance similar to that of PEI LW at the concentration of 100 ppm of SDBS is that most flocs formed fail to rise to the surface alone, due to the larger chain size of the PEI HW, if adsorbing into several different oil droplets. This causes most of the flocs to remain dispersed in the medium, not contributing to efficient separation. The efficiency of PEI LW increases considerably when the concentration of SDBS is increased to 150 ppm, reaching separation efficiencies of up to 67% when used at the concentration of 100 ppm. An increase in removal efficiency of HW PEI is also observed for that amount of SDBS employed, reaching removal efficiencies of up to 58% when using the PEI HW at a concentration of 100 ppm. Both curves show practically the same tendency, as can be observed in In The test with the cationic reference polymer carried out on the DAF sytem showed a greater oil removal efficiency of the oily water than that carried out in Jartest, with an average removal of up to 58%, as shown in This indicates the coupling of the depressurized air bubbles in the formed flocs, decreasing the density of the flocs, now aerated. A higher density difference with respect to the continuous phase increases the rate of ascent, as described in Stokes' Law [ In the case of PEI LW, the removal efficiency was similar to that obtained using only Jartest. Flocs were not observed at the end of the tests, which in a way explains the lack of efficiency increase using the DAF system: in this case, the air bubbles cannot be coupled in the oil droplets or in any flocs formed, because they are not large enough, making it impossible to reduce the density of the flocs (formation of aerated flocs) and increase the water / oil separation efficiency. In the graph of In the case of PEI HW the removal efficiency was lower compared to the tests carried out in Jartest, as can be observed in Dissolved air flotation is known to cause smaller turbulences in the flotation chambers when compared to other types of flotation, such as induced air flotation [ In the case of PEI LW, oil removal efficiency results for systems with SDBS concentration of 100 ppm in DAF system exhibited lower removal efficiencies than at Jartest at most of the concentrations evaluated. This leads us to believe that the chain extension of the PEI LW is a limiting factor: even when there is a significant addition of SDBS to the system, if there is turbulence in the medium, the oil droplets decouple from the flocculating polymer and the removal efficiency is compromised. However, the formation of small flocs could be distinguished in this system. In the case of PEI HW, it was finally possible to distinguish an increase in the significant removal efficiency when using the DAF system: the removal efficiencies doubled in almost all the dosages of PEI HW flocculant, when compared with the test carried out in Jartest. The results obtained for this system were much better than those obtained when the polymer used was the LW PEI, with 100 ppm SDBS. The graph of This result is important because it shows that the higher molar mass of the HW PEI influenced the removal efficiency when the medium became turbulent with the depressurizing of the saturated water. While in the PEI LW + 100 ppm SDBS system showed worse efficiency than Jartest, the PEI HW system practically doubled efficiency over Jartest at all dosages. This leads one to believe that the polymer molecules are more effectively trapped electrostatically to the oil droplets and, forming flocs, are able to incorporate into these new structures the air bubbles released from the saturated water, decreasing the density of the agglomerate and causing it to rise faster. In the case of PEI LW the tests in the DAF system presented values worse than the analogous system realized in Jartest. Turbulent conditions appear to be the major cause of decreased removal efficiency. Flocs, in larger concentrations and larger in size, are also more susceptible to shear, and if they are weakly connected to each other, they are easily split. Only for the lowest flocculant concentration (25 ppm) the oil separation efficiency has increased in the DAF system. In the case of PEI HW, it is possible to observe a small increase in efficiency compared to that obtained by the PEI HW + 100 ppm SDBS at the DAF system. This indicates that the PEI HW + SDBS system may be reaching its maximum of removal, and that the increase in SDBS will not impact large efficiencies from this flocculant concentration. However, it can be seen that the increased removal efficiency is visible when the air flotation system dissolved at these concentrations is compared to the analogous system tested in Jartest. With the results obtained, it is possible to first notice that there is a great difference in the removal efficiency of the polyethyleneimines when tested in Jartest system and dissolved air flotation system. The dissolved air flotation system has caused turbulence in the flotation chamber, so that if the polymer has not formed shear resistant flocs, they break off and decrease the removal efficiency. If the formed flocs are resistant, then the air bubbles released in the dissolved air flotation system are coupled to the flocs, forming the aerated flocs, with a density lower than the original flocs, increasing the rate of ascent of the same towards the surface and Increasing the removal efficiency. By analyzing purely the system used for the oil removal treatment, it is possible to notice that the PEI LW obtained better removal efficiency in the Jartest, whereas the PEI HW obtained better removal efficiency in the float system. Then the PEI LW flocs can be considered less resistant to turbulence than the PEI HW flocs, as shown in Also, it is possible to observe that an increase of the molar mass increased the stability of the flocs, which suggests a bridge flocculation mechanism. This proposition is also indicated by the results obtained with PEI LW in Jartest, which presented better removal efficiency than the PEI HW in intermediate and high concentrations of SDBS. A lower molar mass decreases the negative effect of the electro-static hindrance (this phenomenon is represented in However, these results were only possible with the use of the SDBS anionic surfactant. For all tests of both PEI LW and PEI HW, it was observed that an increase in the concentration of SDBS in the medium implies an increase in the removal efficiency of the polyethylenimines, shown in The presence of SDBS is so important that at concentrations of 150 ppm PEI LW has been able to achieve removal efficiency values comparable to those of the PEI HW even in the DAF system. The more the oil droplets are negatively charged, the greater the removal efficiency and the more stable the flocs formed. This can be explained by the increase in the electrostatic interaction between the polymer and the droplet of oil. The removal efficiency of the PEI HW can already be observed in the DAF system from the concentration of 100 ppm of SDBS in the medium. This can be explained by the amount of positive charges present in the PEI HW. If both PEI’s have 40% of their protonated structures, this means that in absolute terms the PEI HW presents more amount of positive charges than the PEI LW. This implies that its structure can adsorb electrostatically in a larger amount of oil droplets and formed primary flocs, increasing the removal efficiency of the system. The influence of higher molar mass allowing the flocculation of more colloidal particles is also reported by [ In this work the removal efficiency of high molar mass polyethylenimine (PEI HW) and low molar mass polyethylenimine (PEI LW) along with an anionic surfactant SDBS were evaluated, applied to the produced water treatment. A cationic reference polymer was used as a standard removal efficiency parameter. PEI LW and PEI HW were evaluated in Jartest systems and in dissolved air flotation systems. It was observed that the higher the concentration of SDBS in the medium, the greater the removal efficiency of polyethylenimines. This is because the oil droplets become more negative with the allocation of SDBS surfactant molecules on their surfaces, increasing the cationic demand. Because protonated polyethylenimines are strong polyelectrolytes, they are able to meet this demand by adsorbing electrostatically to the surface of the oil droplets, forming flocs that are separated from the medium. However, it has also been observed that the molar mass of the polymer also influences the removal efficiency. In Jartest systems and in low cationic demands, the polymer PEI HW, of high molar mass, had the best removal efficiency. In intermediate cationic demands (100 ppm SDBS), both the high mass polymer PEI HW and the low mass polymer PEI LW performed similarly, suggesting that the increased concentration of the SDBS favored the LW PEI more than the PEI HW. In high cationic demands (150 ppm SDBS), it was observed that the PEI LW low molecular weight polymer has a better removal efficiency than the high molecular weight PEI HW polymer. This suggests that the removal efficiency of the polyethylenimines is governed by a balanced mechanism between the molar mass of the polymer and the cationic demand of the oil droplets. The formation of a greater amount of large flocs by the PEI HW (due to the high molar mass) in relation to PEI LW increases the electro-static hindrance. However, the polymer of high molar mass can flocculate systems of low cationic demand because they have a longer chain and a molecule can reach a larger number of droplets of oil. Short chains such as PEI LW cannot adhere to many oil droplets in cationic low-demand systems, remaining adsorbed and dispersed in the medium without flocculation. In a DAF system, the PEI HW presented better results than the PEI LW and high removal efficiency already from the intermediate concentration of 100 ppm of SDBS. SDBS has been shown to play a key role in increasing the stability of the flocs formed by polyethylenimines: the higher the concentration of SDBS in the medium, the greater the removal efficiency of polyethylenimine. This is valid until the entire surface of the oil droplets present in the system is saturated. Removal efficiencies of the polyethylenimines also showed oil removal efficiencies similar to the cationic reference polymer in low concentrations of SDBS, and better removal efficiency than the reference polymer at higher concentrations of SDBS. This work was supported by