“Recognising our imperfect knowledge of the behaviour of [geotechnical] engineering systems and the uncertainties associated with [geotechnical] engineering parameters the limitations of deterministic approaches become obvious. These approaches do not permit the analysis of reliability and risk under conditions of uncertainty” Because of the sentiments outlined by Chowdhury In conventional limit equilibrium analysis, the probability of failure ( However, The rock engineering design process invariably involves a number of steps that can be summarised as follows: Most rock engineering analysis prior to the initial design stage is associated with estimating the distribution of forces or stresses around the excavation boundaries and within the rock masses surrounding the excavation. However, stress (or its manifestations) is often of concern only if, in effect, it causes or has the potential to cause uncontrolled displacements in the rock mass. Such uncontrolled displacements might take a number of forms; for example, ejection of materials into an excavation from a rock burst, or plastic deformations in excavation boundaries, or kinematically-controlled wedge failures on planes of weakness. Indeed, excavation performance monitoring (part of step “f”, above) normally involves the measurement of displacements. Consequently, the parameter that is often of most interest to the rock mechanics engineer is displacement, since it is usually the amount of displacement (not stress) in the rock mass around an excavation that determines whether or not the excavation is serviceable. This concept is captured by Brady and Brown Based on the discussion above, therefore, an excavation could be thought of as having failed if, during its design life: the stresses in the rock mass surrounding the excavation boundary exceed the strength of the rock mass and/or its inherent planes of weakness; and the resultant displacements of rock mass into the excavation exceed a certain maximum tolerable level and/or volume. In certain applications, this tolerable level might be relatively large (for example, during caving operations) while, in others, it may be relatively small. Consequently, the probability of failure of an excavation can also be defined as the probability that some displacement criterion is exceeded. That is: In establishing what the critical displacement is at the initial design stage, there may be some reason, not related to the rock mass itself, why a particular level of displacement cannot be exceeded. For example, displacements in excess of, say, 75 Alternatively, the design engineer may well have some judgemental concept of what constitutes a critical displacement in a slope or underground excavation. For example, a displacement in excess of 100 Yet another method of deriving this value is to draw on the concept of critical strain, discussed by Sakurai Sakurai Hazard warning levels for stability assessment of tunnels have been established by Sakurai on the basis of the relationship between critical strain and uniaxial compressive strength in laboratory specimens and then confirmed through in situ displacement monitoring. Hazard warning level II ( In practice, Young's modulus ( However, at the initial design stage (before any excavations have been constructed and before any displacement monitoring can be undertaken) the estimates of rock mass strength and modulus are largely based on empirical relationships such as those outlined by Hoek and others Therefore, at the initial design stage, critical strain can be estimated from the calculated rock mass strength and modulus by using The purpose of this first example is to demonstrate the application of a point estimation method of reliability analysis in a situation where the critical displacement is known as an external constraint to design. To this end, consider a 5 For the purpose of this discussion, let us assume that displacements in excess of 25 In this example, Rosenblueth's point estimation method The values of cohesion (     Because there are two variables, there are only four possible combinations of Similarly, the maximum and minimum displacements that are expected in the floor of the drive are calculated, based on the minimum and maximum Mohr–Coulomb parameters, respectively. These displacements are estimated to be 40 and 11 For two random variables, the expected value ( In summary, therefore, the displacement in the floor of the drive is expected to follow a distribution that has a mean value of 19 The purpose of the second example is to demonstrate the application of Sakurai's critical strain approach in the analysis of excavation reliability. To this end, consider an igneous rock mass with the following properties: Mean, minimum and maximum Young's Modulus of 25, 17 and 33 Mean, minimum and maximum rock mass uniaxial strength of 56, 40 and 72 It is proposed to construct a 5 Sakurai In other mining situations (for example, short-term drives or other openings), it may be more appropriate to use the upper bound value of critical strain obtained from the mean rock mass properties. In this example, the critical strain would be 0.75% and the corresponding critical displacement would be 37.5 Having acquired an estimate of the critical strain in this way, a similar probabilistic analysis to that described in 4.1 above can be conducted. In this way, an estimate of reliability will be obtained. A parameter that is of considerable practical interest to the rock mechanics engineer is displacement, since it is often the amount of displacement in the rock mass around an excavation that determines whether or not the excavation is serviceable. Consequently, the probability of failure of an excavation can be defined as the probability that some displacement criterion is exceeded. The reliability of the excavation, therefore, is the probability that the displacements will be less than or equal to the critical value. In establishing what the critical displacement is at the initial design stage, there may be some reason, not related to the rock mass itself, why a particular level of displacement cannot be exceeded. Alternatively, the design engineer may well have some judgemental concept of what constitutes a critical displacement in a slope or underground excavation. Yet another alternative method of deriving this value is to draw on Sakurai's concept of critical strain. Once the critical displacement has been established, the probability of it being exceeded can be derived from numerical modelling. The methodology outlined in this paper is not meant to replace limit equilibrium-based estimates of probability analysis. It is meant to enhance the ability of the geotechnical or rock mechanics engineer to quantify the reliability of excavations that he or she designs. The authors wish to thank Professor Ernesto Villaescusa and Dr Andy Haile for providing a critical review of the manuscript. The first author also wishes to acknowledge his mining and civil engineering clients, the support of whom over the years has enabled these concepts to be formulated and tested in practice.