Steve Ensley and Tim J. Evans Tim J. Evans This article addresses the diagnostic challenges associated with suspected intoxications, the causes of which are actually multifactorial in nature, possibly involving sublethal exposures to multiple toxicants and/or other etiologies which are not toxic in nature. Gold standard toxicologic diagnostic approaches were developed for and are still applicable to obvious intoxications. However, a more integrated diagnostic approach, focusing on the initial problem list, is consistent with how veterinarians diagnose most cases of ruminant production inefficiency, morbidity, and/or mortality and helps ensure that all of the factors contributing to the development of the observed clinical signs are taken into appropriate consideration. Steve Ensley Determining mineral status of production animals is important when developing an optimum health program. Nutrition is the largest expense in food animal production and has the greatest impact on health and productivity of the animals. Knowing the bioavailability of minerals in the diet is difficult. Evaluating fluid or tissues from animals is the optimum method to determine bioavailability. Evaluating the diet provides some information. Serum/blood or liver from the animal needs to be analyzed to determine bioavailability of vitamin and minerals in the diet. This article reviews how to sample and the function of these minerals in cattle. Merl F. Raisbeck Water is the most important nutrient for rangeland livestock. However, competition with municipalities, industry, and other water users often results in grazing livestock being forced to use water supplies that are less than perfect. Surface water in western rangleands are often contaminated by mineral extraction, irrigation runoff and other human activities. Mineral contaminants in drinking water are additive with similar contaminants in feedstuffs. The goal of this and the subsequent article is to provide producers and veterinarians with the basic background to make informed decisions about whether a given water supply is “safe” for livestock. Merl F. Raisbeck Water is the most important nutrient for rangeland livestock. However, competition with municipalities, industry, and other water users often results in grazing livestock being forced to use water supplies that are less than perfect. Surface water in western rangleands are often contaminated by mineral extraction, irrigation runoff and other human activities. Mineral contaminants in drinking water are additive with similar contaminants in feedstuffs. The goal of this article is to provide producers and veterinarians with the basic background to make informed decisions about whether a given water supply is “safe” for livestock. Robert H. Poppenga and Stephen B. Hooser Livestock can be exposed to a wide variety of commercial or industrial chemicals that have variable toxicity. Adverse effects can be due to acute or chronic illnesses and deaths or due to contamination of meat or milk intended for human consumption. A diagnosis can be challenging in the absence of a known exposure. It is critical that a complete evaluation be conducted and appropriate samples be collected for possible analysis. Appropriate experts and regulatory agencies should be consulted as soon as possible to avoid potential contaminated animal products reaching consumers. Steve Ensley Ionophores are a commonly used feed additive for animals and when used properly are safe. When feed mis-mixing occurs and an elevated dose of ionophore is given, a toxicosis can develop. Myocardial and skeletal muscles are the targets of a toxicosis. In many species there is a delay from the time of ingestion of a toxic dose in feed to when clinical signs occur. This makes it difficult to collect the feed in question that was at an elevated concentration. Cardiac troponins in serum can be used to make a diagnosis of an ionophore toxicosis. Steve Ensley Corn co-products are a co-product of the dry and wet corn-milling ethanol manufacturing industry. The dry mill corn co-product is distiller’s grains. Distillers grain can be further categorized into dry distillers grains (DDG), DDG with solubles, wet distillers grains with solubles (WDGS), modified WDGS, and corn syrup (solubles). Wet mill ethanol production produces 2 main feed stuffs: corn gluten (wet and dry) and heavy steep water. Bryan L. Stegelmeier, T. Zane Davis, Michael J. Clayton, and Dale R. Gardner Poisonous plant intoxication is one of the first considerations for various livestock diseases and unexplained animal deaths. Although toxic plants commonly poison livestock, obtaining a definitive diagnosis is difficult and challenging. This article provides a framework to help livestock producers, veterinarians, and diagnosticians reach the most accurate and definitive diagnosis. For this discussion poisoning caused by plants containing dehydropyrrolizidine alkaloids is used to provide examples and suggestions for investigating and sampling. It is also used to show how to recruit expert collaborators, diagnostic resources, and information sources to amass required expertise, information, and laboratory results to produce the best diagnosis. Bryan L. Stegelmeier, T. Zane Davis, and Michael J. Clayton In the western United States, poisonous plants most often affect grazing livestock, and the related livestock losses are estimated to cost the grazing livestock industry more than $200 million annually. Many of these toxic plants contain neurotoxins that damage or alter the function of neurologic cells in the central and peripheral nervous systems. The objectives of this article are to present common North American neurotoxic plants, including conditions of poisoning, clinical disease, pathologic changes, and available diagnostics, to identify poisoned animals and the potential prognosis for poisoned animals. T. Zane Davis, Bryan L. Stegelmeier, and Michael J. Clayton Many toxic plants, ingested by livestock while grazing or eating contaminated processed feed, produce myoskeletal or myocardial lesions that sometimes have irreversible consequences. Some myotoxic plants are lethal after ingestion of very small amounts whereas others require consumption for many days to several weeks to produce disease. Incorporation of field studies, clinical signs, gross and microscopic pathology, and chemical identification of plants, toxins, and metabolites in animal samples is essential for an accurate diagnosis. This review introduces toxic plants that cause myotoxicity, reviews toxins and lesions, discusses analyses for making an accurate diagnosis, and summarizes treatments and recommendations to avoid future poisonings. Bryan L. Stegelmeier, T. Zane Davis, and Michael J. Clayton Whether exposed by grazing toxic range or pasture plants or by eating contaminated feed, there are plant toxins that produce urinary tract disease, gastroenteritis, and other miscellaneous or multisystemic diseases. Diagnosis can be challenging and requires incorporation of field studies, clinical signs, gross and microscopic pathology, and chemical identification of plants, toxins, and metabolites in animal samples. The objectives of this review are to introduce poisonous plants that commonly poison livestock in North America; describe clinical and pathologic lesions they produce in livestock; and present current technology available to identify poisoning, treat affected animals, and minimize or avoid poisoning additional animals. Michael J. Clayton, T. Zane Davis, Edward L. Knoppel, and Bryan L. Stegelmeier The liver is one of the most commonly affected organs by ingested toxicants. This article familiarizes veterinarians with clinical signs, serum biochemistry changes, necropsy findings, and field information found in livestock poisonings with hepatotoxic plants. The focus is on the most common plant-derived hepatotoxins important to livestock in North America. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are covered in greater detail than the other toxins, because they are likely the most important plant-derived toxins worldwide in livestock, wildlife, and even human exposure. Additionally, many of the principles discussed regarding clinical diagnosis of pyrrolizidine alkaloid intoxication can be applied to the other poisonous plants listed. Bryan L. Stegelmeier, T. Zane Davis, and Michael J. Clayton Whether poisoned by grazing certain toxic plants, by eating contaminated feed, or by topical contact with plant toxins, certain plants poison livestock causing photosensitivity and dermatitis. These dermal lesions are rarely fatal, and with appropriate therapy and protection from additional exposure most lesions heal with few permanent sequelae. However, these lesions often result in costly production losses and missed opportunities. The objectives of this review are to briefly introduce toxic plants that result in photosensitivity and dermatitis, review the toxins and pathogenesis of plant-induced skin disease, and summarize treatments and recommendations to avoid poisoning. Bryan L. Stegelmeier, T. Zane Davis, and Mike Clayton Whether poisoned by grazing toxic plants or by eating feeds that are contaminated by toxic plants, affected livestock often have compromised reproductive function including infertility, abortion, and fetal deformities. Certainly all diagnostic tools—field studies, clinical signs, gross and microscopic pathology as well as chemical identification of plant and plant toxins in animal samples—are essential to make an accurate diagnosis, to develop intervening management strategies and to improve the reproductive performance. The objectives of this review are to briefly introduce toxic plants that are reproductive toxins, abortifacients, or teratogens. Michelle S. Mostrom and Barry J. Jacobsen This review focuses on factors associated with mold production in feedstuffs and major mycotoxins affecting ruminants in North America. Ruminants are often considered less sensitive to mycotoxins owing to rumen microflora metabolism to less toxic compounds. However, ruminants occupy wide agricultural niches that expose animals to diverse toxins under widely different environmental and nutritional conditions. Often the moldy and potentially highly contaminated feeds end up at feedlots. Less than optimal feedstuffs creating suboptimal rumen microbial flora could result in decreased ruminal capacity to detoxify certain mycotoxins and adverse effects. Numerous mycotoxins and clinical effects in ruminants are discussed. Merl F. Raisbeck Selenium (Se) is a metalloid that exists as a red amorphous powder, reddish crystal, silver-gray crystal, or brown-black solid. Its potency as a nutrient and a toxicant is such that few people have seen the pure element. It is easy to lose sight of the narrow margin between too little and too much. The most common cause of selenosis is accidental or intentional overuse of supplements. Many target organs and effects of Se toxicity are similar to those of Se deficiency, so laboratory confirmation is necessary. Prevention consists of minimizing exposure to seleniferous feedstuffs and optimizing dietary factors that might aggravate selenosis.