Extracellular vesicles (EVs) play an important role in biological functions and may feature innate therapeutic potential for diseases. In the present study, EVs released by osteoblasts at different stages of the mineralization process were investigated for their potential ability to promote bone formation. Results showed that the characteristics of EVs of mineralizing osteoblasts changed with regularity. EVs derived from the mid-to-late differentiation stage remarkably promoted osteoblast differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and improved osteoporosis in ovariectomized mice. The findings also revealed that the effect of EVs on osteogenesis was related with the maturity of matrix vesicles (MVs), a kind of EVs selectively released by mineralizing-related cells. Nevertheless, only the EVs from the mid-to-late stage showed osteoinductive properties, Synthetic cartilage lymph (SCL) treatment of EVs from the middle stage could promote MV maturation but showed no effect on osteoinduction. Additionally, EVs derived at the middle and mid-to-late stages showed innate bone-targeting potential. Collectively, this study demonstrated that EVs released by osteoblasts at the mid-to-late differentiation stage markedly enhance osteogenesis. Our findings present the prospective use of osteoblast-released EVs in bone tissue engineering.The extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from nearly all cell types are considered naturally occurring biomaterials [ EVs from mineralizing-related cells are occasionally investigated. Exosomes derived from mineralizing osteoblasts and dental pulp cells have been reported to promote osteogenic and odontogenic differentiation [ However, similar to autogenous bone grafting, considering the standards in management of bone defects, naturally occurring EVs might be more conductive for bone formation than a single factor. As a series of pathways participates in osteogenic differentiation, and various osteogenic-related factors may be released by EV secretion [ EVs are a heterogeneous population whose molecular payloads depend on the cell type of origin [ This study aimed to explore the potential use of EVs released by mineralizing osteoblasts during osteogenesis for the management/treatment of bone-related clinical diseases. Additionally, large amounts of MVs are produced during osteoblast differentiation [ Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) were harvested from the tibias and femurs of Kunming mice as previously reported [ Cell culture supernatants of MC3T3-E1 were collected at day 3 for the first time, and then every 2 days before addition of fresh medium. EVs were isolated by differential centrifugation as previously reported [ EVs were sedimented by ultracentrifugation and re-suspended in 1 mL synthetic cartilage lymph (SCL) as previously described [ Protein contents of EVs were determined by BCA method. Different concentrations (0, 1.25, 2.5, and 5 μg/mL) of EVs were added to the mineralization induction medium for the first 3 days of osteogenic differentiation. For osteoinduction, 2.5 μg/mL of EVs were added to the growth medium of BMSCs. After 7 days, the mRNA expressions of osteoblast marker genes, including ALP, COL1A1, and RUNX2, were detected. Total proteins extracted from cell lysates and EVs were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, and blotted with anti-CD63 and Following 10 min of fixation in 95% alcohol, cells were rinsed with double-distilled H For TEM observation, EVs were dropped onto a carbon-coated copper grid. Negative staining was achieved by dropping with 2% uranyl acetate solution onto the grid. Samples were imaged using a transmission electron microscope at 80 kV (Jeol, Japan). The hydrodynamic diameters of EVs were detected using Zetasizer Nano ZSP (Malvern Instruments, UK). EVs labeled with green fluorescent dye PKH67 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were operated according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 200 μL of EVs and 4 μL of PKH67 were diluted in 1 mL diluent C. After 4 min of incubation at room temperature, labeling was stopped by 2 mL of 1% bovine serum albumin, and the mixture was subsequently passed through 100 kDa Amicon filter. Flow cytometric analysis was performed to verify the efficacy of labeling. PKH67-labeled EVs (3 mg/kg) were administered to mice via tail vein injection. After 30 min, 2 h, and 12 h, the bilateral femurs were extracted to be detected by IVIS Spectrum CT (PerkinElmer, USA). Total RNA of cells was isolated using TRIzol reagent. RT-PCR was performed under the following conditions: initial activation step at 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles, with each cycle consisting of a denaturation step at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and an extension step at 72 °C for 1 min. Kunming mice were purchased from Center for Disease Control of the province of Hubei, China. The experimental protocols were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Wuhan University (Wuhan, China). 7-Week-old female mice were randomly divided into six groups including 1) Sham/PBS, 2) OVX/PBS, 3) OVX/E-EVs, 4) OVX/M-EVs, 5) OVX/ML-EVs, and 6) OVX/L-EVs. Ovariectomy operation was performed on mice as previously described [ The femurs of mice were scanned and analyzed by a micro-CT imaging system (SCANCO MEDICAL μCT50, Switzerland). Indicators, including bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), and trabecular separation (Tb.Sp), were determined to evaluate bone mass. The femurs were decalcified with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and ultimately embedded in paraffin. Five-micrometer-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). All images were obtained from an optical microscope. All data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) (n = experimental replicates). Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 7.0. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All experiments were performed at least three independent times. EVs were specifically isolated from culture medium of mineralizing MC3T3-E1 cells. TEM confirmed the presence of EVs in the size range of 30–150 nm ( To test the effects of EVs on osteogenesis, different concentrations (0, 1.25, 2.5, and 5 μg/mL) of EVs were added to the mineralization induction medium of BMSCs. As confirmed by ARS, EVs could effectively accelerated the osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs ( EVs (2.5 μg/mL) derived at days 0, 5, 9, 13, and 17 were added to the medium of BMSCs, respectively. As shown in The results confirmed that EVs from the mid-to-late stage enhanced osteogenesis effectively. As MVs are mainly secreted during the late stage of osteoblast differentiation [ MVs selectively distribute in the matrix of cartilage, bone, and dentin and serve as a leading role in the initiation of mineralization by forming the calcium phosphate crystals of hydroxyapatite (HA) [ According to the morphological characteristics of MVs, osteoblast differentiation could be divided into four stages: early, middle, mid-to-late, and late stages. At the early stage, osteoblast differentiation was inactivated and no MVs were released. At the middle stage, a certain amount of MVs could be detected. At the mid-to-late stage, the size of MVs was notably smaller than earlier ones. At the late stage, membrane-free needle-like crystals formed in EVs. Our results shown EVs from the mid-to-late stage enhanced osteogenesis significantly, and MVs accounted for a large proportion of them. We proposed that the maturity of MVs is associated with their properties. In The maturity of MVs remarkably affected their capacity in pro-osteogenesis. However, the possible effects of other components of EVs should not be neglected. Studies have reported that MVs may function as carriers of osteogenic-related proteins, such as BMPs, vascular endothelial growth factor, and noncollagenous matrix proteins [ We also questioned whether EVs derived by osteoblasts own bone-targeting potential. EVs were successfully labeled with PKH67 ( To investigate the effects of EVs on bone EVs play an important role in biological functions and EVs released by mineralizing osteoblasts show remarkable potential in osteogenesis. However, few studies have focused on osteoblast-derived EV application in bone disease treatment possibly given the complexity of vesicle components, unpredictability of undesirable elements, and difficulty of isolation [ The present study showed that MVs, which are selectively secreted by mineralizing-related cells, accounted for a considerable proportion of EVs, and MVs derived at different stages showed varying sizes and crystallinities. According to the characteristics of MVs, osteoblast differentiation could be divided into four stages: early, middle, mid-to-late, and late stages. At the early stage, osteoblast differentiation is inactivated, and no MVs are released. At the middle stage, a certain amount of MVs could be detected. At the mid-to-late stage, the size of MVs is visibly smaller than that of earlier ones. Membrane-free needle-like crystals form at the late stage. Our study demonstrated that EVs derived at different stages of osteoblast differentiation showed remarkably different potentials to enhance osteogenesis. MVs play an important role in promoting osteoblast differentiation, and their maturity is associated with their properties. With an increase in crystallization by incubation with SCL, EVs from the middle stage decreased in size and promoted osteoblast differentiation of BMSCs more effectively. Additionally, late-stage EVs showed no effects on osteogenesis and EVs from the mid-to-late stage no longer promoted osteogenesis when treated with SCL. Amounts of membrane-free needle-like crystals were observed in the SCL-processed EVs from the mid-to-late stage. Some studies have reported that several members of the vertebrate annexin family exist on the membrane of MVs [ Notably, the possible effects of other components of EVs should not be neglected. Studies have reported that MVs may function as carriers of osteogenic-related proteins, such as BMPs, VEGF, and noncollagenous matrix proteins [ Altogether, EVs derived at different stages of osteoblast differentiation showed notable differences in pro-osteogenic potential. EVs from the middle and mid-to-late stages enhanced osteogenesis effectively. The maturity of MVs is associated with pro-osteogenic potential. EVs derived at the mid-to-late stage showed innate bone-targeting potential and osteoinduction property. Collectively, EVs from the mid-to-late stage showed remarkable therapeutic potential in bone regeneration and repair. Biological mineralization is complicated, and the osteogenesis mediated by EVs remains incompletely understood. The complexity of vesicular components and significant disparities among proteins at different stages of osteoblast differentiation cause difficulty in understanding the direct function of EVs [ The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Y. Wei and C.Z. Tang contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at