The amenability of beneficiating a fine hard coal from Hwa-Sun coal mine using column flotation has been studied using a CoalPro flotation column developed by Canadian Process Technologies (CPT). After initial testwork using a batch flotation cell to determine the optimal flotation conditions, tests were carried out to compare its performance with the column. The results showed that the performance of the column was far superior to that of the conventional cell owing to the large fines content present in the coal. It was established that a stable froth column of 40cm in height and a suitable balance between froth and collection zone could be maintained at 1.0cm/s superficial gas rate. A suitable reagent scheme and the optimal operating conditions that minimized adverse effects generally encountered in treating fine coal, such as gangue entrainment, have been identified. An increase in water recovery significantly decreased ash rejection implying entrainment of fine ash particles. Column flotation is capable of producing an acceptable clean coal concentrate of 85% combustible recovery with 81% ash rejection at a maximum separation efficiency of 62%, compared to conventional flotation which has 70% recovery with 70% ash rejection at an efficiency of 42%.Coal is one of the main fossil fuels that supplies energy of up to 30% worldwide and has been widely perceived as a strategic energy source particularly in countries with poor energy resources, due to rising oil and gas prices. Utilization of coal for energy production requires the removal of ash as well as hazardous materials such as SO Froth flotation exploits the differences in surface hydrophobicity of the different constituent minerals and selectively separates the valuable minerals from gangue by attaching them to air bubbles and recovering them from the mineral laden froth In this study, an attempt has been made to identify the most significant parameters in designing flotation columns for processing a finely-sized low rank coal including water recovery that influences fine gangue entrainment. The working mechanism of a typical flotation column and its important process variables are shown schematically in Several studies on column flotation have focused on the froth stability and the pulp level, entrainment of fine particles, flotation rate, product grade/recovery relationships and carrying capacity. Goodall and O'conner Bias rate (J On the other hand, understanding and implementation of column flotation have undergone a rapid growth in relation to column design, construction, air sparging and operation since 1990s Other commonly used type of sparger is the jetting type devices developed by the U.S. Bureau of Mines but it has been plagued with maintenance problems due to plugging of the orifices In this work, flotation tests on a low rank anthracitic hard coal from Hwa-Sun coal mine were carried out using lab scale CPT Coalpro column. Particularly, this study was focused on investigating variables such as superficial air rate, superficial wash water rate, feed solids concentration and several chemical reagents that affect column flotation with a view in identifying important variables for plant design. Coal sample (anthracite) used in this study was obtained from Hwa-Sun Coal Mine in South Korea. It is a low rank coal which was rejected as waste from the main processing plant. On analysis it was revealed that the ash in this coal could be liberated at about 150 Preliminary tests to determine the effective reagent combination for flotation of this coal were carried out using a laboratory Denver sub-A batch flotation machine with 4 The laboratory CPT CoalPro column flotation system used is shown in The composition of samples of coal and ash was analyzed using SEM, XRD and XRF techniques. The following procedures were followed in the preparation of samples for these analyses. A field emission-scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS, Link Isis 3.0, Oxford Instruments plc, U.K.) was used for this analysis of coal samples. Generally when using this equipment, carbon coating of the sample surface is required in order to make it conductive. However since the sample contains carbon a platinum coating was applied instead. First, each coal product sample was mixed with a volatile solvent alcohol (ethanol), dispersed and cleaned in an ultrasonic bath. The sample was then placed on a stub over a thin layer of silver (Ag) paste. After drying the sample, it was coated using a Pt electron E-1030 sputter for 1 Samples for XRD analysis were prepared by grinding the ash samples to minus 50 Ash ground to minus 100 The results of these tests are given in The proximate analysis of the raw coal sample and the chemical analysis of the ash sample used in this work are given in In coal preparation, the performance of a separation device is generally determined by evaluating the combustible recovery (R In this work, the above performance measures have been used to quantify the effects of variables discussed below. In column flotation, separation of combustibles from ash is significantly affected by the variables relating to: 1) gas dispersion, such as superficial gas rate (J It must be noted that in column flotation it is customary to report the flowrates of water and gas as superficial rates (J), which is defined as the volumetric flowrate per unit area of column cross-section. It has units of velocity and sometimes referred to as superficial velocity. The nature of gas dispersion within a flotation column is of vital importance in determining its performance. Dobby and Finch The superficial gas rate affects the formation of bubbles, froth column and concentrate carrying capacity among others. It is defined as: It has been observed that the size of bubbles increases as air rate is increased The bubble surface area flux is directly proportional to the flotation rate constant in the collection zone. The effect of superficial gas rate on water recovery, combustible recovery and ash rejection in CPT column flotation is shown in One of the advantages of using a column is that it gives rise to a higher froth column than a conventional cell. This increases the residence time of particles in the froth zone which allows any entrained gangue particles to be drained back to the pulp. With the addition of wash water, the entrained gangue particles are washed back into the pulp zone thereby increasing the grade of the concentrate i.e. higher ash rejection. The effect of superficial wash water rate on water recovery, combustible recovery and ash rejection in CPT column flotation is shown in  Water recovery into the concentrate is an important variable in the flotation of fine particles as it has been shown to be directly proportional to the entrainment of gangue particles Rearranging Eq. As shown in The effect of feed solids concentration on water recovery, combustible recovery and ash rejection in CPT column flotation is shown in As the coal tested had a significant fines fraction (less than 37 O'Connor et al. The appropriate flotation reagent combination for cleaning the given coal was identified as the collector (DMU-101), frother (MIBC) and depressant (Sodium metaphosphate). The effect of collector (DMU-101) dosage on combustible recovery and ash rejection in CPT column flotation is shown in Depressant SMP is generally used in coal flotation for preventing the flotation of finer ash. The effect of depressant (SMP) dosage on combustible recovery and ash rejection is shown in The effect of frother dosage on water recovery, combustible recovery and ash rejection is shown in The performance of CPT column and conventional flotation was compared in terms of combustible recovery, ash rejection and separation efficiency measures as described in XRD patterns and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images of the feed, concentrate and tailings products obtained from the CPT column are shown in This confirms the efficiency of the CPT flotation column in cleaning low rank fine grained coal over conventional cells particularly when the coal is liberated only at very fine particle sizes. This fact is confirmed as the particle sizes in the tailings product shown in SEM image are more finer than those of the concentrate. It also implies that the mechanism of separation in the column is predominantly flotation and the effect of gangue entrainment of the gangue particles is minimal possibly due to the wash water. Regression analysis of the data for the prediction of combustible recovery (R For combustible recovery, R  The r-squared values for the relationships for R On testing the amenability of using column flotation for the beneficiation of a fine low rank coal, it has been shown that column flotation was more effective than conventional flotation. The most significant variables for column flotation in relation to combustible coal recovery and ash rejection were: For combustible coal recovery: Air rate, wash water rate, collector For ash rejection: Air rate, collector. The recommended values of the process variables, air rate, wash water rate, feed solids concentration, frother (MIBC) dosage, collector (DMU-101) dosage and depressant (SMP) dosage are 1 The authors would like to express special thanks to the