In the present study, the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) process of hydroxyapatite–titania nanocomposite was kinetically described by the use of response surface methodology (RSM). The electrostatic interaction between particles in ethanol based suspensions was determined by Zeta potential and particle size analyses. After successful electrophoretic deposition from hydroxyapatite–titania suspensions with 0, 10 and 20wt% of titania nanoparticles, it was shown that Baldisserri model can well reproduce the experimental data among the other semi-empirical kinetic equations. The as-deposited hydroxyapatite–titania nanocomposites were characterized employing SEM, AFM, XRD, and FT-IR analyses. Then, the effects of deposition voltage, deposition time and wt% TiO2 on the kinetic of EPD at two time intervals (10–60s and 60–300s) were identified and quantified via RSM based on a central composite design (CCD). According to the results obtained from the statistical analysis, it was found that the deposition rate decreases by an increase in wt% TiO2 and time. Also, a transition in deposition mechanism from linear to parabolic mode was observed and two second order polynomial equations were fitted to the response (deposit weight) at each time intervals.Hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca The difficulties in EPD of HA particles, including low bonding strength between HA and metallic substrate In an EPD process, the colloidal particles in a stable suspension are deposited onto an electrode under an applied electrical field The simplest model describing the kinetics of EPD is known as the Hamaker model; a linear correlation between the deposition yield ( It should be mentioned that Hamaker model is only valid at initial times of deposition process Another model, which considers the variation in suspended particles concentration, was proposed by Zhang Recently, Baldisserri et al. A literature review shows that the appropriate choice of the value of the parameters, such as suspended particles' concentration It has been shown that full factorial DOE as well as fractional factorial DOE gives the most complete information regarding interaction between parameters but the number of experiments becomes excessive in the former The aim of the present study is to elucidate the kinetics of electrophoretic deposition of HA–TiO Hydroxyapatite (Merck, USA) and TiO The prepared suspensions were dispersed by a 50 Response surface methodology (RSM) was employed to investigate the effect of deposition voltage ( In this equation The statistical significance of the full quadratic models predicted was evaluated by the analysis of variance (ANOVA). The significance and the magnitude of the effects were estimated for each variable and all their possible linear and quadratic interactions were also determined. Unless otherwise stated, the significance level employed in the analysis was 5% ( The stability/mobility of HA-based particulate suspensions influences the deposition rate of HA–TiO  In  FT-IR spectra of as-deposited samples are also shown in According to the SEM images presented in  Kinetic modeling of the experimental data by the use of Hamaker (Eq.  In order to shed more light on the effect of pertinent factors in the EPD system, response surface methodology is employed for the identification and quantification of the important parameters; the methodology which is able to simultaneously consider several parameters at different levels, and to give a suitable model for the relationship between the various factors and the response. Based on the results obtained in previous sections, the effects of voltage ( The values of the regression coefficients are presented in   At short time interval, Eq. At long times of deposition, In the cases where interaction between factors is statistically significant, contour plots give more complete information regarding the effect of a factor on the response.  These two relations elucidate that the deposition rate is only In order to verify the rate-controlling mechanism during EPD, Eqs. The kinetics of electrophoretic deposition from HA–TiO The deposition yields corresponding to H, H10T and H20T suspensions increase with both applied voltage and time. However, the deposition rate decreases by an increase in wt% TiO The linear and interactive terms of voltage and time are significant at short times of deposition (10–60 At longer times of deposition (60–300 After initial times of deposition, there is a transition from the linear mode to the parabolic mode. The critical transition time is a function of %TiO