The flotation response of chalcopyrite has been characterized as a function of particle size and advancing contact angle. The advancing contact angle of individual particle size fractions was controlled to different values. Flotation experiments were carried out under constant hydrodynamics and feed particle size distribution. A two-component kinetic model was used to fit the experimental flotation data. The maximum recovery increased with advancing contact angle for each size fraction. Particles within the same size fraction and within the same contact angle range displayed similar flotation behaviour, within experimental error, in different tests. Evidence of a distribution of advancing contact angle values within each particle size fraction was found, and it was assumed that particles in the non-floating fraction had advancing contact angle values below the critical contact angle required for stable bubble-particle attachment. The flotation results were used to model the maximum recovery and the critical contact angle as a function of particle size, assuming a statistical distribution of contact angle values about a measured mean. The recovery and rate constant data were collated into master curves as a function of particle size for different contact angle ranges. These master curves, together with the critical contact angle, may be used to benchmark the flotation response of chalcopyrite and to infer an effective operational contact angle in natural ores.In mineral flotation, the key steps in the collection of particles by bubbles in the pulp involve bubble-particle collision, attachment and detachment ( Hydrodynamic interactions are dominant in the collision efficiency while interfacial forces play a major role in the attachment efficiency. The stability of the bubble-particle aggregate is a function of both hydrodynamics and interfacial forces ( The attachment of a particle to a bubble is influenced by the contact angle and surface roughness. The surfaces of mineral particles are heterogeneous in terms of chemistry ( The rate of flotation is represented by a chemical kinetic analogy where particles and bubbles ‘react’ to form a bubble-particle aggregate. Researchers generally agree that recovery of particles is first order with respect to particle concentration, provided the bubble concentration remains constant ( As The total flotation recovery is often used to estimate the rate constant distributions without necessarily giving regard to factors such as particle size and contact angle ( It has been observed that the advancing contact angle measured on particles compares more favourably with flotation recovery than that measured on polished surfaces ( It would appear that the non-floating component in each size fraction has a contact angle at or less than the critical required for stable bubble-particle attachment ( This paper focuses on the influence of the contact angle, measured on size fractions of model chalcopyrite particles, on the flotation rate and recovery (i.e., floatability components). Master curves of the recovery, rate constant, and collection efficiency, against particle size at different contact angles, are generated. The experimental flotation data relating the recovery and advancing contact angle for each size fraction is used to model the maximum recovery, assuming a statistical distribution of contact angles in the feed, leading to the determination of a critical contact angle for each size fraction for stable bubble-particle attachment. It is anticipated that by closely controlling the physical conditions in flotation, the rate constant and collection efficiency may be used to benchmark the flotation response of real ores in an attempt to infer an operational contact angle as a function of particle size. A 2 In order to vary the advancing contact angles of each particle size fraction, freshly prepared samples were subjected to manipulation procedures to alter their degree of hydrophobicity. Freshly prepared size fractions of chalcopyrite were naturally hydrophobic and needed to be oxidised to decrease the advancing contact angle to lower values were then increased by collector addition. Selected size fractions were thermally oxidised at 150 For the −20 The From Eq. Two capillary tubes covered with a glass frit at one end were used for a single measurement. One capillary is required for each test liquid, water and cyclohexane. The glass frit was first covered with a filter paper to prevent particles from clogging the holes in the frit. An equal mass of particles from the same size fraction (approximately 3 After the measurement of advancing contact angles on each individual size fraction, a flotation feed sample was constituted and the sample tested in flotation within 2 Each test condition was repeated at least twice, and the corresponding concentrates at each time interval combined for particle sizing. A third and fourth test was carried out if there were significant differences in the concentrate mass recoveries with time. The conditioning time at pH 10 was 1 The bubble size in flotation was measured using the photographic method ( Particles are recovered via two primary mechanisms (1) by true flotation in which hydrophobic particles are recovered by attachment to air bubbles and, (2) by entrainment, which involves the non-selective recovery of particles in water recovered to the concentrate irrespective of whether they are hydrophobic or hydrophilic ( Recovery by entrainment in a single batch flotation test was estimated using the method by The rate of particle recovery was calculated assuming a single floatable fraction and a non-floating fraction. The size-by-size recovery data, after entrainment was subtracted, was fitted to the first order rate equation: Surface analysis was carried out at the same time as the contact angle measurements. Chalcopyrite size fractions were prepared without collector conditioning and each fraction was split into two. One sample was for advancing contact angle measurements while the other for surface analysis. Surface analysis was carried out using a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD XPS (monochromatic aluminium X-ray with energy of 1486.7 In this study, the magnitude of error involved in the advancing contact angle measurements needed to be evaluated to ascertain the sensitivity of the measurement method. Further, the error in the maximum recovery and rate constant for each size fraction was evaluated from results of repeated flotation tests, so that meaningful comparisons could be made between results from different tests. Error analysis is a key to the overall methodology of benchmarking flotation performance. The error in contact angle values was evaluated for each size fraction. Two samples of each size fraction were prepared, one with high and the other with low advancing contact angle ( In order to gain better understanding of the method in terms of reliability of the contact angle values measured, further analysis was necessary. It is assumed that cyclohexane perfectly wets even highly hydrophobic particles. This assumption implies that the material constant is independent of particle hydrophobicity within the bed. The material constant, The error in contact angle increases at the coarser end of the particle size distribution ( A method is also proposed by The corresponding average recoveries displayed similar standard error trends as that observed for the contact angle values ( The average standard error in Contact angle on particles conditioned together in the same pulp varied with size fraction ( A series of flotation tests were carried out to probe the flotation behaviour of each particle size fraction as the contact angle varied. Attention was also given to the flotation response of particles hydrophobised differently but exhibiting similar advancing contact angle values within experimental error. In all flotation tests, recovery by entrainment was subtracted from the total recovery. A chalcopyrite flotation feed sample was prepared by conditioning the particle size fractions together with 300 Flotation Tests 2 and 3 were carried out with feed samples constituted from size fractions individually manipulated to different levels ( To further study possible interactions of particles in different size fractions during flotation, five further tests were carried out ( The recovery of each size fraction is closely related to the advancing contact angle. There was no recovery in Test 8 across all size fractions, showing that the measured contact angles were lower than the critical contact angle for stable bubble-particle attachment ( The maximum recovery of hydrophobic particles is achieved when the particles are given sufficient time to be recovered. In this study, the feed was assumed to have two components, floating and non-floating. The superficial gas velocity ( The maximum error that was obtained in contact angle measurements was 2.4° ( Several flotation tests were carried out to generate data for each contact angle range, and including the data displayed to this point. It should be pointed out that it was impossible to manipulate particle contact angles in such a way as to target a specific value. Eventually, sufficient flotation response data was generated for each contact angle range across all particle size fractions. For each size fraction, the cumulative recovery with time after subtraction of entrainment within each contact angle range from different tests was arithmetically averaged. Calculation of the maximum recovery, The flotation response of the −20 The flotation rate of the mineral particles increases with an increase in the advancing contact angle ( It has been argued ( The collation of all flotation data presented in the previous sections serves to provide a global picture to the flotation behaviour of particle size fractions within different contact angle ranges. The maximum recovery for a given contact angle range increases with particle size up to the intermediate size fractions and decreases as the particle size continues to increase ( There is considerable overlap of the error bars at the very coarse end of the particle size distribution for the undistributed flotation rate constant. This is shown by the overlap of the error bars and therefore the calibration is less discriminating for very coarse size fractions. The collection efficiency as a function of particle size for different contact angle range varies as the undistributed rate constant from which it is derived ( The observed flotation behaviour of particle size fractions at different contact angle ranges can be explained in terms of the existence of a critical contact angle for stable bubble-particle attachment. The shapes of these curves may suggest that the variation of the critical contact angle with particle size is a mirror image of the maximum recovery or undistributed rate constant curves. Where the maximum recovery and undistributed flotation rate constant are highest for any given contact angle range, the critical contact angle for the particular size fraction is probably lowest, giving rise to an optimum particle size for floatability. The critical contact angle is explored further below. The data constituting these master curves has been generated using single minerals that are fully liberated and floated under well-defined conditions. It is possible that the flotation response obtained represents a standard or benchmark of flotation behaviour (calibration) of the same mineral in ores. The recovery of particles is dependent on the contact angle range and particle size fraction when the hydrodynamics are constant. For each particle size fraction and contact angle range, there is a non-floating component which decreases with an increase in the contact angle. Further, not all particles are recovered at the same rate even in situations where the bubble surface flux is not limiting. The existence of a non-floating component and the differences in flotation rates may be a result of a distribution of contact angle values within each particle size fraction of the feed, as suggested by the work of The maximum recovery varies with particle size fraction for any feed contact angle value. This suggests an intrinsic characteristic of particles that is size dependent, i.e., the critical contact angle. We may assume that the critical contact angle for floatability is constant for a given size fraction under constant physical conditions. If the critical contact angle is Particle contact angle All particles that satisfy the above condition have a probability of being recovered to the concentrate, while the particles with a contact angle less than the critical value cannot be recovered. The proportion of the floatable and non-floatable components in the feed determines the maximum recovery. Within a size fraction/contact angle range of particles, there may be heterogeneity of both particle size and contact angle. The effect of heterogeneity in particle size can be reduced by working with very narrow particle size fractions, while heterogeneity in contact angle is more difficult to deal with. Contact angle heterogeneity/distribution within a size fraction is demonstrated by direct contact angle measurements on flotation products ( The gamma function is a two-parameter function with a mean and a mode. When the mean is equal to the mode, the gamma function approximates the normal distribution. As the mean and the mode of the distribution vary, there is skewness to the left or right, making this function suitable to describe contact angle distribution at both high and low contact angle regimes. It was assumed that the measured nominal contact angle using the Washburn technique is the mean, while the mode was varied to fit the data ( Contact angles in the distribution were constrained between 0 and 100°, which are the minimum and maximum possible contact angles for the materials used (chalcopyrite-amyl xanthate system) ( The following frequency distributions have been chosen for contact angles ( If mean If mean A least squares method was used, allowing the critical contact angle The critical contact angle for stable bubble-particle attachment is a function of particle size ( The un-sized experimental recovery was calculated for each contact angle range by taking into account the particle size distribution in the feed and the maximum recovery of each particle size fraction and contact angle range. This was compared with the un-sized model recovery at the nominal contact angles, the correlation having an When the distributed rate constant is calculated using the equation relating the contact angle and the undistributed rate constant for each size fraction ( The variation of contact angle with particle size for similarly treated chalcopyrite particles is a result of genuine differences in surface chemistry with particle size, with sulphur bearing species contributing positively to the contact angle, while oxygen bearing species reduces the contact angle. Both the maximum recovery and rate constant increase with an increase in the advancing contact angle within any particle size fraction. The maximum recovery (i.e., floatability component) is not affected by the superficial gas velocity, but the rate constant increases with an increase in the superficial gas velocity. The flotation response varies with particle size as the contact angle is increased. The flotation rate increases rapidly with an increase in the contact angle for particles in intermediate size fractions, while only modest increases in rate constant are realised for very coarse size fractions. The flotation response of particles within the same size fraction is the same, within experimental error (