The study reports the effect of increasing pulp density on the bio-catalyzed leaching of metals from waste mobile phone printed circuit boards. Mixed microbial consortia of iron and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms were used for batch bioleaching at varying pulp density of 7%, 10% and 15% (w/v). The copper content in the feed material was 26.3% (w/w) and the prime focus was to recover maximum copper along with other minor metals, such as zinc, aluminum, and nickel. All the bioleaching experiments resulted with 98–99% of copper recovery together with reasonable extraction Zn, Al, and Ni. The optimum copper recovery from bioleaching experiments demonstrates the possibility of scaling up with high pulp density, which could be economical as well as eco-friendly.The waste generated in the form of waste mobile phones, computers, LCD screens, T.V., and other electronic devices compulsorily have an end of life (EOL) and termed as electronic waste (E-waste) [ Moreover, none of the techniques can independently fulfill process demand due to the complex nature of mineral or material to be processed. Thus, an integrated approach is being applied to recover the metal values from primary as well as secondary resources [ In contrast to the previously reported studies, the recent research on bioleaching suggests that base metal bioleaching from the waste at higher pulp densities is more economical [ Waste mobile phones were collected from local electronic shops at Alwar, Rajasthan. The Printed Circuit Board (PCBs) were segregated from the waste mobile phones by the manual process and later crushed and ground at the Mineral Processing department of CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India. The crushing of mobile phone PCBs was carried out in an impact crusher for ten cycles of crushing and grinding. Final grind size upon sieving of the particles expressed as 80% passing (d The microbial culture used in the bioleaching experiments were collected from the laboratory culture of Lulea University of Technology (Lulea, Sweden). The microbial culture was a mixed culture of chemolithotrophic, acidophilic mesophile consisting of Fe and S oxidizing microorganisms. Revealed from the Q-PCR analysis of Bioclear B.V., Netherlands. The microbial culture was dominated by Thus, the amount of total iron present in inoculum is necessary to estimate before initiating the experiment. The pH measurements of the bioleaching solution during the experiments were carried out by a pH meter (Eutech). Calibration of the pH meter was done regularly with a three-point calibration using the standard buffers of pH 1.68, 4.0, and 7.0 and slope value ranged between 95-100. The oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) of the bioleaching solution was measured by an ORP meter having a platinum electrode with Ag v/s AgCl reference electrode. The Fe (II) concentration in the bioleaching experiment was estimated by a titrimetric method using cerium sulfate with 1, 10-phenanthroline as an indicator. The Fe (total) concentration of the bioleaching solution was measured by visible spectrophotometer at 510 nm. Whereas, the Fe (III) concentration of the bioleaching solution was calculated by subtracting concentration of Fe (II) from the Fe (Total). A turbidimetric method was used to determine the sulfate ion concentration of the bioleaching solution as per the procedure described in American Public Health Association, 1975 (APHA) [ The bioreactor for all three bioleaching operations was of same configuration and material. All bioleaching experiments were carried out on a 2.5 L glass bioreactor with a working volume of 1 L (v/v). The stirring device in the bioreactor comprised of a mechanical overhead stirrer (IKA) and a flat blade turbine type impeller to ensure homogenous mixing of the bioleaching slurry with a stirring rate of 210 rpm. Two baffles were placed perpendicular to the wall of the reactor facing opposite at two extremes of the wall. Each baffle extended vertically from top to bottom of the bio-leaching slurry. The two baffles were used to avoid vortex formation in the bioreactor slurry, allowing homogenous mixing of the solid particles with the lixiviant. The temperature in the bioreactor was maintained at 35 °C by the help of a hot plate (IKA) placed beneath the reactor with desired temperature regulation. The working volume of batch bioleaching experiment was 1000 mL, which comprised of 900 mL (90% v/v) of 0K growth medium and 100 mL (10% v/v) of inoculum (microbial culture). The bioleaching was carried out with increasing pulp density (P.D.), i.e., the weight of pulp or feed material per unit volume The bioleaching experiments were harvested by a solid-liquid separation by vacuum filtration using a water jet Aspirator Pump (Cole-Parmer)   The ferrous, ferric and total iron concentration profile during the bioleaching of 7% P.D. showed an initial increase in ferric ion concentration, followed by a balanced ferrous ferric cycle ( In 10% bioleaching study the ORP value was recovered from 140 mV to 330 mV on the 10 In 15% P.D., the high amount of 5M acid added contributed to 73.96% of the copper recovery in the initial eight days. On the 9 The waste mobile phone PCBs are a rich source of iron. Therefore, all the bioleaching experiments were carried out in iron-free medium so that the microorganisms can utilize the Fe from feed itself [ An increase in pH during the initial phase of bioleaching in all the experiments was due to increased alkaline nature and concentration of acid consuming gangue minerals and was highest in the experiment with 15% P.D [ The pH in 10% bioleaching was showing an increasing trend during 7–12 days, and the highest value of pH 2.01 was marked on the 10 The pH of 15% P.D. was carefully monitored during the first few hours of the experiment, and 5M H The changes in chemical composition, mineralogy and material surface before and after bioleaching was determined by the XRF, XRD and SEM-EDS analysis of feed as well as bioleach residues. The XRF analysis confirms the bioleaching of Cu, which was found as a trace element in the bioleach residues. Comparative SEM-EDX and XRD graphs of feed and bioleach residues show a high-intensity peak of Cu in the feed which was absent in all of three bioleached residues after Cu bioleaching. The elemental and mineralogical analysis of bioleached residues showed the increased concentration of Au and Ag, along with economically important element Ti after bioleaching. The calculations based on XRF data denotes that Ag was concentrated 80% in 7% P.D., and 100% in 10% and 15% P.D. bioleach residue. The concentration of Ti was 100, 79, and 52% in 7, 10, and 15% P.D., respectively ( The bioleaching of Cu, which was the major element in the PCB sample, was high and did not influence by increasing pulp density. The Cu recovery was found to be 98.86%, 98.83%, and 98.81% in 7%, 10%, and 15% P.D. bioleaching experiment. Besides Cu, the recovery of other base metals such as Ni and Zn were also in considerable amount ( The present study mainly focused on bioleaching of Cu; the major element (26.3%) in mobile phone PCB followed by Si, Ca, Al, Fe, Ni, and Zn. The Cu recovery was 98.9%, 98.8% and 98.8% in the ascending order of P.D., with similar weight loss (%) in all the three bioleaching experiments, i.e., 28.9%, 30.4%, 28.2%. It depicts that the increase in P.D. from 7% to 15% (w/v) did not hinder the Cu recovery. The recovery of Al and Zn was equally good in all the experiments. Except for Cu, Al, and Zn; Ni showed varied leaching behavior with varying P.D. The Ni recovery was only 20.39% and 47.9% in P.D. 7% and 15% (w/v). The less availability of lixiviants in 15% P.D. and early Cu dissolution in 7% P.D. experiments might be a reason behind the low-recovery of Ni. The precious metals such as Ag and Au and some other economically important metals, i.e., Ti were concentrated in the bioleached residues. Other chemical treatments can further recover these metals. The study showed a balanced Fe Himanshi Garg, Neha Nagar, Ganapathy Ellamparuthy: Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. Shivakumar Irappa Angadi, Chandra Sekhar Gahan: Conceived and designed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. This work was supported by the The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. Authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. P.C. Sahoo, IOCL, Faridabad, for his cooperation and help in XRF facility, MRC, MNIT, Jaipur for SEM-EDX facility and Department of Physics, CURAJ for XRD.