Fat intake has been associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease, obesity, and diabetes. The aim of this study was to reformulate meat products using amorphous cellulose fiber (Z-trim®) as a fat substitute. Based on a Response Surface Methodology, an emulsified and cooked meat model system was carried out with a standard formulation with 20 g/100 g pork fat, and replacement levels of pork fat (from 0 to 20 g/100 g) by amorphous cellulose fiber (from 0 to 1.5 g/100 g). The independent variables within the levels studied influenced the dependent variables emulsion stability (from 73.64 to 91.76 g/100 g), firmness (from 27.32 to 48.02 N), hardness (from 50.86 to 83.00 N), b* color coordinate (14 days) (from 13.08 to 14.45), and weight loss during storage (from 1.88 to 5.16 g/100 g). Comparing the fitted models to the results of the standard sample, it is possible to obtain products with 1.3 g/100 g amorphous cellulose fiber and 10 g/100 g pork fat (50% fat reduction), with technological characteristics similar to the standard sample.Processed meat products are important protein sources with high biological value, energy, vitamins (B6 and B12), and minerals (Fe and Zn). Such products, however, have been criticized due to their high sodium content, low fiber content, and high animal fat level in several formulations (20–30 g/100 g), being often considered harmful to health ( Animal fat has high saturated fatty acids content (from 30 to 60 g/100 g), which show influences on final consistency of meat products. The pork back fat consisting of roughly 90 g/100 g fat and 10 g/100 g moisture and is mostly used to make processed meat products with high technological quality due to its significant properties, such as high melting point due to its fatty acid composition, and desirable sensory characteristics. However, there is on average 61 mg/100 g cholesterol and it can vary with breed, sex and diet ( Increasing demand for products with low and/or reduced fat levels systems from the need to have healthier diets and has led to the development of new products to replace the fat in traditional formulation. Three different techniques can be applied in meat product segmentto decrease fat, such as modifying carcass chemical composition for meat with lower fat content, manipulating animal raw material by selecting leaner meat, and making meat products through use of fat substitutes, by adding water and functional ingredients. This latter tactic depicts a considerable opportunity to add value to processed meat products by the addition of new ingredients, additives and technological process research, aiming for healthier products ( Neverthelles, replacing animal fat in meat products is an enormous technological challenge. Although being a high caloric formulation ingredient, animal fat in meat products holds a great and positive way in terms of softness, succulence, taste, and important attributes of quality. Chemical and physical properties of fat such as viscosity, heat stability, plasticity, dispersion, physical stability (emulsification, migration, and coalescence), chemical stability (rancidity and oxidation), and microbiological stability (water activity and food safety) affect fat intake and shelf-life of meat ( Reducing and/or replacing fat in processed meat products, therefore, can cause a big hit on sensorially portrayed final products, mainly on traits such as appearance, aroma (taste intensity and sense), satiety, and texture sensation (succulence, creamy texture and palatability), as well as on physical stability of products, mainly on emulsified meat products ( By excessively decreasing fat in meat products, other ingredients which supply products sensorial quality traits can help in achieving this challenge, such as spices, flavorings, and suchlike, which works as fat substitutes ( According to Substitutes derived from carbohydrates are usually hydrophilic due to the large number of hydrogen bonds with water, creating a fat-based system depending on the food texture aimed ( The amorphous cellulose fiber (Z-trim When the amorphous cellulose fiber particles absorb water, they swell promoting viscosity and, sensorially, a sense of smoothness, softness and plasticity in the mouth ( The aim of this study is to evaluate the performance of the use of amorphous cellulose fiber as fat substitute in an emulsified and cooked meat model system. Through the Response Surface Methodology, are investigated the physicochemical parameters such as emulsion stability, cooking loss, weight loss during storage and instrumental color and texture. Quality assured beef (Margen, São Paulo/BRA), and pork meat and pork fat (Marchiori, São Paulo/BRA) were purchased in a local supermarket. The raw materials were characterized for moisture, crude protein, and ash content according to AOAC methods ( The water holding capacity of the amorphous cellulose fiber was determined in triplicate according to the methodology reported by The standard formulation of the meat model system contained 27.82 g/100 g beef, 27.82 g/100 g pork meat, 20 g/100 g pork fat, 19.80 g/100 g ice, 2.0 g/100 g sodium chloride, 2.0 g/100 g maltodextrin (GLOBE The replacement of pork fat by amorphous cellulose fiber was assessed by a two-variables Central Composite Design (CCD), with four factorial trials, four axial trials and three repetitions at the center point, resulting in 11 trials, and the corresponded levels are shown in The dependent variables were emulsion stability (batter), weight cooking loss (product not sliced), and instrumental color and texture (sliced product) after 24 h of storage at 5 °C in a BOD (Electro Lab, São Paulo/BRA). The weight loss and instrumental color were also assessed after 14 days of storage. The product was sliced to pieces of 20 mm thickness, vacuum-packaged, and kept at room temperature for 2 h before analysis to reach thermal equilibrium. Both raw meat and fat were kept at around 0 °C. The comminution was carried out in a GARANT MTK 661 cutter (MADO, Dornhan/DEU) at two different speeds (1400 and 2800 rpm). First, beef, pork, sodium chloride, sodium nitrite, and half of the ice were added at low speed. Then, potassium tripolyphosphate, maltodextrin, sodium erythorbate, and fat were comminuted at high speed until the meat batter reached 7 °C. Soon after, the remaining ice and the amorphous cellulose fiber were added, and the mixture comminuted at high speed until the batter reached 14 °C. Three repetitions were performed for each formulation, in which 500 g batter was cooked in an electric oven at 180 °C, until the geometrical center reached 72–75 °C, which was monitored by inserting cooper-constantan-thermocouples into the meat batter. The moisture content was determined according to the method 24,002 The emulsion stability was determined according to the methodology reported by The cooking loss was determined in triplicate after 24 h of manufacture. The weight before cooking and after cooking and stored until 24 h at room temperature were measured. The differences were determinated and the results were expressed in percentage. Three slices of about 40 g were weighted and stored in nylon-polyethylene bags, vacuum-sealed using a HP 60 seal machine until 93,325.66 N/m Color measurements were performed in a Colorquest II spectrophotometer (Hunter Lab, Reston/USA), previously calibrated, with illuminant D65, observer angle 10°, in RSEX and CIELab color system ( Firmness, hardness and shear force were determined in the sliced samples using a texture analyzer TA XT2i (Stable Micro Systems, Haslemere, GBR) in sextuplicate. The parameters for firmness and hardness were pre-test speed: 1.0 mm/s; test speed: 1.0 mm/s; post-test speed: 10.0 mm/s; 25% distance; time 60 s, with a cylindrical probe P/35 on The data were analyzed by Tukey's test and response surface methodology using the statistical program Statistica 7.0 (Statsoft, Tulsa/USA) (  The water holding capacity of the amorphous cellulose fiber was 12.59 ± 0.90 g of gel/g of samples (in dry weight). The water holding capacity of a fat substitute is one of the most important characteristics from the technological point of view, once it contributes to the emulsion integrity during the manufacturing process and shelf life of the product. The results of moisture and fat contents of the samples are shown in For the fat contents was observed that the addition of amorphous cellulose fiber did not showed influence, because no significant differences were observed for the treatments 7, 8, and central points, respectively for the lower, higher and middle level for the amorphous cellulose fiber. Significant differences ( As can be seen in The cooking losses varied from 3.80 to 8.41 g/100 g, as shown in The addition of water in the treatments containing lower pork back fat content increased the cooking loss due to the increase in exudation because this promotes a weakening to the batter emulsification stability. Thus, the shelf life of the product may also be affected due to the higher water activity, microbiological contamination, and physicochemical changes, affecting the sensory characteristics (  With respect to the hardness, as can be seen in The values of shear force varied from 10.73 to 14.49 N. However, it was not possible to create a predictive model because the According to   The parameters The Higher pork fat and amorphous cellulose fiber contents resulted in higher The addition of potato fiber as fat substitute in pork liver paté did not influence the luminosity of the product. A decrease of  As can be seen in Considering the conditions of this study, the addition of amorphous cellulose fiber and pork fat did not influence the shear force, but significantly increased the emulsion stability, consistency, hardness, It was possible to obtain low-fat products (about 50% fat reduction) with technological properties similar to the standard sample, using 1.3 g/100 g of amorphous cellulose fiber. The amorphous cellulose fiber proved to be a promising functional ingredient as fat substitute in meat products. The authors would like to acknowledge the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (