To evaluate biodiesel production from microalgae, a flotation experiment was conducted using the living cell culture fluid of the diatom Chaetoceros gracilis using a venturi tube type microbubble generator. We compared the separation performance of three different culture periods: 1, 2, and 3 weeks from the start of cultivation. After 1 week, the cells were in the logarithmic growth phase, while after 2 and 3 weeks, cell growth had reached the stationary phase. The amounts of triacylglycerol (TAG) in the foam on the surface of the fluid tank were measured. TAG increased during the first 20 min after the start of circulation without additional coagulants and pH adjustment. The disruption of cells was achieved simultaneously. The amounts of TAG in the culture fluids at weeks 2 and 3 were higher than those at week 1. C. gracilis cells in the stationary phase accumulated large amounts of TAG and were easy to disrupt by pressure fluctuation in the venturi tube. These results provide insight into the fracture strength and buoyance of cells for efficiently separating the cells from large volumes of culture fluid.An efficient thickening technique is needed to produce biofuel from microalgae. Microalgae have many advantages as a resource for biofuels, such as their worldwide prevalence, simple growth conditions, and high levels of lipids per growing area [ Gravity and centrifugation sedimentation are the classical methods used to thicken the culture fluid [ In preliminary experiments, a large difference in triacylglycerol (TAG) yield was observed, even when the growth conditions such as temperature, light intensity, medium type, and bubble generation conditions were the same. Therefore, we hypothesized that the cell culture time may affect the removal efficiency. In the present study, we investigated the influence of the culture time of microalgae on the dispersed air flotation. The diatom The culture medium consisted of 36 g/L artificial seawater (Marine Art SF-1, Osaka Yakken Co., Ltd., Funabashi City, Japan), 252 mg/L Daigo IMK medium, and 56.84 mg/L sodium metasilicate nonahydrate (Na The turbidity, i.e., optical density at 730 nm (OD A schematic view of the experimental facility is shown in A scheme of the microbubble generator is shown in Typical photographs of Changes in cell density over time during growth are indicated in The characteristics of TAG have been previously described [ The negative pressures measured downstream of the throat of the venturi tube are shown in Changes in the cell density of the culture fluid in the tank during the flotation experiment are shown in The rate of decrease of the cell density from 0 to 20 min was 53%, 56%, and 62% for weeks 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Additional experiments for weeks 2 and 3 indicated that the rates of decrease during 20 min were 67% and 54% for 2 weeks and 62% for 3 weeks. Therefore, for all experimental conditions, more than 50% of the cells were separated and thickened into a foam. The rate of decrease of the cell density appeared to be independent of the cultivation time under the present experimental conditions. The difference in the initial cell density was maintained until 50 min. The amounts of TAG present in the foam are shown in In the weeks 2 and 3 culture fluid, TAG levels in the foam increased rapidly until 5 min similar to the observation in the week 1 fluid. In this culture fluid, higher levels of TAG were obtained between 10 and 40 min; all samples contained the same initial levels of TAG. Large fluctuations were observed in the data between 20 and 30 min in the week 2 culture fluid. This may be because the foam was sampled from different locations because the foam rotated on the free surface during circulation. It is noted that the depth (~70 mm) of culture fluid in the tank was very shallow in comparison with that in many previous flotation tests because of the scarcity of test fluid. As a result, the uniformity of the TAG in the foam may have been affected by the flow under the free surface. The separation efficiency was also limited because a part of the cells was sucked into the test loop before floating. The higher TAG levels in the weeks 2 and 3 culture fluid may be related to cell disruption in the venturi tube. The cell culture fluid was passed through the venturi tube approximately 67 times from 0 to 20 min according to estimation based on the fluid flow rate and fluid volume. Exposure to negative pressure in the venturi tube caused gradual cell disruption during circulation. As shown in According to the above results, microalgae can be thickened by using a venturi tube type microbubble generator without using any coagulants or frothers and by adjusting the acidic conditions. However, it is necessary to investigate the removal efficiency again when the type of microbubble generator (particularly, the magnitude of internal pressure fluctuation) and type of cells (amounts of lipid and breakability) change. A venturi type microbubble generator was used to efficiently thicken a large amount of culture fluid containing microalgae. More than 50% of the cells in the culture fluid were separated and thickened into a foam in the first 20 min. The negative pressure in the generator disrupted the silica shells. In the present case using None. This work is based on results obtained from a project commissioned by the