The system of referencing used in papers for this journal is not in my opinion the most author-friendly during paper writing and revision. The system of name (date) is much more flexible and often has the advantage of adding value to text by immediate reference to people and when a piece of work was done. We therefore propose that we make a transition over the coming months to the new style with minimal disruption to authors and the printer. We hope authors will appreciate this change. It surprises me that journals vary so much in the styles adopted. On a second matter, I make a plea for better understanding of quotation of accuracy of data. The worst offender is the Arrhenius activation energy in kJ/mol quoted to one or even two decimal places. Rate constants are not easy to measure and even with a small error and a 10-fold difference in rate constants over a given temperature range the error on activation energy may be of the order of ±20%, so an apparently precise answer of 51.21 kJ/mol should be normally be quoted as 50±10 kJ/mol. There is often curvature of the Arrhenius plot suggesting changes in mechanism so precise answers can be misleading. After all, the answer is normally only needed to indicate chemical or diffusion rate control and thereby support a kinetic model of the process. A similar problem is posed by the coefficients and exponents in empirical correlations. Every coefficient and exponent in an empirical correlation should ideally be quoted with the error of the estimate obtained using sophisticated statistical packages; these errors are usually so large that we prefer to close our eyes to the truth of the matter and wish that statistics would go away. Yet another example is the quotation of percentage metal extraction from ores, or recovery in a solvent extraction pilot plant, to one or two decimal places. Are ores so reproducible or plants so well run that such accuracy has validity? There is probably an underlying psychological need to value our work highly (and have the work published) which hinders many of us (myself included) from coming to terms with the apparently poor estimates of the accuracy of the data which have cost us so much effort to determine.