A probabilistic geotechnical design optimization framework for large open pit excavations is proposed in the present work. An appropriate objective function is formulated in terms of normalized cost of excavation, while the overall slope angle constitutes the decision variable. Probability of slope's failure is computed via Monte Carlo simulations. Optimization curves identifying the optimum slope's angle are developed for different risk and volume factors. For illustrative purposes, a typical example of a surface lignite mine is analyzed and results are thoroughly discussed. The suggested methodology can be used as a complementary tool in the decision analysis process of similar projects.The choice of slope's angle in surface mining has a significant economic impact on the operations of a mining company. This is so because steeper slopes result in lower stripping ratios, i.e. lower amount of overburden (waste) material to be excavated. For instance, Hustrulid et al. Implementation of direct probabilistic analyses in slope stability is not new in geotechnical engineering. Several researchers in the past have applied well established methods of reliability analysis, such as the First Order Second Moment, the Point Estimate, and the Monte Carlo Simulation, in order to consider geotechnical uncertainty and variability, and include the probability of failure, together with the traditional safety factor, in the calculated outcome (see among many others, In the present work, a probabilistic methodology leading to a practical geotechnical risk analysis and design optimization framework is developed for typical slopes of large open-pit excavations. First, geotechnical uncertainties are addressed by modeling shear strength properties as random variables following pre-assigned probability distributions. The probability of failure P Generally, in slope stability problems, safety factor SF is traditionally defined by the ratio: In the present work, stability is addressed using the method of slices (i.e. the entire “failing” soil mass is separated in vertical slices, and equations of equilibrium are solved for each slice) according to Spencer's method Substituting Opposite to a deterministic analysis, in a probabilistic slope stability approach, sources of uncertainty are characterized and explicitly accounted in stability's assessment. To represent the previously described limit state of equilibrium (Eq. This mathematical expression is similar to that of Eq. It is noted that another frequently used probabilistic measure of safety is the reliability index β, which is defined as the number of standard deviations between the most likely value of safety ratio and safety ratio equal to one. However, most practitioners prefer to work with P Reliability assessment in the present work is performed using the well known and widely used in engineering Monte Carlo simulation technique. This is a stochastic technique that generates a great number (trials) of repeated simulation processes. On each realization, a given performance function that depends on certain random variables (i.e. design variables) is solved. When the simulation is repeated many times (usually in the range of thousands), the average solution gives an approximate answer to the problem. Accuracy of the solution increases with increasing number of realizations and of course by choosing appropriately the random variables' probability distributions. The geotechnical engineering literature is full of applications of the Monte Carlo simulation technique on almost every kind of geotechnical problem. For a comprehensive description of the method, interested readers are forwarded to relevant textbooks (see for example, Last but not least, when it comes to probabilistic analysis, another aspect of importance is the correlation and dependency between random variables, or between random variables and safety ratios. Although many probabilistic studies have a tendency to neglect it, some dependency often exists between certain geotechnical parameters. For instance, the most frequent dependency concerns the correlation between friction angle and cohesion at Mohr-Coulomb soils One of the greatest benefits of probabilistic modeling is that, once the probability of occurrence of an event (in our case, event is the failure of a slope) P In the present work, and in the context of developing a practical and easy-to-use decision analysis framework, the excavated volume of the overburden material of an open pit mine is defined as a decision variable. This is so because, as already mentioned in the introduction, the excavation cost, that apparently directly relates to the excavated volume, usually constitutes a very large, if not the largest, part of the overall economics of an open pit mine. So, the objective function may be expressed in terms of cost as following: The ratio C In order to illustrate the previously described framework of probabilistic design optimization, an example of a surface lignite mine in Greece is analyzed. Greek surface lignite mines are mainly soil-like slopes The example analyzed in the present study is a typical case of an open pit lignite mine in northern Greece. The cross section of the mine consists of marls and lignite intercalations as shown in In the present study, only uncertainties related to soil properties, and specifically to the shear strength of the three involved soil profiles, are taken into consideration. So, in total, five parameters were treated as random variables: the clay's residual friction angle φ In addition to the above, it shall be noted that spatial variability of soil properties within the slope was not taken into account. Generally, when extensive laboratory or in situ testing data sets are available, it is feasible to statistically analyze them and describe spatial variability (i.e. variation over space) of the random variables by means of random fields. The main descriptors of a random field are the mean or expected value, the variance or standard deviation, and the autocovariance or autocorrelation function of the analyzed soil property. When soil strength values have been measured within short distances (for example, consider a very dense mesh of boreholes close to each other), the uncertainty of each value with respect to the other becomes smaller, because these two are highly correlated to each other due to their short distance. In such case, we have the so-called short autocorrelation distances, which generally tend to reduce the variance of the soil resistance in limit equilibrium problems and as such they usually result in smaller probabilities of failure Monte Carlo simulations were performed by Slide's build-in random number generator, which is a Park and Miller minimal linear congruential random number generator with the following recursive formula Monte Carlo simulation was performed for fifty thousand realizations. Last but not least, regarding model uncertainty and its associated error, this may be viewed as the deviation of the predicted performance from “reality”, even when soil properties involved in the calculations have been rightly assessed Since the residual friction angle φ Considering the relatively important role of the marl's shear strength (as indicated on Based on the above, finally, it was preferred in the present study to perform a parametric study, rather than adapting a certain value. The results of variation of P As explained in the first part of the paper, the overall angle α of the excavation constitutes the decision variable in the suggested optimization framework. Therefore, an extensive parametric probabilistic analysis for values of α between 16° and 35° was performed and results are presented and discussed in the following paragraphs. First of all, with reference to a deterministic type of analysis, As far as the first limitation, it can be eliminated by a curve such as the one shown in The above results refer exclusively to the assessment of the reliability (in terms of geotechnical stability) of the excavation pit. In the following paragraphs, risk and optimization analysis are also integrated into the analysis of the excavation. By means of risk, it is meant that consequences (in monetary terms) of a potential failure have been taken into consideration, and by means of optimization, it is meant that the design is optimized (with respect to the decision variable α), in order for risk to become minimum. To start with, This means that the curve of With reference to the optimization framework, These results are based on the assumption that the volume of soil V A framework for practical probabilistic design optimization of large open pit excavations was proposed in the present work. An objective function was formulated and suggested to be used in terms of normalized cost, so that its minimum value is sought during the optimization process. The decision variable upon which the objective function minimizes is the overall slope angle of the pit, which is the typical design variable in open pits. The optimization process involves elements of simplified risk analysis. To be more exact, risk of slope failure was computed as the product of the probability of failure (that was calculated from Monte Carlo simulations) by the consequences of failure that were expressed in terms of a risk factor (relating the initial cost of excavation and the cost of rehabilitation in case of failure) and a volume-of-rehabilitation factor (relating the initial volume of excavation and the volume that needs to be removed or rehabilitated in order for the mine to recommence its operation). Ultimately, based on probabilistic parametric studies for varying slope angles, optimization curves may be easily developed for different risk and volume factors, and therefore serve for the identification of the optimum angle of the slope. For illustrative purposes, a typical example of a surface lignite mine was analyzed and the following conclusions, relevant to this specific example, were drawn: For a commonly accepted deterministic safety factor of about 1.2, the corresponding probability of failure – taking into account reasonable coefficients of variation – was computed equal to 4.13%. Whether this is a satisfactory level of safety or not, it is up to the mine owner to decide. The residual friction angle of the horizontal weak clay layer seems to play the most important role in the stability of the slope, since even a small decrease on its mean value by one degree significantly increases the probability of failure. The correlation between deterministic safety factors and corresponding probabilities of failure, for a wide range of pit angles, is highly non linear. In fact, the correlation of the safety factor was found to vary linearly with the logarithm of the probability of failure. In this direction, a simple but practical equation, valid for the present example, has been formulated and suggested. Similar equations may be easily formulated for other examples and serve within a decision analysis context. Optimization curves were developed for a wide range of slope angles and different risk factors (C Overall, it is anticipated that the suggested methodology can be easily adapted and used by geotechnical engineers involved in the mining industry for many cases of large open pit excavations. Ultimately, the goal of the work is to provide a framework that can be used as a complementary tool in the decision analysis process. This work has been funded by the