There were studied four types of powder filler materials for polyolefin composite parts production for automotive and aerospace industry. There was confirmed, that the particle shape has a strong effect on the acoustic and mechanical properties of the powder bed as influenced by the varying packing density. The calcium carbonate spherical hollow particles exhibited the best aerodynamic performance when aerated and were completely fluidised. Simultaneously they were exhibiting the easy flowing behaviour as reflected in the observed flowability of 4.71. In contrary to this, the flat lamellar geometry of the precipitated calcium carbonate resulted in the worst fluidisation behaviour, as the aeration energy was 2.5× higher in comparison to the spherical particles. Remaining samples under study, i.e. flash calcined kaolin and dolomite powder, exhibited cohesive rheological behaviour as reflected in the observed flowability. There was found a clear correlation between powder rheological and electrostatic charge data with the observed acoustic performance as reflected in the frequency dependence of the normal incident sound damping coefficient. This was demonstrated by a relatively high increase in the damping efficiency with increasing porosity of the powder bed as reflected in the decreasing packing density. However the best fit was found between the absolute value of the electrostatic charge values and the sound damping properties.At present there is an increased demand for the application of synthetic polymers in the automotive and aeronautic industries. It is mainly targeted for utilisation of poly(ethylene), poly(propylene), polycarbonate and polyamide components of the interior, exterior or other functional parts of vehicles The recent review article by Wang et al. Creating hollow spheres made of calcium carbonate has proved to be a success, with Another route for the production of the perfectly formed dense agglomerates and the formation of deformed or hollow agglomerates is affected by particle consolidation during spray drying evaporation, particle rearrangement during the consolidation period and by the inter-particle potential. In general, the consolidation can proceed in the thermodynamic state, where the inter-particle potential is either repulsive or attractive. In the dispersed slurry, the long-range inter-particle potential allows the particles to repel one another. When the particles are repulsive, the meniscus that separates the two fluids exerts a capillary pressure on the particles at the surface, forcing them together as a dense agglomerates. In the case of the mechanism, where particles were not allowed to rearrange after a short period of evaporation, the agglomerate becomes hollow and deformed. Whereas in the case of the attractive particle network, if the capillary pressure exceeds the yield stress, the spherical agglomerates with uniform density are formed As a composite system matrix, polyolefin polymers are widely used, such as poly(ethylene) or poly(propylene), with different grades, types and qualities This paper is focused on the application of powder rheology, acoustic performance testing and electrostatic charge measurements on the evaluation of hollow spheres and lamellar mineral powder materials as prospective fillers for polyolefin composite materials applications. Sound is an acoustic wave with frequencies ranging from 10 Hz to 16 kHz, with sonic waves spreading in all directions from the source. On the basis of different points of view on the problem of noise attenuation it is possible to distinguish the following methods of sound and vibration damping Reduction method – attenuation at the noise source, e.g. during the machinery construction stage. Sound isolation method – covering the sound source by material with high airborne sound insulation characteristics. Sound absorption method – endeavour to minimise sound reflections e.g. to absorb the maximum of the incident acoustic energy. In the matrix of the sound/vibration attenuating material, dissipation of the sonic wave to mechanical energy and heat takes place. This proceeds by the combination of the following processes: By friction of the vibrating air particles on the walls during their penetration into the pores of the sound absorbing material. This lowers the kinetic energy of the incident sound field. Effectiveness of this process increases with growing porosity of the absorption material. By decreasing the potential energy of the sonic wave penetrating into the material. This lowers the acoustic pressure due to the heat exchange between air and the skeleton of the absorbing material during periodic pressure changes. By non-elastic deformation of the absorbing material body. At the specifically aimed construction of the vibration or noise–isolation material it is therefore possible to utilise all of the above mentioned processes for their synergistic effect in obtaining maximum effectiveness of attenuation. This is possible by modelling the geometry of the damping material body as well as by proper selection of the main material matrix and adhesive system. Sound absorption properties express a material's ability to absorb incident acoustic energy and is described by the sound absorption coefficient ( The materials studied were commercially available mineral filler powders and are described in Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to determine the shape and size of the studied mineral composite filler particles. SEM images were captured using a Hitachi 6600 FEG microscope (Japan) operating in the secondary electron mode using an accelerating voltage of 1 kV. Thermogravimetry (TG) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) experiments were performed on simultaneous DTA-TG apparatus (Shimadzu DTG 60, Japan) to determine the moisture content of the samples, and to determine whether there was any organic material present. Throughout the experiment, the sample temperature and weight-heat flow changes were continuously monitored. The measurements were performed at a heat flow rate of 10 °C/min in a static air atmosphere at the temperature range of 30 °C–300 °C. Powder rheology measurements were conducted on a FT4 Powder rheometer (Freeman Technology, UK). All experiments were performed under the ambient laboratory conditions of 23 °C and relative humidity of 43%. The frequency dependencies of the sound absorption coefficients of the investigated powders were experimentally determined by the transfer function method ISO 10534-2 Electrostatic charge measurements were conducted on a NK-1001A Coulomb meter (Kasuca Denki, Japan). Samples were placed in a Faraday cage and the charge (nC) was measured for 1 g samples Sound absorption properties of the tested powders are affected by their porosity, shape of pores, angle of inclination of incident acoustic waves on the material surface, friction of acoustic waves during transmission through the porous matrix Results of the normal incidence sound absorption measurements are shown in The results of the powder bed aeration experiments are shown in It is well known from the literature, that the mechanical friction of individual nano/micro particles induces the creation of electrostatic charge on their surfaces In this paper the material properties of four powder filler materials for polyolefin composite parts production for the automotive and aerospace industry were studied. It was found that the particle shape has a strong effect on the acoustic and mechanical properties of the powder bed as influenced by the varying packing density. Moreover the hollow calcium carbonate spheres exhibited the best aerodynamic performance when aerated and were completely fluidised. Simultaneously they exhibited the easy flowing behaviour as reflected in the observed flowability of 4.71. Contrary to this, the flat lamellar geometry of the calcined kaolin resulted in the worse fluidisation behaviour, as the aeration energy was 2.5× higher at 18 mJ compared to the spherical particles (AE_10 = 7.5 mJ). The flash calcined kaolin and dolomite powders exhibited cohesive powder behaviour as reflected in the observed flowability of 3.67 and 3.01, respectively. There was found to be a clear correlation between powder rheological and electrostatic charge data, with the observed acoustic performance as reflected in the frequency dependency of the normal incident sound damping coefficient. Here a clear increase of the damping efficiency with increasing porosity of the powder bed was demonstrating as reflected in the decreasing packing density. However the best correlation with sound damping performance was found with the observed absolute values of the electrostatic charge of the tested powders. Here the largest electrostatic charge was found for sample 2 and the lowest for sample 1 (hollow spheres). The same pattern was also found for the sound damping performances, i.e. the best sound damping properties were found for sample 2 and the worst one for sample 1 (hollow spheres). However, the poor sound absorption performance of the sample 1 indicates its superior sound reflection properties make it potentially commercially attractive for sound insulation applications. The same dependency was also found for the aeration measurements results, where the most cohesive character was found for sample 2 and the best fluidisation properties found for the low density hollow spheres (sample 1). Based on the above results it can be concluded that the combination of the powder rheological and electrostatic charge measurements can be used to predict the sound damping properties of the powder filler materials. Financial support from the grant no.