A magnetic adsorbent with an approximate diameter of 1μm was manufactured and used for fouling control in an anaerobic membrane bioreactor, equipped with a side flow inside-out tubular ultra-filtration membrane, operated under slug flow conditions. Without the addition of the magnetic adsorbent, a short-term experiment showed that the applied slug flow conditions enabled membrane operation at a flux exceeding 20L/m2h with a low trans-membrane pressure (TMP) increasing rate. Then, the magnetic adsorbent (1g/L) and subsequently more magnetic adsorbent was added that increased the concentration of the adsorbent from 1g/L in the reactor to 5g/L. However, the introduction of the magnetic adsorbent resulted in an increased TMP, even at the low concentration applied (1g/L). The TMP increasing rate increased with the applied adsorbent concentration. Strikingly, addition of the adsorbent had no effect on sludge viscosity, although filterability deteriorated significantly. Removal of adsorbent from the sludge using an external magnetic field was unfortunately accompanied by significant biomass loss. Hence, under the applied conditions, the proposed methodology is not considered viable for fouling control.Since the introduction of membranes into wastewater treatment, the problem of membrane fouling has attracted considerable attention and many methods for controlling membrane fouling have been proposed by researchers. Among these methods, adsorbent dosing has been widely tested. The adsorbents include carbon black, powdered activated carbon (PAC) and zeolite Anaerobic sludge has worse filterability than aerobic sludge while components in the supernatant of anaerobic sludge play the most important role in membrane fouling Efforts have been directed to control the membrane fouling in anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AMBR) by dosing PAC. In short term experiments, the dosing of PAC can alleviate membrane fouling, which is attributed to the adsorption of fine particles and further biodegradation, scouring deposited biomass cake from membrane surface In addition to the limited ability of PAC to control membrane fouling under anaerobic conditions, also the regular replacement of used and no longer active PAC from bioreactors forms a constraint for application Adsorbent can be generally be classified into four categories based on whether it is effective in controlling membrane fouling and the removal of it will cause sludge loss: effective in controlling membrane fouling and the removal of it does not cause sludge loss; effective in controlling membrane fouling and the removal of it causes sludge loss; not effective in controlling membrane fouling and the removal of it does not cause sludge loss; not effective in controlling membrane fouling and the removal of it causes sludge loss. The selection of adsorbent for controlling membrane fouling is important. For adsorbent that falls into the first category, the adsorbent is a preferred adsorbent. For adsorbent that falls into the second category, the adsorbent is practical only if sludge loss is not of concern. For adsorbents that fall into categories three and four, they are not useful because they cannot realize membrane fouling control and the case is worse if the removal of it will lead to sludge loss. Magnetic adsorbent has been used in mineral processing, wastewater treatment, molecular biology, cell sorting, and clinical diagnostics The schematic view of the experimental set up is shown in The magnetic adsorbent was prepared following the procedure described by Liao et al. The membrane was operated in a gas-lift mode: the gas superficial velocity was 0.74 The sludge B derived from the starvation of sludge A showed improved filterability, compared with sludge A. As can be seen from Generally, the addition of adsorbents in MBRs improves sludge filterability and thus increases the membrane flux For reactor operational purposes it is of interest to elucidate why the introduction of this particular adsorbent result in significant membrane fouling. It is normally accepted that high viscosity will result in low filterability. Eq. According to Eq.   It seems that the adsorbent cannot be used to control the membrane fouling because it was a foulant. However, if the adsorbent can adsorbent large amount of colloids, which is possible based on However, the removal of the magnetic adsorbent from the reactor by an external adsorbent was accompanied by the loss of anaerobic sludge, as shown in The sludge loss due to adsorbent removal in an AMBR should be as small as possible. After the addition of an adsorbent into an MBR for controlling the membrane fouling, the adsorbent will finally lose its capacity of adsorbing membrane foulant on its surface and thereby will not be effective in controlling membrane fouling. Hence, the removal of the adsorbent and the addition of new adsorbent are necessary. During the removal of the adsorbent, the loss of sludge should be prevented if slow-growing bacteria must be retained in the MBR or else the slow-growing bacteria are also lost during the adsorbent removal. Microorganisms normally grow very slowly at specific extreme conditions such as high saline conditions. Hence, if AMBR is used to treat wastewater with high salinity, the slow-growing bacterium is retained by the use of membrane but is lost due to the removal of adsorbent. The amount of lost bacteria depends on the frequency of the removal of the adsorbent. In any cases, the loss of slow-growing bacteria should be as tiny as possible to provide the maximum freedom of reactor operation. Based on previous results and discussion, the magnetic adsorbent falls into the fourth adsorbent category defined in this study; hence the addition of it into anaerobic membrane reactors should be prevented. However, the magnetic adsorbent may be useful in controlling membrane fouling only if it can completely be removed before it contacts membrane and sludge loss is not of concern during the adsorbent removal. In the here used set-up, dosing of magnetic adsorbents to control membrane fouling of anaerobic membrane bioreactor is not satisfactory owing to its negative impact on sludge filterability and the concomitant sludge removal when harvesting the adsorbents from the reactor.