In recent years, research has been directed towards upgrading of heavy crude oil as unconventional oil recovery rises. Catalytic hydrotreating of crude oil is an important upgrading option that is rarely discussed in literature. The main aim of crude oil hydrotreating is to reduce adverse environmental effects caused by the concentration of contaminants, increase productivity and improve the quality of middle distillate cuts. In this work, Response surface methodology (RSM) has been adopted to study the influence of various process parameters, such as hydrogen partial pressure, temperature and liquid hourly space velocity on the hydrotreating performance. The significance of these parameters is identified by using the analysis of variance (ANOVA) method. The resulting correlations are capable of predicting sulfur, vanadium, nitrogen and nickel conversions that are in excellent agreement with experimental data. The operating parameters are optimized with LINGO optimization software to achieve maximum conversions of contaminants during hydrotreating processes.Crude oil upgrading is one of the most challenging tasks in the petroleum refining industry. This can be attributed to the presence of many compounds and complex structures, in addition to multiple phases in crude oils. The quality of heavy crude oil could be upgraded through a number of technologies. The most common traditional technologies include decreasing the carbon content, increasing the hydrogen content or a combination of both two routes ( Crude oil hydrotreating is one of the powerful techniques in upgrading heavy oils. Crude oil hydrotreating is a catalytic process that uses hydrogen at high reaction temperatures and pressures with a high activity catalyst to remove contaminants such as sulfur (S), nitrogen (N), metal (M) and saturate aromatic and olefinic compounds. The process of removal of S, N and M are referred to as hydrodesulfurization (HDS), hydrodenitrogenation (HDN), and hydrodemetalization (HDM) respectively. The HDM primarily refers to the hydrodevanadization (HDV) and hydrodenickelation (HDNi) of the raw crude oil. Whole crude oil hydrotreating ensures significant improvement in middle distillate yields and fuel quality ( Several research works have estimated the kinetic parameters obtained from modeling HDN, HDV and HDNi reactions based on experimental data ( However, previous works have not considered the modeling of hydrotreating processes of the full crude oil as a function of operating conditions. In this present work, we model the conversions of various hydrotreating processes including HDS, HDN, HDNi, and HDV of crude oil as a function of operating conditions. The principal operating variables commonly monitored in crude oil hydrotreating processes are temperature, hydrogen partial pressure (H This research work is based on the experimental data presented by A schematic diagram of the hydrotreating pilot plant is shown in The aim of this work is to correlate the conversion of HDS, HDN, HDNi, or HDV with process operating conditions. The HDS, HDN, HDNi, and HDV conversions listed in RSM is used to generate correlations of a quadratic-polynomial type between process variables (H The Eqs. A comparison between experimental and model predicted conversions for HDNi, HDV, HDN and HDS processes of crude oil were plotted in The  A perturbation plot shows the effect of each individual variable as the others are held constant ( A program to optimize crude oil operating conditions is formulated based on the above correlations in a Lingo v.14 platform. Constraints for upper and lower bounds of each affecting variable are formulated as follows: Maximum conversions for all investigated contaminants were obtained at the same condition of H LHSV, which is the inverse of residence time, is an indication of the time spent in the reactor by the reactants. It was observed that decreasing LHSV led to increases in HDS, HDN, and HDA conversions for heavy gas oil as a feed stock to hydrotreating process ( There are limitations imposed for increasing temperature and H The first objective of this present research work was the application of RSM using Design Experts, to generate correlations between catalytic hydrotreating process operating conditions, namely H By using the proposed correlations, the conversion values of sulfur, nitrogen, vanadium and nickel within the range of operating conditions could be estimated. All regression coefficients ( The optimization software showed that the most efficient hydrotreating reactions are obtained at a reaction temperature of 400