A mathematical model of pellet induration process in the straight-grate system is presented. The important physical and chemical phenomena known to affect the heat and mass transfer in the process have been taken into account in the formulation of the model. These include heat transfer between gas and pellet, gas flow, evaporation and condensation of moisture, oxidation of magnetite, combustion of coke breeze, calcination of lime and dolomite, and shrinkage of pellet and pellet bed slump. The model is validated by comparing its predictions against actual measurements in an industrial scale plant as well as a pilot pot grate. The effect of several process parameters on the induration regime are evaluated using the model. It is demonstrated through a case study that the model can be employed as a valuable tool for such purposes as process optimization and design of the induration machine.Production of pellet as a desirable feedstock for ironmaking furnaces has exceeded 300 Mt per year in 2005, accounting for about 24% of the iron ore processed globally ( The heat hardening or “induration” of pellets employs one of the three conventional furnace types: vertical shaft furnace, grate-kiln system, and travelling straight grate. The latter process that was primarily developed by Lurgi and is currently owned by OutoKumpu Technology, accounts for two thirds of the world's installed pelletizing processes capacity. This study is focused on simulation of pellet induration process in the straight-grate system.  The induration zone of the furnace is generally divided into several sections and the gas flowrate through each section is controlled by a separate fan. This is intended to provide the operator with the flexibility of controlling the heating profile for better pellet quality and grate bar protection. After firing, burnt pellets undergo cooling where ambient air is drawn upward through the bed. The hearth layer prevents a severe thermal shock to the pellets by preheating the air. The off-gas leaving the early stage of cooling has a temperature around 1000 °C. The gas is directed to the firing and preheating zones where is it further heated by the burners. The gases from the later stages of cooling have lower temperature, hence they are used for drying of pellets. It is clear from the description of the process that considerable attention has been paid to enhancing the energy efficiency of the overall process. Numerous advancements have been made that enable the operators to alter the process conditions (e.g. gas flow and temperature, grate speed, etc.) and achieve both high pellet quality and low energy consumption. However, optimization of thermal treatment of pellet is inherently an iterative process and determination of the optimum operating conditions in a working plant is extremely difficult, time consuming and costly. Besides, the measurement of critical process data such as temperature within the pellet bed is virtually impossible. As a result, induration processes have traditionally relied on laboratory pot grate test results for determination of optimum design and operating parameters. However, results of a single pot grate experiment are deficient in making distinction between the effects of different variables on the heating profile and pellet quality. On the other hand, a complete study of the effect of even one variable on the process requires numerous experiments, with other variables kept unchanged. Also, pilot tests do not directly provide information on local interactions, reactions rates and heat and material balance. As a complementary, and sometimes alternative, method of process analysis, mathematical modeling has been put forward ( The original works on calculation of temperature profile in moving pellet beds date back to over four decades ago. Early studies on a purely theoretical approach to modeling of the process by Following these pioneers, a substantial number of models have been put forward for iron ore sintering ( Despite the considerable studies on modeling of these processes and pellet induration in particular, only a few have developed a model for straight-grate induration process consisting of complete drying, firing and cooling cycles. In addition, each model has been developed by taking into account a few of the many reactions and physical changes involved. One phenomenon that is generally overlooked, yet plays a significant role in the process performance, is variations of pellet porosity and corresponding bed shrinkage as the pellet bed passes through different thermal zones of the furnace. The present article describes development and validation of a complete mathematical model for pellet induration by the straight-grate method. The major improvements over the previous studies in this area are first, including all important reactions in the model and second, taking into account pellet shrinkage and the resulting pellet bed slump as they undergo the thermal treatment. The model is based entirely on the existing knowledge pertaining to physical and chemical changes in the pellet induration process. The mathematical model is developed to predict the detailed process information including temperature, flowrate and composition of gases, rate and extent of progress for the reactions, porosity and chemical composition of pellet, and bed slump at any position and in different times. In the formulation of the model, the following phenomena have been taken into account. Heat transfer between pellet and gas with temperature and composition dependent thermophysical properties for both phases Evaporation and condensation of moisture Oxidation of magnetite Calcinations of limestone (CaCO Combustion of carbon (e.g. coke breeze) Reduction in pellet porosity and the corresponding bed shrinkage Certain assumptions with acceptably small impact on the accuracy of calculations were made. These include: The induration process is at steady state conditions Gas distribution through the pellet bed is uniform, i.e. no channeling of the gas occurs The thermal conductivity of individual pellets is infinitely high so that temperature gradient within each pellet can be neglected The pellet bed is represented as a porous packed bed of uniformly sized spheres Vertical gas velocity is much greater than the horizontal grate speed Heat conduction within the pellet bed is insignificant relative to the convective gas–solid heat transfer rate Heat losses are limited only to the initial heat storage in the grate bars Heat released/absorbed by the chemical reactions is solely exchanged with the solids, except the heat of moisture condensation that is split equally between gas and solid. The equations forming the mathematical model are presented below. The definition of all symbols is provided in nomenclature at the end of the paper. Some thermokinetic properties and constants that have been used in the model development are given in the The dominant heat transfer mechanisms are conduction and radiation between gas and pellet. Using an effective heat transfer coefficient ( In Eqs. It is evident from Eqs. The coefficient for heat transfer to the grate bar is calculated by the equation presented by It is important to note that the heat transfer coefficient calculated from these equations has essentially the effect of radiation embedded in, as it has been validated at high temperatures where radiation has an appreciable contribution to the heat exchange. The drying of pellet can be best represented by a three stage model ( The saturation water vapor pressure of the gas, The value of critical moisture content was assumed to be 120 kg/m In the second step of drying, when the pellet humidity drops below the critical concentration, an evaporation front penetrates toward the pellet centre and pore diffusion within the dry shell begins to play the role as the rate limiting step. A mixed control model consisting of two resistances, diffusion through the dry shell and mass transfer in the gas phase, may be used to express the drying rate as: Towards the end of drying, the evaporation rate is controlled by heat transfer from the gas to the pellet and is represented by: The point of transition between the two latter mechanisms of drying is when the rate of drying in the heat transferred controlled regime becomes smaller than that of the mixed control regime. Condensation of water vapor occurs in the layers of pellet with temperature lower than the saturation temperature of the gas. Eq. The rates of all chemical reactions including decomposition of carbonates, combustion of coke and oxidation of magnetite are expressed using a topochemical or unreacted shrinking core model ( For magnetite oxidation, the reaction consists of three steps: transfer of oxygen from the gas bulk to the pellet surface, pore diffusion through the hematite layer, and interfacial surface reaction with the magnetite particles, i.e. A kinetic model based on mixed control mechanism and applicable to the entire oxidation duration has been proposed by An expression similar to Eq. Calcination of carbonates is controlled only by temperature and can take place within the entire pellet when it reaches an appropriate temperature. The rate of calcinations of dolomite or limestone is thus expressed as: It must be emphasized that in the reactions' sub-model, it is assumed that all of the considered reactions can take place simultaneously with distinct boundaries. The gas flowrate in any section of the machine is chiefly decided by the pressure drop across the bed, which is controlled by the fan draft. The equation proposed by However, as the gas exchanges mass with solids through evaporation/condensation or other reactions, the quantity and compositions of both phases change with time and position. The changes in the gas flowrate and concentration of individual gas species are related to the rate of reactions via Eqs.  Concentration of pellet constituents also changes according to: Gas flowrate and temperature profile of the pellet bed is strongly influenced by the compactness and the height of the pellet bed. The previous models of pellet induration in straight-grate have been developed on the assumption that the pellet bed height remains constant during the process. However, it is well known that the pellet porosity decreases significantly after firing due to formation of semi-liquid slag phase and more importantly, due to solid state sintering (  This equation can be rearranged and differentiated to provide the rate of change in the pellet volume as: For a commercial iron ore concentrate, regression analysis of their experimental data yields the following expressions for The porosity of pellet as a function of time is calculated from the temperature history of the pellet. At any new time (and temperature), first an equivalent “time at temperature,” The decrease in the pellet porosity gives rise to the pellet shrinkage which in turn affects the characteristics of the bed such as its height and void fraction. It can be demonstrated by using Eq. A computer program coded in Visual Fortran (Intel) and called INDMOD was developed for numerical solution of the described equations. Initially, the operating parameters of the system are set. These include pellet properties (size, sphericity, porosity, composition, and moisture content), induration machine parameters (length and speed of the grate, lengths of various zones), and operating conditions (pressure drop and on-gas temperature in various cycles, bed porosity). For solving the differential equations, a finite different scheme is used. The bed of pellets is divided into several segments, forming a column of elements. The vertical spacing of the elements is set to an initial value of 0.1 cm for the beginning of the process but is decreased corresponding to reduction in the bed height as the temperature increases and the pellet undergoes shrinkage. The total process time is divided to 1 s time intervals to ensure the stability of the solution and accuracy of the results. The differential equations are discretized with respect to the distance (height) and time and are solved subsequently. The calculations are made on nearly one million nodes for the base case of pellet bed height and grate speed. It was realized that for larger elements, the convergence may not be reached under some conditions such as very small pellets, high rates of reactions, etc. The program was run on a 2.4 GHz personal computer with the calculation time being normally 1 to 3 min. Integration of the discretized equations over the elements requires determination of the gas flowrate in each element. Generally, the pressure drop measurements are more reliable and readily available than the gas flowrates. Therefore, it was decided to set the pressure drop as an input parameter and calculate the gas flowrate using Eq. x A complete validation of the model requires collecting data from an operating plant under steady state conditions. Measuring temperature inside a moving bed and away from the side bars (to avoid effect of heat losses) is rather impractical. Therefore, temperature predictions were validated against measurements in a pilot pot-grate induration facility. The experiments were carried out in the pilot unit of pellet plant at Mobarakeh Steel Company (MSC). The pilot facility consists of a rotating disk for producing green pellets and a cylindrical pot furnace with an inside diameter of 26 cm and a height of 50 cm. Typically, for each experiment, 10 cm of fired pellets are loaded onto the bottom plate of the pot and the pot is filled with green pellets to a desired height, usually 35 cm. Five thermocouples, identified as T1 to T5 are positioned on top of the pellet bed, 5 cm, 25 cm, 35 cm below the surface, and 5 cm below the bottom plate (in the gas duct), respectively. Pressure drop across the bed and temperature readings are logged continuously during the induration test. The details of measurements and also a mathematical model for the pot-grate are discussed in a separate publication ( The results are shown in The model of straight-grate was further validated against gas flow measurements reported by All the input parameters to the model including arrangement of various zones, feed characteristics and operating conditions may be changed individually or together to study the effect of these variables on the process performance. Each time the model is run, the following information are calculated and recorded for every element within the pellet bed: Temperatures of gas and solid Chemical composition of pellet and gas Rate of reactions and moisture condensation/evaporation Flowrate and pressure of gas Porosity of pellet and height of the pellet bed In this article, results obtained from varying only a few of the input parameters are discussed. The process characteristics used as the base case simulation are shown in The drying regimes of pellet in different depths of the bed are shown in Shape and size of the pellet have significant impacts on the heating and drying regimes. The pellet porosity is one of the most critical properties affecting both strength of the burnt pellet and its reduction behavior in the downstream ironmaking process. The variations in the pellet porosity were incorporated into the model as discussed previously. The favorable effects of magnetite presence in the iron ore feed on more uniform temperature distribution and pellet quality as well as reduction in induration energy consumption have been well recognized and documented. The effect of magnetite content of the pellet on the thermal behavior of the pellet is studied here using the model. A similar improvement in the heating regime is achieved by addition of carbon bearing materials to the pellet feed ( One of the great advantages of using simulation tools in process analysis is giving insight into the details of different phenomena from several perspectives. Combustion of carbon, for instance, may be visualized by presenting the variations in the oxidation rate, carbon content, and temperatures or gas composition. As an example shown in The model may be employed to investigate the effect of several parameters on the induration performance and determine the optimum operation or deign conditions. For example increasing the bed height and pellet throughput is generally limited by two factors: disintegration of weak pellets in the bottom layers due to static load of the bed, and inadequate heat supply to the same layers during firing. While the disintegration problem may be mitigated by appropriate choice of binder type and content, additional heat can be provided to the bottom layers by addition of coke breeze as an auxiliary heat source. This scenario has been examined using the model and the results are presented in A model of pellet induration process in moving straight grate has been developed. All major reactions and physical changes taking place throughout the process have been incorporated into the model. Comparisons with logged data from an operating plant and direct measurements in a pilot pot grate have indicated that the model predictions are well consistent with the actual values. By simulating several scenarios, it was demonstrated that the model provides insight into the details of the process and can be deployed as a valuable tool for design of the furnace and optimization of the process.  Gas–pellet apparent contact area (m Stoichiometric coefficient relating gas consumed/released per unit wt. of solids reacted (32/12, 32/928 for magnetite oxidation, and so on) Specific heat of gas (J.kg Specific heat of pellet (J.kg Diffusivity of component Effective diffusivity of component dimensionless pellet diameter in µm divided by a scale of 1 µm (−) Pellet diameter (m) Superficial gas flowrate (kg.m Pellet bed height (m) Initial height of the raw pellet bed (m) Height of the heart layer (m) Heat transfer coefficient (J.m Thermal conductivity of gas (J.m First order rate of magnetite oxidation (m.s First order rate of lime/dolomite decomposition (s First order rate of carbon combustion (m.s Mass transfer coefficient in the gas of oxygen (m.s Rate constant of pellet shrinkage (s Mass transfer coefficient in the gas of water vapor (m.s Concentration of lime/dolomite (kg/m Constant in pellet shrinkage equation (−) Nusselt number Gas pressure (Pa) Gas absolute pressure (atm) Prandtl number ( Pellet Reynold's number ( Rate of reaction Rate of water evaporation/condensation (kg/.m Rate of decomposition of lime/dolomite (kg/.m Schmidt number ( Time (s) Gas temperature (K) Pellet temperature (K) Wet bulb temperature (K) Volume of raw pellet (m Volume of pellet at any time (m Gas velocity (m.s Volume of pellet containing no porosity (m Relative humidity of the gas Radius of unreacted magnetite core (m) Radius of pellet (m) Radius of wet core of the pellet (m) Moisture content of the gas (kg.m Equilibrium concentration of water vapor between gas/solid (kg.m Concentration of gas ( Depth of pellet bed (m) Fraction of heat from reaction Void fraction of pellet bed Pellet porosity Porosity of raw pellet Gas viscosity (kg.m Specific gravity of pellet (−) Bulk density of pellet bed (wet/dry) (kg.m Density of gas (kg.m Pellet sphericity Enthalpy of reaction Enthalpy of moisture evaporation/condensation (J.kg graphically determined standard deviation of log-normal particle size distribution Tortuosity The author wishes to thank R&D department and pelletizing plant of Mobarakeh Steel Company, Mr. R. Saoleimanpour in particular, for financial support of the project and conducting the pilot tests. The contributions by Dr. A. Saidi and Dr. M. Alizadeh are greatly appreciated. Many correlations for calculations of physical and transport properties and thermokinetics of the reactions were used in the formulation of the model. Thermodynamic properties were calculated using FactSage 5.5 (Ecole Polytechnique). The other expressions and constants used in the current study are provided in this appendix.   