Design and operating conditions of large size mechanical flotation cells were evaluated by comparing it with the actual operating conditions in a plant. The objective was to determine the time scale-up factor, typically based on empirical rules. Experiments were conducted on the rougher flotation circuit at Minera Escondida Ltd. The circuit consisted of self-aerated mechanical cells of 160m3, arranged in six parallel banks with nine cells each.
                  The rougher circuit flotation kinetics was evaluated from direct sampling and local mass balances around each cell of the bank. Adjusted overall mass balances were also developed. This information was used to fit different kinetic flotation models, and it was found that the rectangular distribution function was the most appropriate to describe the distributed rate constant for industrial operation. Then, a rougher flotation simulator was developed to describe the actual operation in terms of the operating variables (mass flow rate, solid percentage, feed grade) and the actual volumetric flow rate entering to each cell. In this study feed pulp samples were taken in parallel from the rougher circuit and were simultaneously floated in laboratory. The kinetic behavior was then modeled at a laboratory batch scale in order to determine the time scale-up factor between laboratory batch flotation data and industrial size flotation. The time scale-up factor observed for large sized cells, 160m3, was found reasonably similar to those previously determined for self-aerated mechanical cells, but of lower size, operating at similar recoveries. In addition, the relative effect of mixing, between laboratory batch and an industrial flotation bank was quantified by the ϕ parameter, separating the impact that kinetic and mixing changes have on the time scale-up factor.
                  In general, the rougher flotation operation was found to reach the predicted metallurgical target, and that the optimal separability criterion was also respected.
                  The diagnostic generates information about the internal state of the process and helps to identify potential improvements for design, operation and control of the circuit.In the last decade, flotation equipment has shown a significant increase in size. Since the 1980’s, mechanical cells size have increased 10 times in size, reaching levels of over 200 The present study was developed in the Laguna Seca concentrator of the Minera Escondida Ltd. mining company, located at 3200 The first cleaner feed combines the regrinding mill discharge together with the second cleaner tail. The first cleaner tailing goes to the scavenger circuit. Both circuits consist of five parallel banks with four Wemco cells, each 160 Mechanical cells in the rougher flotation circuit are self-aerated, cylindrical in shape and are 6.8 The targets of the rougher stage are to maximize the copper recovery, avoid the overloading of the regrinding and cleaning circuits, and to maintain a minimum concentrate grade. Rougher concentrate and tailings grade are monitored while pulp level and frother dosage are manipulated variables. On the other hand air aspiration valves are kept fully open, so that the maximum air rate available by self-aspiration is typically used. An overall mass balance was developed on the circuit by sampling eleven streams of the plant, see The mass balance results are shown in In order to evaluate the flotation cells performance in the rougher bank, sampling from each cell was developed. Thus, the kinetic of the flotation bank was determined and the individual contribution of each cell was identified. The concentrate samples were taken directly from the cell lip using a modified standard sampler of 20 The concentrate mass flow rate per cell was estimated by measuring the mass overflowing over the sampling perimeter for a time period. The total rougher concentrate, estimated from the overall mass balance, was then distributed proportionally to the measured mass flow rate in each cell. Feed sampling was performed at the feed box located at the beginning of the rougher flotation bank. The tails sampling was performed in the last cell of the rougher flotation bank. All samples were analyzed for copper, iron and non-soluble minerals grade, solid percentage and specific gravity. It can be observed that the tailings grade of the rougher bank for the sampling results is lower than the grade shown in The operating conditions during the rougher flotation sampling are shown in The variation of the plant feed tonnage during the sampling period is shown in A rougher feed sample was collected while the rougher kinetics study was conducted. The sample was used to develop batch flotation tests with the same feed characteristics in order to estimate the laboratory based kinetic parameters like maximum recovery ( The flotation operation was characterized using two kinetic models, based on the laboratory batch data and data obtained from the rougher kinetic sampling. A flotation bank simulator to characterize plant operation, which allowed the use of the  A good agreement between the experimental data of the rougher flotation operation and the model prediction can be observed in The cell’s froth depth during the sampling period is shown in The local copper concentrate grade per cell and the cumulative concentrate grade along the rougher bank, compared with the model prediction, are shown in Here it was observed that the first cell and the last cell of a bank showed higher mass and volumetric flow rates. This was caused because, the first cell has the larger amount of floatable solids and the last cell has the lower froth depth. The local copper recovery per cell, and the model prediction, using the flotation bank simulator can be observed in Cells five and seven from In order to improve the recovery and grade profiles along the flotation bank based on froth depth control, a new advanced control system has been developed ( According to data automatically collected every 2 Here a significant spread was observed in the fractional mass flow rate as well as in terms of the enrichment ratio for the concentrate, during a shift. Particularly, two kinds of operating conditions can be observed. Firstly, a rather stable operation with rougher recoveries around 90 The scale-up problem is complex due to the different factors affecting the hydrodynamics, kinetics and transport conditions in the pulp and froth zones ( In order to estimate scale-up factors from batch to plant operation a key consideration is, for comparison purposes, the selection of the recovery. The simplest approach is to consider the overall rougher recovery and compare this value with a standard batch test under the same condition. However, final cells show a rather flat recovery versus time condition in normal flotation bank operations, because their contribution to the overall recovery is relatively small. Thus, there is a large uncertainty when relating total time and recovery from plant operation. Also, individual abnormal cell operations can significantly affect the overall residence time in the bank. In order to avoid these constraints, a new approach has been proposed, one where the comparison between batch and plant operation is made at the optimum separation point and can be observed from the corresponding separability curves ( Because the data was limited here, an alternative approach was developed. In this new approach the flotation bank operation was firstly modeled so as to have an expected smooth behavior for the recovery versus time relationship, both in plant and batch scale. The time scale-up factor has been normally defined as the ratio between the plant mean residence time, Also, in order to account for the differences in maximum recovery observed in batch and plant operations, a dimensionless recovery Then, an implicit relationship between In the present study the rougher bank consisted of nine cells in series. From The corresponding time for the same dimensionless recovery in the batch operation was The different results obtained in Eqs. According to On the other hand, the comparison between the time scale-up factor ( The following points were noted from the study: Large size rougher flotation self-aerated cells each of 160 The kinetic flotation model, based on a rectangular distribution function of rate constant, was found appropriate in describing the flotation bank performance. The rougher flotation operation reached the metallurgical target predicted from design and operates near the optimal separability criterion. A time scale-up factor of 3.2 was determined to relate the laboratory batch flotation to the plant operation in a bank of nine 160 The relative effect of mixing, between laboratory batch and an industrial bank of It was found that the batch kinetic rate constant was 2.5 times larger than the plant rate constant in a bank of nine 160 The authors are grateful to Minera Escondida Ltda. for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modeling and control research was provided by CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1040100, and Santa María University, project 270522.