There are potential disadvantages in the prolonged storage of raw waters, which should be taken into account when considering adoption of storage and its management. The most obvious of these is the likelihood of growth of various forms of plants, either rooted aquatic types (macrophytes) which may choke shallow waters, or free floating water weeds such as duckweed and, in the tropics, water hyacinth or salvinia as well as planktonic types such as algae (phytoplankton), which may increase the difficulties of treatment. The main issues for water supply are raised by the presence of these plants and animals. Storage reservoirs that are less than about 10 m deep can allow light to reach the bottom. This may encourage the growth of rooted plants unless the stored waters are sufficiently turbid to reduce light penetration. Shallow reservoirs are therefore generally avoided if there is any likelihood that plant growth could be high. Thermal stratification can clearly affect retention time of incoming water and is often of major importance with reference to water quality. In many large reservoirs, there are facilities for withdrawing the water for treatment at several different levels, which can be chosen as circumstances dictate. In the case of eutrophic reservoirs, the ability to avoid drawing from surface water with high concentrations of algae is particularly useful. The tower can be sited some way from the shore in order to avoid the build up of surface aggregations of algae that onshore winds can cause.  mono sodium ( di sodium ( tri sodium ( 1200 kg/m 1200 kg/m 900 kg/m 650 g/l at 10°C, 850 g/l at 20°C; 38 g/l at 10°C, 78 g/l at 20°C; 125 g/l at 10°C, 215 g/l at 20°C      Hazardous liquid; Hazardous powder 1.27 g/ml at 20°C; 1105 kg/m −7°C 400 g/l at 20°C   This may be regarded as a first stage in treatment as it may involve a complex combination of physical, chemical and biological changes. Raw water storage has been regarded as a ‘first line of defence’ against the transmission of water-borne diseases; this aspect is still of major importance if the unstored water is liable to excessive bacterial pollution from sewage, even though such pollution may only occur occasionally, e.g. if storm-water sewage overflows discharge into a river. A few days storage improves the physical and microbiological characteristics of a surface water through the effect of a combination of actions including sedimentation, natural coagulation and chemical interactions, the bactericidal action of ultraviolet radiation near the water surface and numerous biotic pathways which help to reduce enteric micro-organisms ( The UK DoE recommended in circular No. 22/72 ( Instruments for water quality parameters such as temperature, pH, conductivity, ammonia or dissolved oxygen, have been available since the 1960s and have been in use by some undertakings from that time ( There are potential disadvantages in the prolonged storage of raw waters, which should be taken into account when considering adoption of storage and its management. The most obvious of these is the likelihood of growth of various forms of plants, either rooted aquatic types (macrophytes) which may choke shallow waters, or free floating water weeds such as duckweed and, in the tropics, water hyacinth or salvinia as well as planktonic types such as algae (phytoplankton), which may increase the difficulties of treatment. The main issues for water supply raised by the presence of these plants and also animals are discussed in Part IV of Waters which contain sufficient nutrient materials to support prolific growths of aquatic plants are usually described as eutrophic. Lakes and water bodies exhibit a range of concentrations from low nutrient conditions in upland lakes on igneous rocks (oligotrophic) through moderate or mesotrophic lakes where a balanced ecology with some shoreline macrophytes and a wide range of planktonic algae occur, through to lowland water bodies which tend to be eutrophic and even hypertrophic waters where prolific growths of plants commonly occur due to enrichment by sewage and where in temperate climates there are usually seasonal peaks. In most reservoirs that are more than about 10 metres deep, and many are designed in this way to avoid excessive plant growth, an additional complication is that thermal layering or stratification may occur on a seasonal basis in temperate climates. As temperature rises in the spring warmer water tends to remain at the surface due to its lower density. In the absence of any strong wind induced circulation the colder and now denser water below remains and ceases to mix with the surface water. The upper and lower layers are known respectively as the epilimnion and hypolimnion; in between there is a zone known as the thermocline in which there is a relatively steep change with depth. In reservoirs averaging less than 10 m deep thermal stratification in temperate lands is often only temporary, lasting for a few days at most. In colder climates there may be winter stratification due to ice formation which ensures the water body and its biological life is protected from lethal frosts ( Thermal stratification can clearly affect retention time of incoming water and is often of major importance with reference to water quality. In many large reservoirs, there are facilities for withdrawing the water for treatment at several different levels which can be chosen as circumstances dictate. Multiple drawoff facilities are discussed in In some large reservoirs the water in the hypolimnion is of a high standard of purity, as well as being cool, e.g. in some places in Scandinavian countries, in the Lake District of England ( When the surface water cools down in the autumn and wind action becomes effective, the reservoir water mixes and, under normal circumstances, water from mid depth or deeper is of good quality. Rapid mixing caused by strong autumnal winds can cause sudden ‘turnover’ resulting in rapid deterioration in the quality of the water at the surface in respect of colour, iron and manganese. A more gradual effect of the resumed mixing is that the plant nutrients carried up from the bottom may increase the growth of algae in the water and cause an autumnal bloom of algae. This is not uncommon in eutrophic lakes and reservoirs and may render the surface water difficult to treat. Reservoir management to control stratification has been established practice since the 1960s. Mechanical pumps have been used to induce mixing artificially but with varying degrees of success. The systems have usually been expensive to install and operate. They are intended both to oxygenate the bottom layers of a reservoir and to control stratification. Pioneering studies in UK ( It may be beneficial to have an emergency bypass so that water may be taken directly from a river instead of from a reservoir. This could be used in the case of exceptional high algal growth in the water or of pollution having occurred, or being suspected in water in the reservoir. However, this action can have operational and hence economic consequences in that waters exhibiting eutrophication are very likely to be at risk of carrying oocysts of Growth of plants can deplete nutrients from the water particularly if the growth is not limited by light or grazing. Management of stored water to make use of this characteristic has been carried out by TWUL for many years ( Passive screens are static screening devices which have no moving parts in water and are used for off-shore or shoreline applications. The passive screens are generally used at locations where it is necessary to keep aquatic life from entering the screened water and may not require further fine screening. Therefore they avoid the need and cost of handling trash. Passive screens, usually vertical, are installed completely below the water surface; they depend on having low velocity (0.1–0.15 m/s) through the screen bars to prevent fish impingement. They are best suited for areas where an ambient cross-flow current is present. The screen bar spacing is generally in the range 0.5–10 mm depending on application. Some designs use perforations, up to 12 mm diameter, in plates instead of screen bars. Combination of low velocity and slot width has reduced the entrainment of eggs, larvae and juvenile fish ( Active screens are either moving or require moving devices for cleaning and are used for off-shore or shoreline applications. Active screening is traditionally used to keep trash and floating debris out of the screened water. Active screens include coarse bar screens, which may have clear spaces between bars from as little as 10 mm to 150 mm or more to suit the application. The aim of the screening facility is to remove trash and protect downstream equipment such as pumps from large objects. Where it is necessary to remove finer material from the water, band screens or drum screens are widely used. Another type of screen that uses revolving screen discs, of non metallic construction, is also available for fine screening, particularly for applications where large quantities of water need to be screened (  Bar screens generally having larger spacing would not arrest smaller size debris. Where this could adversely affect downstream plant it is advisable to install a robust band or drum screen downstream of the protective bar screen.  A supply of clean water under pressure is needed for the wash water jets; this may have to be pumped from the strained water. The total amount of water required for washing may be of the order of 1% of the throughput depending on the amount of material retained. Fine screening must always be preceded by a coarse screen. Band screens in general have a small foot print and require smaller civil works but have more mechanical parts and need more maintenance. Drum screens in general require a larger foot print and usually require a larger structure but can deal with larger flows and have lower maintenance costs. These are revolving drums mounted in open tanks with a straining medium which is usually a stainless steel wire fabric of a very fine mesh, fitted to the periphery of the drum. The drum is submerged for about 75% of its diameter (66% of area) and rotates at about 0.5–5 rpm (peripheral drum speeds of 3–50 m/min). Water to be treated enters the drum axially under gravity and flows out radially through the fabric, depositing particulate matter. Cleaning is accomplished by a row of water jets along the full length of the drum operating at about 2.5 bar pressure. Particulate matter intercepted by the fabric rotates to the top of the drum where it is backwashed into a hopper running the full length of the drum and conveyed by a pipe which also acts as the axle for the drum assembly, to a point outside. Water jets use about 1–1.5% of the total quantity of water strained but this washwater should be filtered and chlorinated. Total headloss through a microstrainer unit including inlets and outlets varies from about 150–200 mm. Single units have capacities of 10 m Microstrainers bring about an improvement in the physical quality of a water but there is no change in the chemical characteristics of the water. The ideal water for microstraining is a lake or large reservoir supply which does not contain a large amount of suspended matter but which contains moderate quantities of zooplankton, algae and other microscopic-sized particles; total algae removal ranges from 50 to 75% depending on the size. When applied for the removal of zooplankton microstrainers are located either at the beginning or end of the treatment process. Fabrics commonly used with stored waters are made of woven stainless steel wires of 0.05 mm diameter with apertures of 23 and 35 μm. However, a coarser mesh at 200 μm aperture is sometimes used after granular activated carbon (GAC) filters to remove eroding particles of the carbon and any bacterial flora or zooplanktons that sometimes develop in GAC filters. Attempts to use plastic mesh materials have not been successful in water supply. Microstrainer operation is fully automatic. A microstrainer screen can easily be damaged if too great a loading is placed upon it; hence head across the screen should be monitored and an alarm initiated if it approaches the maximum desirable value. The rotational speed of the drum assembly can be adjusted so that the optimum differential headloss across the fabric can be maintained to achieve maximum removal efficiency irrespective of the raw water flow or quality. Most installations have an automatic fail-safe bypass weir which diverts unstrained water when the screens become overloaded. This causes deterioration of the treated water at times of peak loading and illustrates why microstrainers are not generally acceptable as an alternative to media filtration for potable waters. Their most extensive and successful use in water supply has been to lighten the loading upon rapid or slow sand filters so that the length of run of these filters between cleaning is extended, thereby increasing their output by as much as 50%. In comparison with roughing filters, microstrainers (which have surface loading rates up to 80 m Sedimentation tanks are designed to reduce the velocity of water so as to permit suspended solids to settle out of the water by gravity. There are many different designs of tanks and most are empirical. A design which may be very successful on one kind of water may perform poorly with another. The success of a design may be judged on its ability to maintain the claimed throughput and the agreed effluent water quality under adverse raw water quality conditions. The effluent quality for suspended solids or turbidity depends on the design and can be in the range 1–5 mg/l and 1–5 NTU, respectively. The amount, size, shape, density and nature of suspended solids in a water, the water temperature and the extent of clarification required all influence the performance of a tank design. Laboratory jar tests are performed on samples of raw water and a suitable tank design has to be selected. Designs which have been successful before under similar conditions are a useful start but alternatives that could provide a more economical and efficient solution should be considered. In plain settling (or sedimentation), suspended solids in a water are permitted to settle out by gravity alone; no chemicals are used. For this purpose the water can be left to stand in a tank, although with continuous supply at least two such tanks have to be used alternately. Such fill-and-draw tanks are seldom used in modern plants, except for filter washwater recovery. Instead plain sedimentation tanks are designed for continuous throughput, the velocity of flow through the tank being sufficiently low to permit gravitational settlement of a portion of the suspended solids to occur. In practice the application of plain sedimentation in waterworks is very restricted because impurities such as algae, aquatic plant debris and finely divided mineral matter do not settle at a rate sufficient for a tank of reasonable size to be utilized. Plain settling is most frequently used as a preliminary treatment for fast flowing river waters carrying much suspended solids as occur in the tropics or at intake works on water transfer schemes in order to minimize the amount of suspended material passing into the system. Under most circumstances chemically assisted sedimentation, which is a more complex process is adopted ( The velocity with which a particle in water falls under gravity depends on the horizontal water velocity, the size, relative density and shape of the particle and the temperature of the water. The theoretical velocity  where A number of different (mainly empirical) formulae have been given for the settlement of sand and soil particles in still water; some of the values derived are given in Aluminium and iron flocs have a specific gravity of about 1.002, particle size as large as 1 mm and a settling velocity (at 10°C) of about 0.8 mm/s (   where  The flow In a tank with uniform flow distribution all particles with a falling speed greater than The foregoing theory, however, assumes that the falling particles do not hinder each other; but In waterworks, grit primarily constitutes sand, gravel and other abrasive material and is present mostly in water abstracted from rivers. If allowed to enter the works it could damage intake pumps and settle in raw water pipelines and inlet process units. Intakes should therefore be sited and designed to minimize the uptake of grit ( Grit tanks operate as plain settling tanks (unaided by coagulants) and are sized to capture particles with diameter larger than 0.1 mm. From This comprises several separate processes of treatment which together make up the complete system known as ‘clarification’. This system is designed to remove from a water suspended materials, colour and other soluble material such as those of organic origin and soluble metals such as iron, manganese and aluminium ahead of filtration processes. It is a delicate and chemically complex phenomenon having three stages: (1) the addition of measured quantities of chemicals to water and their thorough mixing, (2) coagulation and flocculation, or the formation of a precipitate which coalesces and forms a floc and, (3) sedimentation. Most chemical reactions in water treatment applications are completed within 5 seconds and therefore the principal objective in chemical mixing is to obtain rapid and uniform dispersion of the chemical in the main flow of water to ensure that chemical reactions are completed in the shortest possible time. Inadequate mixing of a coagulant such as aluminium sulphate can impair the formation of a good floc and would result in poor plant performance which can only be corrected by using excess of the chemical. The addition and mixing of chemicals to the main flow of water is a continuous process and is frequently described as either rapid or flash mixing. The design of mixers is often based on the concept of velocity gradient, which was first developed by  where Hydraulic mixing makes use of the turbulence created due to the loss of head across an obstruction to flow such as an orifice plate, pipe expansion or valve or by the sudden drop in water level when water flows over a weir or hydraulic jump. The latter is usually formed at a flume (  where: When pipelines are used for mixing, a pipe of equivalent hydraulic length of at least 20 pipe diameters should be allowed. Static mixers are pipeline hydraulic mixers with radial mixing employing stationary, shaped diverters which force the liquids to mix themselves through a progression of divisions and recombinations until uniformity is achieved. These mixers comprise fixed mixing elements installed in a housing of diameter the same or larger than the pipe diameter. The most efficient designs provide the shortest mixing length with lowest headloss and should be used where mixing times required are short, e.g. coagulation. Chemicals are injected at about twice the velocity of pipe flow at a point within 1 m upstream of the mixer and samples of the mixed solution are taken at up to three pipe diameters downstream after normal flow patterns have been re-established. Location of a static mixer in a pipe should be discussed with the supplier as with some designs clear straight lengths are required both upstream and downstream of the mixer. The ratio of pipe flow to the chemical flow should be in the range 10 The useful power input of hydraulic mixers is related to headloss by the equation:  where Hydraulic mixers are usually simple and particularly suitable where some headloss can be tolerated. They have no moving parts or direct power consumption so maintenance is negligible. A disadvantage is that the efficiency of mixing suffers if works throughput is lowered outside the operating range of the mixing device. Mechanical mixing is achieved in purpose built chambers equipped with mechanical rotary impellers such as radial flow turbines or axial flow propellers. Ideally mixer manufacturers should be consulted for guidance on sizing. Typical residence times are of the order of 15–30 seconds and the velocity gradient value Pumps, in particular the centrifugal type, are good mixers. The lower the efficiency of the pump the better the mixing; for example, in a pump of 75% efficiency, a significant part of the 25% energy lost is due to turbulence ( The method of injecting chemicals also contributes to the performance of the mixer. For dosing chemicals into pipelines, 1, 2 or 4 injection tubes of length 33%, 15% and 15% Injection of chemicals at weirs or flumes is best achieved via perforated pipes (for clear solutions) or channels (for slurries) running the full length of the weir about 50 mm above the water surface and just upstream of the point of turbulence. Submerged perforated pipes similarly located are used for gases such as chlorine in solution. Coagulation and flocculation are essential processes in the treatment of most surface waters; one exception being the application of slow sand filtration ( The terms coagulation and flocculation are two separate processes, contrary to common usage. In coagulation the coagulant containing the aluminium or iron salt is mixed thoroughly with the water and various species of positively charged aluminium or iron hydroxide complexes are formed. These positively charged particles adsorb onto negatively charged colloids such as colour, clay, turbidity and other particles through a process of charge neutralisation. Flocculation is the process in which the destabilized particles are bound together by hydrogen bonding or Van der Waal’s forces to form larger particle flocs during which further particulate removal takes place by entrapment. Flocculation is usually achieved by a continuous but much slower process of gentle mixing of the floc with the water in one of the many possible types of plant. In the theory of flocculation the rate at which it takes place is directly proportional to the velocity gradient (  where the symbols have the same meaning as in For the common coagulants of aluminium and iron salts the value of The agitation required for flocculation is usually provided by either hydraulic or mechanical means. The most common hydraulic flocculator is the baffled basin in which a sinuous channel is equipped with either around-the-end or over-and-under baffles. The flocculation energy is derived primarily from the 180° change in direction of flow at each baffle. For the around-the-end type, which is preferred for the ease of cleaning, the minimum water depth is 1 m and the head loss across the flocculator is in the range 500 mm to 1 m. The residence time is 20–25 minutes. The distance between baffles should be at least 500 mm and that between the end of each baffle and the wall should be about 1½ times the distance between the baffles. The baffle spacing should be increased gradually with channel length to achieve tapered flocculation. The floor of the channel should slope towards the outlet. The baffled basin has no mechanical or moving equipment and produces near plug flow with low short-circuiting. The disadvantages are that most headloss occurs at the 180° bends and therefore the value may be too high at the bends and inadequate in the straight channels, Other hydraulic flocculators are helicoidal-flow, staircase-flow, gravel-bed and Alabama types (Schulz, 1968). Hydraulic flocculation is also used in sludge blanket clarifiers ( There are several types of mechanical device for flocculation, common designs being the paddle type stirrers, mounted either horizontally or vertically in the flocculating chamber, or axial flow impeller type stirrers. The latter is also the design used for high energy flocculation. The power term in the velocity gradient expression for a paddle type is given by the equation:  where Tapered flocculation chambers are usually made up of two or three equal size compartments in series to minimize short-circuiting and the stirrers should be counter-rotating. In order to optimize the velocity gradient the stirrer in each compartment should if possible be fitted with variable speed motors with that in the last compartment having infinitely variable speed facilities. The compartments should be separated by either around-the-end or over-and-under baffles arranged to give diagonal flow in the compartment; the headloss across the baffle walls produces a Impurities which require coagulation and flocculation before they can be removed by solid-liquid separation processes can broadly be classified as either inorganic or organic material. The more usual type of inorganic material encountered in water treatment settles easily, especially when it is of particulate size; when chemically unaided settling is used one or two hours retention usually removes at least 40–50% of particulate matter. A primary coagulant, sometimes assisted by a coagulant aid, usually removes 98% or more of the suspended particulate matter for lightly loaded water with suspended solids not exceeding about 300 mg/l, but such a removal rate may not be adequate for those river waters typical of the regions where suspended solids are regularly measured in excess of 1000 mg/l and over 10000 mg/l is not uncommon. In such places it may be necessary to introduce a settlement stage unaided by chemicals before chemical sedimentation or, alternatively, to have two separate stages of chemical treatment and settlement in series because the quantity of solids in suspension and the sludge formed by the addition of chemicals are too much to remove in one stage of treatment. Not all inorganic matter settles out quickly in plain settlement and in some waters, such as are found in Central Africa, it may be weeks or even months before any significant settlement of colloidal material takes place. With such waters there is no option but to use two clarification stages each with chemical coagulation. Organic colour and finely divided mineral matter, including various forms of clay, comes in this category. Clay in water is a hydrophobic colloidal suspension, or ‘sol’, in which the surfaces of the particles are considered to have a negative charge which contributes to the stability of the sol by helping to prevent the particles coalescing into larger particles which would have a relatively rapid rate of settling. The excellent coagulating effect of aluminium or ferric salts may be due to the triple positive charge on the trivalent aluminium or ferric ion neutralising the negative charges on the clay particles. Literature on the coagulation of clay and similar materials is reviewed by Packham ( pH is an important factor in coagulation. The optimum pH range corresponds to that over which minimum solubility of the hydrolysed coagulant products occurs and maximum turbidity and colour removal is achieved. Typically for ferric salts the coagulation pH is greater than 5 and for aluminium salts it is between 6.5 and 7.2. For coagulation of natural organic matter such as colour, coagulation pH values for ferric and aluminium salts are about 4.5 and 5 respectively, whilst optimal turbidity removal typically occurs at pH 6–7.5.  Polyelectrolytes ( The variety of impurities present in raw waters and their varying concentrations explain the dictum that all waters are different and that water treatment is an ‘art’ as well as a science. This particularly applies to waters whose primary natural impurity is organic in origin, as these are very often the most difficult to treat. Miscellaneous fragments of animal and vegetable matter contribute towards the organic content, as does the organic colouring matter derived from peat and similar sources consisting largely of humic and fulvic acids and of more complex compounds, partly in true solution and partly in colloidal form. The optimum chemical treatment for such waters is sometimes very difficult to achieve, particularly when it is necessary to remove dissolved iron or manganese. Laboratory jar tests are an essential tool in the formulation of treatment for all waters. Where possible these should be followed by testing at pilot scale. Planktonic animals and plants, particularly the plants (phytoplankton) which are algae, can cause a variety of problems in treatment. Their removal in microstrainers has been mentioned in Micro-organisms such as cysts and oocysts are readily removed by coagulation and flocculation followed by filtration with or without clarification ( Of the other impurities which are encountered in raw waters, it is far less easy to be precise as to removal efficiency by chemical coagulation. In many lowland waters there are to be found small but appreciable concentrations of substances in the run-off from farmland, drainage from agricultural land and sewage and trade effluent discharges. Many of these are organic substances and are usually classified as volatile or non-volatile with many more subdivisions, such as biodegradability. Whilst it is known that chemical coagulation, flocculation, clarification and rapid filtration are at least partially effective in their removal, in particular those proportions adsorbed on to particles, different processes can offer a higher degree of removal of organic substances. These are described in Some simple types of settlement tank are in use for the clarification of flocculated waters. For large volumes of water containing a relatively heavy load of suspended solids a relatively dense floc is formed which settles easily and in warm climates, where the viscosity of the water is lower thereby permitting more rapid settlement of floc, the large horizontal flow sedimentation tank can be an economical solution for clarification. Although a large tank is necessary in order to keep velocities sufficiently low to permit settlement of floc to the base of the tank, its construction is simple because it need not be very deep and few internal walls are required. In the simplest design of horizontal flow tank, floc is allowed to accumulate on the floor of the tank until such time as the increasing velocity of water above the accumulated sludge begins to stir it up, thereby affecting the clarity of the effluent. When this occurs the tank should be cleaned out. Alternatively, moving scrapers operated continuously or intermittently add to the overall efficiency by pushing the settled floc to outlets in the base of the tank where it may be drawn off as sludge. Accepting their initial low rating and correspondingly high civil construction cost, horizontal tanks are nevertheless versatile clarifiers; modifications to an original simple design to meet changing conditions of raw water can be accommodated if provision has been made at the design stage. For example, rotating flocculators and sludge scrapers can be added and some tanks have had their rate of flow increased by the addition of inclined tube or plate modules ( In the design of rectangular or circular tanks for treating heavily silted water, the feed water should be conveyed in channels rather than pipes to permit easy access for cleaning of settled solids. The advantages of these tanks are: greater tolerance to hydraulic and quality changes, ideal for stop/start operation; infinite turn down; simplicity of operation; suitable for water containing high silt loads; and performance is not appreciably affected by diurnal temperature change. The primary drawback is their low surface loading rate and hence the large footprint and associated capital costs. Compared to rectangular tanks, circular tanks do not lend themselves to a compact layout. One such circular tank design known as Centrifloc Without the aid of a coagulant a rectangular or circular tank only works at a surface loading up to about 1/3 the rate shown by jar tests (33% efficiency). With coagulant assisted sedimentation, the actual efficiency is generally much closer to the results obtained by laboratory jar tests. However, theoretical settling rates cannot be directly translated to tank design because of short-circuiting in the tank. The safety factor can be limited to between 1.3 and 1.5 by careful design of the inlet and outlet arrangements. These design features include multiple inlets at about 1.5 m centres sized to give an inlet velocity of about 0.5 m/s and perforated baffles, with orifice diameters of 100–200 mm to give a head loss of less than 10 mm to minimize floc shear, at the inlet and outlet ends across the whole cross section of the tank to create a more uniform flow pattern through the tank. Whilst these measures help, they may have little effect when the temperature of the incoming water differs from that in the tank and so creates turbulence which must subside before the particles can resume settling under quiescent conditions. In horizontal flow tanks the horizontal flow of water should occur under laminar conditions (Reynolds number <2000) and short-circuiting and instability of flow should be minimum (Froude number >10  where g is kinematic viscosity (m Chemically assisted sedimentation tanks for the removal of organic matter and light flocculated particles, have length to width ratios greater than or equal to 4:1 and surface loading rates between 0.75 and 1.75 m Surface loading rates in clarifiers are often obtained by dividing the daily or hourly flow by the gross surface area of the tank. This can be misleading as it may not take into account the area occupied by the mixing and flocculation compartments (where these are provided), and the effluent launders, which usually account for at least 12% of the gross area. A better guide to the true loading rate is to take the horizontal clarification area available at a depth of about 1.25 m below the surface. Probably the earliest type of sludge blanket tank is the so called ‘hopper bottomed tank’. The sludge blanket effect is obtained simply by allowing the chemically treated water to flow upwards in an inverted pyramid type of tank with the angle of slope usually 60° to the horizontal and terminating in a vertical section of 1.5 m water depth. They are usually square in plan (occasionally circular), although rectangular multiple hopper tank variations have been constructed for large capacity works. As the water rises in the tank of increasing area, its velocity progressively decreases until, at a given level, the reduced upward drag on the particles counterbalances the weight of the particles, leaving them suspended in the water. Their presence forms a kind of blanket in the water in which chemical and physiochemical reactions can be completed and in which a straining action to remove some of the finer particles may also take place. While the top of the blanket is usually well defined there is no distinguishable bottom to the blanket because of the varying density of the particles forming the blanket. Flocculation takes place within the clarifier and is hydraulically induced as the coagulant dosed water enters downwards and flow reverses upwards at the base of the clarifier. Flocculation is completed within the sludge blanket through a process known as contact flocculation. The concentration of the sludge blanket is controlled by allowing it to bleed off via suitably placed hoppers. Sludge is also removed from the bottom of the hopper. The hopper bottomed tank is not cheap to construct as the total water depth, governed by geometry, is usually about the same as a dimension of the plan. During construction care must be taken to ensure that the inverted pyramid is reasonably accurate and the inlet pipe discharges at the geometric centre; if it does not, streaming of the water to one side can occur and upset the stability of the sludge blanket. The surface loading of hopper bottomed tanks is within the range 2 to 3.5 m In order to reduce construction costs there has been a continual striving towards simplification of the tank shape, and the most recent addition to the sludge blanket family is a flat-bottomed variety, usually rectangular in plan, as illustrated in A proprietary design of upward flow flat bottomed sludge blanket tank is the Pulsator Sludge blanket clarifiers are suitable for many types of waters, including turbid ones, provided the particulate matter is of low density. A safe upper limit for turbidity is about 500 NTU but, depending on the nature of the particulate matter, much higher (up to 1000 NTU) peaks can be accommodated. Heavy particulate matter tends to settle on the bottom of the clarifier. When used in such applications these clarifiers should be provided with scrapers or other methods for intermittent removal of bottom sludge. Alternatively they should be drained down and cleaned after the rainy season, or about once or twice a year. In this respect, hopper bottomed tanks are more appropriate for highly turbid waters. For heavily silt laden waters sludge blanket clarifiers should be preceded by simple rectangular or circular sedimentation basins as described in The operation of sludge blanket tanks is somewhat sensitive to sudden changes in flow and raw water quality and requires greater operator skill. They are not suitable for stop/start operation. Restart following a lengthy shut down may take more than 24 hours. However this could be reduced if sludge from a similar clarifier is available for seeding the blanket. Stoppages of 3–6 hours, can however be accommodated. There is also a constraint on flow turn-down, which is normally limited to about 2/3 The performance of sludge blanket clarifiers (and horizontal flow settling tanks) is known to be influenced by temperature ( There are many other designs which endeavour to achieve the same high level of performance as sludge blanket tanks by providing extra mixing energy for flocculation or by the recirculation of sludge, or by a combination of both methods. Nearly all such variations have circular configurations and are usually equipped with bottom sludge scrapers, but operate as solids contact clarifiers. The essential feature is that the settled floc is used to seed the incoming dosed water, thereby accelerating the flocculation process. This is achieved internally (i.e. Accentrifloc clarifier) by feeding the chemically dosed raw water into the flocculation zone where it is mixed with sludge recirculated by the aid of a rotor impeller or externally (i.e. Pre-treator clarifier or Densadeg Commercial competition between treatment plant manufacturers and limited space for construction of treatment facilities has provided the main incentive for the development of new techniques for obtaining higher flow ratings in clarifiers. The maximum rate for a sludge blanket tank using coagulants is about 2 m Some success with increasing flow rates through existing clarifiers has been achieved by the use of tube modules or plates, which make use of the principle established long ago by  where, Flow in the tubes or plates should be laminar with Re <200, but <50 is preferred. Froude number should be >10 Sludge blanket clarifiers are uprated by incorporating tube or plate modules in the clear water zone. The clear distance between the tube pack and the top water level and the sludge layer below is usually maintained at about 500 mm in each direction. The vertical depth occupied by the tube pack is about 650–750 mm. An example of a sludge blanket clarifier with tube modules in the clarified water zone is illustrated in An example of a sludge blanket clarifier which has made practical use of the plate system within the sludge blanket is the Super Pulsator The principle of shallow depth sedimentation has been extended to the design of a parallel plate system, sometimes referred to as lamella clarifiers. Clarifiers using the plate system are usually purpose built to take advantage of the high settlement rates which can be obtained and the greater density of sludge provided. They require an efficient flocculation stage which is critical for successful operation. The flocculated water enters at the base of lamella plates and travels upward between the plates counter current to settled sludge moving down ( With this arrangement, the settling area available is equal to the sum of the projections of plates in a horizontal plane. Thus the settling area is very large on account of the overlapping of plates but occupies a relatively small plan area. The total settling area is equal to ( In ballasted flocculation clarifiers (e.g. the Actiflo In the ‘Sirofloc’ process magnetite in fine particulate form is used as a ballasting agent to achieve high settling rates. The magnetite is ‘activated’ with sodium hydroxide solution then introduced as a slurry and, after a period of contact during which the magnetite adsorbs destabilized colour, it is flocculated by passing it between the poles of a permanent magnet and the floc thus formed settles readily in the clarifiers. Magnetite is recovered by re-treating the sludge drawn from the clarifiers with sodium hydroxide and returned with a make up dose to the main stream. The effluent, which contains very high colour (600–850° Hazen for raw water colour of 50–90° Hazen) and pH (about 12), can be discharged to a sewer or treated by conventional treatment ( The principal advantage of high rate clarifiers is that they occupy a small foot print, but they need close attention and optimisation of chemical treatment. Most of them depend on polyelectrolyte dosing. The retention time in some of them is very short and therefore tolerance to changing water quality is significantly reduced and the sensitivity to optimum operating parameters is significantly increased. Dissolved air flotation operates on the principal of the transfer of floc to the surface of water through attachment of air bubbles to the floc. The floc accumulated on the surface, known as the ‘float’, is skimmed off as sludge ( There is, however, some experience with eutrophic waters with very high counts of algae where dissolved air flotation has not been successful, so that caution is necessary when choosing the process. It should be noted that sedimentation can achieve degrees of removal comparable to flotation, if algae are first inactivated by chlorination. This would however result in the formation of DPBs by the action of chlorine on algal metabolic products. Flotation is preceded by a flocculation stage of the hydraulic or mechanical type usually dedicated to each flotation cell. The flocculation tank should have at least two compartments in series ( In flotation the solids loading can vary in the range 4–15 kg dry solids/h.m For effective flotation the quantity of air required is about 6–10 g/m In plants where there is a need for raw water ozonation and flotation, the two processes could be combined with air in the flotation process being replaced by an ozone–air or ozone–oxygen mixture ( High rate flotation processes are finding application as they require smaller footprint. These include proprietary designs DAFRapide Since the clarified water is taken from the bottom of the tank in the flotation process it could be combined with rapid gravity filtration in the same tank with the filtration section placed underneath (DAFF) e.g. Flofilter The flotation process is suitable for stop/start operation and has a flow turndown of about 2:1 or greater depending on the design of aeration manifolds. The former is one of its advantages when dealing with a water subject to high algal loadings; a plant can be ‘switched in’ as and when needed and will give a steady quality treated water within 45 minutes ( Effective removal of sludge is very important for the efficient operation of clarifiers. With a raw water having suspended solids less than about 250 mg/l (most waters used in many countries fall in this category) the sludge volume to be removed from the tank should not exceed about 2.5% of inflow. For raw waters having high suspended solids (>500 mg/l) the sludge may be as high as 5–10% by volume of inflow; for suspended solids 1000 mg/l the sludge may have to be removed continuously in order to keep the tanks in operation, even at a reduced output, and to maintain an acceptable water quality. Under such conditions output may have to be reduced and the sludge volume can be as much as 20–30% of inflow. Special measures for sludge removal must obviously be provided for heavily silted waters and, for those having above 1000 mg/l solids or possibly less, depending on the nature of the solids, it is necessary to provide scraping equipment for all designs if throughput and quality are to be maintained. Scrapers move sludge to a series of hoppers located at the inlet end of rectangular tanks or usually in the centre or periphery of circular tanks. The floor of the tank should have a slope. Hoppers are of an inverted pyramid shape with an included angle of about 60°. Sludge is removed from hoppers individually under hydrostatic head using the full water depth in the tank.   Some circular tank designs include a suction header similar to the rectangular tanks. Tanks employing suction headers draw sludge at about 2 l/s.m of tank width or radius from points just in front of the scraper blades or squeegees using pumps mounted on the bridge; others are aided by submersible pumps or down pipes with eductors. The floors of scraped circular tanks have slopes of about 1:10–1:20 and those of scraped rectangular tanks have slopes of about 1:300–1:500. Rectangular tanks equipped with suction headers do not require a slope except for drainage. Unscraped rectangular tanks usually have a cross fall of about 1:10 to a central channel running the length of the tank and a longitudinal fall of 1:200. By including high pressure water jets (at 3.5–4 bar) for cleaning the slope can be reduced to about 1:250. Valves for sludge removal are always better placed outside the walls of the tank. Both valves and pipework should be adequately sized to pass the maximum sludge withdrawal rate, which can be 400% or 500% greater than the average rate. The valves should be of the full bore type like plug valves (  A method for initiating sludge removal, which has met with considerable success is a design that relies on sensing the differential weight of concentrated sludge in water. The equipment is shown in  Chemical dosing plant comprises: storage facilities, solution or slurry preparation tanks and chemical metering and conveying systems. It is usual for storage facilities to be sized for 28 days’ demand at average dose and normal flow rate, or the size of one consignment plus the demand for the period between placing the order and receiving a delivery allowing for public holidays. Longer storage may be required for locations where access is affected by bad weather or where chemicals have to be imported. Properties of some of the commonly used chemicals in water treatment are given in Chemicals are delivered as liquids or solids. Most chemicals are made up into solutions of known concentration or suspensions in batches; at least two batching tanks are required for each chemical in order to maintain continuity of dosing; additional tanks would allow maintenance and cleaning without interruption to dosing. Each tank is normally sized so that one or two batches are prepared in a work shift. Accurate batching and dilution, with proper mixing, is required to maintain uniform concentrations as in most cases metering is volumetric. For soluble solids the solution strength should be well below the solubility at the lowest water temperature. For powders such as lime and powdered activated carbon (PAC) suspensions need to be maintained at a value of less than The use of lime as a slurry for final pH correction increases the turbidity of the filtered water depending on the lime dose, the proportion of impurities in lime and the formation of calcium carbonate precipitate due to localized softening caused by poor mixing. This can be overcome either by using caustic soda or a saturated solution of lime (lime water). Lime water is usually prepared in continuous flow saturators which are upward flow hopper bottomed tanks comprising a bed of lime (similar to hopper bottomed sludge blanket clarifiers— Chemical dosing must be accurate and related to the flow of water to be treated. Positive displacement pumps of the reciprocating type with mechanical or hydraulic diaphragm heads are most frequently used for injection but for lime and PAC suspensions or viscous solutions such as polyelectrolytes, progressive cavity type positive displacement pumps are sometimes used. For suspensions, peristaltic pumps also find application. Pumps should be provided with a calibration vessel on the suction side, a pressure relief valve (venting to waste), pulsation dampener, and a back pressure valve on the delivery side. All chemical dosing pumps must be of materials appropriate for the chemical handled. The maximum stroking speed (spm) of reciprocating pumps should be about 120 spm, in particular for viscous or abrasive chemicals. The motor speed of progressive cavity and peristaltic pumps should be kept to less than 500 and 50 rpm, respectively. With the reciprocating pump, dosage adjustment is achieved by altering the pump stroke length. Where plant throughput is variable (greater than ±5%) the pump motor speed is automatically controlled in proportion to the flow rate measured near the chemical injection point. This type of control is called ‘open-loop’; it has no feed-back or corrective action and the applied dose rate is strictly proportional to the flow. In a ‘closed-loop’ system, the pump output is corrected to maintain a given water quality value (such as pH) over a narrow pre-set band, measured downstream of the injection point after the chemical has been well mixed with the water (‘feed-back’ control). A process controller, working in conjunction with an appropriate water quality measuring instrument, sends a 4–20 mA signal ( In some plants it is necessary to apply the same dose to two or more equal streams, e.g. dosing to individual clarifiers; it is then vital to ensure equal division of the metered chemical flow and this is economically achieved by use of a splitter box with equally set V-notch weirs. In remote parts of developing countries chemical dosing systems are kept simple, with manual preparation of solutions and slurries and the use of constant head solution feeders for dosing chemicals ( Among the most important considerations when planning a layout are the following:  The flow through the works should be gravitational: it is inadvisable to re-pump water between clarifiers and filters as this would break up floc. Hence a site having a gentle gradient of 1 in 10 to 1 in 15 is most favourable. The typical head loss across a treatment plant comprising clarifiers and filters and assuming mixing is by hydraulic means (inlet chamber to the treated water reservoir) could be in the range 5.5–6 m of which filters (underdrain, clean media and an allowance for clogging) accounting for 2–2.5 m. Inter-stage pumping may be unavoidable when there are two filtration stages in series for which an additional head of about 2.5–3 m may be needed. When siting works adjacent to a river it is important to avoid siting any structure below highest flood level because of the difficulty and cost of countering uplift problems. No electrical or chemical plant should be put in a basement which could flood owing to a burst pipe. The works should be provided with means to safely evacuate overflow caused by fault or mal-operation. Typical locations are inlets to the works, filters and disinfection contact tank and/or treated water reservoir. All structures conveying and retaining water downstream of filters should be sealed to prevent contamination. All water retaining structures should be provided with means for dewatering. Easy access, including turning-circles, should be provided for chemical delivery vehicles. Access for large equipment for plant repair or replacement should be possible to all buildings and process units. It is preferable to provide chemical dosing lines in duplicate (one duty, one standby). Chemical lines should not be laid in positions where any leakage could damage other lines or cause injury to personnel (e.g. over access ways). Toxic gas under pressure or solution lines should be laid outside buildings in separate ducting. When possible toxic gases should be conveyed under vacuum and mixed with water just before injection. Delivery lines for slurries, such as lime, are difficult to keep clean and should be of the flexible hose type and laid flat. Water-flushing of dosing lines should be provided. Chemical pipes should be laid in trenches in the ground provided with removable covers for better access in preference to buried ducts. All chemicals where possible should be diluted in-line after metering. For lime and PAC, the lower the dilution the better the mixing and typically dilution down to Instrumentation and electrical cables and sampling and dosing lines form a complex network of cabling inside buildings and on the site. In the early stages of planning the building layout, allowance should be made for chemical pipes, cable trays, ventilation ducts and other services such as site water supply. High tension electrical cables should be separately ducted. Ducts for chemical delivery lines can be adjacent, but must be separate. All ducts must have drainage outlets. Liquid chemical storage vessels need bunding dedicated to each chemical ( Substances and products used in the works, which may come in contact with the water, which is to be supplied for drinking or cooking, should not contain any matter, which could impart taste, odour, colour or toxicity to the water or otherwise be objectionable on health grounds. All chemical drainage including that from bunded and hardstanding areas should be collected, neutralized and disposed of separately and should not be allowed to contaminate water courses. Safety precautions for operational staff should receive careful attention. This should include the provision of safety signs, safety showers, eye baths, first aid boxes, protective goggles and clothing and breathing apparatus. Safety screens should be provided around pumps used for hazardous chemicals such as sulphuric acid. Aluminium sulphate is the most widely used aluminium coagulant. It is available in a number of solid grades such as block, kibbled or ground and is also available as a solution. In waterworks practice aluminium sulphate is frequently but incorrectly referred to as ‘alum’. The solid form has the composition Al The aluminium sulphate dose is therefore normally expressed in mg/l as When dosed into water, the formation of an aluminium hydroxide floc is the result of the reaction between the acidic coagulant and the natural alkalinity of the water, which usually consists of calcium bicarbonate. A dose of 1 mg/l of aluminium sulphate as Al reacts with 5.55 mg/l of alkalinity expressed as CaCO There are some coagulants, which are polymerized inorganic aluminium salts such as polyaluminium chloride (PACl), aluminium chlorohydrate (ACH), polyaluminium chlorosulphate (PACS) and polyaluminium silicate sulphate (PASS) and are formulated to contain high basicity, a measure of hydroxyl ions present in the coagulant. A definition of basicity is given by It has been suggested that aluminium in drinking water may be associated with neurological disorders and Alzheimer’s disease ( Iron coagulants in the ferric form behave similarly to aluminium sulphate and form ferric hydroxide floc in the presence of bicarbonate alkalinity. A dose of 1 mg/l of ferric sulphate or chloride as Fe neutralizes 2.7 mg/l alkalinity expressed as CaCO Iron coagulants are available as ferric sulphate, ferric chloride and ferrous sulphate. Ferric salts are very corrosive acidic liquids. Ferric sulphate is usually preferred to ferric chloride since the introduction of chloride ions may increase the corrosivity of a water. Ferrous sulphate, traditionally referred to in its hydrated form (FeSO Polymeric ferric sulphates are now available; they contain about Many iron coagulants contain approximately 2–6 g of manganese per kg of iron as an impurity depending on the product specification. This contributes to the manganese concentration in the water. Coagulant aids are used to improve the settling characteristics of floc produced by aluminium or iron coagulants. The coagulant aid most used for a number of years was activated silica; other aids included sodium alginates and some soluble starch products which are still in use. These substances had the advantage of being well-known materials already used in connection with the food industry and were thus recognized as harmless in the treatment of water. Polyelectrolytes came later into use and were more effective. They now comprise of numerous synthetic products: long chain organic chemicals, which may be cationic, anionic or non-ionic. The theory of their action has been reviewed by Polyacrylamides are the most effective of the synthetic group of polyelectrolytes, but for their safe use the toxic acrylamide monomer residue (the raw materials used in their manufacture) which is not adsorbed by the floc, should be virtually absent from the product. In the UK Water Supply (Water Quality) Regulations ( Polyelectrolyte doses used are very small in relation to the dose of the primary coagulant. Natural polyelectrolyte (starch based) doses vary between 0.5–2.5 mg/l whereas polyacrylamide doses vary between 0.05–0.25 mg/l. Polyelectrolytes are added as a coagulant for turbid waters or after the primary coagulant as a coagulant aid ( Most polyelectrolytes are powders and a solution must be prepared for dosing. For successful preparation the powder must be wetted properly by using a high energy water spray before dissolving; the solution should be allowed to age for about an hour in cold water or 30 minutes in warm water conditions before use. For polyacrylamide the solution should be prepared at about 2.5 g/l, whereas for natural polyelectrolytes the solution concentration could be as high as 25 g/l. Following metering the solution should be diluted ten-fold to assist transfer in the pipe and dispersion at the point of application. Once a batch of stock solution is prepared it should be used preferably within about 24 hours. The practical effect of introducing polyelectrolytes in many existing waterworks has been to increase the settling rate and hence allow substantially greater output through the clarifiers; an additional use is to assist in the recovery of used filter washwater and thickening and dewatering of sludges ( Rainwater is typically devoid of all dissolved solids but contains dissolved gases (oxides of carbon, nitrogen and sulphur) which result in pH values of about 5.5 or lower. In coastal areas rainwater may also contain up to 15 mg/l of sodium chloride from sea-spray. Rainwater is therefore devoid of alkalinity; it is acidic (low pH), low in mineral content and aggressive towards calcium bearing materials such as concrete and some of the metals typically used in domestic plumbing. The presence of chlorides exacerbates corrosivity. Rainwater is also unpalatable in taste, again due to the low solids content ( Rainwater is harvested from roofs via guttering into storage tanks and may be contaminated, particularly in the ‘first flush’ after a dry period, by detritus that has collected on the roof, for instance leaves, insects or more importantly bird faeces. In coastal locations, salt deposits from sea spray may also be present. Water falling on roofs or other surfaces designated for the purpose of collection is directed, via screens to remove leaves, bird feathers and other coarse debris, to a collection tank. The first flush, typically about 1–0.5 l per m The roof surfaces over which the rain is collected should be made of materials from which no undesirable compounds may be dissolved or leached if rainwater is intended for human consumption; examples are lead flashings and bituminous roof material.