Single point inclined axis grinding techniques, including the wheel setting, wheel–workpiece interference, error source determination and compensation approaches, were studied to fabricate small aspheric moulds of high profile accuracy. The interference of a cylindrical grinding wheel with the workpiece was analysed and the criteria for selection of wheel geometry for avoiding the interference was proposed. The grinding process was performed with compensation focused on two major error sources, wheel setting error and wheel wear. The grinding results showed that the compensation approach was efficient and the developed grinding process was capable to generate small aspheric concave surfaces on tungsten carbide material with a profile error of smaller than 200nm in PV value after two to three compensation cycles.Meso and micro optical components have been extensively used in a wide range of industrial applications, such as aerospace, optics, photonics and telecommunications, in the past decade Nevertheless, there are still several key problems that need to be further addressed. For instance, the quality of truing and dressing of grinding wheels and tool wear had such significant effect on the profile accuracy of the ground surface In this paper, we report a single point inclined axis nanogrinding protocol and its on-machine error compensation method. In this grinding protocol, a cylindrical superfine grinding wheel was selected and the grinding was carried out by integrating a rotary movement around As shown in To solve the abovementioned problems, in this work we proposed: (1) to adopt the inclined wheel spindle mode to effectively avoid interference between the wheel and the workpiece for grinding micro/meso optical surfaces, and (2) to use a cube corner wheel, instead of a arc corner wheel, in order to maintain a single contact point during grinding. Through controlling the movements along As the contact between the wheel and the workpiece is a point, so the accuracy for determining the grinding path is increased. This makes the subsequent compensation relatively easy. It is much easier to obtain the sharp corner through truing the end and cylindrical surfaces of a grinding wheel (in linear movement along one axis) than the definite arc of a wheel (need coordinated movements along two axes). The velocity of the grinding wheel is parallel to that of the workpiece, which is beneficial to the improvement of surface roughness The grinding characteristics of the three different modes shown in In profile grinding of concave surface, the diameter of the wheel will influence the interference between the wheel and the workpiece. As shown in As shown in If the curvature radius, As shown in The cylindrical surface and end face of grinding wheel must be trued to obtain a cube corner cutting edge. In this work, a truing wheel was installed on the workpiece spindle, which is also cylindrical, but with larger diameter and coarser abrasives than the grinding wheel being trued, as shown in To generate an axisymmetric surface, a grinding wheel must move along both radial ( As the grinding is carried out via point contact via a very sharp corner, the tool wear is significant in this grinding mode. As tool wear and positioning offset are expected to be the two major error sources, which would significantly affect the profile accuracy in single point inclined axis grinding, error compensation module is integrated into the grinding protocol. The setting error must be present after installing the fine grinding wheel. The shape of error profile is greatly affected by the positioning offset and it is an obvious Λ shape or V shape. In general, the compensation of positioning offset should be carried out if the PV value is about over 600 The ground profile was measured using the on-machine probing. The measured profile data was filtered to remove high-frequency random error prior to analysis. According to the shape of the profile error curve, the effect of positioning offset and tool wear could be identified and distinguished in order to determine the compensation approach. If the profile error was mainly derived from the tool setting error, it should be firstly compensated through adjusting the positioning of the grinding wheel based on the error analysis shown in Grinding experiments were performed on a 4-axis ultraprecision grinding centre with on-machine profile measurement, as shown in Tungsten carbide was the mould material being machined. Two concave aspheric surfaces were generated with apertures of 2 Cylindrical grinding wheels of 2     The interference of a cylindrical grinding wheel with the workpiece in single point inclined axis grinding of small concave surface was analysed and the criteria for selection of wheel geometry for avoiding the interference was set up. The grinding protocol with compensation focusing on tool setting error and tool wear was developed based on comprehensive error analysis. The grinding performance demonstrated that in this grinding process, the tool setting error and wheel wear was indeed the two major error sources. The results also showed that the grinding process was capable to generate small aspheric concave surfaces on tungsten carbide material that has high accuracy with a profile error of smaller than 200 This work was sponsored by the