In this paper, a mean-field micromechanical approach has been employed to formulate a nonlinear constitutive equation and yield conditions of a two-phase composite considering plastic and creep deformation of constituent phases. The derived constitutive equation is expressed in a piecewise linear-rate form, so it can be easily combined with common structural analyses such as a finite element analysis as well as lamination theories for typical continuous fiber-reinforced composite structures. The model has taken into account the threshold creep of constituent phases and diffusional mass transfer at the inclusion/matrix interface, which play a significant role in high-temperature deformation of short-fiber-reinforced metal matrix composites. A numerical study on anisotropy in Bauschinger effect and thermal-cycling creep of SiC whisker/Al matrix composites has been made based on the developed model.Advanced composites including plastic matrix composites (PMCs), metal matrix composites (MMCs) and ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) used in various light-weight and high-temperature structures show inelastic behavior in their manufacturing, processing and application. For PMCs, the plastic matrix undergoes visco-elastic deformation even near at room temperature Developing analytical or numerical methods to predict the macroscopic mechanical response, particularly, nonlinear response due to inelastic deformation or damages in constituent phases of the composites has been a topic of a great interest The mean-field homogenization schemes applied to this problem have been well-established using approximations considering interaction among many inclusions present in the composites such as Mori–Tanaka approximation Finite element analysis (FEA)-based methods dealt with simple heterogeneous periodic or quasi-periodic materials that can be handled at the level of the representative volume element (RVE) without much difficulty Apart from a series of micromechanical models related to tangent or secant stiffness methods described above, Wakashima and Tsukamoto Fiber-reinforced composites can be generally classified into two groups in terms of fiber length, i.e., continuously (long fiber) and discontinuously (shot fiber or particulate)-reinforced composites. For continuously-reinforced composites with laminate structures representing glass fiber-reinforced plastics (GFRP) and carbon fiber-reinforced plastics (CFRP), many theoretical or numerical analyses have been conducted based on lamination theories considering the time-dependent deformation of each lamina For discontinuously (short-fiber or particulate)-reinforced composites, the micromechanical models have been successfully used to analysis of high-temperature inelastic deformation considering plasticity and creep of constituents In this study, the elastic–plastic–creep (visco-elastic–plastic) constitutive equation as well as yield conditions of a two-phase composite, consisting of the inclusions and matrix, subjected to multi-axial loadings have been formulated based on a mean-field micromechanical approach stemming from Eshelby’s equivalent inclusion method A two-phase composite consisting of an isotropic matrix (phase 0) in which inclusions (phase1) of a given ellipsoidal shape are uniformly and randomly distributed is considered as shown in From the work by Wakashima and Tsukamoto Here, inelastic strains of thermal expansion, plasticity and creep are considered, and Let Let us consider the plastic deformation. The isotropic strain hardening rule for both phases is assumed and the temperature dependence of plastic flow is also taken into account. Then, the equivalent flow stress, As for the creep constitutive relation under uniaxial loading, Norton-Baily’s equation of the following form is adopted: Let us consider the threshold creep of the phases. Norton-Baily’s equation can be extensionally used to deal with this problem. It is well known that dispersion-strengthened alloys show the anomalously high stress exponent and high activation energy when analyzed by assuming a standard expression of power-law creep such as original Norton-Baily’s equation described above, which is usually applicable to pure metals and solid-solution alloys. Incorporating a threshold stress concept into the above expression represents some solution to this problem, which naturally leads to lower stress exponent values and yield more acceptable activation energy values. When we consider the threshold stress, Next, we examine the mechanism of the local diffusional mass transfer at the inclusion/matrix interface, which can be detected in discontinuously-reinforced MMCs at high temperatures. The importance of this mechanism has been reported so far by many researchers Let us construct an overall constitutive equation of the two-phase composite. The phase plastic and creep strain rates can be expressed in terms of the phase average micro-stresses and the phase average micro-stress rates. First, the phase average micro-stresses, Thus, by substituting the inelastic strain rates derived above into Eq. Next, a description of yield condition of the composites in terms of the macro-stress For yielding of the inclusion, a similar description can be made. By substituting The yield conditions of the composites containing kinematic-hardening terms derived by taking into account the internal-state variables such as inelastic strains and internal stresses introduced in the constituent phases can be contrasted with the conventional yield conditions for anisotropic materials, in which the parameters were empirically determined The constitutive equation formulated above has a piecewise linear-rate form and can be incorporated into structural analysis such as an FEA. The program was developed based on the formulation, which can be divided into two parts. The first parts are to calculate the constants independent of external and internal stress and temperature states such as [ Two numerical studies have been made to examine anisotropy in thermo-mechanical behavior such as Bauschinger effect and thermal-cycling creep of SiCw (whisker)/Al matrix (6061 Al) composites. The materials property data used in the calculation are listed in Let us examine Bauschinger effect in SiCw/Al composites at elevated temperatures. There has been little work investigating anisotropy in Bauschinger effect in unidirectionally short-fiber (whisker)-reinforced MMCs subject to transverse loadings, in which the load is applied in the direction perpendicular to fibers, at elevated temperatures, even though many studies have investigated Bauschinger effect of the particulate-reinforced MMCs or short-fiber (whisker)-reinforced MMCs subject to longitudinal loadings, in which the load is applied to the fiber direction, associated with axi symmetric inelastic deformation at room temperature   Thermal-cycling creep including thermal ratcheting and internal-stress superplasticity in MMCs has been a topic of considerable interest because of its new possibility in forming or processing of such materials To begin with, we examine the thermal dilatation behavior of SiCw/Al matrix composites. Next we examine the thermal-cycling creep behavior of the composites.  It can be seen that the stress exponent for isothermal creep changes from 3 to 1 with increasing applied stresses at any upper temperatures. This tendency was described in the work by Wakashima The stress exponent in longitudinal thermal-cycling creep at low stresses at low upper temperatures is around 1, which can be expected from previous work Experimental data for thermal-cycling creep from the work by González-Doncel et al. In the present study, a mean-field micromechanical model for nonlinear behavior of a two-phase composite has been proposed considering threshold creep of each phase and local diffusional mass flow at the inclusion/matrix interface, and some numerical simulations were conducted to verify the validity of the developed model and program. In Case study 1, anisotropy in Bauschinger effect of SiCw/Al composites at elevated temperatures was examined. Bauschinger effect of SiCw/Al composites was largely affected by loading directions, temperatures and residual stresses. Bauschinger effect in transverse loadings is totally different from that in longitudinal loadings. The influence of temperature on Bauschinger effect is very large in both longitudinal and transverse loadings. Over 150 In Case study 2, anisotropy in thermal-cycling creep of the SiCw/Al composites was examined. Strong thermal-ratcheting behavior can be seen under low stress and low upper-temperature conditions in longitudinal thermal-cycling creep, while isothermal creep appeared to be dominant in transverse thermal-cycling creep. These results are very important because so far little work has been made on such transverse thermal-cycling creep of the discontinuously-reinforced MMCs. The computed results are reasonable compared with experimental data in literature The mean-field micromechanical model described here is based on the simple assumption that all the inelastic deformation of constituent phases can be expressed by the associated flow rule, in which the rule was applied to the deformation even due to diffusional mass transfer at the inclusion/matrix interface. This assumption in application of the associated flow rule to diffusional mass transfer mechanisms may be open to argument. However, in spite of several studies A nonlinear constitutive equation as well as yield conditions of two-phase composites under multi-axial stress states were formulated based on a mean-field micromechanical approach. The constitutive equation has a piecewise-linear incremental form, which can be easily incorporated with most of structural analytical methods such as finite element analysis and macro-mechanical analysis of composite structures. This constitutive equation takes into account the threshold creep of constituent phases and diffusional mass flow at the inclusion/matrix interface. Simulation on thermo-mechanical behavior of SiCw/Al composites was made to verify the validity of the developed model, and we obtained a new knowledge of anisotropy in Bauschinger effect and thermal-cycling creep behavior of SiCw/Al composites. Bauschinger effect of SiCw/Al composites was largely affected by load directions, temperatures and residual stresses. Thermal-cycling creep behavior showed large difference in longitudinal and transverse load directions. The longitudinal thermal-cycling creep rates were higher than transverse thermal-cycling creep rates under low stress and low upper-temperature conditions. Longitudinal thermal-cycling creep was largely subject to the thermal-ratcheting mechanism, while transverse thermal-cycling creep was subject to the isothermal-creep mechanism. The developed model provides a reasonable estimation on anisotropy in thermo-mechanical deformation at elevated temperatures and will allow to make a good evaluation and prediction of integrity and durability of such high-temperature composite structures.