The influence of reversion annealing on the microstructure and mechanical properties of an austenitic high-Mn low-Ni 15Cr–9Mn–1.1Ni–1.7Cu stainless steel with and without Nb alloying was investigated. The steel sheets were cold rolled to a 60% thickness reduction to obtain about 60% of strain-induced α'-martensite and subsequently annealed at temperatures between 700 and 1100°C for 0.1–1000s in order to revert the α'-martensite back to austenite and recrystallize the retained austenite. Microstructure evolution was studied using X-ray diffraction, magnetic measurements, optical microscopy and electron backscatter diffraction techniques. Mechanical properties were determined using microhardness measurements and tensile tests at room temperature. It was observed that reversion could be completed at 700°C but then recrystallization of the retained austenite remained partial. At 800°C, a non-uniform grain structure was obtained consisting of ultrafine-grained areas formed via α'-martensite reversion and coarser ones by recrystallization of the retained austenite, whereas at 900°C a uniform austenite grain size in the range of 1–2μm was obtained for all the steels. The non-uniform grain structures exhibited excellent combinations of strength and ductility. The major contribution to the strength is attributed to the refined grain size. The strain hardening rate was higher for the Nb-free steel, even though strain-induced α'-martensite fractions after fracture were slightly lower than in the Nb-alloyed steels.There is continuing interest to develop high-strength steels for light-weight applications. Typically, annealed austenitic stainless steels have excellent ductility and formability but their demerit is that the yield strength is quite low A high number of previous studies in the reversion perspective have dealt with Cr–Ni austenitic stainless steels, e.g. Concerning the effects of microalloying on stainless steels, Sawada et al. However, in most studies mainly a martensitic structure was used as the starting structure for the grain size refinement, e.g. In a previous paper, only preliminary observations were made concerning the competition between martensitic reversion and recrystallization of RA and subsequent mechanical properties for the complicated microstructures in metastable austenitic low-Ni Cr–Mn stainless steels, alloyed with Nb The sheets of low-Ni, high-Mn austenitic stainless steels, delivered by Outokumpu Stainless Oy (Tornio, Finland), were used as the experimental materials. The chemical compositions of the steels are listed in The cold-rolled samples were annealed at the University of Oulu using a Gleeble 3800 thermomechanical simulator. The heating rate was 200 To quantify the fraction of the ferromagnetic α'-martensite phase in the non-ferromagnetic austenite a Feritscope (Helmut Fisher FMP 30) instrument was used. The readings obtained by the instrument were multiplied by a correction factor 1.7 for α'-martensite fractions Microstructural examinations were performed using optical microscopy (Nikon Eclipse MA100) and a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss Sigma) together with an EDAX Hikari XP electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) camera and an accessory device (EDAX, TSL OIM Data Analysis). For the EBSD examinations, the specimen surfaces were first polished with a diamond suspension down to 1 Specimens examined in the optical microscope were further tested using microhardness indentation (CSM Instruments, micro-indentation tester) with a 10 Initially, the annealed cold-rolled sheet of the 0Nb steel was fully austenitic with the grain size of 18 In the course of annealing, martensite reverts back to austenite. As mentioned, no ε-martensite was detected using XRD ( Microstructural evolution on annealing at 700 Interestingly, it seems that evidence for both shear and diffusional reversion mechanisms are seen in After 0.1 Two processes occurred at 800 It is seen that a higher annealing temperature is preferred for obtaining a uniform grain size. As shown in It was shown earlier that in the 0Nb steel, the ultrafine grain size increases during 1000 The softening of RA grains, occurring during annealing by recovery and recrystallization, was followed using Vickers microhardness (HV0.01) measurements, and the data are shown in As shown in As shown in Even after direct cooling after heating to 800 At 800 One target of this work was to determine the strength properties and strain hardening behavior achievable from different reversion-treated microstructures. Examples of the true stress – true strain and the strain hardening rate (SHR) curves of the steels annealed at 700, 800 or 900 After 10 For the specimens annealed for 1000 The stability of the present type 204Cu austenitic stainless steel, free or alloyed with Nb, was so high that the applied 60% cold rolling reduction, which is quite severe in practice, only led to partial transformation to α'-martensite. The remaining austenite (RA) fraction was in the range 30–50%. Hence, the martensite reversion in subsequent annealing could only refine a part of the structure and the recrystallization process was required for the grain size refinement of the deformed RA. Generally, recrystallization, though dependent on prior deformation, is slower than the reversion, so that a longer annealing time or/and higher temperature is required for completing the recrystallization Upon annealing, the martensite formed during cold rolling reverts back to austenite. According to magnetic measurements of α'-martensite fractions after annealing, the reversion is very fast, especially in the 0Nb steel, where most of α'-martensite disappeared within 1 Somani et al. However, evidently also fine, equiaxed austenite grains with random orientations are visible in the microstructures, shown in The hardness of α'-martensite in the 0Nb steel was 665 HV after cold rolling and it decreased to 565 HV after annealing at 700 Recrystallization of cold deformed austenite and the shear-transformed highly dislocated austenite has been found to take place more slowly than the reversion, i.e. at higher temperatures and longer times e.g. Recrystallization tends to initiate in deformation bands ( As a consequence of reversion of martensitic areas and recrystallization of RA grains, the grain size distribution became non-uniform as formed at 700 or 800 In order to further refine the grain size, a higher cold rolling reduction, enhancing recrystallization rate and also refining the recrystallized grain size, might be applied but it would be difficult in practice. Lowering the stability of the austenite by adjusting its chemical composition would also be beneficial in this regard, too. Reverted, non-recrystallized structure is formed in low-temperature annealing (i.e. 700 After a prolonged annealing of 1000 Uniform grain structure is formed after annealing at 900 Two clear features can be noticed in Generally, the α'-martensite fractions after tensile testing to fracture seemed to be slightly higher in Nb-alloyed steels than in the 0Nb steel. This is the opposite to the SHR levels which were lower in these steels. Previously, a similar result was found by Martins et al. In an early work, Dyson and Holmes As shown elsewhere The increase in the yield strength by precipitation hardening (Δ The grain size strengthening can be estimated from the Hall–Petch type relationship between yield strength and grain size as follows: Then the contribution of the grain size can be estimated, and for the most refined grain size of 1.4 The contribution of different strengthening mechanisms to the overall yield strength The strengthening mechanisms of the studied steels after the heat treatment at 900 It is obvious that Nb alloying increases the yield strength by decreasing the grain size and by precipitation strengthening. Furthermore, as seen from the strength values in This study investigates the reversion of strain-induced martensite (α'-martensite) to austenite in 60% cold-rolled metastable low-Ni Cr–Mn 204Cu type austenitic stainless steels with Nb contents in the range 0–0.45 Martensite to austenite reversion occurs rapidly at 700 At 700–800 A uniform austenite grain size in the range 1–2 The composite structure of reverted austenite grains and partially recrystallized austenite resulted in significantly enhanced strength with high uniform elongation. Precipitation hardening due to Nb alloying increased further the yield strength without reducing the uniform elongation. In spite of slightly higher α'-martensite fractions after the tensile tests, the Nb-alloyed steels showed lower strain hardening rates than those of the Nb-free steel. This work has been carried out within project SP1 of the “Light and Efficient Solutions” (LIGHT) program of the Finnish Metals and Engineering Competence Cluster (FIMECC Ltd). We are grateful for funding from the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (