Two different sensors were prepared with and without an oxidized tin black filter, and then the effect of the filter on detecting the properties of hydrocarbon gases was investigated. The oxidized tin black filter was prepared by Sn thermal evaporation in a low vacuum, Ar atmosphere of 0.6Torr. Thereafter, the tin black film was oxidized at an operating temperature of 600°C to maximize the chemical filtering effect. The SnO2 sensing layer under the filter was prepared by the thermal oxidation of metallic tin film with a 2000Å thickness. Morphologically, the oxidized tin black filter exhibited a high porous and foam structure. The addition of a filter to the tin oxide sensing layer had a positive effect on the selectivity towards CH4 in comparison with iso-C4H10 and C3H8.SnO Filtering is generally classified into two categories Commonly, a black film, such as gold black, is used for detecting infrared light, as the film is very porous Accordingly, an attempt was made to fabricate a chemical filter from tin black film due to its extensive surface area. We also presume that the filter layer dominantly performs the chemical filtering for hydrogen gases due to the different reaction trends between the filter and these gas species. As such, the chemical filtering properties of an oxidized tin black film on hydrocarbon gases, such as CH Two sensors were fabricated on an Al The preparation conditions for the filter were as follows: tin black film can be fabricated at a chamber pressure between 0.1 and 2 The sensor dimensions were The microstructure structures were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, model: Hitachi S-4200), XRD (model: Philips X’Pert-APD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Model H-7100, Hitachi).    The gap between the initial resistances of the two sensors at room temperature was much larger than the gap at a high operating temperature of 450  The sensor with the filter has two sensing layers in parallel. The resistance of each layer will change as a chemical reaction takes place in the sensing layers. But, total resistance of the sensor depends on variation of the SnO The tin oxide sensor with filter has quite different sensing characteristics to the tested gases as compared to the conventional tin oxide sensor without a filter. For A tin oxide sensor with the oxidized tin black filter was fabricated and the gas sensing characteristics were investigated on CH This work was supported by the National Research Lab from Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.