In this study, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was used to analyze the elements on the surface of subbituminous coal, and reverse flotation was introduced to float subbituminous coal. The effect of ultra-fine coal on the flotation behavior of silica in coal reverse flotation was discussed by comparing the flotation performance with two different artificial mixed flotation feedings, with ultra-fine coal (UFC, −45 μm) or without ultra-fine coal. The comparison results showed that the existence of UFC reduced the flotation rate and the recovery of silica, as well as the separation efficiency of subbituminous coal reverse flotation. Compared to the flotation performance of feeding with UFC, the concentrate ash content of feeding without UFC was lower (9.18%), and the separation efficiency was higher (68.69%). Total Organic Carbon Analyzer was used to test the adsorption quantity of collector by coal and silica to explain the mechanism. Conclusions were obtained that ultra-fine coal particles could adsorb more collector due to their larger specific surface area, leading to less collector left in the pulp to float silica particles. Selective flocculation reverse flotation method could increase the separation efficiency of coal reverse flotation with appropriate dosage flocculant.Flotation is a common method to separate fine minerals. Coal has natural hydrophobicity. Conventional flotation could separate coal and gangue minerals efficiently by using kerosene or diesel as collector to increase the hydrophobicity of coal. The hydrophobic coal particles are scraped out as froth product while hydrophilic gangue minerals stay in the pulp. However, some low rank coals, such as subbituminous coal, have poor hydrophobicity because of high water content and a lot of oxygen-containing functional groups on the surface, which makes it difficult to be separated using conventional flotation [ The flotation of fine or ultra-fine mineral is always a challenge in the area of mineral processing [ The coal sample in this research is subbituminous coal (Peabody Energy, US). Coal sample was crushed to minus 200 μm. The approximate analysis of subbituminous coal is: moisture 27.72%, ash content 8.81%, volatile component 46.62%, fixed carbon 16.85%, and sulphur content 0.72%. The particle size composition of subbituminous coal is shown in The collector for silica in subbituminous coal reverse flotation is compound cationic ammonium Lilaflot D817M (AKZO NOBEL). Dextrin (Fisher Scientific) is used as depressant for coal. The collector and depressant used in the test are 1% solution prepared with deionized water. Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC, Aladdin Bio Technology) was used as frother. The flocculant is non-ionic (Changshu Yiqing Environmental Protection Technology Co., Ltd.). The relative molecular weight of the flocculant is 10–12 × 10^6 and the electric density is lower than 5. Hexametaphosphate (chemically pure) was used as dispersant. The solution concentration of flocculant and dispersant used in the test are 0.05% and 1%, respectively. Tap water was used during the whole experimental process. X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS, Thermo, Escalab 250 × 1) was used to analyze the elements. The data processing (peak fitting) was performed with XPS Peakfit software. The binding energies were corrected by setting the C1s hydrocarbon ( Flotation cell used in the reverse flotation test is lab-used 0.5 L single flotation cell (RK/FD II). The pulp was in natural pH, and the inflating volume was open to the maximum. The flotation feeding was made up of 20 g coal and 8.5 g silica, and the pulp density was 57 g/L. The conditioning speed was 1850 rpm during the whole process. The slurry was initially conditioned for 3 min to ensure complete dispersion of the samples. The pH of the pulp before the addition of dextrin and amine ranged from 6.83 to 6.97. Then 2 kg/t depressant and 20 ppm frother were added with 3 min and 1 min conditioning, respectively. At last the air valve was opened as soon as 1 kg/t collector was added. The froth product was scrapped for 5 min. The products at different time points (20s, 40s, 80s, 120 s, 200 s) were also obtained. The concentrates (sink products) and tailings (froth products) were collected, dried, weighed and tested to calculate silica recovery rate and reverse flotation separation efficiency. The equations are as follows: Among which,  Selective flocculation-reverse flotation was also conducted in the 0.5 L flotation cell. The feeding is artificial mixture with 20 g subbituminous coal and 8.5 g fine silica. Pour the feeding pulp into flotation cell after being evenly stirred, and add water to 0.5 L. The flotation steps are as follows: the pulp was conditioned with a speed of 1890 r/min for 3 min initially, then 1 kg/t sodium hexametaphosphate and 1 kg/t dextrin were each conditioned in the slurry for 3 min. Next the rotate speed was decreased to 1000 r/min. Then moderate flocculating and 10 ppm MIBC were each conditioned for 5 min and 1 min. At last 1 kg/t Lilaflot D817M was added as collector when inflating, and the scrapping time was 5 min. The total organic carbon analyzer was used to test the content of element nitrogen in the solution before and after the adsorption of minerals to calculate the adsorption quantity of collector amine by silica. Dilute the 1% Lilaflot D817M solution to 10–400 mg/L. 20 ml dilution was put into the test tube to measure the content of total nitrogen. The linear relationship between the concentration of Lilaflot D817M and the content of total nitrogen was obtained and the curve could be taken as the standard curve. The adsorption steps are as follows: firstly, put 1 g subbituminous coal or silica into one 100 ml beaker and add deionized water to 80 ml. After sufficient stirring, a certain amount of 1% Lilaflot D817M was put in the beaker and the volume was set to 100 ml. Then put the beaker on the magnetic stirrer for 5 min to make the adsorption sufficient. When adsorption equilibrium achieved, pour the pulp solution into the pressure filter with low speed qualitative filter paper to get the filtrate. At last, take 20 ml filtrate into the test tube to measure the total nitrogen content using TOC instrument. Compare the result with the standard curve to get the adsorbing capacity by calculating the difference. According to some papers, C1s peak of the combination form is C  According to the first-order kinetics rate model [ Among which: The separation efficiency of subbituminous coal reverse flotation is shown in  During the adsorption process, subbituminous coal sample is the flotation feeding with UFC (the whole grade). The particle size of silica is the same with that in flotation feeding. The isoelectric point of silica is at about pH 2, and the surface of subbituminous coal is of electronegativity at neutral pH [ According to the adsorption result shown in  In the previous study, we know that the hydrophilcity of silica is very strong and the water drop spreads completely on silica surface within 1 s. After adsorbing Lilaflot D817M, the surface wettability of silica changes greatly. The result is shown in  The comparison result between selective flocculation-reverse flotation test result and reverse flotation result of feeding with UFC (dextrin 1 kg/t, collector 1 kg/t) is shown in Measure 1 g subbituminous coal (−74 μm) or silica (−56 μm) and put the sample into 100 ml beaker. After stiring thoroughly, add 400 g/t PAM to 100 ml. Put the beaker on the surface of the maganetic stirrer and condition 5 min. Take 1 ml floc and put it on the glass slide. Observe the floc morphology using polarizing microscope.    It is found that there are a lot of oxygen-functional groups on the surface of subbituminous coal through XPS test, which would affect its hydrophobicity. The adsorption quantity of subbituminous coal on ammonium salt is much higher than that of silica. Subbituminous coal could adsorb more ammonium salt because of larger specific surface area, which leads to the decrease of the ammonium salt concentration in the pulp and less silica recovery. The silica recovery, silica flotation rate constant, and separation efficiency of the feeding without UFC is 82.76%, 0.017, 68.69%, respectively, while that of feeding with UFC is only 73.02%, 0.011, 65.16%, respectively. The existence of ultra-fine subbituminous coal decreases the recovery of silica, silica flotation rate and separation efficiency of reverse flotation. Selective flocculation method could flocculate subbituminous coal particles and change the surface particle size, which would decrease the collector adsorption quantity in subbituminous coal reverse flotation. Appropriate flocculant dosage could increase the separation efficiency of reverse flotation. The work was supported by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2018QNA20)”. We also want to thank the support of A Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.