Unequivocal geological signatures of seismic slip are rare, exceptionally so in carbonate-hosted faults where carbonate minerals dissociate at temperatures lower than those required for producing a friction melt. This thermal dissociation leads to significant fault weakening by increased fluid pressure and/or nanoparticle lubrication, preventing further heating of the fault surface. Pseudotachylyte is therefore unlikely to form in carbonate-hosted faults, and other evidence for seismic slip must be identified.
                  We studied the lower Cambrian Naukluft Thrust which crops out in central Namibia. It contains a cataclastic dolomite fault rock, referred to as “gritty dolomite”, which we interpret as a signature of coseismic carbonate dissociation and subsequent fluid–rock interactions. The fault was active at ambient temperatures below 200°C.
                  “Gritty dolomite” contains: rounded, low aspect ratio dolomite clasts with a uniform Fe-rich dolomite coating, euhedral to subhedral magnetite, quartz, and K-feldspar in a fine-grained, massive to laminated carbonate matrix of particulate dolomite and crystalline calcite cement. The fault rock texture, combined with evidence of injectites of gritty dolomite into the wallrock, indicates the cataclasite deformed as a fluidized granular flow. At seismic slip velocities, frictional heating caused dissociation of dolomite to CO2 and Ca-, Fe- and Mg-oxides. This release of CO2 decreased the pH of the pore fluid in the fault, causing dissolution and rounding of dolomite clasts within an inertial grain flow, and precipitation of carbonate coatings and euhedral silicates and oxides during subsequent cooling and CO2 escape.
                  Examples of similar rocks having some, if not all of these characteristics have been described from other carbonate-hosted faults. The geological setting of the Naukluft Thrust is unique in spatial extent and quality of exposure, allowing us to eliminate alternative hypotheses for sources of CO2 to drive fluidization.Fault rock assemblages reflect the mechanical processes by which faults accommodate deformation. Particular fault rocks are therefore associated with particular fault slip styles. For example, earthquake slip can cause significant heating of fault rock ( Identification of carbonate fault rocks that have experienced mineral dissociation related to seismic slip will not only allow for identification of past earthquakes, but can also be used to infer co-seismic properties of carbonate faults. Carbonate dissociation is a significant weakening mechanism along carbonate-hosted faults. Breakdown of carbonate minerals creates sudden localised spikes in CO Textural and geochemical products of carbonate dissociation have been directly observed ( The Naukluft Thrust is the basal décollement of an exhumed foreland nappe complex, exposed in a klippe of the southern flank of the Damara Belt, central Namibia ( The Naukluft Thrust is nearly 100% exposed in the southern Naukluft Mountains ( Amongst the components of the Naukluft Thrust fault rock assemblage, the gritty dolomite is least well understood (e.g. The gritty dolomite forms a single layer of variable thickness ( The gritty dolomite is massive or contains laminae (only locally parallel to layer boundaries) defined by clast size sorting, weak alignment of long axes of clasts, and color variation in the fine-grained matrix ( The framework of the gritty dolomite is composed of mostly Overgrowth cements consisting of aggregates of Each individual clast in the gritty dolomite bears a The matrix of the gritty dolomite is composed of tiny rounded particles of dolomite and patchy interstitial calcite cement ( No evidence of crystal plastic deformation was observed in any mineral grains of the gritty dolomite. The gritty dolomite always crosscuts all mylonitic shear fabrics. Locally, fractures in an older gritty dolomite layer are infilled by injections of younger gritty dolomite, indicating that the granular layer was lithified between slip events. To interpret the processes responsible for formation of the gritty dolomite, we refer to two types of laboratory experiments: high-speed friction experiments on carbonate rocks and gouge ( The high-speed friction experiments show that at room temperature, low to moderate normal stress and slip velocities of about 1  The fault core layer we have described is on average 0.5–1.5 The main framework grains of the gritty dolomite (lithic fragments, monocrystalline dolomite, magnetite, K-feldspar and quartz) and the granular texture are unusual for a carbonate rock and distinct from both footwall and hanging wall rock. Both grain-supported and matrix-supported textures are common. The matrix is composed of rounded Monocrystalline dolomite is present as rhombic, euhedral crystals within lithic dolomicrite clasts ( These source crystals in the wall rock dolomite are dominantly euhedral, but the derivative clasts in the gritty dolomite are subrounded to rounded (  By comparison, we suggest rounded monocrystalline grains in the gritty dolomite achieved their shape during suspension in a Coarse euhedral magnetite crystals ( In The alternative model with an external supersaturated fluid is rejected because (1) there is no clear source for an Fe-saturated fluid, (2) no obvious cause for supersaturation of such a fluid in the inferred ambient conditions, and (3) no clear reason why a percolating, external fluid should lead to precipitation of scattered euhedral magnetites within the fault rock only, and not also in surrounding fracture systems, or localized along permeable fracture planes. The silicate cements and overgrowths in the gritty dolomite ( The solid products of carbonate dissociation (CaO, MgO and FeO) may not be stable at shallow crustal conditions over the c. 500 MY since the Naukluft Thrust was active. The fine-grained matrix of particulate dolomite is morphologically similar to the rolled nanoparticle aggregates observed in friction experiments ( Accretionary rounded grains ( These accretionary grains all have radially symmetric fine-grained mineral coatings, in non-foliated gouges. Multi-layered coatings, indicating multiple episodes of slip and accretion, were reported by Laminations, folding, and off-fault injections of gritty dolomite indicate that the gritty dolomite flowed as a granular material. “Fluidization” is commonly invoked in massive or laminated fault gouges with unsorted grains which are poorly or not aligned. However, “fluidization” is non-specific as to whether the grains are in contact with one another during flow (grain sliding dominated) or in the grain-inertial regime (transient grain collisions) ( The rounded morphology of monocrystalline dolomite grains indicates that they were not in contact with one another during inferred chemical wear by a suspending fluid. If they had been, we would expect selective etching on grain boundaries meeting fluid-filled pore space, resulting in increasingly tortuous grain boundaries (not seen: Fluidized granular flow in faults can be enhanced by the presence of a viscous pore fluid which transfers momentum and helps support grains (e.g. To create the observed textures, the gritty dolomite must have been sufficiently dilated that grains were not in consistent contact with one another during a period of chemical erosion, continuing through a period of chemical/mechanical accretion. This dilation is consistent with high fluid pressure and high grain velocity ( The background temperature along the fault (between slip events) must have been at or below the maximum temperature experienced by the wall rocks ( At these conditions, fast frictional heating during earthquake slip provides all the necessary mechanisms to explain each textural and mineralogical element of the gritty dolomite we have described. A schematic model is shown in The mineralogy compares favorably to the products of high-velocity slip experiments, but in these experiments, CO By comparison to other fluidized fault rock assemblages on other faults ( The fault rock described in this paper is relatively unusual, but the key textural features are common to other carbonate fault rocks. The Naukluft Thrust may be an ideal case where the juxtaposition of multiple features enabled us to develop a conceptual model of the process, which may be applied to other faults where some subset of these features is observed. As noted above, the gritty dolomite only occurs along the section of the Naukluft Thrust where dolomitized calc-mylonite forms the local footwall to the fault, although hanging wall lithology is quite variable ( This dolostone also contains iron, which formed magnetite after reaction. In the Tre Monti Fault, Italy, which is hosted in calcitic limestone, calcite-coated grains have been observed which are morphologically similar to the ones reported here, however, the core grains are not noticeably rounded ( The matrix textures we observe in the Naukluft Thrust ( We have described a unique fault rock assemblage of minerals and structures (“gritty dolomite”), which we interpret as diagnostic of CO Thanks to Nils R. Backeberg, Lynise Esterhuizen, Carly Faber, and Fernando Y. G. Sylvester, for assistance, helpful conversations and braai in the field, and to Steve Smith for helpful discussions. We particularly appreciate the very thoughtful and thorough comments from John Kaszuba and the contributions from the editor and an anonymous reviewer. We thank Parks Namibia for sampling permissions and hospitality. Funding from the