Good mechanical resistance and seal. Consistent cake density Fine particle retention. Resistance to pin holding 7 6 Low moisture content consistent with throughput. Good cake discharge  In the form of woollen felts, non-wovens can claim to be the oldest form of textile fabric, and for many centuries represented the only alternative process to weaving, by the combined action of moisture and heat on carded wool fibres. This simple scenario has been radically changed during the last half-century by the development of a continually expanding variety of manufacturing techniques and novel products, based on a similarly continually expanding array of raw materials. The first significant step recorded in this development process was the production of a few thousand metres of adhesive-bonded fibre webs in the USA in 1942 As these techniques and processes were evolving during the 1960s, there was a considerable amount of international debate over describing them all as ‘non-woven fabrics’. In fact, in his book Krcma's own definition of the term is all-embracing: ‘non-woven fabrics are textile fabrics made of a fibrous layer, which may be a carded web, a fibre web, or any system of randomly laid or orientated fibres or threads, possibly combined with textile or non-textile materials such as conventional [woven] fabrics, plastic films, foam layers, metal foils, etc.. and forming with them a mechanically bound or chemically bonded textile product.’ That definition includes paper as a non-woven fabric, which is a usage foreign to the filtration application. Paper is. of course, frequently made, or at least dried on a non-woven belt, but it is covered separately in this Handbook ( A non-woven fabric, then, is one that is made up from an agglomeration of fibres, and sometimes of continuous filaments, which are held together by some form of bonding, to create a more or less flexible sheet of fabric. This will be as wide as the bed upon which the non-woven material is laid down, and as long as the receiving rolls can accept. In their bulk, as-made, format non-wovens are sometimes referred to as ‘roll goods’ (as are woven fabrics as they leave the loom), as opposed to piece goods, which might refer to the individual pieces of filter media cut from the roll, prior to their being fitted into or onto a filter. The chemical properties of a non-woven fabric are dictated almost entirely by the nature of the basic fibre – unless there is a binding adhesive of significantly different properties (such as melting or softening temperature). Accordingly, the chemical properties of non-wovens can be obtained from the same tables of such properties that were given at the start of There is a steadily increasing range of non-woven fabrics, as manufacturers develop new processes for their production. Nevertheless, it is possible to define two broad classifications of such materials, into which almost all non-woven fabrics will fall, and which can then be used as headings for subsequent description. These two classes are. to a large extent, divided by the means utilized to hold the loose fibres together: felts, which use the basic characteristics of the fibre to provide mechanical integrity, or which use mechanical processing to create a fabric; and bonded fabrics, which use some additional adhesive material to hold the fibres together, or, more commonly, rely upon the thermoplastic nature of the polymer to provide adhesion.  It should be realized that non-woven fabrics are used in many other fields of industry and commerce besides filtration, and that they are therefore a very important part of the industrial scene. Two major (and related) societies, INDA In its brochure for its ‘Index ‘99’ exhibition. EDANA stated that: ‘Non-wovens represent 90% of all filter media used in dry and liquid filtration.’ Even if paper media are included in the total, this is a high figure, but nevertheless it does indicate the importance of non-wovens to the filter media marketplace. Some fibres, wool especially, have the ability to cling together to form a coherent mass. Most others can be made to adhere by suitable processing. The first step in any felt making process is the unloading of the bulk fibre into a carding machine, where the fibres are drawn out into a thin web, which has its fibre content roughly aligned in one direction. Pieces of such web can then be placed one above the other to provide a felt of the required thickness. The successive layers can all be aligned with the fibres all lying in the same direction, or in different directions to give equal directional strengths. When sufficient thickness has been achieved, the felt is compressed and heated, often after dampening, to produce its final structure. The distinctive characteristic of felt is that it comprises a mass of individual fibres, which are compacted and locked together to form a cohesive structure. Early civilizations learnt how to felt wool by means of heat and moisture, so as to produce cohesion through the localized breakdown of the complex structure of these natural fibres. Although this process is not applicable to the wide variety of modern synthetic fibres and filaments, they can nonetheless be felted, either by bonding with an adhesive (as discussed in For some, undemanding, applications, a simple felt can provide suitable performance, without any form of strengthening. However, their low tensile strengths, and the ease with which fibres can become detached from the felt and enter a downstream flow, make simple felts unattractive for most filtration purposes, and some mechanical (or chemical) strengthening is required. Needle punching is by no means a new technique, since it originated in the 1880s with natural fibres, but it is only since about the early 1970s that it has come into prominence because of its applicability to many synthetic fibres. The With perhaps 100 or more needle penetrations per square centimetre, the effect is to entangle the fibres and to reduce the thickness of the web substantially, to a degree that is controlled as desired. Punching may be on both sides of the web instead of just the one, as in Before needling, the web of loose fibres is prepared with great care, using the traditional carding methods of the textile industry; several layers of carded fibre are stacked on top of one another, according to the desired thickness and density of the final needlefelt. Carding aligns the fibres along the length of the machine, so that a stack of layers in parallel produces a felt that is far stronger in the machine direction then transversely. Cross laying of alternate layers can eliminate this directional difference, or even reverse it, depending on the angle between consecutive layers. Most felts are mechanically strengthened by needling, but an alternative, and more specialized, technique employs a set of high-pressure water jets to fix the fibres in place – a technique known as hydroentanglement. The relatively low tensile strength of a plain felt is significantly improved by needling. Even greater strength can be achieved by forming the needlefelt around an inner scrim, which is a single layer of very open woven mesh, as in The shape of the cross-section of the fibre is a significant factor in determining the strength of a needlefelt. This has accordingly received considerable attention from manufacturers seeking to meet the demanding conditions imposed on their The fineness of the fibres in a needlefelt has a significant impact on filtration efficiency, notably in respect of the concentration of particles in the exhaust from bag house fabric filters. A paper by Dilger In many ways, needlefelts would appear to be ideal for filtration, combining the possibility of greater flexibility and versatility in construction, including the ability to produce asymmetric forms, by exploiting variations of fibre diameter and shape, plus the final felt density. Thereby it should be possible to achieve a far more uniformly open surface and controlled in-depth structure than with woven fabrics. On both of these counts, however, the reality falls short of the ideal, but still provides a rich source of media of great industrial value, especially in dry filtration for the collection of dusts. The possibility of optimizing construction of a needlefelt to suit a particular application is, in practice, limited by the practical realities of the textile industry, with its commitments to fields other than filtration. Two factors must be borne in mind: first, felt manufacturers are generally dependent on outside suppliers for the fibres they require, and can only buy grades that the suppliers find it economic to produce on the large scale implicit in their own manufacturing processes; secondly, felting itself is also essentially a large-scale operation, and is therefore inevitably geared to large markets.  For much of the last 30 years, needlefelts have been the dominant material for filter media, especially for gas cleaning. However, they are now steadily being replaced by the thermally bonded spun polymeric media, discussed in Initial enthusiasm for the seemingly endless potential of these then new types of filter media in the early 1970s stimulated Wrotnowski The finishing processes applied to needlefelts are much the same as for woven fabrics, as discussed in The coating of needlefelt fabric surfaces is a little more complex, and sometimes it is difficult to draw the line between coated fabrics and the bonded media discussed in Simple surface coatings include the Ravlex material described in Webron, for example, supplies its Microweb 2000 and Microweb II media as PTFE and acrylic coatings, respectively, on a polyester needlefelt (at 2.1 m wide), with relatively high permeabilities. The company also supplies Supaweb chemical treatments, which can be applied to felts of most synthetic materials, and which are thermally bonded to the basic material. Each treatment conveys a particular additional property upon the felt: Supaweb DR improves cake release behaviour: Supaweb WR repels water and improves release of hygroscopic dusts;  Supaweb CR greatly improves resistance to chemical attack; Supaweb FR resists the effects of incandescent particle carry over. The corresponding treatment processes employed by Fratelli Testori, a long-established maker of filtration fabrics, include: Novates, a coating of polyurethane on polyester or acrylic felts, which is hydrophobic and oleophobic; it resembles a membrane, although the finished pore size is only stated as ‘below 15 μm’; Mantes, a chemical treatment of the felt with a resin containing PTFE, for application to acrylics, and high-temperature fibres such as aramid, polyimide and sulfar (PPS), giving good chemical resistance; Kleentes, which involves steeping the fabric in a chemical solution containing PTFE and fluoride resins at high concentrations, following which the fabric is dried and heated to fix the fluorides on the fibres; used Rhytes, which is made in a similar fashion to Kleentes but is applied to higher temperature fibres, to improve the high-temperature performance, and reduce chemical attack. Madison has also developed an abrasion-resistant coating in its Tuf-tex coatings for polypropylene, nylon and PET substrates (woven as well as non-woven). These are thermosetting resins sprayed or knifed onto the surface, giving not only abrasion resistance, but also improved dimensional stability. The type and range of needlefelt fabrics available are well illustrated by the data of Two significant recent introductions by Andrew Textile concern scrims and microfibres. The use of a scrim in needlefelt has been traditional in Europe, but it has been less common in the USA. Andrew introduced its Fibre-Locked felts to Europe, to overcome the problems of the weakening of a scrim in the needling process. This material has lower tensile strengths than those of scrim supported felts, but the general filtration performance is better. Consequent upon the availability of finer, so-called ‘microdenier’ fibres, Andrew has also introduced its Micro-felt, made 100% from fibres of less than 10 μm in effective diameter. This material is able to achieve much finer degrees of filtration, with mean pore sizes of 12 to 25 μm (from fibres of 0.5 to 2.25 denier).  The filtration of solids from fluids can create electrostatic effects, or can benefit from the existence of electrostatic charges on the filtration media. Especially in the case of the filtration of dusts, the presence or absence of such charges can make a great difference to the filtration performance. Many particles in fluid suspension carry a small electric charge, and so will be more effectively removed from suspension if the filter medium carries an opposite charge. This effect is utilized in the media known as ‘electrets’, and the phenomenon of ‘zeta potential’. The effects are covered in detail in A well-known problem in applying needlefelts to dust filtration is the hazard that can arise from the build-up of electrostatic charges on the filter surface. To guard against this, the system must be well earthed, which is only possible if the fabric of the filter bags has a sufficiently high electrical conductivity. By contrast with this requirement, the synthetic polymers from which needlefelts are made have a high electrical resistance, and are therefore very susceptible to becoming highly charged with static electricity. The solution to this difficulty is to increase the conductivity of the fabric, either by chemical treatment, so that the polymeric fibres become coated with metal salts, or by incorporating into its structure a small quantity of other fibres that are themselves highly conductive. It is worth emphasizing the importance of ensuring that, in use, filter bags of anti-static cloth are properly earthed; if they Chemical treatment has the disadvantage that it is not durable, since the coating is likely to abrade and disintegrate in use, especially if filter bags are occasionally laundered. By contrast, the inclusion of conductive fibres provides permanent protection. Examples of conductive fibres are DuPont's Epitropic and Bekaert's Bekinox. The latter are of a special grade of stainless steel that is of extremely high purity, so as to avoid the risk of inclusions within the very fine 6.5, 8, 12 or 22 μm diameter fibres. Epitropic fibres are primarily polyester, with an outer sheath of polyester isophthalate copolymer, which is impregnated with particles of carbon black, as illustrated in An alternative approach is to make the scrim conductive as well as having stainless steel fibres among those of the felt. This feature is exemplified by Andrew Textile's conductive felts, listed in The fibres in felted media or needlefelts are held together by the natural interlocking of the staple fibre, or by the additional entangling of needling or hydroentanglement, coupled with a small effect of temperature at the points of contact of the fibres. Another group of non-woven materials achieve their Historically the first of the bonded materials to come into use, the By far the greater amount of bonded material is made by  Less frequently, the opened fibre is transported and dispersed pneumatically by If the fibres are of suitable material, the web may be heat-sealed by means of hot rolls. If not, then the web may be treated with a binding resin, either by spraying onto one or both sides of the web, or by immersion in a bath of the resin, before it is finally dried and cured. The web of fibre, mixed with bonding agent, can be laid down on a cylindrical former, to produce a cartridge element, as described in If the web of fibre is of a thermoplastic polymer, and is not too thick, then the fibres can be bonded by passing the felt between pairs of heated rolls, which have a dimpled surface, with raised areas opposite one another, to compress the fibres and heat them in localized spots across the width of the roll. Freudenberg, one of the world's largest makers of non-wovens for filtration, has a set of such ‘point-sealed’ media, shown in Probably the most exciting developments in non-woven media have come from a series of combined extrusion and layering processes that exploit the Since the late 1960s, these novel manufacturing processes have developed rapidly, to give the resulting materials this commanding position in the filter media business. The development has been so rapid that a standard set of terms has not yet been agreed on an industry-wide basis – some refer to all such materials as ‘spunbonded’, others differentiate between spunbonded and ‘meltblown’, while terms such as ‘melt spun’ and ‘flash spun’ are also used. The earliest such processes were those first called melt spinning, now generally known as spun bonding, and which remain important to the present day. They produced relatively coarse filaments, while the newer developments, such as melt blowing, have enabled the production of much finer fibres. The key feature of these processes is that a molten polymer is extruded through a series of holes in a spinneret, and the resultant filaments are laid down in various ways on a moving belt running under the spinnerets. The final bonding of the filaments or fibres is achieved by various combinations of heat, pressure and chemical activation, although the thermoplastic nature of the polymer is the prime structural feature. It is this integral production of filament or fibre followed immediately by its laying down as the medium that distinguishes the spun media from the felts – which are made, usually, from bundles of fibre bought in from a separate supplier. Thus, diverging from the usage of the first edition of this Handbook, where all of these materials were classed under the general heading of spunbonded media, they are here classed as dry-laid spun media. The essential difference between spunbonded and meltblown materials is recognized and described in the following notes. The differences between the two main classes of dry-laid spun material are significant in terms of filtration behaviour, but both are available with the same In the production of spunbonded media, conventional synthetic fibre technology is used to extrude molten polymer through the orifices of a set of spinning heads or spinnerets, mounted above, and across the width of, a moving screen belt. This produces a multiplicity of continuous filaments, which are first quenched by a cross flow of air, and then drawn downwards by concurrent air streams, through an aspirator jet. The spinnerets oscillate from side to side, and the result is that the filaments, kept apart by electrostatic charges, are randomly laid down on the belt (which has a suction box underneath it). The fineness of the filaments depends directly upon the size of the capillary nozzles in the spinnerets, and is therefore relatively coarse. Spunbonded media are therefore not capable of very fine degrees of filtration, but are relatively strong in mechanical terms. The continuous roll of spunbonded material is finally consolidated to the required performance specification, usually by some form of calendering. The majority of spunbonded materials are made from polypropylene and polyester melts. The name Reemay was originally the registered trademark of Du Pont for the company's spunbonded polyester material. The name lives on, now within the BBA Nonwovens Group, which provides an extensive range of spunbonded media, all produced in the manner described above. The range includes the Reemay polyester media, as well as the polypropylene Tekton media (known as Typar within North and South America), and other polyester media such as Synergex, Typelle and QualiFlo.  Another extension of the spunbonding process is to add a needle punching stage. BBA's Typelle has a polyester web formed by spunbonding, which is then partially consolidated in the normal way for spunbonds, prior to being needle punched. Data for Typelle are given in Melt blowing was reported by Meyer  Meltblown fibres have a relatively high surface area per unit weight (1 m The production of materials by extrusion of polymeric filaments has been taken a stage further by Du Pont in its flash spinning process to produce Tyvek high-density polyethylene sheet products. Like the other spinning processes, flash spinning involves extrusion through a spinneret; but whereas pure molten polymer is extruded in the other processes, with flash spinning the extrudate is a partially separated two-phase mixture of pure solvent droplets and a highly saturated polymer/solvent mixture. The decompression across the spinneret capillaries induces flash evaporation and the formation of fibrils; voids are created within the fibrils as ruptures are caused by expanding globules of solvent vapour. The fibril webs are collected on a moving belt, and are then subjected to a combination of heat and pressure to promote self-bonding. This forms sheets of continuous strands of very fine interconnected fibres, with very high specific surface areas (30 m  A material being developed Other forms of extruded polymer are used in filtration in the form in which they are made. There are several suppliers of extruded plastic mesh materials, all deriving from the original Netlon patents, which could be formed into non-woven media. However, the process is mainly used for single layers of mesh, and accordingly is discussed in detail in Non-wovens of all types are used frequently as part of a composite material, with the various component layers chosen to give the right combination of filtration properties and material strength characteristics. Special composites have been developed within the range of spun media. One of these is what is now known as SMS, namely a triple-layered material There are two contrasting styles of laminated structure, depending on whether the filter medium is intended to function by depth filtration or by surface filtration. With depth filtration, the medium should be graded so as to increase in fineness in the direction of flow. The upper, coarser layers will act as a pre-filter, in which the larger particles are retained, with the smaller particles then being trapped subsequently in the finer layers. This will maximize the dirt-holding capacity per unit area of medium, and hence its life before it is discarded. Typical of this type of laminated medium is BBA's range of spunbonded composite material called Synergex. formed from several layers of polyester filaments. Some typical data are given in By definition, surface filtration ideally involves the collection of all particles on the surface, or upstream face, of the medium, with none passing into its depth; thereby the efficiency of the medium is totally dependent on the pores in this surface being sufficiently small for the required purpose. Surface filtration has, of However, the modern emphasis on extremely high-efficiency removal of very fine particles has led to the demand for very finely porous surface layers, and this demand has been met by the lamination of a membrane on to a suitably robust substrate. Non-woven materials have proved to be very suitable as substrates, especially for the support of PTFE membranes. Depending upon the intended application, substrates range from lightweight spunbonded polypropylene or polyester, to substantial fabrics such as thick needlefelts. These materials, which are effectively membranes as far as filtration is concerned, are more fully discussed in In the same way that woven media can be made with combined filtration and chemical treatment behaviour, combination media exist in the non-woven field as well. Typical of these are BBA's Qualiflo media, made from polyester fibres, which are resin bonded. Qualiflo are thick media, internally graded to provide efficient filtration (99% against 2–3 μm particles) and high dust-holding capacity (658 g/m A wealth of information exists to guide the prospective user of a fabric, woven or non-woven, as a filtration medium. Most suppliers of filter media issue such guidance, but completely independent advice is not so easily come by. The notes here are intended to give as balanced a view as possible. (Since much of the data is fibre material dependent, the following notes relate as much to woven media as to non-woven.) The three main parameters in the choice of a medium are: filtration performance, mechanical performance and cost. As far as cost is concerned, the rough figures of In terms of application, and in the broadest possible terms, woven media are used for liquid filtration, and non-woven media for gas filtration – but there are almost as many exceptions to this general rule as there are agreements. It is perhaps more correct to say that non-wovens have successfully displaced wovens from a large number of gas cleaning applications, but have been less successful in displacement in liquid filtration (although the membrane has taken a large share of the market here). One reason for this is that all the mechanically complicated filter equipment (such a belt or a tower press) are used for liquid filtration, and these need the strength in their belts that only woven fabrics can provide.  The following tables are intended only as a preliminary selection guide. They are based primarily on the experience and product range of P & S Filtration, now part of Madison Filter Group. The tables consider only woven fabrics and needlefelts, with one pair of tables summarizing information in respect of liquid filters, and a second pair similarly devoted to dust filters, but, in the latter case, supplemented by a table relating the recommended fabric weight to the vigour of the cleaning method. A total of 16 different groups of fabrics are identified in Understandably, heavier needlefelt fabrics are advisable for use with the more intensive methods of cleaning. The type of filter, and especially the mode of cleaning, broadly determine the type of fabric that is appropriate. Bergmann The chemical and physical properties of the fabric are also of crucial importance, as described in A total of 18 groups of fabric are identified in 