Metal–N–H systems have recently attracted considerable attention as alternative hydrogen storage materials to traditional metal hydrides. In this work, the reactions of the mixture LiNH2–MgH2 (1:1) during different mechanical milling processes and the subsequent dehydrogenation reaction were investigated by using TGA, XRD and FT-IR in order to determine an optimal condition for the formation of pure LiMgN. High-energy milling (SPEX mill) and low-energy milling (rolling jar) techniques were used in this work. The results demonstrated that monolithic LiMgN can be produced using the low-energy ball milling technique. The hydrogenation properties of the as-prepared LiMgN were investigated by a Sieverts’ type instrument. In contrast, multiple reactions including the metathesis reaction between LiNH2 and MgH2 and release of H2 and/or NH3 took place during high-energy milling using the SPEX mill, which resulted in complicated and unexpected reactions during the subsequent dehydrogenation experiments. Consequently, the dehydrogenated products from the high-energy milled samples consisted of multi-phase mixtures.In an effort to develop a reversible hydrogen storage material for vehicular applications, researchers are investigating various metal hydrides/catalysts combinations. Metal–N–H systems More recently, Alapati et al. Experimentally, Liu et al. The above theoretical and experimental findings clearly show that the reactions between LiNH In general, contact or collision between reactant molecules is a necessary condition for a chemical reaction to take place. In the case of solid–solid reactions, such as the reaction studied in the present work, it is especially challenging to bring the reactants together at a molecular level. Ball milling is one of the most effective methods for enabling solid–solid contact. In particular, solid reactants, usually crystalline, may become amorphous which would facilitate reactions during ball milling. During milling, high pressures on the order of GPa are generated on solid particles as the result of high-energy collisions between milling balls, which could initiate not only the primary reactions but also the side reactions. On the other hand, a ball milling process can also be controlled such that the energy of collisions are sufficient for mixing the powders uniformly, but limited to avoid any excessive side reactions that may take place during milling. The present work investigates the effects of two different types of mechanical ball milling techniques on the reaction between LiNH The starting materials, lithium amide (LiNH Reactant mixtures were prepared using two different ball milling techniques, i.e. the jar-roll mill (low energy; 120 Thermal gas desorption properties of the milled samples were determined using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) (Shimadzu TGA50) heated to 300 The identification of reactants and reaction products in the mixture before and after the thermogravimetric analysis was carried out using a Siemens D5000 model X-ray diffractometer with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation ( FT-IR spectra were collected using a Bio-Rad spectrometer (FTS-6000) via diffuse reflection of the IR through a loosely packed sample. The FT-IR samples were prepared in an argon-filled glove box by grinding a small amount of the sample with fully dried potassium bromide (KBr) powder in an agate mortar and pestle. The ground sample was then transferred and loosely packed into a custom holder, which is approximately 7 The hydrogenation of dehydrogenated samples was evaluated by using a commercial Sieverts’ type apparatus (PCTPro-2000). About 1.5 In order to determine the optimized condition for the formation of monolithic LiMgN from the mixture of LiNH To investigate possible reactions during the milling processes, X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) were carried out on the samples after ball milling. Although LiNH   The results are more complicated when a high-energy ball milling technique (SPEX mill) is used. To understand the chemical reactions that occurred during the high-energy ball milling process, solid residues at different milling stages were collected for XRD and FT-IR analysis. However, the characteristic N–H vibrations of LiNH The above results indicates that high-energy ball milling induces the exchange of the NH Subsequently, the newly formed Mg(NH As can be seen, reactions  On the basis of the above results and discussions, the reactions and changes during high-energy ball milling (SPEX mill) of the LiNH Due to the multi-step reactions during the high-energy ball milling and subsequent dehydrogenation process, the dehydrogenated samples are expected to be mixtures of various phases. An isothermal hydrogenation experiment using a PCT apparatus was performed on the dehydrogenated sample JR-96 to verify the ability of LiMgN for hydrogenation, as shown in It is concluded based on the results of this study that ball milling technique and conditions have critical effects on the dehydrogenation products from a mixture of LiNH The authors wish to thank Dr. Jan Miller and Dr. X. Wang for their assistance with FT-IR analysis. This research was supported by the