Chalcopyrite Cu (In, Ga) Se2 (CIGSe2) thin film solar cells have emerged as a popular absorber material among thin film technologies, leading with photoconversion efficiency more than 22% on lab scale already being reported. Solution processed absorber ink using non-vacuum route found to be cost effective and for scalable approach of CIGSe2 thin film solar cells. In this context, Inkjet printing emerges as a feasible technique for manufacturing CIGSe2 thin film solar cells. Here, inkjet printing of aqueous precursor ink to successfully make high-quality CIGSe2 absorber layer with controlled thickness and morphology is being presented. Precursor ink in aqueous medium and ink jetting parameters were optimized to obtain stable drop formation, essential for high-quality precursor film. The parameters that are found to strongly influence the formation of quality precursor CIG film were drop spacing and pretreatment temperature, discussed in detail. The effects of ink properties and printing parameters were investigated through rheological studies and optical microscopy; results suggested that uniform coverage of precursor CIG film can be achieved using a drop spacing of 175 µm and pretreatment temperature of 150 °C. A single phase highly crystalline chalcopyrite CIGSe2 thin film with dense morphology was obtained using atmospheric pressure selenization process. Semiconducting properties of film was studied by Mott-Schottky analysis. The photovoltaic performance of CIGSe2 film solar cell device fabricated using non-vacuum inkjet route demonstrated 4.0% photoconversion efficiency on active device area of 4 × 4 mm2.Chalcopyrite Cu (In, Ga) Se Copper (II) nitrate hydrate, Indium (III) nitrate hydrate and Gallium (III) nitrate hydrate were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and were mixed thoroughly in a Cu/(In + Ga) ratio of 0.95 and Ga/(In + Ga) ratio of 0.21 in 10 ml of deionized (DI) water. Later, 2 ml of anhydrous polyethylene glycol (PEG-300, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) was added drop-wise to the mixture solution; the final mixture was ultrasonicated for about 10 min to make homogenous ink. To ascertain the suitability of precursor ink for ink jet printing, the concentration of PEG was varied from 1 ml to 10 ml in the formulated ink to adjust the rheological properties while keeping other contents constant for all the inks used in present work. A high resolution piezoelectric based drop on demand (DOD) Ceraprinter, (X Series, Make: Ceradrop) was used for printing all formulated inks. The printer is mounted with a CCD (Charge coupled devices) camera to monitor drop to drop variation with individual nozzle and also to determine droplet characteristics. These droplets were ejected through print head (Dimatix, USA) which consist of 256 nozzles having individual pore diameter of 21.5 µm. The diameter of individual droplets ejecting from nozzle can be tailored by adjusting the applied voltage and pulse parameters. In this work, droplet volume of 30 pL and pulse voltage between 80 and 90 V was used for printing. Before filling the ink into the ink chamber, it was filtered with 0.5 µm filter to avoid undesirable larger particulates and solid impurities. Later, priming of the print head was performed to remove the air bubbles from the ink chamber and the tubes carrying ink. Prior to the printing process, the pulse parameters (voltage and time) applied to the print head was adjusted for the CIG precursor ink to generate satellites free droplet. The droplet characteristics such as volume, diameter, and velocity of a droplet and ejection deviation from z-axis were optimized and adjusted to get the desired droplet. Starting from droplet formation to ejection of the droplet was captured by inbuilt charge coupled device (CCD) camera equipped with the system. An area of 15 mm × 20 mm was selected to print CIG precursor ink on Molybdenum coated soda lime glass (SLG) substrate using optimized jetting parameters. A homemade sputtered Mo coating on SLG substrate was used in this work; the details of Mo coating on SLG by DC sputtering could be referred from our earlier reports. ( Rapid Thermal Process (RTP) system (Make: Qualflow-Therm, France) was used for the selenization of the inkjet printed CIG precursor film. The precursor film was selenized in a closed graphite box under selenium rich atmosphere with continuous nitrogen purge, prior to selenization; the RTP chamber wherein the graphite box was kept was pumped and purged three times with nitrogen gas to reduce the oxygen content. Two step selenization profiles at a temperature of 250 °C for 10 min and 550 °C for 14 min was chosen for CIGSe The rheological properties of the different formulated inks were measured at room temperature using Rheometer with the shear rate of 1000 S Structure and phases of all the prepared CIGSe A schematic of complete process sequence for CIGSe The jettability of ink for the ink jet printing is primarily determined by suitable ink formulation, several properties such as density, viscosity, surface tension, stability, pH and ionic conductivity are crucial in determining the jetting behavior of ink. The inverse of Ohnesorge number, Z (1/ TGA of the formulated ink was done in argon atmosphere as can be seen in A jettability of formulated precursor ink with pre-determined precursor ratio, PEG, and other content was tested and analyzed by drop analyzer. Fine adjustment of pulse parameters using a variation of voltage and time allows influencing the ejection of ink at all stages of drop formation process. Three different time zones were adjusted to eject the droplet at fixed voltage and frequency, scheme presented in For solar cell application, to have good interface and better p-n junction, smoothness of precursor film is highly desirable to realize high uniformity in final CIGSe It is well known fact that uniformity of final absorber film mostly dependent on the physical nature of the precursor film which is expected to affect by the pretreatment temperature of the film. In this work, required precursor film thickness was obtained using sequential printing of multiple layers, thus, pretreatment of individual precursor layer in the sequential printing is a crucial in order to avoid coffee ring effect. Moreover, it is already reported that before the post-treatment of the film, pre-treatment decides the morphology of the precursor film to large extent ( A precursor film with five simultaneously printed and pre-treated layers was further used for selenization in order to achieve the minimum desired thickness. A two-step temperature profile with a heating rate of 10 °C/s was used for the selenization in a rapid thermal processing furnace. Compositional analysis data of CIG precursor film and the post selenized film is briefed in The surface and cross-sectional FESEM images of the CIGSe In order to assure p-type semiconducting behavior of the film, Mott-Schottky study was carried out using the following relation. In which, the symbols C,  The solar cell device was fabricated by coating of CdS buffer layer, and i-ZnO/Al:ZnO as a windows layer on top of CIGSe In summary, we explored the inkjet printing technique as an efficient method to prepare CIGSe Acknowledge the funding from