Paraffin wax exhibits a volumetric expansion of ∼15%, at around its melting point. By exploiting this phenomenon, high performance bulk-machined electrothermal hydraulic microactuators have been demonstrated. The microactuators have been integrated into microfluidic valves, microgrippers and micropipettes. The paraffin wax is confined within a bulk-micromachined silicon container. This container is sealed using an elastic diaphragm of PDMS, while it is heated via gold microheaters located on an underlying glass substrate. All the layers used to make up the containers are bonded together using a unique combination of overglaze paste and PDMS. The hydraulic pressure of expanding paraffin wax was determined using the deflection theory of a circular plate. For the first time, the hydraulic pressure of expanding paraffin wax was calculated using the theory of large deflections for a circular plate and measured data from the type-A microgripper. This theory has been exploited for the deflection analysis of micromachined thin elastic diaphragms. In order to calculate the hydraulic pressure, the theory of large deflections of a circular plate is calculated using the measured actuation height, the PDMS diaphragm dimension of the microgripper (type-A) and mechanical properties of the PDMS. The hydraulic pressure was calculated to be approximately 0.12MPa. All the devices were successfully demonstrated and operated at either 10 or 15V.With microactuators, various physical phenomena have been exploited. One of the most powerful forms of actuation is obtained by using phase change materials (PCMs). PCMs have the property of volumetric expansion when changing from solid to liquid (or liquid to gas) phases. This expansion can produce large hydraulic pressures that can be exploited to realise useful electrothermal microactuators, when compared to other types of microactuators as shown in As a PCM, paraffin wax is a suitable actuation material because when paraffin wax melts a volumetric expansion of ∼15% occurs, as illustrated in Unlike the surface-micromachining version This microactuator can be used directly as a microfluidic valve, since the structure of the device is relatively simple and a high integrity seal is inherent. The valve closes a microchannel, by means of expansion of the melting paraffin wax, and opens, by means of contraction of the solidifying paraffin wax. The microvalve unit consists of two microactuators, positioned in the two opposite outlet channels. The microgripper can also be driven using the paraffin wax microactuator. Two actuation modes are described here. The microgripper can be closed with the actuation from the outside to the inside of the gripper (type-A), or be opened with the microactuator operation from the inside to the outside (type-B). The last application is the micropipette, used for sampling small quantities of liquids. A liquid is drawn-in by creating a low pressure within the micropipette's chamber, and then the liquid is expelled by creating a high pressure within the chamber. The paraffin wax microactuators can generate the low and high pressures by the respective shrinkage and expansion of the paraffin wax. For the first time, this paper describes the design and fabrication of the paraffin wax microactuators and its new applications within microvalves, microgrippers (type-A and B) and micropipettes. In addition, the hydraulic expansion pressure of molten paraffin wax is calculated using the theory of large deflection. Under normal conditions, the PDMS diaphragm expands into a hemispherical shape when the microactuator is actuated. The height of the hemisphere defines the displacement of the microactuator. If the microactuator is required for a specific height of actuation, the diameter of the bottom circle of the hemisphere is determined by considering the entire size of the microactuator. The volume of the expanded paraffin wax can be calculated from the dimensions of the hemisphere. Using the expanded volume, the solid phase volumes for the paraffin wax and the container dimensions can be also calculated, since an expansion of 15% is expected. However, the expanded hemisphere is not a perfect hemisphere but a dome, as illustrated by the shaded area in With a silicon wafer (∼525 Microheaters can generate enough thermal energy, through Joules heating. The metal microheaters were realized by depositing gold (Au) tracks on a glass (Pyrex) substrate. Since glass has very low thermal conductivity, thermal loss by conduction through the substrate can be minimized. A high density microheater covers the entire underside of the container, having a thickness of 3000 At first, a 250 Each component of the microactuator was bonded using an overglaze paste and a room temperature curing PDMS. The two silicon layers were attached together using the overglaze paste (Dupont, QQ550), and then fired in a furnace at 550 The containers were filled with paraffin wax using on a hotplate heated to ∼50 The microchannel of the microvalve was fabricated using SU-8 2050. A 150 For the last step of the assembly process, the bulk-micromachined silicon microgrippers and micropipette chambers were bonded onto the fabricated microactuators using PDMS. With the micropipette, a glass plate covered the chamber and a glass tube (o.d./i.d.: 1/0.58 In order to measure and observe the driving performance, these devices were placed under an optical microscope and the control bias voltage was applied via dc probe needles. The microfluidic valve has a T-shape microchannel, consisting of one inlet and two outlets. The dimensions for the microchannel are: height, ∼150 Two types of microgripper have been fabricated. One that can grip by activating the microactuator is termed ‘type-A’, as shown in The height of the microgripper was measured at various dc bias voltages. With the type-A microgripper, the actuation height increased linearly with increasing voltage, as shown in Another microfluidic application is the micropipette, realized using four microactuators integrated within the main chamber of the micropipette. The maximum volume of fluid that can be drawn is by activating all four microactuators at the same time. The expanded microactuators expel the air inside the chamber by applying 10 The hydraulic pressure created by the expanding paraffin wax can be calculated using the measured deflection height, thickness and mechanical properties of the elastic diaphragm, according to the deflection theory for a circular plate. This theory is applied here, and for the first time, for the analysis of micromachined thin elastic diaphragms. There are two plate deflection theories: one is the small deflection theory, which deals with deflections of less than 25% of the diaphragm thickness; while the other is the large deflection theory, which is used for more than three times the deflection of the diaphragm thickness When a circular diaphragm with a clamped edge is uniformly pressed by a pressure The large deflection of the diaphragm under the same conditions shown in Using the measured deflection During melting, paraffin wax can generate large hydraulic forces by volumetric expansion. This hydraulic power has been exploited for the creation of a novel bulk-micromachined microactuator. To this end, we have demonstrated that this microactuator can be employed to realize a microfluidic valve, microgripper and micropipette. Each device has been assembled, using a novel material system that includes overglaze and PDMS, and successfully demonstrated. The microfluidic valve completely closed-off the DI water flow in the microchannel with a 15 The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. John P. Stagg for undertaking the DRIE and Dr. Munir M. Ahmad for his advice on materials.