Nano zero-valent iron (NZVI) was prepared using sonochemical leaching of the obtained powder from mechanochemical treatment of natural pyrite with metal powder of aluminum. At the first step, the Fe-Al2S3 compound was prepared via co-milling of natural pyrite and aluminumin a planetary ball mill. At second step, the aluminum sulfide was separated from the Fe-Al2S3 compound to produce NZVI using sonochemical leaching method with 1.5MNaOH solution for 45min at 80°C. The results from XRD and XRF analysis revealed that more than 83% of aluminum sulfide was extracted during separation step and iron phase remained as a main constituent phase in the leaching residue (NZVI). The FE-SEM images and the BET surface area verified that the produced NZVI has particles size less than 100nm with BET surface area of 116m2/g.Nano zero-valent Iron (NZVI) as an advanced environmentally friendly material has been applied in water treatment, soil/groundwater remediation processes removing various contaminants. In recent decades, NZVI application in the removal of different types of pollution has attracted interest of many researchers due to its advantages ( Mechanochemical synthesis as an environmentally friendly method is classified in mechanochemistry science, wherein mechanical energy is applied for performance of chemical reactions between reactants ( The prior investigations revealed that Al Regarding the facts that the mechanochemical synthesis of NZVI from natural pyrite is not reported before, the present study aims to propose a method involving mechanochemical reduction of pyrite with aluminum metal powders in the first step and separation process to prepare NZVI by the elimination of extra Al A high-purity pyrite concentrate was obtained using conventional beneficiation methods of mineral processing such as flotation and magnetic separation. XRD analysis of the pyrite concentrate revealed that the pyrite reflections corresponded with JCPDS No. 1–1295 as main phase ( Then, the natural pyrite concentrate was used as initial feed for the preparation of NZVI through mechanochemical reaction and following separation step. The mechanical reaction was conducted in a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, FRITSCH, Germany) with a 250 To separate products of the mechanochemical reaction of pyrite and Al metal powder (Fe-Al The X-ray diffraction patterns of natural pyrite and products were collected with Bruker Axs D8 advance instrument with Cu Kα radiation (λ As mentioned, preparation of NZVI from pyrite involves two steps of mechanochemical reaction (MSR reaction) and separation (selective sonochemical leaching). The complete mechanochemical reaction has to occur in the first step to attain proper separation in the second step. The complete mechanochemical reaction between natural pyrite and the aluminum metal powder was examined by XRD analysis. The XRD pattern of the mechanochemically synthesized Fe-Al At the second step, sonochemical selective leaching was considered to prepare NZVI from the produced Fe-Al In the primary selective leaching tests, several leaching agents such as water, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide were experienced. The primary results proved that water, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid have not selective performance, even hydrochloric acid and sulfuric acid dissolved Fe-Al The chemical compositions of the Fe-Al After selective leaching as separation step, the XRD analysis of the products revealed that major phases of Fe and Al The crystallite size and lattice strain can be calculated using obtained XRD patterns as well. The microstructure parameters are determined using several approaches as mentioned in previous investigations ( The crystallite size and microstrain of Al Finally, the influence of sonochemical leaching on the particle size of Fe-Al Synthesis mechanism of NZVI from mechanochemically treated natural pyrite by using sonochemical leaching of the product (Fe-Al Nano zero-valent iron (NZVI) was prepared from natural pyrite by a new proposed method as two steps of mechanochemical reaction and sonochemical leaching were employed. At the first step, Fe-Al