In 2009, the survey of Wei and Craig reported qualitatively on the benefits of process control systems in grinding and flotation. The present review of about twenty milling operations reports quantitatively on these benefits. Expert systems, model predictive controller, and fuzzy logic control systems, to name only the most used in the mining industry, have delivered superior operational performance (1–16% gain in ore throughput, at least 40% reduction in mill load variability, up to 1% in metal recovery in flotation) and reduced operating costs (15% reduction in grinding media consumption 52% reduction of the cyclone pressure variability).This article focuses on quantifying the benefits of process control systems in the mineral processing industry. The benefits sought in the mineral processing industry are the same sought in other commodity industry, namely throughput gain, process stability, energy consumption reduction, and increased yield. A survey by The business case for a control system needs to consider the costs of control hardware, control software, consultant labour, production loss due to installation downtime, and hardware/software maintenance. Against these costs are the benefits of lower operating costs and higher metal production. Metal production is given by the product of head grade, throughput and recovery (metal produced Whereas This study was realized independently of the survey of The published literature contains many articles about grinding control systems, many of a theoretical nature with no reference to any operations, and others presenting simulations that refer to certain operations. Even though such articles may cite performance benefits, they are not the subject of this study, concerned only with actual operational data. Gold, platinum, copper, nickel, zinc, and iron operations from across North America, South America, Africa, and Australia, were examined. There were zero rod mill operations, three ball mill operations, nine SAG mill operations, three rod and ball mill operations, zero rod and SAG mill operations, and seven ball and SAG mill operations.  The types of control system used were: twelve operations using expert systems, six using model predictive controllers (MPC) (no mention whether linear or non-linear), five using fuzzy logic, and occasional applications of multivariate controllers and other systems (PID control, adaptive/self-tuning control, neural network-based control, linear programming, statistical process control, dead-time compensation control, and constraint control). Emerson Delta V MPC, ABB Linkman Expert Optimizer, Invensys Connoisseur, Honeywell Profit Suite, Gensym G2, Prediktor, Metso Adaptive Predictive Model, and Metso OCS process control software are common commercial control packages ( Whilst this study does not discuss the fundamentals of control systems, it is worth mentioning some key differences between the two most commonly used systems: expert system vs MPC. An expert system uses a model of the operators; MPC uses a mathematical model of the system ( Amongst the references consulted, mill operations implemented control systems to achieve throughput gains (thirteen instances reporting), increased recovery via grind size control (nine instances), lesser variability in different areas of the circuit (six instances), greater control of the mill load (four instances), and no grind out (three instances). No operations reported testing more than one control systems in their trials. The most often cited benefit was an increase in throughput, followed by a reduction of the throughput variability, a reduction of the mill load variability, a reduction in power consumption, a target size achieved, a tightening of the mill feed size distribution, and a recovery gain. This analysis of the benefits confirms the previous survey findings of Quantitative data for most of these benefits are given in the next sub-sections. Throughput gain is the most often cited benefit of process control systems, followed by lesser throughput variability. The majority of operations using model predictive controllers also commented on the significant reduction in the variability of throughput, by a factor between 22% and 92%. Operations using other control systems did not make such frequent mention of a reduction in throughput variability.  At the Peñoles Gold Mine in Chile, the SGS expert system was implemented, resulting in higher throughput without sacrificing grind size or recovery. Another benefit of the system was in fact a reduction in the variability of the grind size. Five operations using expert systems reported recovery gains of up to 1%. One operation cited no gain but saw benefits in higher throughput, lower power consumption, and fewer mill shutdowns. Two operations cited some gain but did not quote the value, and the remaining two cited a gain of 0.6% and 1%, in addition to reporting a throughput increase. The increase in recovery must have been the direct outcome of a reduction in grind size; some operations increased by up to 1.4% the percentage of ore passing 75 One of Palabora Mining Company’s operations had six parallel milling circuits consisting each of a rod mill followed by a ball mill in open circuit ( Six operations reported greater than 90% utilization of the control system. While encouraging, this finding is bias; it is likely that plants using control systems more intermittently would not have published their performance. Mintek identified that the main causes for not utilizing the controller are: (1) a change in ore type or particle size, (2) operators reacting too quickly to a small upset that may not be caused by the controller, and (3) the controller being untuned. Five operations reporting on the mill load commented that when the control system was in use, the variability of the load was reduced by 40–90%. Only the Leeudoorn gold mine indicated that the control system increased the mill load by 2.9%. The expert system of Anglogold Ashanti Kopanang and Xstrata Strathcona prevented mill overload. Two operations reported up to 15% reduction in the grinding media consumption. Xstrata Strathcona and a platinum operation in South Africa experienced fewer mill grindouts. Operations cited fewer alarms, fewer mill stop/start, fewer mill shutdowns, and reduced maintenance on the mill feed hoppers and seals. Two plants specifically reported setpoints being reached 80% faster with the control system in use. With respect to the cyclones performance, the benefits were achieved mostly by reducing the variability of the cyclone pressure by 32–52%, the cyclone density by 50–85%, and the cyclone overflow rate by 20–92%. No plant reported a reduction of labour or an increase in safety with the use of the control system, though one operation cited better crew morale. In grinding and flotation processes, the new era of operational efficiency seeks greater productivity and recovery from ore reserves. Implementing a control system for typically less than one million dollars achieves this goal. The mining industry has used primarily expert system, model predictive controller, and fuzzy logic control systems. Of the twenty mining operations worldwide commenting on the performance of their control system, benefits are undisputable: 1–16% gain in throughput, up to 1% gain in recovery, many other simultaneous benefits in grinding and flotation, fewer operator interventions, and a payback of less than six months ( The author thanks Mrs. Elizabeth Amann, Strategic Knowledge Leader at BHP Billiton, for collecting publications, as well as two (2) anonymous reviewers for their suggestions.