Self-compacting concrete (SCC) is extensively applied in many construction projects due to its excellent fresh and hardened concrete properties. In recent years, manufactured sand (Msand) produced by crushing rock deposits is being identified as a suitable alternative source for river sand in concrete. The main objective of this study is to explore the possibility of using Msand in SCC. In this process, an attempt was made to understand the influence of paste volume and w/p ratio (water to powder ratio) on the properties of self-compacting concrete (SCC) using Msand. The powder and aggregate combinations were optimised by using the particle packing approach, which involves the selection of combinations having maximum packing density. The chemical admixtures (superplasticisers, viscosity modifying agent) were optimised based on simple empirical tests. Fresh concrete tests such as slump flow, T
                     500 and J-ring were performed on SCC; hardened concrete tests were limited to compressive strength. From the results, it was observed that relatively higher paste volume is essential to achieve the required flow for SCC using Msand, as compared to river sand. Low and medium strength (25–60MPa) SCCs were achieved by using Msand based on the approach adopted in the study. Results showed that it is possible to successfully utilise manufactured sand in producing SCC.Self-compacting concrete (SCC) is a highly flowable concrete which does not segregate and can spread into place, fill the formwork with heavily congested reinforcement without any mechanical vibration River sand (Rsand) is being used as fine aggregate in concrete for centuries. However, increase in demand and depletion of river sand, along with restrictions imposed on the exploitation of the river sand, have resulted in search for a suitable alternative. From the literature Manufactured sands contain high fines content In the present investigation, Ordinary Portland Cement – 53 grade The powder (cement and fly ash) combination was selected based on the particle packing concept by using Puntke test Research has shown that the packing density of concrete mixtures and the flow properties of corresponding fresh concrete are related Experiments were conducted in a systematic way to determine the packing density of different combination of aggregates.      Knowing the mass of the individual aggregate type added and the volume of the container, the void content can be calculated. The packing density of the aggregates is calculated from the void content. The equations for calculating the void content and packing density are as follows: It was decided to develop a ternary packing diagram for the Msand and the two sizes of coarse aggregates based on the experimental results. By using the ternary packing diagram, it is possible to determine packing density of any given combination of aggregates. However, conducting experiments to obtain the packing density for all the combinations of aggregates is cumbersome. Therefore, 24 experiments were carried out for different combinations of Msand: 12.5 The maximum packing density of 0.70 was achieved by a set of aggregate combinations (see From Experiments were conducted for possible combinations of the powder content (350–650 In the present study, the paste volume was varied from 360 The results were further analysed to estimate the required amount of paste volume in excess of void content to achieve SCC. Apart from slump flow test, experiments were conducted to determine the For assessing the passing ability of SCC, J-ring test was conducted according to ASTM C 1621 For SCC, achieving high strengths is not difficult, due to the presence of high powder content. However, achieving low and medium strength SCC is a difficult task. Therefore, in this investigation, the emphasis was given to achieve low and medium strength SCC. Studies were conducted to investigate the influence of w/p ratio on the compressive strength of SCC. Concrete cubes of dimension 150 The crushing processes of Msand affect the shape, grading of the Msand and the proportion of microfines (particles passing through 75 The present investigation was conducted to explore the possibility of 100% replacement of river sand by using Msand. In this context, the influence of the paste composition and paste volume on the fresh and hardened concrete properties of SCC using Msand was evaluated. The presence of high fines in Msand increases the water demand. However, the Msand fines contribute to an increase in paste volume, which is useful for the development of SCC. The powder and aggregate combinations were optimised by using packing density criterion. The superplasticiser and VMA dosage was optimised by using empirical methods – mini-slump and marble test respectively. Further, experiments were conducted by varying the paste volume and w/p ratio. Experimental results revealed that paste volume had a predominant effect on the fresh concrete properties for a given combination of aggregates. A minimum of 160 The results of J-ring test revealed that apart from paste volume, paste composition and aggregate characteristics also influence the passing ability of SCC. As expected, the w/p ratio had a good correlation with the compressive strength of SCC for a given cement/fly ash ratio. The compressive strength of mixes developed in this study ranged from 25 Whereas the cost of Msand is higher than that of river sand, Msand presents numerous advantages, including its contributions as filler content of the concrete (as it has excess fines that are not clay or silt), and in reducing environmental impact. This helps in achieving a lower cost to benefit ratio as compared to river sand. Moreover, the difference between the cost of Msand and river sand will likely become smaller as the use of such alternative materials increases in the future, with increased awareness of its benefits. From this study, it is evident that Msand is a suitable alternative for river sand in developing SCC.