The interaction of gold cyanide complex with elemental sulphur and all metastable sulphur species has been studied using Density Functional Theory (DFT). The elemental sulphur and sulphide species formed during pre-treatment of refractory gold ores or dissolution of sulphide minerals form a series of metastable species including hydrosulphide, polysulphide, thionates, sulphite and finally sulphates which are known to have a detrimental effect on gold cyanidation. Previous researchers have attributed this effect mainly to passivation of the gold surface. However, interaction of dissolved aurocyanide with sulphur species has received almost no attention. Here, DFT molecular modelling has been used for the first time to describe the interaction of dissolved gold cyanide and sulphur species, and to explain the reduction and destabilisation potential of sulphur species in gold cyanidation.
                  Computational modelling shows that sulphur species can have a significant negative effect on the stability of gold cyanide complex. Elemental sulphur and sulphide ion with −446.6 and − 198.4 kJ.mol−1 interaction energies have the most negative effect. S0 and S2− contribute to the destabilisation of gold cyanide via two different mechanisms of precipitation of AuCN and thiocyanate formation as well as reduction of gold by formation of sulphite and sulphates respectively. The effect of elemental sulphur can be neutralised by excess free cyanide in solution, while sulphide ion can still stay reactive toward gold cyanide in the presence of free cyanide. Addition of lead salt can decrease the inhibiting effect of sulphide ions by formation of lead sulphide. However, lead cannot eliminate the negative effect of elemental sulphur. It is concluded that oxidation of sulphur species can significantly overcome the adverse impact of sulphur species on the stability of gold cyanide complex. The destabilisation of gold cyanide complex by sulphur metastable species is introduced as one of the main mechanisms for loss of gold in sulphide gold ores.The stability of target dissolved complexes in leaching solutions is one of the most important factors in the viability of any hydrometallurgical operation ( The cyanide ligands link to Au(I) through strong covalent bonds and form the most stable gold complex with 2 × 10 The source of different sulphur species in gold cyanidation solution has been investigated by several researchers ( It is well known the speciation of sulphur in gold cyanidation solutions is significantly controlled by reaction kinetics rather than thermodynamics. The range of sulphur stability is significantly greater than that expected by thermodynamics due to the kinetic constraints. Luna and Lapidus claimed that the dominant sulphide species detected after 24 h is thiosulphate (S It has been reported for many years that elemental sulphur as well as dissolved sulphide ions at very low concentrations can inhibit gold recovery almost completely ( In an early study by Simpson and co-workers in 1984, the effect of sulphide ion was investigated in gold cyanidation ( This reaction is favourable, as it has a more negative standard potential than the reduction of gold cyanide complex (−0.62 < −0.57 V). Eq. As demonstrated in A Density Functional Theory (DFT) based calculation has been conducted using the Dmol A double numerical basis set was used (two atomic orbitals for each occupied orbital) for all atoms plus a p-function polarisation on all hydrogen atoms (DNP) to account for hydrogen bonding ( The continuum solvation model, (COnductor like Screening MOdel, COSMO) [13] and the dielectric constant of water (78.54) were used to describe solutions of the different gold complexes in the dilute solutions studied here. Multipolar expansion was used for calculation of the solvation energy for all molecules. Geometry optimisation convergence thresholds were set at 1 × 10 To define the extent of the destabilisation of gold complexes by different species, the interaction energy of species was calculated based on the following equation: It must be noted this value deviates significantly from the free energy of reactions as the currently available computational protocols are not accurate enough to precisely estimate sensitive values of free energy of reactions or stability constants ( Based on the sulphur speciation, 22 different metastable sulphur species could be present in gold cyanidation solutions (al, 2018; There is a small variation in the geometry and energy data reported here compared to our previous study ( For some other compounds, the oxidation state diagrams ( To investigate the effect of sulphur species on the stability of gold complex, the interaction of each sulphur species with gold complex was modelled and interaction energies were calculated. To compare the computational modelling results of interaction energies, the interaction energy of gold cyanide complex with hydrogen cation was modelled. It is well known gold cyanide anion decomposes readily in acidic pH to precipitate AuCN and release hydrogen cyanide ( It is observed clearly that the proton is oriented toward one of the cyanide ions of the gold cyanide complex in the interacted geometry. It dissociates the cyanide complex and precipitates AuCN by formation of cyanogen. Here, the interaction energy of H Elemental sulphur can form in gold cyanidation solutions in many different routes. In pre-treatment of refractory gold ores including acid pre-treatment and roasting, elemental sulphur is formed due to insufficient oxidation of sulphide ions ( It can be observed clearly that elemental sulphur mono cluster is oriented toward one of the CN Here a new mechanism is observed by molecular modelling that elemental sulphur is strongly interacting with dissolved gold cyanide by taking one of the cyanide ligands and precipitating AuCN. The deposited AuCN can re-dissolve if enough free cyanide is available. In order to compare the interaction of elemental sulphur with aurocyanide and cyanide ion, the interaction energy of cyanide and elemental sulphur to form thiocyanate was also calculated: It is clear from the reaction energies that elemental sulphur has a slightly higher tendency toward free cyanide in comparison with aurocyanide, so deposition of gold complex is more probable in cyanide deficient solutions. In other words, at higher cyanide concentrations the negative effect of the elemental sulphur may be eliminated ( Moreover, based on the standard electrode potentials, elemental sulphur has reducing potential for gold cyanide as follows ( The anodic half reaction of sulphur oxidation to both sulphite and sulphate has lower potential than cathodic reduction of gold cyanide (−0.66 and − 0.75 vs. -0.57 V) so these reactions are electrochemically probable. To further investigate these two reactions from a computational modelling point of view, the interaction energy of elemental sulphur with gold cyanide in the presence of different numbers of hydroxyl ions was calculated and compared with thiocyanate formation energies. It is very interesting that in the presence of hydroxyl ions, sulphur is oriented toward the gold atom of gold cyanide instead of the cyanide complex with almost the same interaction energy (−444.1 and − 420.1 kJ.mol In the other words, hydroxyl ions promote interaction of elemental sulphur with the gold cation of the complex to precipitate gold and produce more oxidised sulphur species such as sulphite and sulphate. Elemental sulphur has a higher tendency toward free cyanide in comparison with gold cyanide. If free cyanide is not available, elemental sulphur has the potential to either take one of the cyanide ligands of the gold complex or reduce AuCN, or in more alkaline solutions precipitate gold. The sulphide minerals dissolve to some extent and generate sulphide ion (S In contrast with elemental sulphur, the S This has been further validated by the optimised geometry of sulphide ion oriented toward gold in the aurocyanide complex. For other polysulphides, it is well known they can dissolve in cyanide solution by formation of thiocyanate as follows ( To evaluate this reaction by computational modelling, the interaction energies of different polysulphides with cyanide and gold cyanide were calculated and compared in It is observed that the interaction of polysulphides with cyanide and the gold cyanide complex is almost the same for different polysulphides. The low value of interaction energy also shows cyanide is not reactive with polysulphides, in agreement with previous studies ( Elemental sulphur and polysulphides are thermodynamically unstable toward oxidation by the dissolved oxygen in the alkaline solution ( Thiocyanate is more reactive toward cyanide in comparison with gold cyanide. So similar to elemental sulphur, thiosulphate can destabilise gold cyanide complex in cyanide deficient solutions. Sulphite and sulphate are the last oxidised products of elemental sulphur and sulphides. Similar to thio-compounds, the value of interaction energies depicted in The optimised geometry of interacted species with almost unchanged structure of gold cyanide confirms the low interaction energy. Sulphate as the most oxidised sulphur species has the lowest interaction energy with gold cyanide, showing oxidation of sulphur species decreases their inhibiting effect. Comprehensive computational modelling has explained the effect of sulphur species on the destabilisation and reduction of gold cyanide. The interaction energies of sulphur species with gold cyanide complex are in the following order: S Elemental sulphur and sulphide ion have the most detrimental effect on the stability of gold cyanide with interaction energies of −446.6 and − 198.4 kJ.mol Lead cation has a very high interaction with sulphide ion, more than both free cyanide and gold cyanide, so considerably decrease the negative effect of sulphide ion by formation of PbS. In other words, when sulphide ion is present in leaching solutions, lead salt can neutralise the inhibiting influence of S The interaction energies for other polysulphides decrease with an increase in the number of sulphur atoms in the chain. The tendency toward gold cyanide and cyanide for other polysulphides are almost the same (slightly higher in gold cyanide), and thiocyanate formation by precipitation of AuCN is one of the proposed mechanisms here. As in the case of the sulphide ion, the effect of polysulphide can be decreased significantly by lead salt addition. Thiosulphate can form thiocyanate by taking one of the CN It is concluded that sulphide species have an important effect on the destabilisation of gold cyanide. The oxidation of sulphur species can significantly decrease the negative effect of sulphur species on the stability of gold cyanide complex. Also, the effect of elemental sulphur can be almost completely neutralised by excess free cyanide in solution, while sulphide ion can still remain reactive toward gold cyanide in the presence of free cyanide. Addition of lead salt can decrease the inhibiting effect of sulphide ions by formation of lead sulphide. However, lead cannot eliminate the negative effect of elemental sulphur. Therefore, when sulphur exists in elemental form in the ore (such as pre-treated sulphide ores), excess free cyanide is the answer, while addition of lead nitrate is not effective. In sulphide-bearing solutions where reactive sulphide minerals dissolve in the first hours of cyanidation, lead nitrate can effectively eliminate the negative impact. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.