The geochemical standard bauxite BX–N was treated with sodium dithionite to selectively remove iron oxides. Mössbauer spectra of the original sample and that which had been thus deferrated showed minor amounts (about 2% of the original content) of hematite that survived the dithionite treatment to be identical to the hematite of the original bauxite. This indicates the residual hematite to be occluded within other mineral constituents of the bauxite rather than constituting a different, possibly better-crystalline variety that is more resistive to dithionite. The possibility of not merely being able to identify, but also to characterize such minor quantities of hematite, demonstrates the suitability of Mössbauer spectroscopy for the study of subordinate iron-bearing constituents of bauxites and similar mineral products that are impervious to processing.Iron oxides and oxyhydroxides are common constituents of bauxites, in which they are undesirable because their presence increases the cost of aluminium production. Specific properties of the iron oxides—usually hematite and/or goethite—such as their particle size and intergrowths with other constituents can have a decisive influence on the ease with which they can be removed prior to the production process. In the present study, the iron mineralogy of the geochemical standard bauxite BX–N from Brignoles, France, has been determined prior to and following the selective removal of iron oxides (“deferration”) with sodium dithionite. A compilation of analyses of bauxite BX–N by The iron oxide constituents of BX–N were extracted by three successive citrate–bicarbonate–dithionite treatments after The mineralogy of the bauxite before and after iron oxide extraction was determined by X-ray diffraction using a Bruker D8 diffractometer equipped with a Cu tube and a diffracted-beam graphite monochromator. Samples that had been smeared on a silicon slide were step-scanned from 5° to 70° 2  The most obvious manifestation of the dithionite treatment was a bleaching of the originally reddish-brown bauxite as the iron oxides were removed, the colour changing from Munsell 2 YR 5/4 to 9 YR 8/2, i.e. to a very pale brown. Chemical analysis of the dithionite extracts showed the treatments to have removed a total of 21.38 X-ray diffraction showed boehmite to be the principal constituent of the bauxite, followed by hematite and kaolinite as major components ( The Mössbauer spectra of the original bauxite could be adequately well fitted with a dominant sextet and a subordinate Fe As could be expected, the dithionite treatment removed the greater part of hematite from the bauxite, the sole iron oxide contained in this sample. Because of the high Curie temperature of hematite (955 Three successive treatments of bauxite BX–N with sodium dithionite resulted in the removal of over 92% of the iron oxide (hematite) content. A definitive identification of the hematite which remained in the thus treated sample (about 0.5