Flotation of 43μm diameter, hydrophilic glass beads with hydrophobic cationic polystyrene nanoparticle flotation collectors revealed that bead-bead collisions during conditioning and flotation caused the irreversible abrasion of the adsorbed nanoparticles. The abraded particles were present in the suspension as large aggregates. Nanoparticle abrasion explains why small polystyrene particles are more effective than larger ones, and why, much higher dosages of larger nanoparticles are required for the same flotation performance. These behaviors also were demonstrated with a phenomenological model of the abrasion dynamics.Froth flotation is a critical operation in most mineral processing schemes Our nanoparticle flotation collector development efforts have involved two types of experiments – pentlandite flotation experiments mainly conducted in the pilot facilities of our industry partner Vale, and small scale laboratory flotation of a simplified system, consisting of negatively charged, hydrophilic glass beads, as a model for the mineral particles. Simple cationic polystyrene latexes were used for most of the glass bead flotation studies, whereas more complex particle surface chemistries were used for the pentlandite studies. The pentlandite experiments were used to assess the commercial feasibility of nanoparticle collectors, assessing both recovery and grade. By contrast, the model glass bead experiments answered specific mechanistic and nanoparticle design questions, such as the role in flotation of nanoparticle diameter, hydrophobicity, softness, and extent of adsorption of the nanoparticles on the glass beads. The main findings from the model glass bead experiments were: small nanoparticles (∼50 Our published pentlandite flotation studies show that nanoparticles can sometimes give better flotation than PAX In trying to understand why smaller and softer particles are more effective, we recently concluded that high nanoparticle adhesion to the glass bead surfaces was a requirement for nanoparticle flotation collectors In this paper, we present direct evidence for abrasive nanoparticle removal caused by bead-bead collisions in flow. One the most revealing experiments shown herein involves measuring flotation recovery as a function of conditioning time. Laboratory flotation studies often involve a conditioning step where dispersed mineral particles are mixed with the flotation collector, giving time for the collector to adsorb before initiation gas flow. The flotation literature deals with a large variety of minerals and collector chemistries. However, with the exception of kerosene or other mineral oil emulsion, all the collector chemistries are small molecules that can rapidly diffuse to surfaces Glass beads with a mean diameter of 43 Polystyrene nanoparticles with a diameter of 317 Polystyrene nanoparticle with a diameter of 63 The latexes were purified by mixing with 50 Nanoparticle diameters were measured by dynamic light scattering (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation) with a detector angle of 90°. Latex samples were diluted with 5 Electrophoretic mobility (EM) measurements were performed on a Zeta PALS instrument (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation) at 25 Water sessile drop contact angles on glass slides coated with nanoparticles were measured with a Krüss Drop Shape Analysis System DSA 10 running DSA software (version 1.80.0.2). In a typical water contact angle experiment, pre-cut glass slides (1 The conditioning and flotation experiments were performed in the same vessel, a polypropylene 125 In some cases conditioning was immediately followed by flotation. After conditioning, 0.125 PS317 latex (0.556 Cationic polystyrene latexes were prepared by surfactant-free emulsion polymerization A series of glass bead (43 The larger PS317 particles were completely ineffective as flotation collectors. These results clearly show that the effectiveness of nanoparticle flotation collectors deteriorated with conditioning. Presented below is evidence that conditioning removes adsorbed nanoparticles. One of the advantages of nanoparticle flotation collectors is that the particles are easily observed by electron microscopy. We also explored the fate of nanoparticles dislodged from the glass bead surfaces. After conditioning, the heavy glass beads were allowed to settle and the particle size distributions of the supernatant suspension were measured with a Malvern Mastersizer. Also, shown in Further evidence for large aggregates of nanoparticles was obtained by SEM analysis of the floated glass beads. In the following paragraphs, we present a simplified model that we propose demonstrates the key features of the nanoparticle abrasion mechanism. The key equations are given below. A detailed derivation and example calculations are shown in the The rate of nanoparticle deposition is given by the following expression (Eq. During turbulent mixing, bead-bead collisions will occur. We assume that when the surface of one bead rubs across another, within the area of contact, the nanoparticles on both beads are scraped to form aggregates that are irreversibly dislodged from the bead surfaces. The experimental results in Combining rates of deposition (Eq. Although the simulated results in  We employed the model to explore the role of nanoparticle dosage. Our results demonstrate that turbulent mixing induces bead-bead collisions, which can dislodge nanoparticle aggregates. This concept is not foreign to the mineral processing industry which has employed high intensity conditioning to remove adsorbed slime particles on the surfaces of ultramafic ores Does nanoparticle abrasion prevent the development of commercially significant nanoparticle flotation collectors? We have recently shown that core-shell nanoparticles with soft shells require more energy to detach from a surface compared to the hard nanoparticles used in the current work From a mechanistic perspective, abrasion from bead-bead contacts explains the influence of nanoparticle size – see Latex aggregation during conditioning was an interesting observation ( Finally, a few comments about our modelling. The model combines a standard treatment of colloidal deposition with a naive treatment of abrasion based on the frequency of bead-bead collisions. The concept of maximum effective conditioning time, Δt, where Γ Although hydrophobic nanoparticles are potentially useful flotation collectors, the abrasion of adsorbed nanoparticles during conditioning (i.e. pre-flotation mixing) and flotation, deteriorates flotation efficiency. In this work, collisions between glass beads (a mineral particle model) are responsible for nanoparticle abrasion. The abraded nanoparticles are present as large aggregates, limiting their future ability to promote flotation. A simple model accounting for nanoparticle deposition onto glass beads and subsequent abrasion helps explain two experimental observations – smaller nanoparticles are more effective, and less effective larger nanoparticles must be added in great excess to obtain high flotation recoveries. Both observations are a consequence of the increasing propensity for abrasion with increasing nanoparticle size. The detailed tribological mechanism for the abrasive removal of the hard, polystyrene nanoparticles is not revealed herein. However, more insight comes in a future publication showing the abrasion of core-shell particles with soft shells. When nanoparticles are abraded from the glass bead surfaces, remnants of the soft shell polymer are left on the glass bead surfaces – footprints. The footprint patterns do speak to the abrasion mechanism. We thank Drs. Carlos Filipe and Erlita Mastan for mathematical help, and Dr. Songtao Yang from AuTec Innovative Extractive Solutions Ltd. We thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and VALE Base Metals for funding this project. Some measurements were performed in the McMaster Biointerfaces Institute funded by the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. R.P. holds the Canada Research Chair in Interfacial Technologies. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 