This article reports the effect of pre-existing carbides prepared by different heat treatments on the nitriding behaviour during a carburizing and nitriding duplex treatment of an M50NiL steel. The goal was to achieve an improved understanding of the relationship between the pre-existing carbides and nitriding behaviour. The M50NiL steel was carburized at 950 °C, heat treated at different quenching temperatures (ranging from 1000 to 1150 °C) and tempering temperatures (ranging from 500 to 580 °C), and finally nitrided at 500 °C. The surface layers were characterized by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD), laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Vickers microhardness measurement and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The results show that the formation of intergranular precipitates was greatly related to the presence of pre-existing carbides, which led to a change in the carbon content in the matrix and showed different dissolving capacities. The compound layers consisted of γ′ (Fe4N) and ε (Fe2-3N) phases as well as a minor amount of Fe3O4. The pre-existing carbides had no effect on the composition of the compound layer. For the diffusion of nitrogen, a density of pre-existing carbides that was too high or too low was unfavorable, as it greatly decreased the thickness of the nitrided layer. At the quenching temperature of 1100 °C and the tempering temperature of 540 °C, the thickest nitrided layer herein and a good hardness distribution were obtained, which was attributed to the optimum density of pre-existing carbides. This study provides information regarding how to obtain a thick nitrided layer by controlling pre-existing carbides during the duplex treatment of M50NiL steels.M50NiL steels possess remarkable overall properties and have thus been used for gears and bearings [ In this study, carburizing and nitriding duplex treatments for M50NiL steel were carried out under different quenching and tempering temperatures. The effect of pre-existing carbides that were prepared by carburizing and different heat treatments on the nitriding behaviour during the duplex treatment of an M50NiL steel was studied. The material used in this study was an annealed M50NiL steel bar, and its chemical composition was 0.13% C, 4.14% Cr, 3.37% Ni, 4.07% Mo, 1.24% V, 0.29% Mn, 0.19% Si, 0.005% P, 0.002% S, and the balance Fe. Before duplex treatment, the material was cut into squares with a side length of 15 mm. All samples were ground, polished and ultrasonically cleaned in alcohol before carburizing and nitriding. Carburizing was carried out in a low-pressure vacuum carburizing furnace with two horizontal chambers (WZST-20) with a carburizing temperature of 950 °C. A mixed gas of 50% acetylene and 50% nitrogen was used for carburizing. The gas flowed into a hot chamber at a rate of 8 L/min at the boost stage. When the pressure reached 1500 Pa, the supply of gas stopped. After 20 s, the hot chamber was then evacuated by a mechanical pump. After the above steps were repeated for 1.5 h, an additional diffusion stage (maintained at 950 °C without supplying gas) was performed for 3 h. A nitriding treatment was performed using a pulse glow discharge plasma furnace (LDMC-30AZ). The nitriding parameters were as follows: temperature, 500 °C; time, 10 h; gas, NH The cross sections of the samples were etched in 4% nitric acid. The microstructure observations of the samples were carried out using laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM, OLS5000) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SUPRA40-41-90). The compound layers were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, X' PertPowder) with Cu Kα radiation over the 2θ range from 20 to 100° at 40 kV and 40 mA with a 0.02° interval step. The microhardness (HV-1000) was obtained from a microhardness tester under a load of 100 g for 20 s. The precipitates in the diffusion layers were analysed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2F20STWIN, 200 kV). A statistical analysis of the density of the pre-existing carbides was carried out using the software “Image-Pro Plus”. Five SEM images at a depth of ~40 μm were obtained for each sample, and the average was calculated. The microstructures of the carburized layers on the samples quenched at different temperatures and without nitriding were obtained with SEM and are shown in The SEM microstructures of the carburized layers of the samples tempered at different temperatures and without nitriding are shown in The densities of carbides of all of the samples are shown in The microstructures of the duplex-treated samples quenched at different temperatures are shown in The microstructures of the duplex-treated samples tempered at different temperatures are shown in The SEM images of the diffusion layers of the duplex-treated samples tempered at different tempering temperatures are shown in The precipitation mechanism of the intergranular precipitates can be explained as follows. During nitriding, the liberated carbon atoms released by the dissolution of carbides were easily enriched at the grain boundaries and formed intergranular precipitates. Therefore, the intergranular precipitates were closely related to the pre-existing carbides. In the 1000Q-540T and 1050Q-540T samples, the formation of large continuous intergranular precipitates did not occur readily because there were too many large pre-existing carbides. This resulted in a low carbon content in the matrix. In addition, these large pre-existing carbides did not dissolve readily or release a large amount of liberated carbon atoms. When the quenching temperature increased to 1100 °C, the number of pre-existing carbides decreased, and these carbides were small and grainy. This led to an increase in the carbon content in the matrix. Upon comparing the SEM images of the 1100Q-540T sample before and after nitriding, it is obvious that these grainy carbides dissolved to a substantial degree, so that a large amount of liberated carbon atoms were released. Therefore, large continuous intergranular precipitates were formed in the 1100Q-540T sample. The 1150Q-540T sample and the 1100Q-500T sample had similar densities of pre-existing carbides, but intergranular precipitation did not occur in the 1100Q-500T sample. There were more grainy precipitates in the 1100Q-500T sample, which indicates that the depletion of the pre-existing carbides was small. The amount of liberated carbon atoms was thus small and the intergranular precipitation did not occur readily. Although the density of pre-existing carbides in the 1100Q-580T sample was similar to that of the 1050Q-540T sample, the pre-existing carbides in the 1100Q-580T sample were grainy and dissolved more easily than the block-shaped and strip-shaped carbides. Therefore, this led to the formation of intergranular precipitates. The XRD patterns of the all samples are shown in It was difficult to distinguish the boundary between the nitrided layer and carburized layer due to a gradual change in the microstructure. To determine the differences among the nitrided layers, the nitrogen distribution profiles were obtained by EDS line scanning, and the fitted curves are shown in The factors affecting the diffusion of nitrogen included the following. Pre-existing carbides: The diffusion rate of nitrogen in the carbides differed from that in the matrix. When nitrogen atoms attempted to pass through the carbides, the carbides became obstacles for the diffusion of nitrogen atoms towards the core. Alloying elements: High-alloy steels generally contain many nitride-forming elements, such as Ti, Cr, V, Mo, W, and some others. This type of alloying element increases the diffusional activation energy of the nitrogen in the matrix, thus hindering its diffusion. Carbon atoms: The diffusion mechanism of both the carbon and nitrogen atoms was interstitial diffusion. The octahedral interstices that can accommodate carbon and nitrogen atoms were limited. Therefore, there was competition between the carbon and nitrogen. An increase in the carbon content in the matrix led to a reduction in the diffusion rate of the nitrogen during nitriding [ In summary, when the densities of the pre-existing carbides were 7.5% (1100Q-580T), 8.5% (1050Q-540T) and 12.5% (1000Q-540T), the diffusion of nitrogen was greatly affected by factor (1) due to the high density of the pre-existing carbides. There were M The TEM morphology of a precipitate in the 1000Q-540T sample and the corresponding EDS mapping and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) results are shown in To better understand the change in the surface properties of the duplex-treated M50NiL steel, the hardness profiles are shown in In this study, the effect of pre-existing carbides, which were prepared by carburizing and different quenching and tempering temperatures, on the nitriding behaviour in the duplex treatment of an M50NiL steel was investigated. This study provides information to obtain a deeper nitrided layer by controlling pre-existing carbides in the duplex treatment of the M50NiL steel. The specific results are as follows: M The evolution of the precipitates was the same before and after nitriding. The formation of intergranular precipitates was related to the presence of pre-existing carbides, which led to a change in the carbon content in the matrix and showed different dissolving capacities. The compound layers consisted of γ′ (Fe For the diffusion of nitrogen, a density of pre-existing carbides that was too high or too low was unfavorable, as it greatly decreased the thickness of the nitrided layer. The heat treatment had a significant effect on the hardness of the matrix, carburized layer and nitrided layer. At the quenching temperature of 1100 °C and the tempering temperature of 540 °C, the thickest nitrided layer herein and a good hardness distribution were obtained, which was attributed to the optimum density of the pre-existing carbides.  No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described is original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. The research documented in this work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guizhou Province, China (Grant Nos.