Objective
                  Tibial plafond fractures are one of the most challenging injuries in orthopaedic surgery. Their results could be improved by following the new guidelines for the management, and modern plating techniques. The results and complication rate between anteromedial and anterolateral approach for open reduction and internal fixation of these fractures were compared.
               
                  Material and methods
                  A study was conducted on 40 patients treated by open reduction an internal fixation between 2007 and 2008. The surgical approach was selected by the surgeon in charge, depending on fracture pattern and skin situation. Patients were evaluated clinically and radiographically by an independent orthopaedic surgeon, who was not involved in the surgical procedure, using clinical (American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score) and radiological criteria at a minimum of 2 years. The appearance of complications after both approaches was recorded.
               
                  Results
                  Forty patients were included. The mean age was 53 years, with 24 males and 16 females. Seventeen of the injuries were of high energy, and there were 8 open fractures (3 of type i, 4 type ii and one type iii), and 12 of the closed injuries were grade ii or iii in the Tscherne classification. Six patients (15%) had associated injuries. At final follow-up there were 33 (82%) excellent or good results. No statistical differences were found between either surgical approach regarding time to bone union, rate of delayed union and infection rate. Three plates of the anteromedial group and none of the anterolateral group needed to be removed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Open reduction and internal fixation of distal tibia fractures produced reliable results, with no statistical differences found between anteromedial and anterolateral surgical approaches. Clinical and radiological results and complication rate were mainly related to the fracture type.Treatment of tibial plafond/pilon fractures is challenging due to the difficulty of achieving an anatomical reduction without complications. The anteromedial approach enables a good visualisation of the central and medial thirds of the tibial pilon, but provides poor soft tissue coverage and the rate of wound complications is high. The anterolateral approach is preferred in cases of fractures of the lateral column of the tibial plafond associated with fibular fractures and syndesmosis injury. The lateral surface of the distal tibia has a better soft tissue cover, and the fibular Chaput tubercle may be displaced to allow reduction of the posterior fragments. The aim of this study is to compare the results and complication rates between the anteromedial and anterolateral approaches for open reduction and internal fixation of tibial plafond fractures. We prospectively evaluated 40 consecutive patients with tibial plafond fractures between January 2007 and December 2008. The inclusion criteria for the study covered all the tibial plafond fractures treated in our hospital during the study period. Tibial plafond fracture was defined as a fracture with a line within 4 The postoperative protocol consisted of immobilisation with a sural-foot splint at 90° dorsiflexion until healing of the soft tissues took place. Load was not permitted for a period of 8–12 weeks. Thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin was used for 4 weeks, as well as antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin (vancomycin if the patient was allergic) for 48 Open fractures were classified according to the Gustilo and Anderson classification and treated with early debridement and irrigation. Patients were evaluated clinically and radiologically by an independent orthopaedic surgeon who was not involved in the operation at 1, 3 and 6 months and 1 and 2 years after surgery. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) scale We used anteroposterior and lateral ankle radiographs with a standard technique at the time of fracture to evaluate their patterns. Fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification. Fractures were considered consolidated when radiographs showed 3 bone bridge corticals and weight load without significant pain was possible. Consolidation was considered delayed if the time exceeded 6 months from the injury. Pseudoarthrosis or nonunion was considered if no bone consolidation had taken place 9 months after the injury. Septic nonunions were managed by removal of the plate and use of an external fixator. Aseptic nonunions were treated with iliac crest autografts and fixation of the fracture using new plates. Fracture malunion was defined as a joint step of more than 1 We used the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS 12.0, Chicago, IL, USA) software program for the statistical analysis. The level of statistical significance was set at The mean age at the time of fracture was 53 years (range: 22.9–92.1 years). There were 24 males and 16 females; 17 right leg fractures and 23 left leg fractures, and 17 high-energy fractures and 23 low-energy fractures. A total of 6 (15%) patients presented associated injuries (1 fracture of the lumbar spine, 2 contralateral tibial shaft fractures, 1 contralateral calcaneal fracture, 1 ankle fracture and 1 fracture of the humerus). The radiographic classification included: 22 type A fractures (5 A1, 5 A2 and 12 A3), 9 type B fractures (1 B1 and 8 B3) and 9 type C fractures (1 C1, 1 C2 and 7 C3). A total of 33 (82.5%) cases suffered associated fibular fracture. There were 8 open fractures which were classified according to the Gustilo classification: 3 as type I, 4 as type II and 1 as type III. The mean time from the accident until surgery was 7.5 days (range: 0–40 days). In 9 (22.5%) patients without significant soft tissue injury, surgery was performed within the first 24 One fracture with significant comminution required plates in both columns through an extended approach. Bone grafts were used in 8 fractures. There were no statistically significant differences regarding the types of fracture (type, mechanism, associated injuries) or regarding patients between the anterolateral and anteromedial groups. At the end of the follow-up period there were 33 (82%) excellent and good results. The mean AOFAS score was 84.9 points (range: 46–97 points). Anatomical reduction was achieved in 33 (82.5%) cases. We found a higher rate of anatomical reductions among type A (81.8%) and type B (88.9%) fractures than among type C fractures (77.8%). There were 7 (17.5%) losses of secondary reduction during follow-up (5 with anteromedial plates and 2 with anterolateral plates). We could not find statistically significant differences between the anteromedial and anterolateral plates regarding the quality of the reduction ( The mean consolidation time was 18.1 weeks (range: 8–32 weeks). Delayed union was observed in 5 (12%) cases; 3 cases had been treated with an anteromedial plate and the other 2 with an anterolateral plate. No statistically significant differences were found regarding the rate of delayed union between both groups ( Deep infection appeared in 3 (7.5%) fractures (2 were open fractures and 1 was a closed fracture), 2 after an anteromedial plate and 1 after an anterolateral plate. There were no statistically significant differences in infection rates between both methods ( Five (12.5%) patients required a graft; 4 patients due to skin necrosis with wound dehiscence and exposure of material and 1 patient due to the development of compartment syndrome which required surgery to close the medial fasciotomy. A total of 3 anteromedial plates generated discomfort and were withdrawn after fracture consolidation. Patients suffering tibial plafond fractures present poorer scores on functional and overall health scales compared to control subjects. Depending on the fixation method, it is difficult to achieve and maintain an adequate reduction and alignment following tibial plafond fractures. Fractures treated by intramedullary nailing suffer alignment problems in 7–35% of cases, Nonunion and delayed union are common complications following distal tibial fractures treated with traditional approaches. The rate of soft tissue complications has decreased after the establishment of a treatment protocol in 2 stages. Some of the limitations of this study included the small number of patients and the involvement of several different surgeons. The type of method employed was decided by the surgeon depending on the fracture pattern, rather than randomised. The study included low- and high-energy fractures in all age groups. The strengths of this work include it being a prospective study, not losing any patients during follow-up and a monitoring period of over 2 years. In short, open reduction and internal fixation of distal tibial fractures provide reliable results. No differences were found between the 2 approaches regarding the clinical and radiographic results. The onset of complications appeared to depend more on the injury itself that on the type of approach employed to manage the fractures. Level of evidence IV. The authors declare that this investigation did not require experiments on humans or animals. The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their workplace on the publication of patient data and that all the patients included in the study received sufficient information and gave their written informed consent to participate in the study. The authors declare that this work does not reflect any patient data. The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.