 PROCESSING AQUEOUS TITANIUM SOLUTIONS TO TITANIUM DIOXIDE PIGMENT Duyvesteyn, Willem P.C.; Spitler, Timothy Malcome; Sabacky, Bruce James; Vince, Andrew; Prochazka, Jan, AUSTRALIA assigned to Altair Nanomaterials Inc. A hydrometallurgical process is provided for producing pigment grade TiO2 from titanium containing solutions. Generally, the solution is an aqueous solution. The process includes hydrolyzing the solution via complete evaporation in well-controlled conditions of temperature to form titanium oxide of well-defined characteristics. The hydrolyzing can be achieved by spray hydrolysis in a spray dryer. After hydrolyzing, the titanium oxide is calcined to transform the titanium oxide to the desired form of titanium dioxide. The titanium dioxide can be either anatase or rutile. Following calcination, the titanium dioxide is milled to provide the desired particle size distribution and then finished. 6551378 RECOVERY OF PRECIOUS METALS FROM LOW CONCENTRATION SOURCES Farone, William A.; Azad, Maryam H., USA assigned to Green Mineral Products LLC A process for the recovery of gold and the platinum group metals from sources that contain relatively low amounts of the metals is described. The process is environmentally acceptable and uses no expensive and potentially dangerous organic solvents. The process utilizes hydrogen chloride, sodium hydroxide, and cation resins to concentrate and purify the precious metals 6555008 METHOD TO EXTRACT SILVER FROM A PHOTOGRAPHIC DEVELOPER Poncelet, Olivier J.; Roussilhe, Jacques; Wettling, Danielle M., FRANCE assigned to Eastman Kodak Company This invention concerns the developing of silver halide photographic products. Silver-laden slurries accumulate in developing baths. It is possible to eliminate these silver-laden slurries by placing the developing baths in contact with aluminosilicate polymers modified by sulfur groups. For example, a tank 12 is fitted with a loop to feed the bath through a cartridge 16 that contains the elements 18 that are permeable to the developing bath, and which contain the aluminosilicate polymer modified by the sulfur groups. 6566561 FLUORO-ALCOHOL PHASE MODIFIERS AND PROCESS FOR CESIUM SOLVENT EXTRACTION Bonnesen, Peter V.; Moyer, Bruce A.; Sachleben, Richard A., USA assigned to The United States of America as represented by the Department of Energy The invention relates to a class of phenoxy fluoro-alcohols, their preparation, and their use as phase modifiers and solvating agents in a solvent composition for the extraction of cesium from alkaline solutions. These phenoxy fluoro-alcohols comply with the formula: in which 6569224 HYDROMETALLURGICAL PROCESS FOR THE RECOVERY OF NICKEL AND COBALT VALUES FROM A SULFIDIC FLOTATION CONCENTRATE Kerfoot, Derek George Eagland; Krause, Eberhard; Love, Bruce John; Singhal, Avinash, CANADA assigned to Inco Limited A hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of nickel and cobalt values from a sulfidic flotation concentrate. The process involves forming a slurry of the sulfidic flotation concentrate in an acid solution, and subjecting the slurried flotation concentrate to a chlorine leach at atmospheric pressure followed by an oxidative pressure leach. After liquid–solids separation and purification of the concentrate resulting in the removal of copper and cobalt, the nickel-containing solution is directly treated by electrowinning to recover nickel cathode therefrom. 6569391 HEAP LEACHING COPPER ORE USING SODIUM NITRATE Arias, Jaime A., CHILE assigned to Ingesol LTDA The heap leaching of copper-bearing ores is improved by using sodium nitrate as an oxidizing chemical reactive in a sulphuric acid leaching solution. In particular, the ore is crushed to less than 6 mm and stored in heaps less than twelve meters high. The heaps are irrigated with a dilute solution consisting essentially of sulphuric acid and sodium nitrate to produce a leach product. The leach product is recovered from the heap and copper is recovered from the leach product by electrolysis. The pH of the heap is preferably maintained at 1.7 pH. 6572741 ELECTROLYTIC CELL H. Victor Vidaurre, L. Jorge Dufeu, O.; Ricardo Mena, G.; Carlos Le Fort, CHILE Design improvements in constructing electrolytic cell receptacles for electrowinning and electrorefining of nonferrous metals are disclosed. Also disclosed are formulations for three-layered polymer composite materials and surface sealing coatings, which are used in monolithic formation of receptacles or containers of electrolytic cells. 6576041 METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR CHEMICAL PROCESSING Cole, John A., USA assigned to Newmont USA Limited A system and method are disclosed after chemical processing involving agitation and/or mixing of components. In one embodiment, the chemical processing involves pressure oxidation and in another embodiment involves pressure leaching. Agitation during chemical processing is aided by an agitator pump disposed in each compartment or stage of a reactor to draw components into a cavity of the agitator pump. In another embodiment, feed to a multi-stage reactor is split between different compartments of reactor. 6576335 SOLID-PHASE MATERIALS FOR CHELATING METAL IONS AND METHODS OF MAKING AND USING SAME Harrup, Mason K.; Wey, John E.; Peterson, Eric S., USA assigned to Bechtel BWXT Idaho, LLC A solid material for recovering metal ions from aqueous streams, and methods of making and using the solid material, are disclosed. The solid material is made by covalently bonding a chelating agent to a silica-based solid, or in-situ condensing ceramic precursors along with the chelating agent to accomplish the covalent bonding. The chelating agent preferably comprises a oxime type chelating head, preferably a salicylaldoxime-type molecule, with an organic tail covalently bonded to the head. The hydrocarbon tail includes a carbon–carbon double bond, which is instrumental in the step of covalently bonding the tail to the silica-based solid or the in-situ condensation. The invented solid material may be contacted directly with aqueous streams containing metal ions, and is selective to ions such as copper (II) even in the presence of such ions as iron (III) and other materials that are present in earthen materials. The solid material with high selectivity to copper may be used to recover copper from mining and plating industry streams, to replace the costly and toxic solvent extraction steps of conventional copper processing. 6579504 HYDROMETALLURGICAL TREATMENT PROCESS FOR EXTRACTION OF PLATINUM GROUP METALS OBVIATING THE MATTE SMELTING PROCESS Liddell, Keith, Stuart, AUSTRALIA A hydrometallurgical treatment process for extracting platinum group metals from a flotation concentrate in which the invention revolves around obviating the matte smelting and granulating process. Instead the concentrate is submitted to pressure leaching, oxidative or reductive roasting and final recovery by means of ion exchange adsorption. Roasting is applied in order to convert the platinum group metals to a form that dissolves in chlorine/HCL and a chlorine/HCL leach that renders the platinum group metals in solution. 6547949 METHOD FOR PREVENTING STRAY CURRENTS IN PERIPHERAL SYSTEM PARTS DURING AN ELECTROLYSIS PROCESS FOR OBTAINING METALS Anastasijevic, Nikola; Laibach, Stefan; Munker, Friedhelm; Schweitzer, Markus; Kuhn, Walter, GERMANY assigned to MG Technologies AG The electrolyte is supplied from a reservoir through at least one supply line to an electrolysis area including anodes and cathodes and at least one electric d.c. voltage source, and used electrolyte is at least partly recirculated from the electrolysis area back to the reservoir through at least one discharge line. Between a first contact point in the electrolyte of the supply line and a second contact point in the electrolyte of the discharge line there is a bridge line containing electrolyte, where the ohmic resistance R1 of the electrolyte in the bridge line between the first and the second contact point is not more than 10% of the ohmic resistance R2 which exists between the first and the second contact point in the electrolyte flowing through the reservoir. The amount of electrolyte flowing through the bridge line per unit time is not more than 5% of the amount of electrolyte flowing in the supply line in the vicinity of the first contact point. 6551026 METHOD OF REMEDIATING HEAVY METAL-CONTAINING SOIL Cerea, Giuseppina, ITALY assigned to Vomm Chemipharma S.r.l. A method of remediating soil that contains heavy metals comprises the steps of removing and sieving heavy metal-containing soil to separate stones and gravel, and treating the sieved soil, in a thin layer kept in a strongly turbulent state, with a solution of an alkali sulfide at a temperature of at least 50 degree C. 6569339 METHOD FOR REDUCING THE SIZE OF SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESS STEPS AND CELL FOR USING IN THE SOLVENT EXTRACTION PROCESS Laitala, Hannu; Jussi, Sipila, FINLAND assigned to Outokumpu Oyj A method and cell for reducing the size of a solvent extraction process in which a series of cells are arranged in an extraction process. The process includes the use of conventional settlers at the beginning and at the end of the extraction process with at least one reduced-size extraction cell in the middle of the extraction process. 6572677  Lobo, Lloyd A.; Donovan, Kevin M., USA assigned to Eastman Kodak Company The present invention relates to the use of fine metal particles for the recovery of silver from a silver-bearing photographic waste solution. In particular, the metal particles are encapsulated in a hydrophilic colloid that allows for the permeability of water and silver ions. When contacted with the silver-bearing photographic waste solution, the hydrophilic colloid will imbibe water and swell. At the same time, the silver ions can permeate the colloid matrix and come into contact with the metal particles, preferably iron particles, at which point a metal–metal exchange reaction takes place.