The influence of primary particle size distribution (PPSD) on aggregation behaviour and the resulting effect on yield stress of a concentrated colloidal suspension was investigated theoretically. The discrete element model (DEM) combined with the well-known DLVO theory was employed to obtain an insight into the aggregation process of nanoparticles with different PPSDs, where a modified version of the Flatt and Brown model [J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 89 (2006) 1244–1256] [9] was employed to calculate the corresponding suspension yield stress from the simulation results. Specifically, the aggregate growth and structure in terms of fractal dimension, coordination number and the longest dimension were examined.
                  It was shown that at small PPSD variances, a netlike structure was formed with aggregate branches interconnected in multiple locations, whereas at large variances aggregates with more compact structure and smaller longest dimension were generated. The rate of aggregation and particle assemblage was found to be faster at broader PPSDs, in turn generating aggregates with narrower size distributions and more compact structures. The influence of PPSD on coordination number (CN) was found to be minor while a decrease in PPSD variances led to an increase in both the mass-equivalent size and the longest dimension of aggregates. Further, suspension yield stress decreased as PPSD became broader. The simulation results agreed well with the experimental measurements and the published data.projected area of aggregate Hamaker constant drag force coefficient gas constant coordination number fractal dimension buoyancy force Brownian random force contact force viscous drag force electrical double layer force surface force van der Waals force Faraday constant surface separation distance inertia Boltzmann con Debye–Huckel parameter the longest dimension particle mass normal unit vector particle radius vector from the particle centre to the contact point centre-to-centre distance temperature velocity rotational velocity valence elastic deformation permittivity of vacuum dielectric constant of the medium particle time step volume increment zeta potential mean particle size sliding friction damping coefficient Gaussian random number spring stiffness density particle concentration adjustment factor Gaussian distribution variance suspension yield stress fluid particle mean value relative normal component slip particle index Tangential component particle size index two and three dimension Colloidal suspensions are commonly encountered in many industrial processes including water treatment and mineral processing Nanoparticles in colloidal suspensions always exhibit a wide distribution of particle size Previous studies have focussed predominantly on the effect of PPSD on the overall bulk properties of colloidal suspensions, e.g. viscosity Experimental study of micro scale aggregation behaviour has proven difficult due to technological limitations regarding collection of data associated with nano-particles in suspensions. These limitations have greater impact in situations when dealing with concentrated suspensions and/or rapid aggregation. As yet, no method of reliable observation of the aggregation process has been published. Thus, accurate and efficient theoretical models to predict aggregation behaviours are of utmost importance. Amongst the computer simulation techniques, the use of discrete elemental modelling (DEM) has been found to produce greater understanding of systems containing nanoparticles where detailed information on individual particles and particle–particle interactions can be captured In this study, we employed the DEM technique to simulate nanoparticle aggregation in colloidal suspensions driven by random Brownian diffusion under different PPSDs. Our main objective was to gain insight into the effect of PPSD on physical characteristics of fractal aggregates and bulk properties of the suspension. The main forces considered in the model include surface force, contact force, fluid drag force and Brownian random force. The yield stress model developed by Flatt and Bowen The DEM technique was applied to solve particle trajectories. Each solid particle was considered individually, taking into account the dynamics due to the complex particle–particle and particle–fluid interactions. The detailed information regarding the particle motion was captured at each time step. The translational and rotational motions of single particles were calculated based on Newton's equation of motion: In the absence of additives such as polymeric dispersants and coagulants, the van der Waals and electrical double layer (EDL) forces are considered to be the dominant forces in colloidal suspensions The Johnson–Kendall–Roberts (JKR) adhesive force model is commonly applied to avoid numerical singularity for Eq. The soft-sphere model When | When collisions occur between particle Particle The total torque is calculated assuming that the rolling resistance is negligible due to the effect of hydrodynamic lubrication A two dimensional (2D) simulation was chosen to reduce computational time. It has been shown previously [e.g. The particles were randomly introduced into the computational domain at To reduce the computational requirements for this simulation, periodic boundary conditions were adopted for all sides of the square domain Simulation outputs include: (i) normalised number of singlets which is an indication for the particle assemblage rate, (ii) mass-equivalent aggregate size, (iii) the longest dimension which represents the aggregate spreading structure, (iv) fractal dimension which indicates the intrinsic fractal characteristics of the aggregate, and (v) coordination number which represents the number of particles in contact with each individual particle and hence aggregate physical strength. A summary of the calculation methods for these computational outputs is given in Suspension yield stress is defined as the critical shear force applied to overcome the inter-particle bonding strength and induce the suspension to flow The larger effective volume of the truncated cone of two bonding real particles leads to an increase in solid volume fraction from Here it is to be demonstrated how the results of our numerical simulation on aggregate structure can be used to predict one of the bulk flow properties of colloidal suspensions namely the yield stress as a function of PPSD variance. In DEM, each particle can be tracked transiently and hence the specific complex microstructure of fractal aggregate, e.g. coordination number, and particle interactions, e.g. inter-particle forces are known at any given time which allows the prediction to overcome the shortcomings of the original model by Flatt and Bowen Experiments were conducted to capture the complex structure of fractal aggregates using the TEM technique. For these experiments, Firstly, aqueous solutions with pH The growth of aggregates in an aqueous medium with pH   The effect of PPSD variance on aggregate structure including 2D fractal dimension, coordination number, mass-equivalent aggregate size and its size distribution, and aggregate longest dimension are presented as follows. Fractal analysis was performed to obtain 2D fractal dimension of aggregates, The 2D fractal dimensions of aggregates as a function of PPSD variance is presented in The evolution of coordination number, CN, for PPSD variances 20, 40, 60, and 80 is shown in The evolution of aggregate size in terms of mass-equivalent size and the longest dimension for PPSD variances of 20, 40, 60, and 80 is shown in   The experimental data with respects to the dependence of suspension yield stress on PPSD is largely non-existent. Therefore, the proposed approach has been verified indirectly by comparing the simulation results with experimental data as a function of particle concentration. For this comparison, a specific set of modelling has been carried out using the experimental conditions: pH  The DEM technique was used to investigate the effect of PPSD on nanoparticle aggregation and the resulting yield stress of colloidal suspensions. The results demonstrated that small PPSD variances yielded more complex netlike aggregates, whereas large PPSD variances generated aggregates with more compact structures and smaller longest dimension. The assembling of primary particles happened at a higher rate for broader PPSD, where the aggregate size in terms of mass-equivalent size and the longest dimension, appeared smaller with narrower size distributions. The 2D fractal dimension of aggregates increased from 1.46 Thanks to Richard Dear and Con Safouris for technical support in the usage of high performance computer (HPC) in the University of Newcastle; thanks to David Phelan for the guidance in TEM experimental measurements. This work is financially supported by