Poly (l-lactide)'s (PLLA) biodegradable properties are of special value in orthopaedic applications, but its mechanical strength limits its usage. To overcome this PLLA can be reinforced by multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT). In this study the PLLA and MWCNT were combined to prepare nanostructured composites (nanocomposite) at 0, 0.1, 0.5 and 1wt.% reinforcement. The in vitro biocompatibility of these PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites was evaluated taking into account the various stages of implantation including nanocomposite degradation. PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites were highly biocompatible with human bone marrow stromal cells (HBMC). The potential surface degradation product, MWCNT, did not induce toxic responses on HBMC. However, the combination of MWCNT with lactic acid, resembling release after bulk degradation, significantly inhibited HBMC proliferation and activity. This study demonstrates the importance of comprehensive evaluations of novel materials for medical applications in predicting possible adverse effects during nanocomposite degradation.
               
                  From the Clinical Editor
                  This study scrutinizes the cytocompatibility of poly-L-lactide reinforced by multiwall carbon nanotubes, and concludes that the combination of MWCNT with lactic acid significantly inhibited human bone marrow stromal cell proliferation and activity, highlighting the importance of comprehensive evaluations of novel materials.Polylactides in general and in particular poly ( PLLA is characterised by quite low mechanical properties that limit in certain extent its usage for biomedical applications. One of the solutions to overcome low stiffness and strengths of PLLA is the introduction of dispersed oriented fibres in a process known as self-reinforcement. PLLA based nanocomposites with different concentrations of carbon nanotubes (CNT) were lately suggested as promising for those medical applications where an extra mechanical strength is indispensable. It is well accepted that degradation products of biodegradable biomaterials should be non-toxic and get metabolized by the body. To our knowledge the effect of PLLA/MWCNT degradation products – a combination of LA and MWCNT – on human cells has not been reported so far. Therefore in this study, we evaluated the cytocompatibility of PLLA/MWCNT with respect to primary human bone marrow stromal cells. Such assessment was investigated at every stage of implantation, i.e. directly after implantation (cytotoxicity, cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation potential into osteoblasts) and of the degradation products that are released during surface (MWCNT) and after bulk material degradation (MWCNT-LA). Two origins of MWCNT, namely Arkema Graphistrength™ C100 and Nanocyl SA, showing different characteristics, were evaluated. We proved that PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites as well as free-dispersed MWCNT are cytocompatible for HBMC and allow differentiation towards pre-osteoblast cells. In addition, we report that combination of MWCNT and LA inhibits cell metabolic activity and proliferation. These data suggest that secondary body reaction may appear after complete biodegradation of PLLA to LA in the presence of MWCNT. We suggest that our discovery opens an avenue for a comprehensive evaluation of new nanocomposites. PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites containing different concentrations of nanotubes (0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 In order to evaluate the cytotoxic potential and the effect of different features of MWCNT we utilized nanotubes of two origins: the Arkema Graphistrength™ C100 and Nanocyl SA (Sambreville, Belgium) (characterized in Table S1, Supplementary data). MWCNT were suspended in 160 The circular, 32 At indicated time points cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS solution, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and blocked by 1% bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS for 15 The qRT-PCR was performed as described in Supplementary material. The following primers were used: RPL13a: forward (F): F-5′-AAGTACCAGGCAGTGACAG-3′ and reversed (R): R-5′-CCTGTTTCCGTAGCCTCATG-3′, osteocalcin: F-5′-GAAGCCCAGCGGTGCA-3′ and R-5′-CACTACCTCGCTGCCCTCC-3′, collagen I: F-5′-CAGCCGCTTCACCTACAGC-3′ and R-5′-TTTTGTATTCAATCACTGTCTTGCC-3′; ALP: F-5′-GGACATGCAGTACGAGCTGA-3′ and R-3′-CCAGCAAGAAGAAGCTTTG-5′. HBMC were plated in 6 and 96-well plates at a cell density of 3.2 MWCNT were suspended in Pluronic F-127. Five days after HBMC incubation with MWCNT, the cell pellet was sucked up into a cellulose capillary tube (Leica-Microsystems, Heerbrugg, Switzerland). The cell fixation was performed by a 0.1 MWCNT were suspended in LA (8.9 Data are presented as mean Neat PLLA showed stiff and semi-ductile behaviour with a fracture strain at 14.9% (  Bone cell potential to attach and spread over the implant surface is indispensable for implant osseointegration Under osteogenic conditions HBMC have the capacity to differentiate towards (pre-)osteoblastic phenotypes, which might be affected by the substratum. The expression of osteogenic specific markers (bALP, osteocalcin and collagen I) was assessed by culturing HBMC for five days on the various material surfaces. An increased osteocalcin expression by HBMC was observed independently whether cells were cultured on PLLA or PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites compared to tissue culture treated polystyrene (TCPS) control ( The toxicity of suspended MWCNT on HBMC was evaluated to predict cell responses to well-dispersed MWCNT possibly released during nanocomposite surface degradation. The MWCNT dispersed in Pluronic F-127 were incubated with HBMC for five days. Pluronic F-127 did not affect cell metabolism as demonstrated in Figure S2 (Supplementary Material). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis revealed that both MWCNT bundles and “single” MWCNT were located in cell cytoplasm and/or vacuoles of HBMC cells indicating for cellular uptake ( In order to analyse whether cellular uptake of MWCNT and their presence in the medium affected cell functionality and viability, we determined the esterase activity and the percentage of dead cells (see Supplementary Material). MWCNT at the tested concentration range did not induce HBMC death after short (24 The bulk degradation of the nanocomposite, followed by the burst release of high concentrations of LA and MWCNT, represents the second predictive scenario for subsequent tissue exposition. In order to mimic the reactions taking place during the bulk degradation of nanocomposites we incubated MWCNT in concentrated lactic acid under accelerated ageing conditions (80 Poly ( Carbon nanotubes are promising reinforcements for the development of lightweight and stiff materials due to their unusual Young's modulus of 1.2-1.5 TPa To evaluate the biocompatibility of the PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposite    Next, the combination of lactic acid and MWCNT may affect cells. Therefore, we evaluated this combination taking into account the potential modification of MWCNT due to long exposure to acidic pH during the bulk degradation. Bulk degradation may result in different dispersion patterns of MWCNT in comparison to surface degradation and may range from well-dispersed CNT to large MWCNT clusters. This consequently may have an impact on the reaction of surrounding cells and tissue. In contrast to the homogenously and well-dispersed MWCNT suspensions (in Pluronic F-127), the combination of MWCNT and LA shows higher levels of nanotube bundles in solution as visualised by light microscope. Similar was observed for MWCNT dispersed in water without subsequent centrifugation of the suspension. In addition, we found that the combination of MWCNT and LA (pH neutralized) adversely affects HBMC functionality in a concentration-dependent manner. MWCNT-LA suspension affects cell metabolic activity, viability and proliferation, even at the lowest evaluated concentrations (0.1 Evaluating water-suspended MWCNT in the absence of lactic acid we found an opposite concentration-dependent effect with the lowest concentration being the most biocompatible. This was confirmed in respect to the metabolic activity, the total cell number, the number of dead cells relative to living cells and the percentage of proliferating cells. It must be noted that the inhibition of cell activity at the lower MWCNT concentration range (3.75-7.5 Since contradictory data were reported so far concerning biological effect of MWCNT, In summary, we demonstrated that although the PLLA/MWCNT nanocomposites show good biocompatibility, the degradation products (e.g. MWCNT-LA) may induce adverse effects on cell metabolism and proliferation. Moreover, the cellular response was dependent on the MWCNT suspension quality and presence of lactic acid. Our data indicate that an extensive The following are the Supplementary data to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at