The paper describes a process for the recovery of manganese and nickel from the sulfuric acid leach liquor of Indian Ocean manganese nodules using starch as the reductant. The leach liquor contained 22.85g/L manganese, 6.38g/L iron, 1.01g/L copper, 0.023g/L zinc, 0.09g/L cobalt and 1.44g/L nickel. From this leach liquor, Fe was first precipitated out with Ca(OH)2 at pH3.8 followed by the extraction of copper using LIX 84I. From the almost Fe- and Cu-free leach liquor, Zn was extracted out as an impurity with D2EHPA in kerosene, after which the extraction of Mn was carried out with NaD2EHPA. The extraction efficiency of manganese using NaD2EHPA was 99.93% in 2-stages at A:O ratio of 3:4. The co-extraction of cobalt with manganese was 43mg/L which was subsequently removed by scrubbing in two stages with MnSO4 solution. The stripping of manganese was achieved with 4% H2SO4 in 2-stages at A:O ratio of 1:1. After extraction of Mn, Ni was extracted with NaD2EHPA. The extraction isotherm of nickel reads 2-stages at A:O ratio of 3:2. The co-extraction of cobalt with nickel was 47mg/L for which the Ni-LO was scrubbed out with NiSO4 solution. The stripping efficiency of nickel was 99.93% with 0.5% H2SO4 in 2-stages at A:O ratio of 1:1.The manganese nodules deposited on sea bed bearing Mn, Fe, Cu, Co and Ni is considered as an alternative source of the valuable metals for which numerous research programs are being carried out all over the world to recover these metal values in various ways. The hydrometallurgical unit operations such as leaching, precipitation, solvent extraction and electrowinning are being adopted by many researchers for recovery of metal values from manganese nodules. The reduction roast–ammonia leach process for high recovery of iron, manganese, copper, nickel and cobalt values from manganese nodules ( The recovery of manganese, cobalt and nickel from deep sea manganese nodule was carried out by acid oxidative leaching and solvent extraction ( In the present investigation, the manganese nodule was leached with H The manganese nodules collected from the Indian Ocean was used for the study. The commercial extractants, 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (LIX 84I) and TOPS-99 which is Di-2 ethyl-hexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) were used as received from Cognis Corporation, USA and Heavy Water Board, Talcher, India, respectively. Distilled kerosene (140–190 The pH of the aqueous phase was measured with a digital ELICO pH meter, model L1 120 provided with a combined glass electrode and pH of the solutions were adjusted to the desired value by adding NaOH/H All the extraction experiments were carried out at room temperature i.e. ~ The leach liquor contained 22.85 For the complete precipitation of iron from the leach liquor, the ferrous iron present in the solution was oxidized to ferric state by the addition of 0.5% H The leach liquor containing 0.76 To enrich the concentration of copper in organic phase, the extraction was carried out in two-counter current stages with 10% LIX 84I at A:O ratio of 6:1 followed by the stripping of loaded organic with 180 After Fe and Cu removal, the leach liquor contained 6 After extraction of copper and zinc, the leach liquor contained 6 For extraction of manganese, 80% neutral D2EHPA diluted with kerosene was used for the extraction. The effect of pH on the extraction of manganese was investigated within the pH range 0.3 to 3.1 while keeping the concentration of NaD2EHPA constant at 1.0 The plot of log D To study the effect of extractant concentration on the extraction of manganese from leach liquor, after the extraction of Fe, Cu and Zn, the extractant concentration was varied from 0.2 to 2.0 The plot of log D The extraction of Mn from the solution carried out with 1 The loaded organic bearing 43 After scrubbing the loaded organic with 0.1 To find out the theoretical number of stages for the stripping of manganese from the loaded organic, the stripping isotherm ( After extraction of manganese, the leach liquor contained 6 To know the pH for maximum extraction of nickel, experiments were carried out in the initial pH range of 3.1 to 5.6, while the concentration of NaD2EHPA and the A:O phase ratio were kept constant at 0.08 The pH of the leach liquor after Fe, Cu, Zn and Mn extraction was 4.1 and the corresponding equilibrium pH after extraction of Ni was 5.2. At this equilibrium pH of 5.2, the corresponding percentage of Ni extraction was 63.83%. As the extraction of Ni did not increase much after this pH, the extraction of Ni was carried out at this pH of the solution without adjustment. The plot of log D versus equilibrium pH ( To study the effect of various concentrations of extractant on extraction of Ni, the concentration of NaD2EHPA was varied within 0.01 to 0.2 The extraction of nickel carried out with 0.15 After scrubbing, the loaded organic contained 2.14 The stripping isotherm for Ni loaded organic was constructed with 0.5 The flow-sheet for the extraction of Mn and Ni from the polymetallic manganese nodule leach liquor was shown in The extraction mechanism of manganese with NaD2EHPA is shown as follows: D2EHPA was neutralized with NaOH and the neutralization reaction can be expressed as in Eq. As D2EHPA is an acidic extractant, the pH of the solution decreases after extraction due to the release of H The reaction mechanism for the extraction of metal can be given as in Eq. The equilibrium constant, K of the above reaction is given as Eq.  Taking logarithm of Eq. The above reaction mechanism holds good the extraction of Mn and Ni from the aqueous solution using NaD2EHPA, which showed the requirement of 2 The extraction of manganese and nickel from the poly-metallic manganese nodule leach liquor was carried out with neutral forms of D2EHPA. The other associated metal ions such as Fe, Cu, Zn and Co were removed from the leach liquor employing the precipitation and solvent extraction techniques. The iron content in the leach liquor was precipitated out at pH The authors wish to thank Dr. I. N. Bhattacharya, HOD, Hydro & Electrometallurgy Department for encouragement and Prof. B. K. Mishra, Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar for kind permission to publish this paper. The authors are also thankful to the