Sedimentation along with consolidation processes dictate the in situ engineering and hydraulic behavior of a particulate system such as soil. With this in view, the present investigation discusses about the application of dielectric measurements in relation to sediment concentration measurements for fine grained soils. An in-house set up comprising of open ended coaxial probes and vector network analyzer has been used to measure the dielectric behavior of kaolin suspensions in tap and deionized water. These have been further analyzed to furnish suspended sediment concentration, pore water conductivity and shape factors utilizing Complex Refractive Index Model (CRIM) and Bruggeman–Hanai–Sen (BHS) model, through the implementation of an optimization scheme. Furthermore, measured and estimated suspended sediment concentrations showed good agreement with each other in terms of statistical parameters, and a ranking of models approach reliant on three statistical criteria revealed that, CRIM outperforms BHS model for estimating sediment concentrations.Weathering of rocks, and subsequent deposition of uncemented aggregates at their sites of origin (residual deposition), or in places far from their origin (transported deposition via air, water, gravity etc.) lead to formation of geomaterials. In general, the tendency of particles to settle down in a suspension, which is either controlled by particular self-weight as in case of coarse grained soils, or by a critical combination of inter-particle attractive and repulsive forces as in case of fine grained soils The reactive nature of clay minerals may be ascribed to unsatisfied ion valences, and presence of net negative charges on the surface. As such, during the process of sedimentation, clays might attain either dispersed or flocculated state depending on the dominant interparticular force. Fine grained clay mineral such as kaolinite, illite, montmorillonite In an aqueous media, settling velocity is one of the characteristic properties of the sediment, which is reliant on the properties of the media such as density & viscosity, along with particular properties such as size, shape, density and concentration or number Although, measurement of suspended particular/sediment concentration can be carried out either by direct sampling However, TDR measurements present several limitations. The analysis is based on the determination of effective parameter, computed from the TDR waveform, such as apparent permittivity In view of the above, we propose a dielectric spectroscopy based approach in frequency domain to measure suspended sediment concentration for fine-grained porous media. The primary driveway for the investigation is to combine frequency domain measurements in microwave range For the present investigation, a commercial grade kaolin (Eckalite-I) procured from an Australia based business was used. Particular composition of the kaolin was determined by wet analysis through laser diffraction measurement using a particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer2000 MU). In a suspension, the mastersizer determines volume of different sized particles present from measurement of light scattering of particles. This method provides a rather continuous, fast and accurate measurement, and is advantageous over conventionally used hydrometer analysis for establishing particle size distribution curve (PSD) of kaolin Upon subjection to X-ray diffraction and total elemental microwave digestion, it was identified that the kaolin sample has 72.7% of reactive clay minerals (52.7% kaolinite and 20% Illite-mica) An in-house setup involving open ended coaxial probes and a vector network analyser In order to minimise the systematic errors, Performance of the calibrations were further appraised with other standard liquids (tap water, ethanol etc.), and a satisfactory estimation of relative complex permittivity was obtained for 50 MHz–3 GHz range. Prior to the test, kaolin samples were kept inside an oven at 60 °C for 24 h to eliminate any initial residual moisture. Masses of the kaolin sample needed to achieve several target concentrations in deionised water and tap water, as detailed in It is worth mentioning that electromagnetic methods in general provide a means to perform indirect soil characterization by correlating the dielectric permittivity and the targeted soil parameters. To do so, different approaches are available: empirical calibration, relaxation model and theoretical mixing rules. Empirical calibrations are widely used in Time Domain Reflectometry application, with the classic and well known examples of the determination of water content from apparent permittivity with Topp et al. For the pore water, a modified Debye model The dielectric response of solid phase is assumed to be independent of frequency and temperature, and the dielectric permittivity of solid phase ε In this framework, the unknown parameters of the models were derived by fitting the computed spectra in an optimization scheme. A Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) algorithm was used to obtain the best fit In the case of CRIM, 2 parameters were computed: the concentration In order to evaluate the relative efficacy of the CRIM and BHS model in prediction of concentration of suspensions, a ranking system reliant on several statistical parameters through three criteria The three sets of statistical criteria used are described in brief below: Criterion 1: (R1), Based on coefficient of determination ( Coefficient of determination (  Criterion 2: (R2), Based on mean ( An estimation model, under idealised conditions, produces estimates such that the mean ( Criterion 3: (R3), Based on the cumulative probability of the ratio of estimated to observed concentrations Under this criterion, ratio of estimated to observed concentrations are sort in ascending order and plotted against the cumulative probability ( Eventually, Ranking Index (RI) is expressed as the sum of the ranks arising out of individual criterion (Eq.12), and the model with least RI is considered to be the best model.  The spectrum presents typical pattern for suspensions. The real part is almost independent of frequency. Nevertheless, for frequencies between 50 MHz and 1 GHz, a systematic relationship between concentration and real part of permittivity can be observed (the highest value of real part of permittivity is obtained for the lowest concentration and vice versa). Real part of the permittivity at 500 MHz versus concentration is plotted in The parameters estimated with CRIM and BHS model for both sets of measurements are presented in It is worth reiterating that for CRIM, From As described in the previous section, a ranking analysis was performed, and is summarized in This paper introduced and discussed the application of dielectric measurements for determining the suspended sediment concentration of suspensions. With the help of an in-house set up comprising of open ended coaxial probes and vector network analyzer, dielectric behavior of kaolin suspensions were measured, which were then analyzed to furnish suspended sediment concentration, pore water conductivity and shape factors. CRIM and BHS model were employed to achieve the above mentioned objective through the implementation of an optimization scheme. A linear relationship was observed between the real part of the dielectric permittivity at 500 MHz and the concentration. Moreover, real part of the dielectric permittivity is shown to be almost independent of frequency and to reduce with increase in concentration at any given frequency. At low frequencies, higher concentrations yielded higher loss, and thus higher values of imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity. Furthermore, measured and estimated suspended sediment concentrations showed good agreement with each other in terms of statistical parameters. A ranking of the models reliant on three statistical criterion revealed that, CRIM performs better than the BHS model in the studies reported herein. This work was funded by scholarship supports through ‘Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship’ (Formerly ‘International Postgraduate Research Scholarship’), UQ Centennial Scholarship (The