Rietveld quantitative phase analysis has become a widespread tool for the characterization of Portland cement, both for research and production control purposes. One of the major remaining points of debate is whether Portland cements contain amorphous content or not. This paper presents detailed analyses of the amorphous phase contents in a set of commercial Portland cements, clinker, synthetic alite and limestone by Rietveld refinement of X-ray powder diffraction measurements using both external and internal standard methods. A systematic study showed that the sample preparation and comminution procedure is closely linked to the calculated amorphous contents. Particle size reduction by wet-grinding lowered the calculated amorphous contents to insignificant quantities for all materials studied. No amorphous content was identified in the final analysis of the Portland cements under investigation.Over the last decade quantitative phase analysis of anhydrous Portland cements by X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) and whole-profile fitting methods such as the Rietveld method have become standard practice in cement characterisation. Also at cement production plants XRPD quantitative phase analysis is becoming more common as an aid in controlling the various stages of the production process Rietveld quantitative phase analysis usually only considers the crystalline phases included in the analysis and normalizes the sum of the phase contents to 100 XRPD peak intensities and thus Rietveld quantification results are affected by physical phenomena influencing the diffraction process and depend on the data acquisition configuration and the sample preparation procedure. Of importance are issues due to absorption contrast between low and high X-ray absorbing phases, extinction effects at low angle, high intensity lines related to multiple reflections in large crystals or crystal mosaics, particle statistics, and preferred orientation effects A set of five commercial CEMI Portland cements from various producers were selected for study. The cements were sold under varying strength classes from 32.5 The clinker, alite and limestone samples were wet-ground in isopropanol using a McCrone micronizing device. Fixed amounts of 3 The particle size distribution of the powders was measured by laser diffractometry using a Malvern Mastersizer S equipped with a small volume sample dispersion unit. Isopropanol was used as dispersion medium. Measurements were carried out in triplicate. XRPD measurements were made using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer in conventional Bragg–Brentano θ–2θ geometry with a 240 Phase identification and Rietveld quantitative phase analysis were carried out using the X'Pert High Score Plus v3.0e software package by PANalytical. Topas-Academic v4.1 The global variables refined during the Rietveld quantitative phase analysis were a zero error and in case of refinement by HighScore Plus a background polynomial of 5 coefficients combined with a 1/X term. The number of background coefficient was also varied from 2 to 7 to study the impact of the background function on the quantification results. In the Topas-Academic refinements, a 2 term Chebyshev polynomial was used combined with a 1/X term. Initial structure models for the identified phases were taken from the literature and are listed in The external standard method was used as main method to quantify absolute phase contents and the potential presence of unknown crystalline and amorphous phases. The latter fraction is henceforward designated as ‘unknown’. The adopted methodology is similar to earlier works that applied the external standard method to study cementitious systems The results obtained by the external standard method were cross-checked using internal standard additions of a range of reference materials (internal standard method). 20 A complete phase identification and characterisation of the cement and clinker samples was carried out using the selective dissolution treatment residues. As pointed out before In addition to phase identification, the residual fractions can also be used for characterisation of the identified phases. A Rietveld refinement of the patterns delivers information on the lattice and peak profile parameters of the identified minor phases which can subsequently be fixed in the final analysis of the bulk samples. Here, lattice parameters of the minor phases were constrained to the values obtained from the selective dissolution fractions in order to reduce the number of variables in the final refinement  The effect of sample preparation and fineness on the quantification of unknown content in cements was investigated by calculating the unknown content in clinker, alite and limestone samples of varying fineness. The particle size distribution curves for the alite and clinker samples wet-ground for varying durations from 30 The quantitative phase analyses of the as received Portland cements with median particle sizes between 12.4 and 23.1 To verify that the observed trends were not an artifact produced by the selected quantification approach and software, an additional series of experiments was set-up. The unknown content quantification for Portland cement CEM3 (as received) was cross-checked using the internal standard method. Four different reference materials of known crystallinity were used as internal standard, added at a 20 The results obtained using the HighScore Plus software were checked by a parallel quantitative phase analysis using the Topas-Academic package. The quantification of the unknown content by both software suites is compared in The results presented here clearly indicate the importance of appropriate sample comminution using suitable grinding equipment for quantitative evaluation of the amorphous content by XRPD techniques. It should be noted that many dry-grinding techniques can effectively damage the surface and the underlying crystal structure to such extent that widespread amorphisation occurs. Wet-grinding largely overcomes these issues as impact heat and deformation energy is more readily dissipated through the grinding liquid. The calculation of the unknown phase content is directly related to the refined phase scale factor values and thus to the intensities and areas below the measured diffraction peaks (Eq. Finally, Diverging views on the presence of amorphous phase in Portland cement as analyzed by Rietveld quantitative phase analysis emerge from earlier works. This study showed that sample preparation and especially sample comminution is closely linked with the calculated content of amorphous or unknown phase. Wet-grinding to particle sizes around 3.5 V. Fays is warmly thanked for his help in sample preparation. R. Snellings wishes to acknowledge funding through the