Compacts, made from a microwave-plasma-synthesized Fe nanopowder, were sintered under H2 at increasing temperatures. Despite its initial nanosize, we did not observe any enhanced, low-temperature sintering behavior with the powder. Using FESEM, XRD, and BET surface area, we found that the primary nanoparticles are aggregated into micrometer-sized dendritic structures that hinder sintering and densification.It has been shown that nanostructured iron (Fe) exhibits high-strain-rate mechanical behavior that is unlike that observed in coarser-grained material A promising alternative to comminution is the direct synthesis of the nanopowder by microwave-plasma processing (MPP). Fe bodies of 95% theoretical density (TD) have been reported by moderate-pressure consolidation of precursor powder by plasma pressure compaction (P To examine the suitability of such powder as raw material for the preparation of nanograined bodies, compacts of MPP Fe nanopowder were pressureless sintered in a H A representative lot of Fe nanopowder, derived from microwave-plasma synthesis The bulk tap density was determined by weighing the as-received Fe powder and dividing by the filled container volume. Nitrogen gas adsorption analysis was performed on a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 Accelerated Surface Area and Porosimetry System (Micromeritics, Norcross, GA). Samples were outgassed overnight at 200 °C under vacuum. Two separate samples were subjected to six-point BET surface area analysis. Additionally, a full adsorption isotherm was collected for one of the samples. Assuming a spherical particle morphology, particle sizes were calculated using Eq. XRD analysis for determination of particle size was performed using Cu–Kα radiation on a fixed optics, Philips APD1700 Automated Powder Diffractometer System (Philips Analytical, Natick, MA). For the Fe powder, the four most intense peaks, [(1 FESEM was performed on a Hitachi S4700 F-SEM (Nissei Sangyo America, Gaithersburg, MD). Several attempts to obtain optimum imaging conditions resulted in selection of an electron energy of 5 kV. Lower kV settings did not have the required resolution; higher kV settings tended to penetrate into the particles too deeply, resulting in a loss of surface detail. Both lower SE(L) and upper SE(U) secondary electron detectors were used with a working distance ranging from 11.6 to 3 mm. The sample was prepared by sprinkling the powder onto a colloidal-carbon-covered aluminum stub. Loose excess powder was removed with an air gun. Green compacts were made at a range of compaction pressures under ambient laboratory conditions in a uniaxial die. About 1 g of powder was used for each compact. Green density was determined based on measurements of the compact thickness and diameter. After a trial-and-error determination of the optimum pressure to achieve the highest compact density without a pyrophoric oxidation reaction, four compacts were pressed at 55 MPa (8000 psi). Sintering was performed over a temperature range from 300 to 900 °C for 30 min under a 10 l/min flow of dry H The bulk density of the powder was found to be 0.13 g   Results of the BET surface area analysis were 13,866 and 15,079 m XRD line-broadening analysis of each of the four Fe peaks yielded an average crystallite size of about 20±3 nm. Regardless of sintering temperature, all of the consolidated pellets delaminated, though the macroscopic appearance of the compacts improved with increasing temperatures. At the lower two temperatures, the pellets were heavily delaminated, black, and rough. The extent of delamination seemed to decrease with increasing temperature. At higher two temperatures, the pellets had only one or two lateral delaminations, but were blistered with a silvery exterior surface. Interior surfaces were also shiny. Shown in Also included in This study has shown that microwave-plasma synthesis does result in a powder with features on a nanometer scale. Aside from the primary particles observed in FESEM, the BET surface area and XRD measurements are consistent with a nanosized powder, as is the pyrophoricity of the powder during handling. However, despite of little or no interior grain substructure, as revealed in The most striking properties of the microwave-plasma-synthesized powder vis-á-vis conventional powders are the unexpectedly low-bulk green density and poor compaction behavior. The high specific surface area of the primary particles cannot account for neither the markedly low-bulk density nor the excessive springback. Both, however, can be understood as being due to the presence of the dendritic structures. The inability to compact the particles beyond a green density of 40% TD can also be attributed to these aggregates. It has been postulated that increased interfacial and surface free energies in nanosized particles would enhance diffusion and thereby facilitate sintering at lower temperatures These results are inconsistent with those of Kalyanaraman et al., where the starting material was prepared in an identical process, but consolidation was by the P An MPP Fe nanopowder was found to consist of dendritic agglomerates of nanosized spheroidal particles. Data indicated the existence of a bimodal particle size distribution. The estimated average particle size was 60–80 nm with 20-nm subgrains, while the overall agglomerate size was 0.3–1 μm. Only FESEM was able to identify the true nature of the particles; BET- and XRD-based methods were complementary as both failed to correctly interpret the agglomeration of the nanoparticles. An examination of the pressureless sintering behavior of this powder indicated that the dendritic structure of the nanopowder hinders solid-state sintering into a fully dense body. No enhanced sintering below the secondary recrystallization temperature was observed. Instead, the initial size and morphology of the Fe were completely lost above this 500 °C threshold. Unfortunately, the sinterability occurs at an inconvenient time during powder synthesis, whereby further processability is compromised. It is suspected that modifications of MPP will be required to sidestep this difficulty. The implications for processing are twofold: on one hand, if the nanostructure is to be retained, sintering must be conducted below this temperature. On the other hand, direct sintering of nanopowders to dense bodies will require more careful control of the MPP synthesis process to avoid formation of low-density agglomerates. While it may be possible to introduce further processing steps, conventional pressing and pressureless sintering of such agglomerates to full-density bodies is extremely difficult. The authors appreciate the assistance of Ms. Sara White at Nissei Sangyo America with the use of the FESEM, Messrs. Bradley Klotz and George Dewing in the preparation and SEM examination of the sintered samples, and Kyu Cho for the XRD measurement protocol development.