Synthetic diamond is an important carbonous material that has widespread applications ranging from machine tools to the next-generation wafer of powder devices. Understanding of its wetting behaviours is therefore essential for the development of the highly required diamond bonding technique. In this paper, the wettability and spreading kinetics of Sn-Ti solder alloys were systematically investigated on polycrystalline chemical vapour deposition (CVD) diamond using the sessile drop method. In situ examination of contact angles at continuously elevated temperatures indicated that wetting of the CVD diamond by Sn-Ti solder alloys commenced at temperatures well below the bonding temperatures of conventional filler alloys. An excellent wetting of Sn-Ti solder alloy on the CVD diamond was induced by the addition of a small amount of Ti (0.5 wt%). It was also revealed that the spreading process of Sn-Ti alloys on the CVD diamond was initially controlled by the Ti adsorption at the wetting triple line. Enhancing the Ti adsorption at the wetting triple line could effectively improve the low-temperature wettability of Sn-Ti alloys on the CVD diamond, such as the case of 600 °C in this work, at which the possibility of surface corrosion and thermal damage of diamond devices can be substantially reduced.Synthetic diamond is an important carbonous material that offers desirable properties such as ultra-high thermal conductivity, large electrical resistivity, and low thermal expansion coefficient [ In previous studies, the wettability of active filler alloys on synthetic diamond was mainly measured by equilibrium contact angle after high-temperature wetting [ In this paper, the wetting behavior of Sn-Ti solder alloys on CVD diamond films was systematically investigated at both continuously elevated and isothermal temperatures. The starting wetting temperature of Sn-Ti alloys on CVD diamond films was identified through The Sn- The Sn-    To examine the phase formation and the growth morphology of the interfacial titanium carbides formed between Sn-Ti alloys and CVD diamond, the remained Sn-Ti alloy of the wetted samples was removed through chemical etching in an HCl solution. Phase spectra obtained at the reaction interfaces indicated that WC, diamond and TiC peaks existed, as shown in   Sn exhibits weak Van De Waals interaction with C. As a result, pure Sn and diamond compose a non-reactive wetting system, in which the equilibrium contact angle is usually reached in a very short time (10 The XRD and Raman results in  The SEM and TEM results presented in As discussed above, the adsorption of active Ti and the reaction product formed at the liquid-solid interface can both drive the liquid Sn to spread; while the underlying wetting mechanism is temperature dependent. To further reveal the role of Ti adsorption in low-temperature wetting of Sn-1Ti alloy on polycrystalline CVD diamond, isothermal wetting experiments at 600 °C were carried out using cast and mechanically mixed Sn-1Ti alloy ingots. According to the discussion given in In this paper, the wetting behaviours of Sn-Ti alloys were systematically investigated on polycrystalline CVD diamond using the sessile drop method to understand the underlying wetting mechanisms. According to the experimental results and discussion, the conclusions can be drawn as follows. Addition of 0.5 wt% Ti was sufficient to result in an excellent wetting of Sn-Ti alloys to polycrystalline CVD diamond after wetting at 950 °C. Extensive Ti addition conversely reduced the wettability of Sn-4/6Ti alloys on CVD diamond at 950 °C, because the existence of a large amount of refractory Sn-Ti IMCs reduced the fluidity and impeded the spreading of molten Sn-Ti alloys. Wetting temperatures played a determinant role in the reactive wetting of cast Sn- The wettability of Sn-Ti alloy can be improved by enhancing the Ti adsorption at relatively low temperatures. In this work, the CVD diamond was well wetted by mechanically mixed Sn-1Ti powder alloy at 600 °C, at which the possibility of thermal damage caused by high-temperature wetting could be substantially reduced.      XJL is financially supported by Subsidized Project for Cultivating Postgraduates' Innovative Ability in Scientific Reacher of The data used to support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at