The capitellar fracture of the humerus is a relatively uncommon injury but can result in significant functional impairment if not appropriately treated. Since its first description in 1841 by Cooper, The capitellum is directed 30 degrees anteriorly and distally with respect to the long axis of the humerus, and its center of rotation is located 12 to 15 mm anteriorly to the humeral shaft axis The capitellum and the lateral aspect of the trochlea receive extraosseous blood supply through posterior perforating vessels arising from the lateral arcades which are formed by the radial recurrent, radial collateral, and interosseous recurrent arteries ( The capitellar fracture is truly rare, accounting for only 1% of all elbow fractures and 3% to 6% of all distal humerus fractures. The capitellar fracture occurs as a result of vertical shear stress transmitted from the radial head. Clinical reports indicate that the fracture commonly occurs after a fall from a standing height on an extended or semiflexed arm similar to that of a radial head fracture. Capitellar and radial head fractures have been produced experimentally from an indirect impact along the radius in full extension and another fracture from direct impact to the end of the distal humerus with the elbow in 90 degrees of flexion. The radiocapitellar joint provides valgus and external rotatory stability primarily when the medial collateral ligament is dysfunctional. Finally, increased loads at the ulnohumeral joint have been demonstrated when the load-sharing function of the radiocapitellar joint is absent. Historically, the original descriptions identified two distinct fractures and provided a basis for a classification. The type I fracture, also known as a Watts et al. reviewed 79 shearing fractures and observed the type I fracture was the most common (47%) followed by type IV (41%). Type II and III fractures occurred in 8% and 4%, respectively. This can be very difficult for all but the type I injury. A clear and detailed history is suggestive and also helps to identify associated injuries. Physical exam often shows crepitus on flexion or extension and also with pronation/supination. Mechanical block can be presented on flexion and extension but not with supination and pronation. Localized pain and swelling on the lateral side of the elbow is a common presentation, but generalized pain and swelling of the entire elbow can also variably occur. The type I fracture may appear as a semilunar fragment. The fragment displaced proximally into the radial fossa suggests the capitellum since the radial head fragment rarely displaces into this quadrant ( The radial–capitellar view is helpful in diagnosing nondisplaced fractures or identifying small fracture fragments. However, a computed tomography (CT) scan with three dimensional reconstruction is the clear gold standard for diagnosing the capitellar or any subtle elbow fracture. The treatment plan must consider not just the precise fracture characteristics but also the complexity of the fracture and the associated injuries. Due to the rarity of the fracture, there is no clear consensus on how to manage these fractures. Earlier studies favored nonoperative treatments due to limited diagnostic and treatment options. However, with better understanding of the fracture characteristics and advances in small fragment fixation devices, surgical intervention is clearly the treatment of choice. Under general anesthesia with muscle relaxation, the elbow is fully extended and supinated, which often will reduce the fragment. Varus stress or directly compressing the fragment may aid in the reduction. Despite the promising reports with this treatment, If the fractured fragments are too small for stable fixation, excision is considered, especially for the type II fracture when internal fixation is difficult due to absence of bone. Unfortunately, excision of the thin fragment may remain symptomatic so a more extensive resection may be required. However, if the fracture involves the lateral ridge of trochlea, it should be treated with anatomical reduction and internal fixation as excision of this structure may destabilize the elbow. Regardless, in all instances, the lateral ligament complex is preserved to preserve stability. While excision of the capitellum has minimum effect on immediate valgus stability, and despite satisfactory short-term outcomes, chronic pain, progressive instability, and limitation of motion have been reported. The goal of open reduction and internal fixation is to obtain anatomical reduction and rigid internal fixation to allow early motion. Because the fracture can be more complex than what it appears to be in the simple radiographs, a CT scan is required. If a CT scan is not available, it is important to have the full spectrum of fixation and replacement options readily available. The fixation options may include threaded or smooth Kirschner wire, cancellous or headless screws, and even plates The patient is placed in a supine or lateral decubitus position. Under tourniquet control, a Kocher approach can be extended as necessary and is preferred. Alternatively, a posterior longitudinal skin incision can be used if medial exposure is considered possible. To enhance the anterior articular exposure, the origin of the wrist extensors and the underlying capsule are sharply elevated from the lateral supracondylar ridge. Forearm supination facilitates removal of the fragment, but pronation is recommended to move the posterior interosseous nerve away from the surgical field. After precise reduction, the large fragment characteristic of this type of fracture is fixed from posterior to anterior. A bone graft may be necessary in the cases with impacted fracture, and care is exercised to minimize the posterior dissection as this may interrupt the blood supply to the fracture site. Because this fracture is primarily a shearing fracture of the articular cartilage from the subchondral bone, fixation is problematic. The use of the provisional K-wire fixation is often required. Screw or pin fixation must be posigrade, through the cartilage, and the fixation counter-sunk through the cartilage. Because of the concerns noted previously, the senior author prefers to stabilize the thin type II fracture or smaller fragments with absorbable suture fixation With capitellar fractures and distal humeral shear fractures, the senior author also regularly protects the fixation with an articulated external fixator for 3 to 4 weeks (see If rigid fixation is not achieved, as in the type II or III fractures, or if severe osteoporosis is present, prolonged immobilization may be necessary. The important consideration is that the contracture can be more reliably addressed than a nonunion or malunion. The external fixator is removed at 3 to 4 weeks, and the elbow is examined for motion, crepitus, and stability; subsequent rehabilitation is predicated on this examination (see The recent literature utilizing current techniques to treat these fractures, with and without trochlear involvement, is encouraging. Arthroscopic treatment has been employed for the purpose of excision of the type II fracture. Total elbow arthroplasty and distal humerus hemiarthroplasty have been used in the elderly patient with badly comminuted fractures with good success. However, we now prefer capitellar hemireplacement for isolated capitellar pathology. Biomechanical studies indicate that the implant restores valgus and external rotational stability to the elbow. Isolated capitellar replacement is an off-label application of the device designed to be used with a radial head replacement. The most common complication following isolated capitellar fracture is elbow stiffness. Other complications include posttraumatic osteoarthritis, malunion and nonunion, ulnar nerve neuropathy, and avascular necrosis. In the literature, complications of capitellar fractures are reported as case series with relatively small numbers, and thus the incidence of each complication is unclear. Today nonunion and localized arthrosis are treated with capitellar replacement by the senior author.