The effect of sulphur on the strengthening and the thermally activated deformation of cold-worked Zr–1 Nb alloy was investigated. In the present study, the sulphur strengthening was observed even at room temperature unlike the previous study of Ferrer et al. The flow stress increased by 65MPa at room temperature with the addition of sulphur as little as 20ppm. With further increase of sulphur content up to 300ppm, negligible change of the flow stress was observed. The additive strengthening behavior in which the entire stress–strain curve shift upward by the friction stress due to the addition of sulphur was observed in the Zr–Nb alloy of the present study. The activation volume decreased slightly (from 110b3 to 80b3) with the addition of 300ppm sulphur at room temperature. The rate-controlling mechanism of the deformation can best be explained by the dislocation interaction mechanism in which the segregation of alloying elements such as oxygen and sulphur atoms affects the activation length of dislocations.Sulphur and phosphorus have been known to cause the embrittlement in many alloys by reducing the boundary cohesive strength Ferrer et al. A Zr–1 Strain jump tests were performed at room temperature and 300  The stress–strain responses of Zr–1.0Nb with various sulphur contents at room temperature and 300 The strength level of Zr–Nb of the present study is far higher than that of Ferrer et al. Fracture surfaces of Zr–1.0Nb (a), Zr–1.0Nb–100 In order to investigate the deformation mechanism of Zr–Nb alloys, the activation volume for plastic flow was measured. The activation volume The observation that sulphur has the strengthening effect at a lower temperature (room temperature) in the present study than the study (100 The difference of the strain dependence on strengthening (the additive strengthening in the present study and the multiplicative strengthening in Zr–Nb alloy of Ferrer et al. The basic rate-controlling mechanisms that could be operative in Zr–Nb alloys with or without sulphur are (1) intersection of dislocations ( Hong et al. Kocks suggested that the activation length (described as ‘bulge length’ in the paper of Kocks The segregation of sulphur atoms to dislocations can result in the slight decrease of the activation volume and the increase of the strength. To examine the effect of sulphur on the strength, the effect of sulphur on the thermally activated deformation mechanism should be discussed. Ferrer et al. The model of Ferrer et al. The presence of sulphur atoms as little as 20 The interaction of oxygen and sulphur atoms with a dislocation and its effect on activation of bulge can be schematically depicted in On the basis of the investigation of the effect of sulphur on the strengthening and the activation volume, the following conclusions can be drawn: The sulphur strengthening was observed even at room temperature unlike the previous study of Ferrer et al. The flow stress increased by 65 The additive strengthening behavior in which the entire stress–strain curve shifts upward by the friction stress due to the addition of sulphur was observed in Zr–Nb alloy of the present study. The difference of the strain dependence of the strengthening (the additive strengthening in the present study and the multiplicative strengthening in Zr–Nb alloy of Ferrer et al. The activation volume decreased from 110b The elongation decreased with the increase of the sulphur content, but the reduction of the ductility with the addition of 20 The rate-controlling mechanism of the deformation can best be explained by the dislocation interaction mechanism in which the segregation of alloying elements such affects the activation length of dislocations. The segregation of sulphur atoms in addition to oxygen atoms could decrease the activation volume by limiting the length of the activated bulge and enhance the strengthening effect. The authors acknowledge the support from MOCIE (Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy), funded through Korea Nuclear Fuel Co. (2006).