This chapter focuses on the advances made in the design and operation of carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) plants. Most of the advances over the last few years have been in the area of carbon management. Trends towards cyanide-free elution are becoming more prevalent, impacting positively on operating costs. While the elution and regeneration components are essential aspects of a CIP plant, the capital cost of this area of the plant is a relatively small part of the overall project cost and can therefore, be engineered with a higher contingency factor.The use of cyanide to leach gold ores revolutionized the gold industry at the beginning of the 20th century, providing a new process that was efficient, cost-effective and widely applicable. The introduction of activated carbon to recover gold from cyanide leach solutions in the last quarter of the 20th century had a similar impact on the economics of gold ore processing. By replacing the Merrill–Crowe zinc cementation step, carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) recovery provided a process that allowed the treatment of lower grade and problematic ores ( In a fortuitous bit of timing, this technology became available as the world gold industry entered a period of unparalleled expansion following the deregulation of the gold price in the mid-1970s. As a consequence, in a relatively short period of 10–15 years, the new technology was developed, proven and implemented industry wide. Although the era of CIP commenced in the late 1970s, the use of carbon for the recovery of gold was recognized and practiced much earlier. In 1927, Gross and Scott of the US Bureau of Mines published an extensive report on the use of charcoal to recover gold and silver from cyanide solution, identifying many of the key parameters of the process ( The modern application of activated carbon as an alternative to the Merrill–Crowe process had its genesis in the post-war years in the United States. The first CIP flowsheet was introduced at the Carlton Mill, Cripple Creek, Colorado ( The first modern CIP plant in Australia was commissioned in 1975 at Canbelego, New South Wales, to retreat 6 In South Africa the first CIP plant was commissioned in 1978 at Modderfontein 74 ( By the late 1980s, most of the equipment and processes that today characterize CIP technology were in place. By 2000, several hundred plants had been built. The majority of the activated carbon used for precious metal recovery is either granular coconut-shell carbon or peat-based extruded carbon. Important considerations when selecting an activated carbon for use in a CIP operation include gold-loading kinetics (activity), gold-loading capacity, elution kinetics, level to which gold can be eluted, strength and abrasion resistance, particle-size distribution and wet density. The properties of a particular activated-carbon sample will have a significant impact on most aspects of the gold-recovery operation, affecting variables such as carbon inventory, residence times, gold losses, carbon losses and elution conditions. Therefore, due consideration must be given to the physical and chemical properties of the virgin carbon when selecting a particular brand for precious-metal recovery. In addition to standard ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials; now ASTM International) procedures (see Several different methods for monitoring the rate at which gold is adsorbed on to carbon from an alkaline cyanide solution have been proposed ( Essentially, all the procedures involve contacting a known mass of carbon with a solution of known initial gold concentration, collecting and analysing samples of the solution over a period of time and then calculating the activity of the carbon sample based on the data obtained. Unfortunately, there is currently no accepted standard method for evaluating carbon activity. A number of the test methods are summarized in Parker Centre method (modified Mintek method – Tennant Ltd method ( Mintek method ( Calgon Corporation method ( Pica Pty Ltd method ( Sutcliffe Speakman ( The AMIRA P420A Gold Industry Survey of Australasian mining operations (   The gold-loading capacity of an activated carbon, often referred to as the The approach used by Attrition resistance or hardness of the carbon is (in part) inversely related to its kinetic activity. That is, increasing the internal surface area of the carbon will yield a more active material but will weaken the structure, rendering it more susceptible to breakage. Many methods have been proposed for determining the resistance of activated carbons to particle-size degradation under service conditions, including the ball-pan hardness method, the Denver cell wet-attrition test, the stirring-bar method and the dust-elutriation method. No method has been accepted as an industry standard. However, the ball-pan hardness method has been used widely in the carbon industry and is useful for establishing a measurable characteristic of the carbon for comparison purposes. Based on an ASTM method ( There are several methods available for the measurement of wet attrition resistance ( Methods used in the gold-mining industry are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Three methods of surface-area determination are of relevance to gold processing: The specific surface area of the carbon is measured by the adsorption of a gas of known dimension (typically nitrogen) under standard conditions of temperature and pressure, in the low-pressure range of an adsorption isotherm. The iodine number represents an approximation of the surface area available to most adsorbates ( The carbon-tetrachloride activity (CTC activity) of a carbon is a measure of the micropore volume or activation level of the material ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( This test is only necessary for virgin carbons intended for use on plants using slotted screens ( Models can be useful tools for assessing the influence of design, operational variables and cost factors on circuit performance. In CIP and CIL plants, the number of these variables and the complexity of their inter-relations are such that simulation techniques can be a cost-effective means for assessing design parameters or carbon-management options ( High-quality experimental data are required in order to make effective use of models and simulations ( leach feed-grade – solids and solution; leach-feed pulp density; solids flowrate; specific gravity (SG) of solids and solution; volumes of the leach and adsorption tanks, pulp density, carbon concentration; leach/adsorption tank profiles – gold concentration in solid, liquid, carbon; tailings grade and density; and barren and loaded carbon grades. It is not intended to exhaustively review all the models that have been published over the years; as an overview, several of the models will be briefly described, including the Nicol model based on simple film-diffusion theory, the Stange model based on population balance and the Liebenberg and Van Deventer model based on pore diffusion.  The model was tested in steady-state continuous tests and batch tests and was then extended to simulate a five-stage CIP pilot plant. The Mintek leaching kinetic model was incorporated so that the model could also be used for modelling CIL plants. The Mintek model has been further developed into a simulator that is part of the collaborative research project, AMIRA P420B; the model (SIMCIL) is accessible to sponsors of the project. In a series of three papers, This distribution takes into account the non-instantaneous nature of carbon transfer and any carbon leakage from tank to tank. The approach removes one of the major assumptions of other models, viz. that carbon transfer is instantaneous.  The model was tested through validation testing and three case-study tests. Testing was performed for different scenarios such as carbon leakage and concurrent leaching. Model results were in quite good agreement with actual plant data. The three case studies were performed to study the effects of carbon transfer, leaching and eluted-carbon loadings, and to demonstrate the model's ability to simulate a wide range of operating conditions. For example, for the effect of carbon transfer, four different modes of carbon transfers were modelled – carousel operation where all the carbon is transferred to the next tank, continuous-transfer operation and two types of sequential transfer.   This more recent model attempts to take into account changes in the parameters of the isotherm between tanks with an empirical relationship to the effect of changing cyanide levels down the cascade with feed cyanide concentration and feed pH as the parameters. Recent developments in gold processing have seen a greater proportion of circuits with a CIL, or part CIL configuration, compared to the early CIP plants. The number of leach and adsorption stages in modern CIP/CIL plants is quite variable. Most of the sites have none or only one or two leach tanks. As the number of adsorption stages increases, the amount of carbon required at each stage decreases ( In summary, increasing the number of stages will have the following effects on the circuit ( less carbon is required to achieve the same barren solution gold concentration; higher gold loadings on the carbon in each stage (except the first stage); lower weighted-average gold loading on carbon; less gold lock-up (lower gold inventory); less carbon abrasion and gold loss; and shorter carbon retention time, thus lowering fouling potential. The overall extraction of gold from the ore is increased owing to increased residence time in the leach. The increase in solution tenor in the adsorption feed, combined with the fact that little leaching takes place in the last few stages in the plant, results in improved adsorption performance and overall increase in gold recovery. The amount of carbon in the CIL circuit is not dependent on the size of the vessels but on total gold input and number of stages. A typical CIL circuit will have lower carbon concentrations than in a CIP circuit because the leach vessels are typically much larger than normal adsorption vessels. The amount of pulp that has to be transferred to move the required amount of carbon is therefore significantly increased. This increases the flow through the interstage screens, which have either to be enlarged or supplemented by external screens. Transfer times tend to be longer than for CIP operations and the plant is upset for longer periods. In addition, leaching and adsorption requirements may easily be in conflict and optimization of these stages may be difficult to achieve.  One of the few significant mechanical innovations in CIP in the last 15 years has been the introduction of the AAC pump cell produced by Kemix Pty Ltd ( The Pump cell is particularly applicable to a carousel adsorption-circuit configuration. In the carousel system, each batch of carbon spends the entire adsorption cycle in one tank. Instead of transferring carbon, as is done in normal CIP operations (sometimes called cascade CIP), the feed and discharge points of each contactor are changed sequentially. Advantages of the carousel system include: elimination of carbon back-mixing due to carbon not being transferred as a batch in cascade CIP; removal of the recirculating-pulp load; reduced capital costs; and reduced operating costs. An important consideration related to carbon residence time is that the longer the carbon remains in contact with the pulp, the greater the extent of fouling and the greater the detrimental effect on adsorption of gold (  A higher carbon inventory is often the result of a low carbon activity, caused either by inefficient regeneration or circuits with high fouling capacity,    there is sufficient carbon in the adsorption plant; good eluted-carbon assays (<40 g/t) are routinely achieved; there is a minimum of leaching in the last few adsorption stages; carbon activity is consistently high through good acid washing and regeneration practices; and there is minimal co-current flow of carbon through the circuit caused by leakage of carbon through interstage screens. It has often been suggested that more carbon should be added to the later stages of an adsorption circuit than to the early stages to scavenge gold (  Modelling Australasian circuits using SIMCIL has generally shown little or no benefit by skewing carbon distribution to either the front or back of the circuit. Two exceptions to this general rule are (i) where leaching continues down the circuit, there is an advantage is moving the carbon to the back of the circuit; and (ii) where the ore contains a It can be seen from the table that, after normalizing the carbon inventory, the minimum solution-loss result is achieved with equal concentration of carbon in all tanks. Significant additional solution loss results with variable distribution. The model successfully predicted the trend observed in the plant. Barren-carbon grades of 20–50  The majority of sites reported carbon losses of between 10 and 30 High carbon inventories result in extended carbon residence, with the carbon being subjected to increased attrition time in the tanks. However, the major source of carbon loss is during the elution and regeneration stages, arising from mechanical factors during carbon transfer (short radius bends in transfer piping, high pumping velocity, high carbon density and screening) or from uncontrolled regeneration leading to burning of the carbon, resulting in reduced attrition resistance. Higher gold loadings on carbon have the beneficial effect of decreasing the size requirements of the elution-regeneration plant. Some savings in carbon usage rate may also be achieved owing to reduced carbon handling. Carbon inventory will not be significantly affected, although the average carbon activity in the circuit may decrease due to longer average carbon residence times ( Carbon loading is strongly influenced by the gold tenor in the pregnant solution. Loaded carbon values can be up to 10,000 times higher than the gold tenor in solution (   The smaller the particle the greater the adsorption rate. Although the size range of particles in the circuit is relatively small, it is nevertheless significant. For the same contact time, the smaller particles will become loaded to higher values than the larger particles, and the gold loadings on individual particles will be distributed as a result. The method of carbon transfer also has an effect. The mean gold loading on the carbon in the circuit decreases from the first to the last contactor in the adsorption train. During the transfer cycle carbons from different tanks become mixed to some degree, unless the complete carbon inventory in each tank is instantaneously moved upstream. In the Woollacott and Erasmus study, it was found that 11% of the carbon contained 30% of the gold, this carbon being classified as small, highly loaded particles which could impair the performance of adsorption and elution processes. Such particles would have lower than expected adsorption rates before they are removed from the adsorption circuit. In addition, some fraction of the gold in these particles is likely to be found in the smaller pores of the carbon and so may be less accessible to elution. Modifying operating practices to reduce the proportion of carbon that is loaded in this way should improve the adsorption and elution. Carbon movement can either be performed in one transfer per day or numerous small transfers using either of the following methods ( Loaded carbon is transferred from the first tank and then sequentially down the bank until regenerated carbon is added to the last tank. This is known as Regenerated carbon is added to the last tank and then carbon is transferred sequentially upstream until loaded carbon is transferred from the head tank. This is known as Up-bank transfer temporarily doubles the carbon concentration in one of the stages, returning to normal as the batch is transferred. This transfer regime creates more mixing of the carbon and a flatter gold on carbon profile but is considered more desirable than increasing tails loss. Hence, up-bank transfer is the preferred method. The relative performance values for the transfer of various fractions of the carbon inventory at each stage during each cycle are given in The operating costs associated with elution and regeneration are proportional to the rate of carbon transfer through the circuit ( This chapter has focused on advances made in the design and operation of CIP and CIL plants. Most of the advances over the last 10 years or so have been in the area of carbon management. Trends towards cyanide-free elution ( The author gratefully acknowledges the contributions and assistance provided by members of the Murdoch University Gold Research Group. The author also acknowledges the support provided by industry through the collaborative AMIRA P420 “Gold Processing Technology” project, which made available some of the information presented in this chapter.