This paper reports a study on the effect of redox potential in chalcopyrite bioleaching in the presence of iron- and sulphur-oxidizing bacteria. Bioleaching tests were carried out in stirred Erlenmeyer flasks at 180 rpm, with 0.5 g of chalcopyrite mineral, 99 ml of a sulphate solution of Fe3+/Fe2+ (with the redox potential ranging between 300 and 600 mV Ag/AgCl) at pH 1.8 and 1 ml of a mesophilic (35 °C) or thermophilic (68 °C) culture. The overoxidation of the leaching solution, due to the activity of iron-oxidizing microorganisms (Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Leptospirillum ferrooxidans and Sulfolobus BC), favoured the precipitation of jarosite on chalcopyrite surfaces followed by passivation. Iron- and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms, such as A. ferrooxidans and Sulfolobus BC adapted for 4 months to elemental sulphur as the sole energy source, recovered their iron-oxidizing ability after being in contact with Fe2+.The use of microorganisms in the leaching of minerals dates back to the beginning of the fifties. Many of the studies published to date have shown that bacterial leaching of metal sulphides, including secondary copper sulphides, is possible ( Many researches have dealt with the subject of the slow kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching and its passivation ( Recent studies ( This study examined the effect of redox potential in bioleaching of chalcopyrite. The aim was to show the relationship between its passivation and the Fe- or S-oxidizing ability of mesophilic and thermophilic mixed cultures. As in previous papers in this series, all tests were performed with a chalcopyrite-rich mineral (approximately 80% CuFeS The mineral was dry ground using a ball mill to an average particle size of 70 μm ( Mixed cultures of mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria, grown at 35° and 68 °C respectively, were used. The majority of species in the mesophilic culture were Since the mixed cultures mainly consisted of iron-oxidizing bacteria and our study also considered the effect of sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms on leaching kinetics, the bacterial cultures were also adapted to elemental sulphur. The following nutrient mediums were used: 0K medium, a modification of the 9K medium of The different redox potentials of solutions were determined by mixing ferric and ferrous sulphates with a constant total iron concentration of 0.5 or 5 g/L and pH 1.8. The stock solutions of ferric sulphate were prepared with 0K and Norris nutrient mediums for the tests at 35 and 68 °C respectively. All leaching tests were performed in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm and 35 or 68 °C using 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks covered with hydrophobic cotton to admit oxygen but reduce water loss through evaporation. A low pulp density of 0.5% (99 ml of leaching solution and 0.5 g of mineral) was chosen to avoid sharp changes in the redox potential of the solution at the start of leaching. Finally, tests were inoculated with 1 ml of the corresponding bacterial culture. Periodically, water evaporation was restored, pH adjusted when above the initial value, redox potential recorded and 1 ml samples removed from the liquid to obtain kinetic information on metals dissolved, using atomic absorption spectroscopy (Cu and FeTotal) and photocolorimetry (Fe  Despite the low copper extraction in the bioleaching tests, the bacterial activity was sufficiently high to retain practically all iron in solution as Fe The SEM observations of the bioleaching residues at 35 °C showed chalcopyritic surfaces free of passivating products ( The above results therefore seem to confirm the refractoriness of chalcopyrite to leaching. In order to increase the copper dissolution rate, the chalcopyrite surface needs to be activated, either by increasing the temperature or by addition of a catalyst such as silver. Unlike at low temperature, bioleaching at 68 °C with thermophilic microorganisms was kinetically favoured ( However, unlike the chemical leaching tests at 68 °C with 5 g Fe/L and the initial potential controlled ( The SEM micrographs of the bioleaching residues at 68 °C show the growth of a passivating layer covering most particles ( Since the copper dissolution rate in There has been very little research into the effect of redox potential on chalcopyrite bioleaching until recently, but there are some contradictions. For instance,  However,  Our results seem to indicate that despite the positive action of microorganisms in regenerating the leaching agent for chalcopyrite, the increase in ferric ion concentration provokes a “chemical instability” in the system which favours its precipitation. Under such circumstances, the precipitation of ferric ion as jarosite would cause the passivation of chalcopyrite.  The trend at 68 °C was similar to that observed in tests at 35 °C, but with the difference that the maximum copper extraction was much higher, 70% (  The addition of iron, whether as ferric or as ferrous ion, in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite using iron-oxidizing thermophilic microorganisms, will eventually produce a sharp increase of the potential. Unquestionably, the metabolic action of those bacteria is very fast, since they retain most of the iron in solution as ferric ion. Therefore, although chalcopyrite bioleaching assisted with iron (Fe However, findings on this topic are contradictory. In contrast, Similarly, other researchers have remarked on the importance of the ferrous ion in bioleaching of mineral sulphides. Thus, the enhancement of chalcopyrite bioleaching at 68 °C with the addition of as little as 0.5 g/L iron (whether in ferric or ferrous form) may be explained by the establishment of a high Fe As discussed previously, mixed cultures with predominance of Fe-oxidizing microorganisms retained high redox potentials (around 650 mV vs. Ag/AgCl) from the beginning of the tests, and so the effect of redox potential on chalcopyrite bioleaching was negligible. Its effect was therefore studied using a mixed culture of S-oxidizing bacteria.  At 35 °C, the tests inoculated with the sulphur-oxidizing culture maintained an appreciably lower redox potential than the tests inoculated with the mixed culture during the first days of bioleaching ( The increase of potential beyond 600 mV in the tests with the S-oxidizing culture indicates that although the growth of The tests at 68 °C with thermophilic microorganisms ( Unlike in the mixed culture, the percentage of copper extracted in the test inoculated with S-oxidizing thermophilic microorganisms was lower when iron was added, probably due to a greater precipitation of that element. As shown in Again, the precipitation of iron seems to be related to the sharp increase in the redox potential. In the test at 400 mV with S-oxidizing bacteria, the copper dissolution rate ( S-oxidizing thermophilic bacteria therefore seem to be very sensitive to sharp jumps in iron concentration. For instance, the bioleaching test with those bacteria and without adding iron presents an acceptable leaching kinetics, even slightly better than the same test when inoculated with a mixed culture. Moreover, in that test there was neither precipitation of iron nor a sharp drop in the bacterial population.  The role of Fe-oxidizing microorganisms in chalcopyrite bioleaching is to control the redox potential of the leach solution, keeping it at a high value. Initially, this favours chalcopyrite dissolution by increasing the concentration of leaching agent, but eventually it causes precipitation of basic iron sulphates, mainly jarosites and ferric hydroxide sulphates, which readily nucleate on chalcopyrite surfaces, provoking passivation. On the other hand, S-oxidizing bacteria oxidize elemental sulphur to sulphate, increasing the acidity of the solution and avoiding the diffusion barrier created by S There was clearer evidence of the passivating effect of jarosites during bioleaching than during chemical leaching, since the activity of iron and sulphur-oxidizing bacteria favours its precipitation. This has been confirmed by various authors ( Nevertheless, the SEM micrographs of the different bioleaching residues show no indication of a direct mechanism through which the bacteria act on the chalcopyritic surfaces. Furthermore, the morphology of the chalcopyrite attack follows preferential crystalline planes ( Finally, the rate-controlling step in chalcopyrite bioleaching, considering its refractoriness, seems to be the chemical reaction, since temperature is far more important than any other factor. In this connection,  The role of microorganisms in uncatalyzed chalcopyrite bioleaching is to regenerate the leaching agent and to dissolve the elemental sulphur formed in the process ( Despite the positive action of microorganisms in the regeneration of Fe The iron concentration in solution should not be excessive so as to avoid the nucleation and growth of jarosites over chalcopyrite particles, which would otherwise immediately cause passivation. In chalcopyrite bioleaching with mixed cultures, the Iron- and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms such as