For near-net-shape manufacturing technologies such as casting, additive manufacturing, powder processing, and powder injection molding, residual pores and voids are inherent. Gaseous isostatic forging (GIF) provides a rapid and cost effective way to heal these defects. In GIF, isostatic pressure is rapidly applied to heated components by means of a pre-pressurized gas. This rapid pressurization causes internal defects to close through plastic deformation, thus densifying the component. By utilizing plastic deformation, lower temperatures may be used, thus maintaining microstructure integrity. Previous work has shown GIF processing to be an effective method for closing residual porosity and increasing mechanical properties of Ti-6 A l-4V produced by the powder metallurgy process Hydrogen Sintering Phase Transformation (HSPT). However, little information regarding the processing parameters of GIF is known. Therefore, the aim of this publication is to broaden the understanding of GIF processing by investigating various methods for predicting the resulting rapid pressurization based on simple system parameters and observe the effects of processing temperature, starting porosity, and hydrogen concentration on densification and microstructure of HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V.Defects such as voids and porosity are inherent in near-net-shape (NNS) manufacturing, such as casting, powder metallurgy (PM), and additive manufacturing (AM). This has driven the research and development of several secondary processes used to close voids and pores, thereby improving the mechanical properties of the material. Traditional metal working technologies, such as forging and rolling, are effective at closing pores. However, these methods change the shape of the components in an anisotropic manner. This compromises the NNS capabilities of these processes and produces anisotropic properties. Therefore, methods have been developed that apply pressure in an isostatic manner, providing no shape distortion or texture development. Hot isostatic pressing (HIP) has been at the forefront of isotropic defect healing, as it has proven to be an effective method for closing internal voids. As such, the major processing steps, applications, and limitations of HIP have been thoroughly reviewed by multiple sources, but most recently by Though HIP has proven to be effective at closing internal voids/pores, it has its disadvantages. Not only does HIP require high temperatures, but long soak times are needed to allow for full densification to occur. Specifically, A faster and more economical method called pneumatic isostatic forging (PIF) or gaseous isostatic forging (GIF) was first presented in 1996 by The rapid pressurization during GIF is achieved through the use of a pressure reservoir, which is in the form of a second pressure vessel. Both pressure vessels are connected to a gas compression system, as well as each other, and separated by isolation valves. Before the process, the sample is preheated in the external furnace and the reservoir is pressurized to a specified level. Once the optimal temperature is reached, the sample is quickly transferred from the furnace to the empty pressure vessel. The vessel is then closed and the isolation valve between the two vessels is opened. This causes the pressure to rapidly increase on the heated sample as the two vessels equilibrate. This rapid pressurization is referred to as an “air hammer”, as it acts as a pneumatic hammer that produces an effect similar to traditional forging. In order to achieve the highest possible hammer pressure, the pressure vessel containing the sample(s) is filled to above 80 vol% with a combination of the sample(s) and some sort of filler, if needed. A schematic showing the processing steps in GIF is given in Rather surprisingly, other than the original introduction in 1996 ( In more recent years, GIF processing has been utilized in conjunction with a novel titanium PM process called the Hydrogen Sintering Phase Transformation (HSPT). During HSPT processing, titanium hydride (TiH It is the purpose of this publication to first outline the general construction of a custom made GIF and then examine various theoretical and phenomenological methods for predicting the hammer pressure. Additionally, the limitations of GIF processing will be investigated on Ti-6 A l-4V produced by the HSPT process. Specifically, the effects of starting porosity, pre-heat temperature, and hydrogen content will be examined. Using the original patent as a guide, a custom-built GIF was constructed. The basic setup including auxiliary equipment is shown in All high pressure valves, high pressure tubing, associated fittings, and the 414 MPa (60 ksi) gas booster (GBS-60) were all rated for 414 MPa and purchased from High Pressure Equipment Company to ensure safety on the high pressure end. The high pressure valves were pneumatically operated via solenoid valves connected to compressed air. A 138 MPa (20 ksi) booster (Hydraulics International 5 G-TD-60/150) was used to consistently boost the supply gas pressure to a minimum of 14 MPa (2 ksi), which is necessary for the 414 MPa booster to efficiently reach full pressure. Each vessel was fitted with a pressure transducer (Omega PX91N0-60KS5T) to monitor the pressure. Both the solenoid valves and pressure transducers were connected to a data acquisition (DAQ) system (Omega USB 1208FS) to allow for continual collection of system pressures and valve positions. Before each test, the reservoir was pressurized to approximately 414 MPa (60 ksi), unless otherwise indicated. To measure the resulting hammer pressure as a function of the filled volume fraction in the sample vessel, room temperature tests were conducted with the sample vessel containing differing amounts of filler. The filler material was machined aluminum 6061 with a known density (2.70 g/cm For experiments in which Ti-6 A l-4V samples were processed, a specially designed sample holder was used in order to protect the samples from oxidation during pre-heat and provide thermal mass to prevent excessive cooling before the hammer pressure ( To reduce open space in the pressure vessel (thereby increasing the resulting hammer pressure) a combination of machined 304 stainless steel discs and -20 + 40 mesh (420–841 μm) stainless steel shot were used inside the sample holder as filler. The discs were used to fill the majority of the sample holder, whereas the shot was used to fill the remaining space around the samples and provide a constant free volume between GIF runs (within 1%). The discs were sized such that a sufficiently large gap remained in between the disc and sample holder wall to allow the expanding gas to flow past. For the highest pre-heat temperature, -12 + 20 mesh (841-1680 μm) tungsten granules were used in place of the stainless steel shot. The external dimensions of the sample holder were designed such that a maximum of the pressure vessel was filled within engineering limits. All Ti-6 A l-4V samples were produced using the HSPT process by mixing TiH For the pre-dehy samples, pre-heat temperatures of 650, 750, and 800 °C were used. A maximum temperature of 800 °C was chosen as To examine the effects of starting porosity on final density, TiH After pre-heating, the sample holder was quickly transferred from the furnace to the pressure vessel and the lid to the pressure vessel installed securely within one minute. The isolation valve between the sample vessel and reservoir was then opened and the hammer pressure applied to the samples. All GIF experiments on Ti-6 A l-4V used Ar gas as the pressure medium and the small pressure vessel as the reservoir. Before each experiment, the reservoir was pressurized to approximately 425.8 ± 4.6 MPa. After opening the isolation valve and allowing sufficient time for the pressure vessels to equilibrate, the pressure vessels were vented and the samples removed. To calculate density, sample volumes were measured using gas pycnometry (Micromeritics Accupyc II) and masses were measured using a 0.1 mg laboratory scale. For relative density calculations, the measured density was compared to the theoretical density of HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V which In this section, four methods for predicting the hammer pressure are presented. In order for these models to be useful in an engineering application, the hammer pressure (P The four models developed in this study were based on Boyle’s law, van der Waal’s gas law, Redlich and Kwong’s modification to van der Waal’s gas law, and published experimental data on gas density as a function of pressure, respectively. The theoretical predictions from these models are compared to experimental room temperature results. The experimental results were produced from tests performed with various filled volume fractions in the sample vessel. Additionally, the theoretical models and the experimental tests examine the difference in using the small versus large pressure vessel as the reservoir and the effects of using various industrial gases. Boyle’s Law states that the pressure and volume of an ideal gas are inversely proportional. A common form of this law is given in Eq. ( To obtain  As will be shown in subsequent sections, treating Ar as an ideal gas under ultra-high pressures results in a significant degree of error when predicting It can be seen from Eq. In Eq. ( Eq. ( In Eq. (8), As an alternative to the van der Waal’s equation, an equation of state that is applicable at high pressure was proposed by Here the constants Using the same method for Eq. ( As done with the van der Waal’s method, the change in moles after opening the isolation valve was assumed to be negligible. Therefore, no distinction in In Eq. (13), As mentioned above for the van der Waal’s and Redlich-Kwong methods, we assume the change in moles is negligible when the hammer pressure is first applied. In essence, the law of conservation of mass is being applied. Another form of this law can define the initial and final volumes of the system with respect to the densities of the gas (Eq. (14)). In Eq. 14, Due to the compressibility of gas, we know that the density is greatly affected by the applied pressure. In order to obtain density as a function of pressure, data compiled in the NIST WebBook was utilized ( Eq. (14) can then be rearranged, where density is written as a function of pressure, Eq. (16). To keep Eq. (16) as general as possible, the coefficients As mentioned previously, the GIF used in this study was designed in such a way that either pressure vessel can act as the reservoir. In this section, we examine the accuracy of the predicted hammer pressure ( To analyze the accuracy of the models derived in this paper, experimental As seen in As stated previously, the Redlich-Kwong equation is a modification to the van der Waals equation. By incorporating the temperature and molecular volume, The gaseous density method also does a sufficient job at predicting the hammer pressure, which was expected due to the phenomenological nature of the derivation. Rather than requiring modifications to the attraction and molecular volume terms as in the Redlich-Kwong method, these aspects are accounted for in the experimentally derived coefficients, The decrease in error when using the larger pressure vessel as the reservoir is most likely attributed to the purity of the gas after opening the isolation valves. After the isolation valve is opened, the compressed Ar gas mixes with air in the pressure vessel acting as the sample chamber. The unpredictable thermo-physical properties of air produce error in the result. However, by reducing the volume of air that is in the system via a smaller sample chamber, this error is also reduced. Additional error in these calculations may also stem from the purity level of the supplied Ar gas. In an effort to be economical, industrial grade Ar gas was used rather than ultra-high purity. However, the degree of error in these equations is still quite minimal. Therefore, it can be assumed that using regular purity Ar is sufficient for producing a reasonably predictable hammer pressure. While Ar is likely the most versatile gas for the GIF process, it is possible to utilize other gases that may be either more cost effective or provide additional benefits. Using the small pressure vessel as the reservoir and the same method described previously for Ar gas, the hammer pressure using N Theoretical predictions for neon (Ne) and xenon (Xe) gases using the gaseous density and Redlich-Kwong models are also included in It must be noted that the hammer pressure data obtained using He gas has been modified. Due to an equipment malfunction, an initial reservoir pressure of 414 MPa was not attainable. Therefore, lower initial pressures were used and the resulting hammer pressure was adjusted to estimate what the hammer pressure would have been if an initial pressure of 414 MPa was used. The adjusting method is shown in Eq. (18). Using data from the NIST WebBook ( Unfortunately, the density of He as a function of pressure does not follow a logarithmic trend, thus coefficient values of g and h are not available. However, using He data taken from NIST Technical Note 1334 ( This quadratic equation was then substituted into Eq. (14), which was solved for  The data generated for the different gases indicates that the density method may be a more accurate way to predict the hammer pressure. This can be attributed to the theoretical nature of the Redlich-Kwong model, whereas the density method is entirely phenomenological. In the Redlich-Kwong method, the values In addition to observing which method is the most accurate in predicting the hammer pressure, a trend was also observed for which gas will produce the highest hammer pressure. From This phenomenon can be explained through the Redlich-Kwong equation. In Eq. (9), the second half describes the intermolecular forces of the gas molecules through the coefficient, Though CO During GIF processing, the pressure of the system can be further increased after the hammer pressure by the gas booster. However, when utilizing this method with Ar gas, the time required to increase the pressure post-hammer can be significant and depends on filled volume fraction in the sample chamber. As the pressure vessel is not heated, the hot workpiece begins to cool as soon as it is removed from the furnace, thus greatly increasing the stress required to close internal defects. Therefore, a two gas system could be utilized to provide a dual pressurization system. In such a system, a high hammer pressure could be applied by a highly compressible gas (He, Ne, or even Ar). Immediately after the hammer pressure has been applied, a highly incompressible gas (CO As discussed previously, GIF processing has been shown to effectively close residual porosity in Ti-6 A l-4V produced via the HSPT process. However, the effects of the GIF processing parameters on HSPT Ti64 are unknown. Therefore, samples of HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V with varying starting porosities and hydrogen concentrations were examined in addition to the pre-heat temperature. By utilizing the coarse, medium, and fine powders starting porosities were varied. To examine the effects of increased hydrogen content samples were GIF processed before the dehydrogenation step (pre-dehy) in HSPT processing. For the pre-dehy samples pre-heat temperatures of 650, 750, and 800 ℃, whereas samples in the post-dehy condition had pre-heat temperatures of 850, 900, and 950 ℃. Stainless steel shot or tungsten granules were used to maintain a constant fractional load of the sample pressure vessel in every run. For each run the sample pressure vessel was filled to a fraction full of 0.844 ± 0.003 which resulted in a hammer pressure of 217.0 ± 12.6 MPa. It was found that at 900 ℃the stainless steel shot began to sinter to the samples and the sample holder, thus making sample removal difficult. To prevent this, coarse granules of tungsten were used for the pre-heat temperature of 950 °C. Because the main purpose of GIF processing is to close residual porosity in HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V components, it is of greater interest to examine the relative densities of the samples before and after GIF. Relative densities for the various pre-heat temperatures and particle sizes are summarized in Because GIF applies pressure via a gas, open porosity in the samples should hinder the ability of GIF to densify these samples. However, for samples that were pre-heated to 850 °C or higher, pore closure during GIF is clearly evident in For the post-dehy samples with the medium and fine particle sizes, there was a measurable increase in density for each of the three pre-heat temperatures. However, only a pre-heat temperature of 950 °C resulted in 100% densification of both the medium and fine particle sizes. Relative densities greater than 99% were achieved using 900 °C. This can be seen in  As previously seen in As mentioned previously, the purpose of the lower pre-heating temperatures was to examine the effects of hydrogen content on the ability to GIF Ti-6 A l-4V. Unfortunately, the addition of hydrogen doesn’t appear to aid in the densification during GIF. As Ti-6 A l-4V is heated under inert gas, the material will begin to dehydrogenate. Therefore, the apparent ineffectiveness of hydrogen on the ability to GIF Ti-6 A l-4V is likely an artifact of the unknown level of dehydrogenation during pre-heating. As mechanical properties of a material are highly dependent on the microstructure, it is important to understand how the various dehydrogenation conditions and pre-heating temperatures affect the starting microstructure. For the coarsest particle size powder, the microstructure varied greatly not only between different pre-heating temperatures but across the sample’s cross-section. The non-uniform microstructure can be attributed to insufficient homogenization of the alloying elements during sintering due to the large TiH Of particular interest is the shift in microstructure seen for samples pre-heated at temperatures above 800 °C. For pre-heat temperatures at and below 800 °C, the microstructure after GIF appears to be very similar to standard HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V ( The use of lower temperatures show that limited microstructural changes can occur, thereby keeping the starting microstructure intact. This would be of particular interest to UFG (e.g. HSPT Ti-6 A l-4V) or even nano-grained material systems, where grain growth may be undesirable. However, in order to obtain full densification at these lower temperatures, a higher hammer pressure would be needed to overcome the flow stress of the material. As discussed previously, multiple methods including using different gases, increasing the reservoir size, or increasing the reservoir starting pressure can be used to increase the hammer pressure. In this paper, the basic methods were outlined for constructing a custom gaseous isostatic forge (GIF) used to rapidly close internal defects in near-net-shaped processed parts. Four separate methods for predicting the hammer pressure of the GIF system have been investigated. These methods are based on Boyle’s law, van der Waal’s equation, the Redlich-Kwong modification to the van der Waal’s equation, and gaseous density as a function of pressure. Of these four methods, the Redlich-Kwong and gaseous density methods were shown to have the greatest accuracy and to produce reliable predictions of the hammer pressure for several gases. Specifically, the Redlich-Kwong method showed the best results with CO The effects of starting porosity, pre-heating temperature, and hydrogen concentration were explored using Ti-6 A l-4V produced via HSPT processing. It was shown that a minimum pre-heat temperature of 900 °C was needed to produce appreciable densification at the hammer pressures produced in this study, though complete densification occurred reliably at 950 °C. The use of hydrogen did not appear to significantly affect the required temperature needed during GIF, which may be attributed to either insufficient or excessive dehydrogenation during pre-heating. Furthermore, it was shown that samples sintered from coarse particle size powders are not acceptable for GIF processing, as they lead to open porosity that causes GIF to be ineffective. Additionally, the coarse particle sizes prevent homogeneity of the alloying elements during sintering, thereby producing large variations in microstructure. Dr. Z. Zak Fang and Dr. James D. Paramore are both listed as inventors on the HSPT process patent (patent number US 9816157B2). The authors acknowledge funding support by the