The vibrating screens with elastic screen surface (EVS) have been widely used for cleaning moist coal due to their good performance. In this work, the kinematics and spatial behaviors of a novel elastic screen surface, and the screening behavior of particles were investigated using dynamic simulation and image analysis system to reveal the elimination mechanism of plugging during dry deep screening of moist coal. Furthermore, the effect of technological parameters on the performance of elastic deep screening was studied using single factor test method. The results indicated that the average vibration intensities of elastic screen rod and tube were significantly larger than 20 because of the collisions, which promoted the loosening of material. The frequency-domain of the elastic screen surface contained the fundamental frequency of the covering film, which resulted in the resonance and eventual breaking down of the covering film. The change in the spatial position of adjacent elastic screen surface and their own deformation led to the periodic fluctuation of screen aperture. Besides, the spatial rotation of the screen tube exhibited shear effect on the covering film, the adherent and the near-aperture particles, whereas the direction of spatial force was random, therefore, the rupture of the covering film and the adherent particles was promoted. In addition, with the increase of amplitude and feed rate, the screening efficiency first increased and then decreased, while with the increase of the speed of excitation motor and screen length, the screening efficiency gradually increased. When the values of amplitude, excitation motor speed, screen length and feed rate were 4.3 mm, 1000 r/min, 1200 mm and 1.5 kg/s respectively, the screening efficiency of Li Jiahao and Wan Li coal samples was >86%.Coal is one of the most important energy resources in the world and plays a significant role in industrial production [ In order to overcome the plugging phenomenon during dry deep screening of moist coal, many researchers investigated the method, which involved modifying the properties of coal, and innovating new structure of screen to increase the vibration intensity. The method can overcome the problem of screening aperture plugging by heating the screen's surface, and adding an absorbent into the screening raw material [ Different types of structures for vibrating screens having elastic screen surface (EVS) have widely been used in moist coal cleaning due to their good performance. The vibration intensities of surfaces of piano wire screen, cascade screen, and elastic cantilevered vibrating screen were enhanced using secondary vibration of the screen surface in order to break the slime layer and realize highly efficient screening process [ In this study, the kinematics and spatial behaviors of a novel elastic screen surface, and the screening behavior of the particles under simple harmonic excitation were investigated using the software ADAMS and the high-speed camera to reveal the elimination mechanism of plugging during dry deep screening of moist coal. Furthermore, the effect of excitation parameters on the performance of elastic deep screening was studied using the single factor test method. The study provides theoretical and technical support for research and industrial applications of EVS.  The software ADAMS was selected for dynamic simulations of the elastic screen surface to further analyze the characteristics of its motion-related parameters. The high-speed camera was used to analyze the behavioral characteristics of the screen surface and of the coal particles during the screening process. The lens of high-speed camera was focused on the observation window. The technical parameters were controlled using the CDU controller. The high-speed camera was operated, while the EVS was started and the coal was fed to the system. When there were no coal particles on the screen surface, the EVS and the high-speed camera were shut down. A number of elastic screen surfaces and particles were labeled, and selected for analysis to determine their behavioral characteristics during the screening process using the I-SPEED software (as shown in The coal samples were obtained from Li Jiahao and Wan Li mines, Ordos, China, which were long flame coal and used as power coal, and their characteristics were shown in In an ideal screening process, the particles that are smaller than the designated size exist in the oversized product, while those that are larger than the designated size exist in the undersized product. However, some mismatches usually exist in the oversized and undersized products during the actual screening process. In this study, the screening efficiency and the total misplaced materials were used to evaluate the screening performance [ The kinematics parameters of the elastic screen surface were analyzed using the numerical simulation.   In order to facilitate the video observation and analysis of the characteristics of elastic screen surface, the organic glass plate material was used as the screen side panel. The screen rod, the screen tube and the tracer particles were dyed in different colors, and the related areas of the screen rod and the screen tube were marked with special color points to track and analyze the spatial trajectory and movement of screen rod, screen tube and tracer particles. In the experiments, three screen rods were selected and marked as 1, 2, and 3. The three screen tubes were marked as 4, 5 and 6. These marked screen rods and screen tubes are shown in The results obtained from the high-speed camera showed that the screen rods contacted and collided with the inner wall of the circular holes in the screen surface panel and the inner wall of the screen tubes. In addition, the screen rods and the screen tubes rotated around their centers and the center of circular holes of the screen surface panel. This phenomenon also appeared in the simulations of elastic screen surface. Therefore, the marked points appeared at different quadrant positions at different time periods of the screening process. Meanwhile, the distance between the adjacent screen tubes along  The amplitude of the screen has a direct effect on the loosening and stratification of material, the migration velocity and the time of screening, and therefore, affects the performance of elastic screening of moist coal. The excitation force and the amplitude of screen box could be changed by adjusting the angle between the two eccentric blocks of the excitation motor to investigate the effect of amplitude on the elastic screening. During the experiments, the angle of inclination of screen was 12°, while the speed of excitation motor was 1000 r/min. The screen length and width were 1200 mm and 600 mm, respectively. The feed rate was 1.5 kg/s. The values of the amplitude were changed successively through 3.5 mm, 3.9 mm, 4.3 mm, 4.7 mm and 5.1 mm. In this paper, five parallel screening experiments of a large amount of material under different condition were carried out to reduce the experimental error. The standard error of mean of screening efficiency under different condition was smaller than 0.04, indicating that the experimental error was low and the experimental data was enough accurate. According to the results of elastic screening experiments of Li Jiahao moist coal, the screening efficiency and the misplaced materials with different amplitudes of the screen box were obtained by analyzing the experimental data, which are shown in With the increase in the amplitude of the screen box, the vibration intensity of the screen surface increased. The loosening and the stratification of the moist coal material were enhanced, and the migration velocity of the materials on the screen surface increased. The residence time of the coarse particles larger than the designated size on the screen was reduced, so that, the quantity of coarse particles passing through the screen aperture can be reduced. This meant that the effective placement efficiency of coarse particles increased and the misplaced material in the undersized product decreased. While the quantity of fine particles passing through the screen aperture increased, the content of misplaced material in the oversized product decreased. Therefore, the screening efficiency increased. However, when the amplitude of the screen box reached 4.3 mm and continued to increase further, due to the larger energy of the elastic tube, the migration velocity of the material along The vibration frequency of the screen box directly determines the number of runout times and the projectile intensity of the screen surface in a unit time. This in turn affects the loosening, stratification, screening and migration of material. Additionally, the vibration frequency of the screen box was determined using the speed of excitation motor. Therefore, the running speed of the two excitation motors, and the vibration frequency of the vibrating screen can be changed by adjusting the parameters of frequency converter. Due to this reason, the effect of running speed and vibration frequency on the elastic screening of the moist coal can be investigated. Based upon a previous study, considering the screening efficiency and the total content of misplaced material, the amplitude of the screen box was set to be 4.4 mm, and the value for the speed of excitation motor was successively changed through 1000 r/min, 950 r/min, 900 r/min, 850 r/min and 800 r/min. All other experimental conditions were consistent with those presented in the previous study.  When the speed of excitation motor changed within the range of 800–1000 r/min, the vibration intensity of the screen surface increased with the increase in the speed of excitation motor. The loosening and the stratification of moist coal material enhanced, and the migration velocity of the material on the screen surface increased. The residence time of the coarse particles, which were larger than the designated size, on the screen reduced, and the quantity of coarse particles passing through the screen aperture decreased. This meant that the effective placement efficiency of coarse particles increased, while the content of misplaced material in the undersized product decreased. While the quantity of fine particles passing through the screen aperture slightly decreased, more of the particles smaller than the designated size were not observed in the undersized product and thus, joined the oversized product, which slightly increased the content of misplaced material in the oversized product. Overall, with the increase in the speed of excitation motor, the screening efficiency increased slightly. The screen length determines effect on the screening time, and number of contacts between particles and screen apertures and had significant influence on the screening performance. Based upon a previous study, considering the screening efficiency and the total content of misplaced material, the excitation motor was set to be 1000 r/min, and the screen length was successively changed through 300 mm, 600 mm, 900 mm and 1200 mm. All other experimental conditions were consistent with those presented in the previous study.  With the increase of screen length, the screening time and number of contacts between particles and screen apertures, which made the probability of fine particles and coarse particles passing through the screen aperture increased. As a result, the effective placement efficiency of fine particles increased, while effective placement efficiency of coarse particles decreased. On the whole, the screening efficiency increased rapidly at first and then increased slightly, while the total mismatch content decreased rapidly at first and then increased slightly. The feed rate determines the thickness of the material on the screen surface, and has a significant impact on the stratification and screening performance. When the feed rate is too high, the screening efficiency will decrease. While, the feed rate is too low, it cannot meet the requirements of large-scale production of coal preparation plant. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the effect of feed rate on the screening efficiency to determine its appropriate value. Based upon a previous study, considering the screening efficiency and the total content of misplaced material, the screen length was set to be 1200 mm, and the value for the feed rate was successively changed through 1.0 kg/s, 1.5 kg/s, 2.0 kg/s, 2.5 kg/s and 3.0 kg/s. All other experimental conditions were consistent with those presented in the previous study.  With the increase of feed rate, the thickness of the material on the screen surface becomes thicker, the loosening and the stratification performance of moist coal material became worse, which made the probability of fine particles and coarse particles passing through the screen aperture decreased. As a result, the effective placement efficiency of fine particles decreased, while the effective placement efficiency of coarse particles increased. On the whole, the screening efficiency increased and then decreased, while the total mismatch content decreased and then increased. In order to further the adaptability of the EVS for different materials, different coal samples from Li Jiahao and Wan Li mines were used for screening tests, when the values of amplitude, excitation motor speed, screen length and feed rate were 4.3 mm, 1000 r/min, 1200 mm and 1.5 kg/s respectively. The screening efficiency and the total mismatch content of Li Jihao coal samples were 86.84% and 7.09%, while those of Wan Li coal samples were 86.05% and 7.21%. It is known that when 6 mm elastic screening of Li Jiahao and Wan Li coal samples was carried out using the EVS, well screening performance can be achieved, and screening efficiency was above 86%.  The time-domain response curve and the acceleration of elastic screen rod and tube along The frequency-domain of the elastic screen surface contained the fundamental frequency of the covering film, which could cause the covering film to resonate and break down. The change in the spatial position of adjacent elastic screen surface and their own deformation led to the periodic fluctuation of screen aperture. In addition, the spatial rotation of the screen tube exhibited shear effect on the covering film, the adherent and the near-aperture particles, whereas the direction of spatial force was random. Therefore, the rupture of the covering film and the adherent particles was promoted. Additionally, the near-aperture particles could be screened more easily. With the increase of amplitude and feed rate, the screening efficiency first increased and then decreased, while the total content of misplaced material first decreased and then increased. While with the increase of the speed of excitation motor and the screen length, the screening efficiency increased, and the total content of misplaced material decreased. When the values of amplitude, excitation motor speed, screen length and feed rate were 4.3 mm, 1000 r/min, 1200 mm and 1.5 kg/s respectively, the 6 mm screening efficiency of Li Jiahao and Wan Li coal samples was >86%. The research work is financially supported by the