Carbon-in-leach (CIL) is a common process alternative to carbon-in-pulp (CIP) when an ore is preg-robbing. The activated carbon will compete with the preg-robbing ore constituents in the leach tanks, with gold cyanide more selectively adsorbing onto the carbon due to its stronger adsorptive capacity. However, other mechanisms may also play a role in enhancing the extraction of gold from an ore in the presence of activated carbon. There may be an equilibrium effect in solution, where the gold concentration is decreased due to adsorption onto activated carbon, resulting in a greater driving force for further dissolution of gold, according to Le Chatelier's Principle.
                  In this paper the use of activated carbon to improve gold dissolution from a number of ores of different mineralogy was investigated. Plant work, batch experimentation and diagnostic leaching were used to research this effect. An appreciable improvement in gold extraction was found when activated carbon was used. Both of the suggested mechanisms were found to play a role in enhancing gold extraction, with the controlling mechanism most strongly dependent on the ore's mineralogy. The preg-robbing characteristics of the ore and the cyanide concentration used for gold leaching were also important factors in the enhancement of gold extraction.There are a number of competing processes occurring during the carbon-in-pulp (CIP) or carbon-in-leach (CIL) processing of gold, such as the continuous leaching of gold from the ore, preg-robbing at the ore surface and the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon. Preg-robbing is the adsorption of the gold cyanoanions from the cyanide solution by carbonaceous species in the ore, clay-type minerals and other mineral species. This adsorption follows the Freundlich equation. Gold may also associate with an organic carbon matrix in an ore or sulphide minerals, which may not be extracted by cyanidation, depending on the refractoriness of the ore. This refractoriness should not be considered as preg-robbing. It is widely appreciated that gold leaching and adsorption onto activated carbon are complex and affected by operating variables such as the cyanide concentration, pH, competing base metals and level of agitation of the pulp. When the ore treated is refractory many side reactions may occur resulting in high cyanide consumption. These side reactions affect the gold extraction from the ore due to lack of cyanide or other interaction reactions. The process of preg-robbing is less well understood, although the adsorption of gold to components of the ore is accepted in the literature Adams et al. Preg-robbing may have an effect during CIP processing. Gold that has been preg-robbed at the surface of the ore may adsorb onto activated carbon. Therefore, the extraction of gold would be enhanced by the presence of carbon. An investigation into the effect of activated carbon on improving the gold extraction from ores may significantly improve understanding of the competing effects of leaching, preg-robbing and adsorption. Alternatively, activated carbon may enhance gold leaching from ores by continually removing leached species from solution, disturbing the solid/liquid equilibrium and favouring further gold dissolution, in accordance with Le Chatelier's principle. An investigation into the enhancement of gold extraction using activated carbon by either of the above two mechanisms has not been performed before, and represents a sizable gap in the literature. Knowledge of this phenomenon is essential for the overall performance of a CIP/CIL plant and will be addressed by this paper, using results from an operating plant, batch experimentation and diagnostic leaching Experiments were performed on a variety of different ores. These consisted of an oxide ore and three sulphide ores. These ores were obtained from the Telfer Gold Mine, Australia. The sulphide ores consisted of the feed to the Telfer flotation circuit and a pyrite and copper concentrate produced from the flotation feed, using a two-stage sequential flotation. The mineralogy of the samples was determined by quantitative XRD analysis, and is given in The oxide ore was prepared by crushing in a roll crusher. The ore was then ground using a ball mill to obtain a particle size distribution of 80% passing 75 μm. The flotation feed and copper concentrate were received already ground, with a particle size distribution of 80% passing 75 μm, while the pyrite concentrate had a finer particle size distribution of 90% passing 75 μm. A rotary splitter was used to obtain representative samples of the ores for experimental use. Leaching and adsorption experiments were performed in a 1 l baffled reactor using an overhead stirrer with a flat-bladed impeller. 1 l of distilled water was added to 400 g of ore, which was the maximum percentage solids found to give satisfactory mixing characteristics at 200 rpm with these ores. This stirring speed was used as it is believed to give a similar level of mixing commonly used on gold mills. The lid of the vessel was perforated to allow the dissolution of oxygen into the slurry. The pH was kept constant at 10.5 by the addition of potassium hydroxide. Cyanide was added as a powder, along with carbon, which had been presoaked, as indicated later, to remove any air trapped within its pores. Norit extruded carbon was used in the experiments. Prior to use, the activated carbon was prepared by washing in distilled water to remove any loose fines. The carbon was then stirred in a solution of 1% hydrochloric acid for 24 h, followed by further washing to remove carbon fines. The carbon was then stirred in distilled water, with periodic additions of 1 M KOH until the pH had stabilised at 10.5. This process took approximately 6 days. Further carbon attrition during experiments was negligible. The technique of diagnostic leaching was used to determine the deportment of gold within the mineralogy of the ores and as a tool to understand the mechanism of enhanced gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon. Diagnostic leaching is a technique where successive oxidative attacks are used to destroy progressively more stable minerals within the ore. This process is then followed by cyanidation to determine the gold liberated by the attack. A picture of the deportment of the gold within the ore is thus gained. A technique based on those found in the literature Solution analysis was performed using a Perkin-Elmer ICP-OES. A cadmium internal standard was added to alkaline cyanide solutions and the solutions analysed for Au, Ag, Fe, Cu, Ni, Zn, Ca, Mg and S. Standards were created using stock cyanide solutions. Activated carbon was analysed by ashing the carbon at 750°C for 6 h. The ash was then digested using aqua regia and analysed by ICP in 10% HCl. Fire assay of mineral samples was performed at Genalysis Laboratory Services (WA). XRD of mineral samples was performed using a Philips PW 1800 X-ray Diffractometer. This was used to determine the minerals destroyed by the diagnostic leaching technique. Fire assay of the residues was also performed, although it was found that the error in this technique was much greater than the error in ICP solution analysis and carbon digestion. Therefore, in this paper the results of the ICP analysis are given. Cyanide concentration was determined by performing a silver nitrate titration, using rhodanine as an indicator. For some of the experiments performed, the level of copper in solution was high, so the titration was not an accurate indicator of the actual level of free cyanide. This was due to the dissociation of copper(I) cyanide complexes during the titration. Copper cyanide complexes with three or four ligands dissociate, and a significant amount of the cyanide bound in these complexes is titrated, giving higher results for free cyanide. This problem may be overcome by the use of an ion-chromatographic method to determine the concentration of free cyanide in solution and the concentration of metal–cyanide complexes Plant trials were conducted at the Telfer Gold Mine, Australia. This gold mine has three thickeners, three air agitated pre-leach tanks and seven CIL tanks. The circuit is shown schematically in An analysis of the performance of the leaching and adsorption circuit was undertaken while the oxide ore was processed through the plant. The concentration of species in solution, pH, solids concentration and carbon concentrations were all determined periodically throughout the leaching and adsorption circuit. This may indicate that the gold was adsorbed loosely to the surface of the oxide ore during the leaching stage of the process. Once activated carbon was added, which is a stronger adsorbent, the aurocyanide complex would adsorb onto the carbon. However, this was not supported by other work performed at the gold mine, which showed that this ore would not adsorb gold when there was no free cyanide in solution. Under these conditions, the preg-robbing phenomenon would be expected to be strongest, as it has been found in other work Therefore, the oxide ore extracts additional gold through an enhanced extraction due to the carbon pulling more gold from the ore. This could be the result of a shifting equilibrium as the gold is removed from solution, which increases the driving force for further gold dissolution. The addition of cyanide to the first CIL tank, which can be seen in A number of batch experiments were performed at the Telfer Gold Mine to determine if the location, or the initial cyanide concentration of a sample of ore from the plant, had an effect on the improvement of gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon. From each tank a volume of slurry was taken and carefully split in two, 2.3-l fractions. Subsequent testing showed that both the solid and liquid phases were split evenly between the two samples. 12 g of activated carbon was added to one sample, while no carbon was added to the other portion. No additional cyanide was added above that already present in the tank. Extraction was continued for 22 h. The results are given in It can be seen that a similar improvement in gold extraction was recorded regardless of the sampling location. The level of cyanide was also found to have little effect on the magnitude of the improvement in gold extraction for this ore. The effect of cyanide is examined further in the following section, along with an investigation into enhanced gold extraction with activated carbon on ores of different mineralogy. Batch experiments were performed on the oxide and sulphide ores at different cyanide concentrations to quantify the enhancement of the extraction of gold in the presence of activated carbon. Two slurries were created for each ore. To each, an identical quantity of potassium cyanide was added to achieve the desired initial cyanide concentration. This cyanide was allowed to degrade throughout the experiment without any further addition. To one of the batch reactors, 4 g of prepared activated carbon was added, while to the other no activated carbon was added. After 24 h of leaching the solution and carbon phases were analysed to determine the extraction of gold from the ore. It can be seen that the presence of activated carbon resulted in a significant improvement in extraction for all the ores. The effect can also be seen to lie well outside the error of analysis by ICP and digestion of activated carbon. At the completion of the experiment, each ore was washed with water, then with a solution of 50 ppm free cyanide for 2 min. Any preg-robbed or precipitated gold adsorbed on the surface of the ore may be pulled off by this treatment. The results of the cyanide wash are given in  Batch experiments to determine the extraction of gold after 24 h with and without activated carbon were also performed at an initial free cyanide concentration of 500 ppm using 4 g of activated carbon. The results of this experiment are given in The flotation feed showed a moderate improvement in gold extraction at an initial cyanide concentration of 500 ppm, while the pyrite concentrate showed a larger improvement than at 200 ppm CN To confirm the results that activated carbon improves the extraction of gold from the sulphide ores, 800 g of ore in 2 l of a solution that initially contained 1000 ppm CN As preg-robbing is initially rapid, the magnitude of the enhancement of gold extraction with or without carbon may have been lower from these specially split solutions as activated carbon was not present at the commencement of the experiment. Therefore the activated carbon could not compete with the adsorption of gold to the ore at the start of the experiment and less enhancement in gold extraction was observed. It has been shown previously A batch experiment was also performed at an initial free cyanide concentration of 2000 ppm. The experiment was performed using 4 g of activated carbon for 48 h. After this period the flotation feed and pyrite concentrate had reached equilibrium. For the copper concentrate the 2000 ppm of cyanide was instantly consumed, as in previous tests. Leaching of gold, therefore, continued through the dissociation and precipitation of other less stable metal–cyanide complexes for this ore  The improvement of gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon was not found to be strongly dependent on the cyanide concentration for the sulphide ores. However, this section has conclusively shown that additional gold may be extracted from an ore when activated carbon is present during leaching at a variety of cyanide concentrations. As these ores were found to be preg-robbing the mechanism for the improvement of gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon for the flotation feed, pyrite and copper concentrate was at least partly due to the activated carbon competing for gold that would otherwise have been preg-robbed. The mechanism is investigated further in the following section. The effect of cyanide is different for the Telfer oxide ore. For this ore it was found that a high level of cyanide resulted in no improvement in gold extraction with activated carbon, as the ore had reached the maximum possible gold extraction that could be achieved by cyanidation without finer grinding. At lower levels of cyanide the results from the plant surveys suggest that additional gold may be extracted due to an equilibrium effect that results in more gold dissolution as the gold is removed from solution by activated carbon. To investigate the role equilibrium plays in gold leaching, two batches of each of the refractory ores were leached at an initial free cyanide concentration of 2000 ppm. The flotation feed and pyrite concentrate were leached for 48 h, while the copper concentrate was leached for 7 days. After this period, each ore had come to equilibrium in terms of gold extraction. To one batch a further 2000 ppm CN The results of this experiment for the flotation feed are not shown here, as almost no difference in the gold extraction was found regardless of whether a fresh solution of cyanide was used or additional cyanide was added to the already leached solution. This was because the flotation feed had already reached the maximum gold extraction during the first 48 h of the cyanidation. The additional cyanide only caused a difference to the zinc, nickel and copper in solution, where slightly more of these species were observed in the fresh solution. This indicates that an equilibrium does exist for this ore, and that it is easier to extract Zn, Ni and Cu into a solution which contains low concentrations of these species. By removing these species from solution, further dissolution would occur. No equilibrium effect was observed for gold in this ore, as no further gold dissolution occurred as a result of using a fresh cyanide solution which contained no gold. Therefore, in the experiment to determine the enhancement in gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon at 2000 ppm, which was presented in The copper concentrate showed some interesting curves, as shown in From the gold curves in The results of this equilibrium experiment for the pyrite concentrate are given in Diagnostic leaching tests were used in an attempt to determine the effect of the sulphide ore's mineralogy on the enhancement of gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon. Each of the refractory ores was subjected to the diagnostic leaching procedure detailed in As well as a sequential test, diagnostic leaching pretreatments were also performed in a non-sequential manner. This involved pretreating each ore with either HCl, H All of the gold within the flotation feed was found to be leachable by conventional cyanidation at the completion of the diagnostic leaching sequence. XRD analysis was used to confirm that the HCl treatment destroyed the calcite and dolomite mineral phases. Approximately 2% of the gold was liberated after this attack, which indicates that a small proportion of the gold was bound within this mineral. When activated carbon was used, a more significant proportion of gold was extracted. Sulphuric acid, which breaks down labile sulphide minerals The non-sequential diagnostic leaching pretreatments, also shown in The deportment of gold within this ore is shown in A similar test was performed with the pyrite concentrate. For the non-sequential pretreatments performed on the pyrite concentrate a significant improvement in gold extraction was seen for all tests except the sulphuric acid treatment, which showed a modest improvement. Once again, the results found in the non-sequential pretreatments did not agree with the sequential test, most probably due to the effects of film formation. The majority of the gold within the pyrite concentrate was leachable by cyanidation. The deportment of gold for this ore is shown in The results in In the sequential test a reduction in extraction was observed for the activated carbon test following the hydrochloric acid treatment. All other tests showed a significant improvement in the presence of activated carbon, including the sulphuric acid. Overall, an additional 6.2% more gold was extracted when activated carbon was used in conjunction with cyanide, rather than cyanide alone. As this ore was strongly preg-robbing, this can be completely attributed to the effect of overcoming preg-robbing. The results of the sequential diagnostic leaching tests for the copper concentrate cannot be considered as indicative of the deportment of gold as insufficient free cyanide was available for the complete liberation of gold and not all of the chalcopyrite was destroyed in the nitric acid leach. The free cyanide that was used, was consumed immediately and not enough time was given for the leaching reaction to reach equilibrium for this ore. Instead, conditions were used which allowed a comparison with the pyrite concentrate and flotation feed. This may account for the discrepancy of the gold extractions when a different pretreatment was used in the non-sequential diagnostic leaching pretreatments. To investigate the deportment of gold within the copper concentrate, a leaching test was performed at a very high initial free cyanide concentration of 40 In experiments using low cyanide concentrations and on the plant, the Telfer oxide ore gave higher gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon than when activated carbon was not present. As this ore displayed no preg-robbing characteristics, this effect was due to the activated carbon pulling gold from the ore that would otherwise not have been recovered. At high cyanide concentrations, this ore did not show enhanced gold leaching in the presence of activated carbon, as the driving force for gold dissolution was large enough for all of the leachable gold to be extracted by cyanide alone. The flotation feed also showed an enhancement in gold extraction when activated carbon was present, however this ore was found to be mildly preg-robbing. The relatively small improvements in gold extraction observed for this ore could be completely attributed to the activated carbon adsorbing gold that would otherwise have been preg-robbed. This ore did not display the establishment of a second equilibrium on the addition of 2000 ppm free cyanide to an already leached slurry, as the maximum amount of gold had already been extracted. The improvement in extraction was not found to be a function of the minerals present in the ore, with similar improvements in extraction regardless of which minerals had been destroyed by diagnostic leaching-type pretreatments. The copper concentrate showed an enhancement in gold leaching which was also entirely attributable to the effect of overcoming preg-robbing. For this ore, less gold was extracted from an already leached ore when a fresh cyanide solution was subsequently used, as less metal–cyanide species were available to promote gold leaching. The existence of preg-robbed gold at the surface of this ore was confirmed from the equilibrium curves which showed the rapid redissolution of preg-robbed gold following the addition of cyanide. The amount of gold redissolved agreed with the observed enhancement in gold extraction in the presence of activated carbon. For the pyrite concentrate, the addition of cyanide to a slurry which had already been leached for 48 h at an initial cyanide concentration of 2000 ppm saw the establishment of a new, higher equilibrium extraction. This ore was only weakly preg-robbing, while large improvements in gold extraction were observed, which were not only attributable to this effect. Therefore for this ore, the extraction of gold in the presence of activated carbon was enhanced by the attainment of a higher equilibrium extraction of gold from the ore. For this ore the enhancement was not found to be a function of the mineralogy present, as similar improvements in extraction were observed regardless of which minerals were destroyed by an acidic pretreatment. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge Newcrest Mining and the Australian Research Council for financially supporting this work. A number of experiments were performed at Newcrest's Telfer Gold Mine and the help and support of the staff were much appreciated.