Earthworms are one of the dominant groups of soil macro-invertebrates in many terrestrial ecosystems affecting nutrient cycling and plant growth. However, it is not well known how earthworms can influence availability of silicon (Si) as an element whose beneficial role in agricultural systems has been widely recognized. The objectives of this study were: (1) to determine the effect of earthworms on the mobility of Si in soil, and (2) to determine whether earthworm induced effects on Si mobility are of importance for the availability of Si to plants (Cucumis sativus L. and Zea mays L.). Two soils (a sandy loam soil and a sandy soil) with two levels of two independent treatments (±CaCO3 and ± earthworms) were used. Concentrations of water-extractable Si and monosilicic acid (Si(OH)4) in casts/soils and Si movement via xylem of plants were measured. Casts of earthworms – endogeic Aporrectodea caliginosa (Savigny) and anecic Lumbricus terrestris L., had generally higher amounts of water-extractable Si (by 2.0–12.0 times) and Si(OH)4 (by 1.3–3.5 times) compared with bulk soils, irrespective of soil type and application of CaCO3. Bioturbation of the sandy loam soil by living earthworms were generally of major importance in improving xylem translocation of Si from roots to shoots in cucumber and maize. The results highlight for the first time the importance of earthworms in plant acquisition of Si and biogeochemistry of Si.Silicon (Si) is the second most abundant element in the earth’s crust ( Although Si is not yet listed among the essential elements for higher plants ( Earthworms are one of the abundant faunal groups in most terrestrial ecosystem affecting nutrient cycling of soil with relatively long-term benefits for plant nutrient acquisition ( The objectives of this study were: (1) to determine the effect of earthworms on the mobility of Si in soil, and (2) to determine whether earthworms induced effects on Si mobility are of importance for the availability of Si to plants. In this study, it was hypothesized that earthworms can increase Si availability to higher plants. The experimental design included two experiments: experiment I where the Si mobility in cast/soil material was examined, and experiment II where the availability of Si to plants in soil bioturbated by earthworms was examined. Two earthworm species widely occurring in temperate regions were chosen. In experiment I two types of soil with different concentrations of soluble Si were used: a sandy loam soil and a sandy soil. Silicon bioavailability in calcareous soils is often low ( The experimental design included two levels of two independent treatments (±CaCO Experiment II was performed in two stages. The first stage was provided as a pre-incubation period (for 4 weeks) in the presence of living earthworms. The impact of The two soils were collected from the humus layer of two different permanent grasslands near the Biological Research Institute of Saint Petersburg State University, Petergof, Russia (N 59° 53′ 36″; E 29° 49′ 48″). The sandy soil was a Umbric Albeluvisols soil and the sandy loam soil was a Anrthri-Umbri-Endogleic Luvisoil soil. Soil properties for these soils are tabulated in We used the endogeic earthworms The earthworm casts were collected (experiment I) and soil were pre-incubated (experiment II) as described previously ( Three plants of cucumber ( The xylem sap method is commonly used for evaluate availability of most nutrients in soil ( For assaying plant-available Si pool in soils either with or without CaCO Since plants absorb silicic acid its concentrations in water extracts from soils were determined by colorimetric molybdenum blue method ( All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics, version 21. Data were subjected to analysis of variance procedures (ANOVA, type III) and means were compared by Student–Newman–Keuls’s post-hoc test at 5% significance level ( Application of CaCO The earthworm species strongly increased 2–13 times water-extractability of Si (ANOVA for the sandy loam soil, Bioturbation of both The impact of the CaCO The impact of the earthworm factor on sap Si was significant for Translocation rate of Si via xylem (μM Si plant Our hypothesis is that earthworms can increase Si availability to higher plants. Overall, beneficial effects of earthworms for plant Si acquisition include an increased cast concentrations of water-extractable Si and Si(OH) Earthworms may stimulate mineral nutrition of plants by formation of nutrient-rich patches (casting). Burrows of It is well known that the positive effect of earthworm on plant growth is mainly due to an increase in mineralization of SOM ( On the other hand, earthworms can potentially play a role in soil mineral weathering that releases mineral elements. Mineral weathering is a biogeochemical process in which organisms are intimately involved. However, relatively scarce attention has been given to the role of earthworms in soil mineral weathering ( A large increase in Si mobility caused by the passage of soil through the earthworm gut is probably not related to a proton driven dissolution of minerals. Earthworm can produce granules of CaCO In perspective, the ability of earthworms to enhance bioavailability of Si first showed in the work may be of practical importance for alleviating multiple environmental stresses in soils where Si availability is low. Generally, sandy soils tested extremely low in plant-available Si compounds ( There is evidence for the first time that earthworms ( The reported study was funded by