The removal of sulphate and molybdate anions (among other anions) from mining liquid effluents is attracting much interest because of the strict environmental legislation world-wide and the need for water recycling and reuse. In this work, adsorption of sulphate and molybdate ions on chitin-based materials was investigated. Chitin flakes with various deacetylation degrees (DD) were produced from an industrial shrimp shell waste after demineralisation, deproteinisation and deacetylation steps, without further purification, immobilisation or grinding. Batch adsorption experiments were carried out as a function of pH and the best adsorbent material was selected following its chemical stability in acidic medium, degree of anions uptake and time needed for the deacetylation reaction stage. Thus, detailed sulphate adsorption studies were conducted with a chitin having a 25% DD, at various adsorbent concentrations, medium pH and other operating conditions. Best sulphate removal values (92%) were obtained at equilibrium pH 4.5, 8.5 mgmg−1 chitin/ions ratio and 15 min contact time. The adsorption data followed the Langmuir model and showed saturation values of the order of 3.2 mEqg−1. Chitin also proved to adsorb molybdate ions in the presence of sulphate ions, but reaction required longer equilibration time (60 min for the same 92% removal). Practical examples of removal of these anions were studied in actual mining effluents, attaining values of the order of 71% sulphate and 85% Mo from a Cu–Mo flotation mill effluent and 80% sulphate removal from a coal AMD––acid mines drainage (Mo free). The regeneration of the adsorbent material was possible through the anions desorption in alkaline medium. All results are discussed in terms of solution and interfacial phenomena and the practical aspects of the process, in the mining and metallurgy fields, are envisaged.Most of the studies on ions removal from wastewater in the mining and metallurgical fields, are concerned with cations removal, namely Cu, Zn, Cd, Hg, Pb, etc., and with anionic complexes species, such as cyanide, chromate, arsenate and vanadate. Yet, high concentrations of less toxic anions, as sulphate, molybdate and chloride ions, are becoming a major water quality problem in many areas, mainly due to the huge produced volumes of mining effluents without any recycling. More, sulphate ions are often the dominant pollutant in these discarded mining waters. These anions are generated by dissolution of sulphate bearing minerals and through chemical and biological oxidation of sulphide ores, like pyrite (FeS Sulphate ions are the main contributors to the water “mineralisation”, increasing thus the conductivity and the corrosion potential of receptor bodies. These anions promote corrosion and scaling in pipes, structures and equipment, rendering thus recycling and reuse of these waters difficult ( Efficient removal of sulphate ions from wastewater is a complex problem due the high solubility and stability of these anions in aqueous solutions. In AMD for instance, partial sulphate ions removal is often accomplished through precipitation with lime. However, this technique, usually presents a very low practical efficiency because of the high solubility of the produced CaSO Chitin is a potential adsorbent of sulphate ions because of its high uptake capacity and availability of common crustaceans. Chitin can be obtained from the shells of crustaceans such as squid, shrimp and oysters, and from fungi. Their recovery and transformation into chitin from shellfish is being encouraged as it deals with the problem of waste disposal produced by the seafood industry. The chitin found in the exoskeletons of shellfish is usually strongly associated with proteins, organic material, calcium carbonate and pigments. Therefore, a complete purification process should precede the use of chitin as adsorbent. Samples of chitin vary in chemical and physical properties depending on the source material and purification process employed ( This bio-adsorbent corresponds to a nitrogenated polysaccharide and the deacetylation of the biopolymer chains leads to the production of a material with superficial amine groups. When the deacetylation degree (DD) is higher than 50% ( The aim of this work was to study the removal of sulphate and molybdate ions from aqueous solutions by adsorption on chitinous materials produced from industrial shrimp waste, an abundant pollutant solid residue in Brazil. The emphasis was on the removal of these anions and parameters studied were adsorption pH and time, adsorbent/adsorbate ratio, and feed concentration of sulphate ions. The adsorbent regeneration and the simultaneous adsorption of sulphate and molybdate ions were also evaluated in synthetic and real mining effluents. Frozen industrial shrimp shell waste was provided by Torquato Pontes Pescados S.A. (Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil). Synthetic solutions were prepared with Na The shrimp shell waste was defrosted, screened and washed with tap water crushed and soaked in HCl 5%, for 1 h to “demineralize” the material by mainly removing CaCO The resultant chitinous material was placed in contact with 40–50% NaOH solutions, in a soda/solid ratio of 25 g The DD was determined by infrared spectroscopy using Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 1000 equipment. KBr disks were prepared with a mixture of 2 mg of each chitinous material (crushed in a porcelain mortar) and 98 mg of KBr. The thickness of the disks was of 0.42 In this work, different base lines were used for DD determination ( Batch adsorption experiments were carried out in agitated glass flasks (200 ml In the desorption studies, the saturated material with sulphate ions was submitted to vacuum filtration for approximately 2 min and transferred to the adsorption flask. Then, de-ionised water and NaOH 1 mol Sulphate concentration was analysed using a turbidity-based method ( Molybdenum concentration was measured using a photometry method (Photometer SQ 118 (Merck) at 405 nm), usually applied in plants analysis ( Chemical oxygen demand (COD) was determined, by spectroscopy, using a Thermoreactor TR 300 and a Photometer SQ 118. The samples were added to A (with AgSO Flakes of chitin bearing materials (<1 cm) with different DD values were produced at different conditions described in Q0 mass yield was approximately 30%, with respect to the dry residue and the water content of 75% in the waste. The deproteinization step employing NaOH 50% promoted practically no deacetylation due to the low reaction temperature (about 25 °C). Therefore the use of NaOH 5% in the deproteinization step and NaOH 50% at 98 °C for further deaceytlation step was found to be the best alternative. The effect of equilibrium pH on sulphate ions adsorption on different chitinous materials is shown in Results revealed that for all deacetylated materials the optimum pH values for the sulphate adsorption was about pH 4–4.5 and that the lower the pH, the higher was the sulphate ion adsorption. It is believed that this is due to the higher protonation of chitin superficial amine groups revealing that the electrostatic adsorption mechanism must be the predominant one. Moreover, it can be observed that this maximum coincides with the protonation values around of pH 4. This may explain that the sulphate uptake, at pH about 4, by Q1 (25% DD), was closed to those values obtained with Q2 (82% DD) and Q3 (68% DD) samples. An inherent problem associated to the use of chitin/chitosan in wastewater treatment is the partial or total solubility of these materials in very acid or basic medium. The solubility increases with increasing DD values because of the presence of protonated amino groups and consequent increase of the affinity for water. The cross-linking of the polymeric chains with a bifunctional reagent, such as a glutaraldehyde, has been used to solve this problem, since it promotes a greater chemical stability to the materials ( Results show that the Q2 (82% DD) was the only material completely soluble at pH 2. Because Q1 (25% DD) presents high sulphate ions uptake and relatively low solubility in acid medium, this sample was selected as adsorbent material for the subsequent adsorption studies. More, less energy input is required in the production of this material due the low DD, compared to a material having higher DD values.  The pH variation with time, during the adsorption, was investigated and results showed that medium alkalisation occurred because of the amino groups’ protonation, following the reaction described in Eq.   Thus, in all adsorption experiments, a known volume of HCl 1 mol The sulphate ion uptake was studied as a function of contact time, where Q1 concentration and equilibrium pH were kept constant. According to Adsorption isotherms were measured by changing the feed sulphate ions concentration and keeping constant the Q1 concentration values, equilibrium pH, contact time and temperature (25 °C). The amount of adsorbed sulphate ions was calculated according to Eq. The adsorption isotherm is shown in The value obtained for the Langmuir constant ( Desorption experiments were conducted to evaluate both, the reversible nature of adsorption and the adsorbent regeneration feasibility. In these studies, medium pH was increased, since OH Adsorption–desorption cycles were also carried out and are depicted in Finally, because in mining effluents, both sulphate and molybdate ions are usually present in quite high concentrations (Cu–Mo flotation mills), the simultaneous adsorption of these ions on chitin was studied ( It is known that only at pH values higher than 4, the anionic molybdenum species (molybdate) are predominant. Thus, after 60 min contact time, when pH of the solution reaches about 4.5, the adsorption of molybdate ions attained values as high as 92%. The removal of sulphate and molybdate ions from two distinct liquid effluents was conducted to confirm bench data obtained. The first effluent was from a typical porphyry Cu–Mo sulphide flotation mill from Chile having both, molybdate and sulphate anions. General data, experimental conditions and results obtained are summarised in The second industrial effluent was a coal mining drainage acidic effluent having sulphate ions only. Results are described in Results obtained showed similar uptake and desorption values, when compared to those bench results in synthetic effluents. Thus, high removal of sulphate and molybdate from liquid effluents was possible in the Cu–Mo flotation effluents, yielding final values, which are within emission standards allowed in Chile. Similar results were obtained with the coal AMD effluent where sulphate ion feed concentrations were very superior to those permitted in the Brazilian law (250 mg Chitinous materials, prepared from an industrial waste, were found to be excellent adsorbents of sulphate and molybdate ions from aqueous solutions and from real mining effluents. Best conditions were equilibrium pH of 4.5, 8.5 mg JR thanks to the students and colleagues for the friendly atmosphere at the LTM––Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (CAPES, CNPq, UFRGS).