This paper is a study of the roles of strontium as a modifier and titanium as a refiner of the Al–12%Si commercial alloy for escalator steps processed by a hot-chamber pressure-die casting method. Specifically, two objectives were pursued. First, the detection of the level at which the modifier and the refiner become effective in altering the relevant microstructural parameters, namely, the volume fraction, grain size and shape of proeutectic phases. Second, investigation of the morphology of the eutectic matrix.The excellent fluidity and low micro-shrinkage tendency of the eutectic Al–Si alloy in contrast to hypoeutectic alloys are well known. Nonetheless, the alloy's somewhat lower strength and ductility prevent its use in favor of the latter, which presents a broader scope of mechanical applications. However, the addition of elements such as Sr to both eutectic and quasi-eutectic melts has been widely reported as improving the mechanical properties, notably ductility, thus giving rise to new possibilities for potential fields of application of eutectic alloys The present paper reports on a study of the roles of strontium as a modifier and titanium as a refiner of a Al–12%Si commercial alloy. Two objectives were pursued: the detection of the level at which the modifier and the refiner become effective in altering the relevant microstructural parameters, and an investigation of the morphology of the eutectic matrix. The samples used in the present study were extracted from commercial escalator steps made by pressure-die casting in the factory that the International Group Thyssen-Krupp Guss has at its site in Mieres, Asturias, in northern Spain. The components were escalator steps obtained via a hot chamber injection system. The final dimensions of the step, which weighs 15 kg, are: 1100 mm long by 400 mm wide. Samples were cut from a central rib in the step possessing a nominal thickness of 4 mm. The commercial alloy used for this research was Al–12%Si, the detailed composition of which is given in The strategy followed to obtain the complementary chemical compositions may be summarized as follows: In the first compositional design, no refiner or modifier was added to the 700 kg-capacity ladle. In the second test design, Sr was added to the melt at 600 ppm Sr per 100 kg of commercial alloy so as to obtain a modified eutectic matrix. The third composition was designed to contain 400 ppm Ti per 100 kg of commercial alloy in order to obtain the beneficial effect of its refinement potential. The fourth and fifth compositions were designed to bear refiner and modifier additions simultaneously. The percentage of Sr added to the melt was kept at 0.04%, whereas Ti additions were designed at two levels, 0.03% and 0.04%.  Samples for metallography were cut from the central rib of the step and were prepared in the usual way by means of a series of grinding steps with SiC discs, followed by a polishing stage with special cloths impregnated, respectively, with 9, 3 and 1 μm diamond paste. The as-polished samples were etched with 0.5% HF aqueous solution to reveal the microstructure under a light optical microscope (LOM). A Nikon Epiphot metallographic bench connected to a Kappa ImageBase was used to capture micrographs of the different samples and to describe the relevant features quantitatively. The evaluation of the volume fraction and the grain size of the α-Al phase and that of the primary Si particles were conducted on captured images by the point count method and by area analysis for the α-Al phase and by linear analysis for the Si cuboids The microstructures observed in the different microalloying conditions can be seen in  With respect to the eutectic phase, the Si platelets turn from lamellar to almost globular, being mostly regular in shape (less elongated). This morphological change may help to anticipate an improvement in the mechanical properties, mainly in ductility and toughness. On adding both Sr and Ti (  There are, however, other microstructural differences that are thought to have an after-effect on the mechanical properties: The solidification of the Al–12%Si alloy without added microalloying elements starts with the precipitation of α-Al dendrites followed by a residual liquid which, on reaching a critical value in Si, develops a lamellar eutectic alloy ( With regard to the solidification of the Sr-treated sample, the following may be stated: the somewhat higher thermal undercooling of the eutectic temperature, Further to the above observations, it is noted that the amount of α-Al phase decreases from the wall in contact with the die in the direction of the center line ( As regards the morphology of the α-Al phase, it is seen that a cell-type geometry predominates that is almost regular or equiaxed, with very little branching. This is a finding that supports a reduced undercooling that governed the entire solidification due to the shift in the equilibrium diagram to higher temperatures. The amount of micro-shrinkage is virtually non-existent, since the pressure applied during the process of solidification enables the residual liquid to break the solid bridges, feeding the contraction resulting from the liquid After the addition of Ti to the melt at a proportion of 0.024%, the conditions for the development of the peritectic reaction in the Al–Ti system are reached at temperatures above the freezing point of the Al–12%Si commercial alloy: The volume fraction of α-Al increases slightly, underlying its alpha phase-forming nature; The morphology of the grains is also somewhat dendritic, mostly equiaxed with some branching, indicating that they grew at some constitutional undercooling, and presents small differences with the grain shape found in the commercial alloy ( The volume fraction of α-Al decreases with the addition of Sr under pressure solidification conditions, a tendency in contrast to what has been detected under gravity die casting conditions When modifiers and refiners are added together, it is noted that the grain size is considerably reduced, with hardly any effect of the Ti, at least at the two levels of additions studied (0.03% and 0.04%). However it is worth noting that, on comparing the sample refined only with 0.024% Ti (for which the lowest grain size was obtained) with any of the refined and modified samples, it may be concluded that Sr exerts an unfavorable effect over the refining potential of Ti when the two elements are present. It is also noticeable that the morphology of the alpha grains remains equiaxed, being very much the same at the two addition levels. It is likewise interesting to remark that, at a constant level of Sr, increasing the Ti added also augments the volume fraction of α-Al. This suggests that the effect of Sr on the volume fraction of α-Al remains unnoticeable, being sensitive only to the Ti level of addition. When the Al–12%Si eutectic alloy is modified by Sr, the mechanism of growth of the eutectic Si is changed ( The eutectic in the Al–Si system is highly displaced to the left side of the phase diagram, and the volume fraction of the discontinuous phase (eutectic Si) is a small percentage of the total ( The development of preferred orientations leading to epitaxial growth during the solidification of eutectic Si serves to stabilize the lamellar structure over the fibered one. This is due to the ability of the Si in the eutectic to form stable low-energy boundaries by twinning in the two eutectic solid phases Sr, like many other impurity elements (e.g., Na, Ba, Ca, Yb), satisfies an ideal ratio of The development of a radiating eutectic cell caused by Sr is worth noting ( When the refiner and modifier are added simultaneously, a change in both the mechanism of growth of primary Si and eutectic Si is observed ( The following conclusions may be drawn from the above results: The high cooling rates and the pressure applied throughout the solidification process prevent the formation of an air gap between the solidified surface skin and the mould walls characteristic of conventional gravity casting processes. This provides less pronounced thermal gradients, thus allowing constant heat flow at all solidification stages, and therefore results in a more homogeneous distribution of phases and grain sizes across the component section. It has also been observed that the grain size of the primary α-Al dendrites is reduced in all the compositional designs. However: When Ti was added at 0.024% for refining purposes to the commercial Al–12%Si alloy, the size of the primary α-Al dendrites was reduced by half and the volume fraction of the dendrites increased. The addition of 0.02% Sr to modify the eutectic was found to decrease the volume fraction of α-Al under pressure die-casting operating conditions. This is the result of the displacement to higher Si contents that Sr additions have over the eutectic composition, which is thought to be counteracted, and perhaps overcompensated, by the pressure acting in the opposite direction. When Ti and Sr were added together, it was noted that the refining potential of Ti prevailed. However, on comparing the alloys with these two elements, it was perceived that Sr has a deleterious effect on the refinement potential of Ti. This was noted by a reduction in the primary α-Al grain size, when Ti was increased from 0.03% to 0.04% while the Sr addition was held constant at 0.04%. This also underlines the fact that Sr does not play a role in the refinement of the primary α-Al dendrites at the micro-alloying levels studied. As regards the Si phase, this appears as a primary phase in the form of cuboids and in the eutectic, the following effects being observed after the additions: When the eutectic alloy was modified with Sr, a reduction in the size and volume fraction of primary cuboids was obtained. The eutectic Si changed its growth mechanism and the development of a cellular-type granular eutectic was obtained. The simultaneous addition of refiner and modifier elements gave rise to the occurrence of coarse, but short, eutectic Si platelets. This variation in eutectic morphology was more pronounced at higher Ti additions. This emphasizes the fact that Ti counteracts the refinement capability of Sr in the eutectic when the two elements are added together. With respect to the change in morphology and the decrease in the size and volume fraction of the primary Si cuboids, Sr appears to be the sole responsible element.