Composite scaffolds, especially polymer/calcium phosphate composite scaffolds with porous structures are promising materials for bone tissue engineering. Depositing minerals on the surface of polymer scaffolds is a general method however, attachment between inorganic minerals and organic polymeric is a big challenge, because of the absence of strong interactions between the interfaces. In this work, polymer/calcium phosphate composite scaffolds with good attachment were fabricated through introduction of calcium and alternate mineralization. Calcium methacrylate was polymerized into the polymer scaffold and calcium acted as “ion glue” endowing the polymer/calcium phosphate composite good interfacial interaction. After alternate mineralization, the surface of polymer scaffold with calcium was coated with plate-like minerals which attached to polymer well and composite scaffold preserved the porous morphology. The results demonstrated that the concept of “ion glue” provided an option for the improvement of attachment between inorganic minerals and organic polymer. The results also indicated that the good attachment of minerals with polymer scaffolds enhanced the mechanical properties and improved the cell attachment of the polymer scaffolds.Bone tissue engineering scaffolds aim to repair or regenerate bone defects by using a scaffold as a platform for maintaining biological functions of cells The mechanical properties of pure polymer scaffolds are far from natural bone, scaffolds made of inorganic materials are too brittle to manipulate Two approaches of incorporation of inorganic materials are mixing inorganic materials and polymer directly In order to overcome this defect, several research groups have developed many methods to improve interfacial attachment for fabricating composite scaffolds. Li et al. In this study, in order to solve the interfacial attachment problem, a polymer scaffold with Ca Acrylamide (AM) was purchased from Tianjin Fuchen Chemical Reagents Company. 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate (HEA) was purchased from Aladdin Industrial Corporation. Calcium methacrylate (CDMA) was obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., LTD. 2-hydroxy-4′-(2-hydroxyethoxy)-2-methyl-propiophe (2959) was donated by Tianjin Juri new materials Company. Mouse fibroblasts (L929) were offered by Department of Microbiology, Peking University Health Science Center. Other chemical agents were obtained from China National Medicines Corporation Ltd. and used as received. Real-time Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (RT-FTIR) was conducted to measure polymerization reaction by monitoring double bond conversion (DC) by using a Thermo-Nicolet 5700 instrument. The polymerization was induced by UV light source (EFOS Lite, Canada) and the light intensity on the surface of samples was detected by UV Radiometer (Photoelectric Instrument Factory of Beijing Normal University, China). The mixture solution containing different ratio of monomers and certain concentration of photo-initiator was injected into a plastic mold (1.5 The basic principle of RT-FTIR consist of exposing the sample to the UV light which induces the polymerization simultaneously, and meanwhile the infrared beam serves to measure IR absorption, characterizing the monomer. The conversion of double bonds was calculated by the area decline of the (methyl)acrylate double bond absorption peak around 6162 Setting the molar ratio of AM to HEA at 3:2, CDMA was added into the AM/HEA mixture and the sample number of the scaffolds (M10C0, M8C2, M6C4) represented the weight ratio of AM/HEA mixture (M) and CDMA(C). The concentration of deionized water was about 73 Composite scaffolds were prepared through alternate mineralization. In detail, the wet gels were froze at − The morphology of the freeze dried polymer scaffolds and composite scaffolds were observed by using Hitachi S-4700 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi Company, Japan). Its accelerating voltage was 20 Compression test of the composite scaffolds was carried out by using an Instron 3366 electronic universal testing machine (Instron Corporation, Norwood, MA) at room temperature. Cylindrical samples with diameter 20.0 Thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA, Q500, TA instruments, New Castle, DE, USA) was performed on the dried composite scaffolds at a heating rate of 10 MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; thiazolyl blue) assay was widely used to detect products toxicity or adverse reactions The cytotoxicity of composite scaffolds was evaluated by MTT assay based on the ISO10993-5 standard test method. Mouse fibroblast (L929) was cultured in DMEM medium (10% fetal bovine serum, 1.0% penicillin–streptomycin, 1.2% glutamine) under 37 The compatibility nature of L929 cells on the composite scaffolds were evaluated by using SEM according the ISO10993-5 standard test method. The prepared samples (area 1 In the photo-polymerization system, the double bond conversion is an important factor that would affect the properties of the prepared polymer materials As the different polymer scaffolds were prepared, the alternative mineralization of the scaffolds was conducted. After alternative mineralization, it was necessary to investigate substance on the scaffolds. The effect of calcium on attachment of inorganic slat was examined by SEM. As shown in Compositional analyses were performed on minerals formed via alternate mineralization processes to determine the effects of surface calcium on the composition of the mineral formed and to further confirm the growth of minerals. From the EDS spectra, we could observe that the minerals had strong phosphate signals ( The primary function for bone scaffolds is to be used as a supporting structure and offer suitable mechanical strength which maintains the pores demanded for cells growth. The cyclic mechanical tests ( Thermogravimetric analysis is widely used tool now a day to get valuable information about the thermal stability of materials, which are widely used to study interfacial interactions in composites For bone scaffolds, perfect bioactivity that promoted cellular adhesion, proliferation and differentiation have been expected Cells compatibility was studied by SEM Polymer using calcium as “ion glue” to bridge the minerals and polymer has been synthesized by photopolymerization and the composite scaffold has been made by alternate mineralization. The properties of prepared materials were studied by SEM, EDS, XRD, Mechanical Property Test, DTG and MTT, the results indicated that addition of calcium in the scaffold did increase the attachment of organic and inorganic interface and greatly enhance the mechanical properties of the scaffolds. The biocompatibility of the prepared materials was also improved by minerals coating at a certain degree. This study could be extended to the fabrication of other composite materials to increase the interfaces interaction between organic and inorganic phases. This study was financially supported by