Based on the results of the earlier proposed process of separation of mixtures of mineral electrolytes by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), it has been suggested that a mineral salt must spontaneously resolve, at least partially, into its parent acid and base constituents, provided that the separating media discriminates the anion and cation of the salt according to their size. Indeed, migration of a zone of an aqueous salt solution through a bed of neutral nanoporous hypercrosslinked polystyrene-type packing was shown to result in the generation of acidic and alkaline effluent fractions. The principle of spontaneous salt resolution has been extended to other types of discriminating interactions between the stationary phase and the two ions of the salt. The idea was exemplified by the resolution of ammonium acetate, due to hydrophobic retention of the acetate, into fractions enriched in ammoniac and then acetic acid.A new process of separating mixtures of inorganic salts, acids and bases has been suggested recently For decades, SEC serves as an unrivalled and mature analytical technique for examining molecular weight distributions of polymers, i.e. complex analyte mixtures that are difficult to operate by any other chromatographic technique. Problems of analytical-scale separations of mineral ions are now not so actual, since they have been largely solved by ion chromatography and capillary electrophoresis techniques. Therefore, at this stage, we paid our attention to the preparative perspectives of size-exclusion chromatography of mineral electrolytes. In SEC, the absence of any stoichiometric relations between the solute species and adsorption sites of the stationary phase creates a unique possibility to increase the concentration of the ion mixture under separation up to the limits of solubility of the salts in water. Processing the highly concentrated solutions of mineral salts, acids and bases is totally alien to classical chromatography but presents an ever increasing problem in hydrometallurgy, plating and electrolysis processes, etc. When working with concentrated solutions of mineral electrolytes according to frontal analysis technique, we have been lucky to discover that contrary to general chromatographic practice, not only the productivity of the separation procedure of a binary mixture rises on increasing the concentration of the feed solution but also the selectivity of separation of its two components. Moreover, the concentration of each of the two electrolytes after separation of the mixture was found to significantly exceed their concentrations in the initial mixture. This unprecedented phenomenon of self-concentrating of all two separated components together with the high selectivity of separation of the concentrated mixtures made the new ISE process extremely interesting for the industry; the more so as the process requires no reagents besides water and generates no mineralized waste flows. While the elution volumes of ions from the SEC column was found to basically correlate with their hydrated radii, acids and bases were always observed to elute last, i.e. behind their corresponding salts. This makes an impression as if hydrated protons are smaller than any other cations, and hydroxyl ions are smaller than any other anions. While this is generally known not to be the case under static conditions, the above slower movement of acids and bases under SEC conditions was explained From the above understanding of the ISE chromatographic process, it logically follows that cations and anions of a salt do not need to move through the porous space of a sorbent in the form of ionic pairs, since an occasional excessive local charge can be easily compensated by emergent protons or hydroxyls. If the cation and anion of a salt differ in size, they must tend to move through the SEC column with different velocities. The incipient separation of the cations of a salt from their anions should be facilitated by the emerging protons and hydroxyls, which would prevent formation of charged micro domains or charged zones of separated cations and anions. In other words, a salt in an SEC process can be expected to resolve into corresponding acid and base. Present communication puts to test the above prediction, namely, (partial) resolution of a salt into corresponding acid and base, if the cations and anions of the salt are exposed in a chromatographic column to a situation where they will tend to move at different rates. Potassium sulfate, potassium iodide, tetrabutyl ammonium iodide and ammonium acetate were of “pure for analysis” grades. They were used without additional purification. Hypercrosslinked polydivinylbenzene (poly-DVB) was prepared by radical suspension polymerisation of a commercial product composed of 80% mixture of m- and p-DVB isomers and 20% of ethylstyrene isomers in the presence of toluene taken in the amount of 150% to the volume of DVB. The organic phase was supplied with 1.5% (w/w) benzoyl peroxide and dispersed in an aqueous 1% solution of poly(vilyl alcohol). Polymerisation was carried out for 6 Styrosorb 2 represents a typical hypercrosslinked polystyrene material. It was prepared by post-crosslinking of styrene-1% DVB copolymer, swollen in ethylene dichloride, by monochlorodimethyl ether, taken in the amount of 0.5 pH measurements were carried out using pH-meter AR-15 (Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with rugged bulb combination electrode 13-620-183 and a home-made flow-though pH cell having a liquid volume of 2 The above hypercrosslinked polymeric beads (fraction 0.3–0.6 Let us suppose that a portion of a neutral mineral salt, for instance K Hypercrosslinked polystyrene was the first nanoporous neutral polymeric material available for chromatography in aqueous (or any other) media. However, synthesis of these polymers usually involves condensation of active chloromethyl groups with phenyl rings of polystyrene. The unreacted chloromethyl groups can possibly hydrolyze to hydroxymethyl groups or even experience oxidation to carboxyls under the action of the Friedel–Crafts catalyst that participates in the condensation reaction. These minor polar groups could possibly interfere with the size-exclusion mechanism that was supposed to generate resolution of a salt into parent acid and base. Therefore, a nanoporous polydivinylbenzene was first taken as the separation medium for the SEC experiments. According to our definition of hypercrosslinked polymers as rigid and dense networks prepared in a solvated state A home-made glass column of 24 or 28 On injecting a portion of a neutral K A similar partial resolution into acidic and basic fractions was observed on chromatography of several other neutral salts, for instance, potassium iodide ( To achieve an opposite elution order, namely basic fractions before acidic ( Of course, resolution of a neutral salt into constituent acid and base implies creation of equivalent amounts of protons and hydroxyls. Though the respond of a pH electrode to the concentrations of these two ions is exponential, and the surface area under the negative and positive peaks cannot be directly correlated with the amounts of emerging acid and base (deviation of the base line from pH 7 must be also taken into consideration), the rather symmetrical shape of the elution peaks on Actually, the size exclusion should not be the only possible separation mechanism bringing about a spontaneous chromatographic salt resolution. Any type of differentiated retention of the cation or anion must also generate acidic and basic effluent zones. Possible examples of such types of interactions are cation-aromatic cycle interactions that are claimed to play an important role in metal-protein interactions We can ask ourselves a question that what happens if one of the two ions gets irreversibly retained by the neutral stationary phase, by one mechanism or another. Most probably, the remaining ion will elute in the form of a corresponding acid or base. However, the eluting peak should be expected to be rather broad, since the system cannot easily generate many protons or hydroxyls, and the “moving” ion must be retarded for a certain time by the “immobilized” counter ion. This ion-pair-type retention can explain the tailing of the ammonia peak in Finally, the point must be addressed that the resolution of a salt into constituent acid and base implies generation of additional protons and hydroxyls in the system through dissociation of an equivalent amount of water. This process can proceed spontaneously at room temperature but requires a very substantial amount of energy (118 It has been theoretically predicted and experimentally proven that a neutral salt spontaneously (at least, partially) resolves into parent acid and base in the course of chromatography of a salt sample, provided that the stationary phase exerts differentiating exclusion or retention forces on the two constituent ions of the salt. If several types of interactions are involved, they may cooperate or contradict each other, thus enhancing or deteriorating the resolution. It is difficult to think at the present stage of any analytical or practical application of the salt resolution process (contrary to the ISE process of separating two electrolytes that rapidly arrived at the stage of an intensive pilot plant evaluation). Nevertheless, the very fact of a spontaneous chromatographic salt resolution is remarkable by itself and highly intriguing from the scientific point of view.