A computational fluid dynamic model has been developed for a modified Denver flotation cell used in laboratory batch tests. The model incorporates fundamental aspects of bubble–particle interactions including bubble–particle collision, attachment and detachment. Model predictions are compared against carefully planned laboratory experiments with narrowly-sized spherical ballotini. Flotation results for different impeller speeds have been obtained for a constant air flow into the cell. The particles have been made hydrophobic by methylation with trimethylchlorosilane. For a given particle size, the results from the model and experimental work indicate that there is an optimum stirring speed that produces a good compromise between attachment and detachment rates in the cell for flotation. For less hydrophobic particles, a lower stirring speed is beneficial in having a longer contact time because of the longer induction time required for attachment.constant body force bond number constant bubble or particle diameter diffusivity of phase fractional surface coverage drag force gravity vector turbulent kinetic energy or rate constant particle number concentration pressure or probability Reynolds number source or sink term, or surface ratio time velocity collision frequency volume fraction bubble loading turbulent energy dissipation rate surface tension contact angle dynamic viscosity kinematic viscosity density free particle or attachment attached particle or detachment bubble fluid phase index particle total Flotation is commonly used in the beneficiation of valuable minerals in mineral processing. Every improvement in flotation recovery is important because of the large quantity of ores treated by flotation so that significant benefits are available even with a small percentage increase in recovery. As ores containing more easily recovered minerals are being mined out, more accurate computer models are needed to help improve the design of larger flotation cells or to increase the throughput of existing cells. Computational fluid dynamic (CFD) models have been developed for various industrial flotation cells ( In CFD modelling, the flotation cell is divided into individual finite volumes where local values of flow properties are calculated. Multi-phase flow equations for the conservation of mass, momentum and turbulence quantities are solved using an Eulerian–Eulerian approach in which the phases are treated as interpenetrating continua ( The CFD mesh of the modified 3-L Denver cell is shown in For simulations with flotation kinetics, the transfer of particles between the pulp and bubbles is achieved by applying source terms in the transport equation for particle number concentration The experimental work included water washing, sizing, grinding, methylation, analysis and froth flotation, together with contact angle measurement. The ballotini samples with a density of 2600 The methylating reagents consisted of analytical grade trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) and cyclohexane (for dilution) obtained from Aldrich and British Drug House (BDH) respectively, and used as received without further purification. The ballotini sample was made hydrophobic by methylation with TMCS for the investigation. The method used is similar to that reported previously ( The contact angles for the ballotini samples were measured using the capillary rise method, also referred to as the Washburn method ( Flotation tests were conducted on 50 Samples were floated in a bottom driven 3-L CSIRO (stainless steel) flotation cell and tests were performed at three impeller speeds, 1050, 1200 and 1500 CFD simulations of the CSIRO flotation cell have been performed and the results are plotted in Contour distributions of the void fraction shown in Contour distributions of the turbulent energy dissipation rate at three stirring speeds are shown in Flotation kinetics has been simulated for fully methylated ballotini with a contact angle of 88°. The net attachment rates of particles to bubbles at various times after the start of flotation are shown in The predicted flotation rate constants have been obtained by analysing the total number of particles remaining in the cell with time. This analysis involved summing all the particles in all finite volumes in the cell at each time step ( The probability of attachment in the model is related to the ratio of the induction time and the sliding time of a particle on the bubble surface. In the model, a correlation has been used for calculating the induction time. By definition, induction time is the time required for film thinning and liquid drainage during the formation of a stable particle–bubble bond. The induction time, Induction time for the methylated ballotini used in the flotation has been calculated from the correlation and is plotted as a function of the contact angle in From the model, the attachment rates are plotted against induction time in  The results of CFD simulations of the CSIRO batch flotation cell (a modified Denver cell) have been verified against measurements from carefully planned batch flotation tests. Detailed data from the simulations include the liquid velocity vectors, void fraction and turbulent energy dissipation rates in the cell at three stirring speeds. The average gas holdup in the cell is found to decrease with decreasing stirring speed and the values are consistent with observations with the increased height of the pulp surface when air is pumped into the cell. As the local turbulent energy dissipation rate has an effect on both the attachment and detachment rates, contour distributions of the turbulent energy dissipation rate at three stirring speeds and the volume distribution of the turbulent energy dissipation rate in the cell have been obtained for simulating flotation. Flotation kinetics has been simulated for fully methylated ballotini. The net attachment rates varied across the flotation cell due to varying hydrodynamics in different parts of the cell. In regions of the cell with negative net attachment values, the local detachment rate exceeded the local attachment rate. Generally, the predicted and measured recovery-time curves are in good agreement at the three stirring speeds investigated. This is confirmed by both the flotation rate constant and the cumulative recovery values for fully methylated ballotini particles. For less hydrophobic ballotini particles, a lower stirring speed is beneficial in having a longer sliding time because of the longer induction time required for attachment. The authors gratefully acknowledge that the experimental work was supported by