The wetting behaviour of silicon on diamond and the interaction of diamond with molten silicon were investigated. It was found that diamond is well wetted by molten silicon reaching a contact angle of about 20° after melting. The wetting is caused by the rapid formation of a SiC interlayer by nucleation of silicon carbide grains on the surface of the diamond. Investigations of the interaction of silicon with CVD diamond, using SEM, showed that the initial rate of SiC formation is very fast and is significantly reduced after the formation of a 4–6μm thick dense SiC interlayer. At that stage further growth is likely to be controlled by the diffusion of Si and C through the grain boundaries of the silicon carbide interlayer. The results were compared with the interaction of silicon with glassy carbon.Diamond–silicon carbide composites have been widely produced because of their attractiveness as ultra-hard materials Mixing of Si with diamond and densification of the mixture under pressure (reaction sintering) Infiltration of a preform made from diamond powder or from mixtures of diamond with graphite or resin The analysis of the literature shows that fully densified materials from the first route could only be obtained under high-pressure high-temperature conditions (8 Infiltration on the other hand has been successful under low-pressure conditions only for large grained diamond preforms (5–250 and 7–63 Silicon carbide formation, taking place during infiltration, is accompanied by volume expansion of the solid phase. This reduces the size of the pore channels and could result in blockage thereof. This becomes especially a matter of concern in the case of fine-grained preforms There exist several papers dealing with the reaction of graphite and glassy carbon with silicon Wetting experiments were carried out using a heating microscope optical dilatometer (EMI2). Equipment is calibrated with a certified Pt/Rh 6/30 thermocouple twice a year, inserted in the sample holder, by using melting points of different standards. A piece of silicon with approximate dimensions of 2 For comparison, the wetting angles of graphite by silicon, within the same temperature range and conditions were also determined. For the investigation of the reaction, one or more silicon wafers of approximate dimensions 0.5 The roughness of the interface between the diamond and the formed SiC was also measured using Image Tool version 3 by dividing the actual tortuous length by the length parallel to the interface. The measured wetting angles as a function of temperature are shown in An increase in the wetting angle of diamond by Si around 1350 The drop down of the wetting angle occurs at 1435 The Si/diamond reaction couples were heat treated at 1450, 1475 and 1500 Even in the samples heated for 0 The quantitative analysis of the thickness of the formed layer shows the rapid formation of a dense layer, which subsequently grows very slowly. The thickness of the SiC layer increases slightly with increasing temperature. SiC is also formed inside the diamond plate in some of the diamond grain boundaries or in microcracks ( Although diamond converts into graphite at 1500–1550 The wetting angles observed fit well with the known data from literature for carbon and SiC, see The dense SiC layer was rapidly formed during the heating up of the reaction couple to the reaction temperature. The morphology of the layer reveals that its formation starts with a few crystals growing along the interface. These grains are well faceted. Similarly faceted grains were also found for the reaction of Si with glassy carbon or graphite Zhou and Singh The micrographs of the etched cross sections ( Liquid silicon wets diamond. A wetting angle of approximately 20° could be detected above the melting point of Si. The values of the wetting angle measured are very similar to those observed for glassy carbon or graphite. The wetting is caused by the fast formation of a SiC interlayer. The investigation of the growth of this interlayer has shown that it forms very rapidly (even during the heating up period) by nucleation of SiC grains on the surface of the diamond. After a dense layer is formed the growth rate slows strongly down and further growth is likely to be diffusion controlled (diffusion of Si and C through the grain boundaries). The results obtained can form the basis for the optimization of the preparation of SiC/diamond composites by reactive infiltration. This work was supported by the South African Department of Science and Technology/National Research Foundation Centre of Excellence in Strong Materials and Element Six (Pty.) Ltd.