The desiliconization reaction in sodium aluminate solution was studied by adding tricalcium hydroaluminate (C3AH6). C3AH6 prepared at 323 K has a relatively high desiliconization capacity. Kinetic results show that the desiliconization reaction is first-order in SiO2 concentration, and the apparent activation energy is estimated to be 96 kJ/mol between 363 and 393 K, which is lower than that from adding Ca(OH)2. During the desiliconization process, SiO2(OH)2
                     − ions enter the interior of C3AH6 particles and react with them further. As a result, the distribution of SiO2 in the desiliconization product (DSP) is more uniform than that from adding CaO. Also, the SiO2 content in DSP is higher.During the extraction of alumina from sodium aluminate solution in the Bayer process, the removal of silicate ions in the sodium aluminate solution has a considerable effect on the grade of the alumina product. The weight ratio of Al In two-stage desiliconization procedure, Ca(OH) A novel desiliconization agent, tricalcium hydroaluminate (C The desiliconization product (DSP), hydrogarnet (CaO·Al In this paper, the kinetics of the desiliconization reaction is studied, and the desiliconization mechanism is suggested. The aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving Al(OH) In C Desiliconization experiments were carried out in an autoclave. Samples were collected at intervals. After filtering and cooling, the concentration of silicate ions in the solution was analyzed and expressed as The XRD pattern of the prepared C A DSP sample was embedded with epoxide resin and sliced. The silicon and aluminum contents in the cross section of the DSP were then measured by Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX, Shimadzu). The Desiliconization experiments were conducted with the addition of C It can be seen from  The C  It could be deduced from  The desiliconization rate constants can be obtained from The relationship between the desiliconization rate constant and the activation energy can be expressed by Arrhenius equation Eq   When 20 g/L C The mechanism of desiliconization reaction by adding CaO and C When using CaO as desiliconization agent, CaO on the surface reacts with Al(OH) With the addition of C To verify the above mechanism, the silicon and aluminum contents at various spots in the cross section of DSP formed from adding C The C  weight ratio of Al constant initial SiO SiO activation energy desiliconization rate constant ideal gas constant desiliconization time (min) caustic module (mole ratio of Na stoichoimetric coefficient of SiO The project has been supported by the National Natural Sciences Foundation of China (No. 59974027), National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (No. 2001AA647010), the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry (SRF for ROCS, SEM), and the Natural Sciences Research Foundation for Young Teachers in Beijing University of Chemical Technology (No. QN0502).