A study of iron(III) transport through a solid-supported liquid membrane using the phosphine oxide Cyanex 921 as carrier has been carried out using batch experiments. A model is reported describing the transport mechanism which consists of a diffusion process through a source aqueous diffusion layer, a fast interfacial chemical reaction and diffusion of HFeCl4·L2 (L, the extractant) through the membrane. The transport system is studied as a function of several variables, such as the diluent of the organic phase, metal concentration in the source phase, etc., along with the composition of the receiving solution. The mass transfer coefficient was calculated from the model as 23 μm/s and the thickness of the source aqueous boundary layer was calculated to be 44 μm. The behaviour of Cyanex 921 has been studied with respect to other organophosphorus extractants and also the selectivity of the membrane-carrier system on various metal-bearing aqueous solutions.It is of general concern that metal hydrometallurgical processing involves the unwanted production of nearly 18 million ton/year of iron Liquid membranes can be put into two classifications: procedures with or without phase dispersion. The first includes emulsion liquid membranes; the second includes bulk liquid membranes, which are generally used for fundamental studies methods without phase dispersion, as well as supported liquid membranes and liquid film pertraction. Supported liquid membranes are based on the use of a porous solid membrane which supports the liquid membrane phase (extractant or carrier and diluent). The pores of the solid membrane are completely filled with the liquid and this impregnation produces stable heterogeneous membranes. In the liquid film pertraction process, there are three solutions in continuous motion: the source and the receiving solutions which flow along vertical supports alternatively arranged at small distances in the membrane solution. Despite the above mentioned facts of iron by-production in hydrometallurgical processes and the implementation of membrane technologies, there is very limited information about the use of membranes for iron separation/rejection from aqueous solutions or wastes The present work presents a model of active transport of iron(III) using the commercially available Cyanex 921 extractant immobilized on a microporous hydrophobic support. The organic membrane and aqueous diffusional resistances were calculated from the proposed model. The influence of hydrodynamic conditions and chemical parameters were investigated to obtain efficient conditions for iron(III) transport. The phosphine oxide Cyanex 921 was kindly supplied by CYTEC (Canada) and was used without further purification. The extractant is mainly based on the tri- The flat-sheet supported liquid membrane was impregnated with a carrier solution containing Cyanex 921 dissolved in xylene, if not otherwise stated, by immersion for 24 h and then leaving it to drip for a few seconds before being placed in the transport cell. The flat-sheet membrane used was Millipore Durapore GVHP 4700 125-μm thick microporous polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF) film with nominal porosity of 75%, effective pore size of 0.22 μm and tortuosity of 1.67. The batch transport experiments were carried out in a permeation cell consisting of two cubic compartments made of methacrylate and separated by the microporous membrane. The membrane effective geometrical area was 11.33 cm The experiments were performed at 30°C at a mechanical stirring speed of 1600 min The ionic strength in the source and receiving phases was kept constant at 2 M in all the experiments. Membrane permeabilities were determined by monitoring metal concentration by AAS (Perkin Elmer 1100B spectrophotometer) in the source phase as a function of time. The permeation coefficient ( The mass transfer of iron(III) across the membrane is described by considering only diffusional parameters. The interfacial flux due to the chemical reaction is neglected, as the chemical reactions seem to take place at the interface aqueous source solution-membrane and membrane-receiving aqueous solution interfaces, and different studies suggest that chemical reactions can be considered as occurring instantaneously relative to the diffusion process Data on the iron(III) extraction from 2 M HCl solutions by tri- The iron(III) transport rate is determined by the rate of diffusion of iron-containing species through the source diffusion layer and the rate of diffusion of HFeCl Assuming that the distribution coefficient of iron(III) between the membrane phase and the receiving phase is much lower than that between the source phase and the membrane, the concentration of the iron-extracted complex in the membrane phase on the receiving solution side may be negligible compared with that on the source solution side. Then, If the chemical reaction expressed by At the steady state, The permeability coefficient can be defined as: Previous experiments were performed to establish adequate hydrodynamic conditions. The permeability of the membrane was studied as a function of the stirring speed on the source solution side. Results obtained are shown in The influence of the composition in the receiving phase on iron transport has been studied using a source phase of 0.18 mM Fe(III) in 2 M HCl, a membrane phase of 0.78 M Cyanex 921 in xylene and a receiving phase at constant In many liquid–liquid extraction systems, the characteristics and type of the diluent of the organic phase may influence metal extraction; thus, it is also recognized that the membrane diluent chosen as a water-resistant barrier in any liquid membrane process exerts a major influence on membrane performance, i.e. enabling high membrane lifetimes to be obtained In the present work, the use of various diluents for the Cyanex 921/Durapore permeation system was investigated for experiments carried out with source phases of 0.18 mM Fe(III) in 2 M HCl, membrane phases of 0.39 M Cyanex 921 in each diluent and receiving phases of 2 M NaCl. The results obtained are shown in To study the influence of the hydrochloric acid concentration in the source phase on iron permeation, a number of experiments was carried out at various HCl concentrations, keeping other variables constant, Thus, the single ion transport through the membrane of 0.18 mM Fe(III) from an aqueous source phase of varying HCl concentrations but at constant The influence of the initial iron concentration in the permeation of this metal by Cyanex 921 was investigated. This study was carried out using source phases which contained various iron concentrations in 2 M HCl, membrane phases of 0.78 M Cyanex 921 in xylene and receiving solutions of 2 M NaCl. The results are shown in The results concerning transport of iron(III) from a source phase containing 0.18 mM Fe(III) in 2 M HCl and the receiving phase 2 M NaCl and varying concentrations of Cyanex 921 in the range of 0.07–0.78 M dissolved in xylene revealed no significant change in the permeation coefficient at higher carrier concentrations To determine the value of the resistances to the mass transfer, the next expression, obtained from Thus, by plotting 1/ The diffusion coefficient of the iron-complex in the bulk organic phase ( The selectivity of the present system was studied against the presence of other metallic ions (e.g. chromium) that may be present in some wastes (e.g. pickling solutions). For these investigations, transport experiments were carried out using a membrane phase of 0.78 M Cyanex 921 in xylene, receiving phases of 2 M NaCl and source phases, which contained various metallic ions Results obtained, shown in The behaviour of the system iron(III)–Cyanex 921 was compared to other iron transport systems with organophosphorus derivatives such as TBP and DBBP. Experiments were carried out using membrane phases of the carrier at 0.78 M in xylene, source phase of 0.18 mM Fe(III) in 2 M HCl and receiving phase of 2 M NaCl. The experimental results are shown in The transport of iron(III) using the phosphine oxide Cyanex 921 under various experimental conditions has been studied and a mechanism of iron(III) transport considering the aqueous film diffusion of metal ions, fast chemical reaction at the interface and diffusion of HFeCl Distribution coefficient, defined as the ratio [Fe(III)] Transport resistance due to diffusion by the aqueous-source boundary layer (s/μm). Thickness of the aqueous source boundary layer (μm). Average aqueous diffusion coefficient of the iron-containing species (m Total iron concentration in the source phase (mM). Total iron concentration at the source phase-membrane interface (mM). Transport resistance due to diffusion through the membrane (s/μm). Thickness of membrane (μm). Membrane diffusion coefficient of the iron-containing species (m HFeCl HFeCl Permeability flux (mol/m Porosity (%). Tortuosity of the membrane. Diffusion coefficient of the iron-containing species in the bulk organic phase (m To CAM (Comunidad de Madrid, Spain) for Project 07M/0053/1998. To Mr. Bascones and Mr. López for technical assistance throughout the experiments.