Esculetin, a natural coumarin derived from herbs, has shown different potential pharmacological activities. However, the poor aqueous solubility of esculetin may limit its therapeutic efficacy. Nanocrystal is a promising dosage form to overcome this drawback by enhancing drug saturation solubility. Hence, a laboratory-scale wet-bead milling approach was employed to develop an esculetin nanocrystal formulation. Povacoat™ was selected as a stabilizer after screening different surfactants and polymers. Design of experiments was applied to identify and understand the relationship between process parameters and formulation compositions at the stage of formulation optimization. Furthermore, the optimized formulation was solidified using two different approaches (spray-drying and freeze-drying) and characterized by dynamic light scattering, laser diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, thermal analysis, and X-ray powder diffraction. An esculetin-Povacoat™ nanocrystal formulation that maintained a 200 nm particle size for 180 days was successfully obtained with specific critical process parameters and formulation composition within the design space.Over the last decade, nearly half of potential drug candidates have shown poor aqueous solubility [ The key factors in developing a new formulation are the process parameters, formulation composition, and the interactions among them. Design of experiments (DoE) is a structured and organized statistical tool for providing in-depth knowledge of the relationships between the independent and dependent variables affecting the process and the output of that process [ Typically, the nanocrystal formulation is obtained in its liquid form, a nanosuspension. However, dried particulates are more stable and convenient for shipping and dispensing than liquids. To achieve a product with long-term stability, the production of powders via water elimination from the resulting suspension is a promising strategy. This solidification can prevent Ostwald ripening phenomena, subsequent agglomeration and/or chemical changes caused by hydrolysis [ The aim of this study was to develop an esculetin nanocrystal formulation by laboratory-scale wet-bead milling using a design space approach to determine the critical process parameters. The optimized formulation was solidified and further characterized. Esculetin (purity>98%) was purchased from Chengdu Herbpurify Co., Ltd. (Chengdu, China). Vitamin E polyethylene glycol succinate (trade name Kolliphor® TPGS), alkyl polyglucoside C8–C10 (trade name Plantacare® 2000 UP), poloxamer 407 (trade name Kolliphor® P407), poloxamer 188 (trade name Kolliphor® P188) and polyvinyl caprolactam–polyvinyl acetate–polyethylene glycol graft copolymer (trade name Soluplus®, MW = 90,000–140,000) were kindly provided by BASF, Brazil (Sao Paulo, Brazil). A polyvinyl alcohol copolymer (Povacoat™, Type F, MW = 40,000) was supplied by Daido Chemical Corporation (Osaka, Japan). Polysorbate 80 and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were purchased from Synth (Sao Paulo, Brazil). Ultrapurified water was obtained from a Milli-Q Millipore water apparatus (Sao Paulo, Brazil). All other reagents were analytical grade. The esculetin nanocrystals were produced by a modified wet-bead milling method [ To select the most suitable stabilizer for esculetin nanocrystals, different surfactants and polymeric stabilizers were screened. The components of the different suspensions were 3.0% w/w esculetin, 3.0% w/w different stabilizers (0.2% w/w for SDS) and purified water added to a total of 7 g, as shown in DoE was employed to investigate the influence variables on the response (particle size) and their relationships to obtain an optimized esculetin nanosuspension. The three independent variables selected were the esculetin content (% w/w), the Povacoat™ content (% w/w), and the milling time (days). The variables were studied at two levels, and the actual values for each level are shown in Multiple linear regression analysis and ANOVA were employed to develop a mathematical model. The general form of the model is represented by equation A B-190 mini spray-dryer (Buchi, Flawil, Switzerland) was employed to spray-dry 40 mL of nanosuspension containing 5.0% w/w mannitol. The conditions were set as follows: inlet temperature, 120 °C; feed rate, 3.5 mL/min; and air flow rate, 800 L/h. The resulting outlet temperature was 80 °C. The nanosuspension was under constant stirring during the spray-drying process [ Approximately 1.5 mL of the final nanosuspension was immediately transferred into 10 mL glass flasks after preparation by wet milling. The bulking agent mannitol (5.0%, w/w) was added to prevent aggregation, and the flasks were partially closed with rubber stoppers. Then, samples were placed in a Dura-Stop MP & Dura-Top MP Tray Dryer MNL-031-A system (FTS Systems, New York, USA) individually for slow freezing (1 °C/min) until the product temperature reached −40 °C, where it was held for 5 min. The annealing heat treatment was applied with heating to −10 °C and a 5-min hold at this temperature. Then, the primary drying was conducted at a product temperature of −25 °C and a pressure of 100 mTorr for 24 h. In the secondary drying stage, the product was held at 10 °C and the same pressure for 8 h. The particle size of the freshly prepared nanosuspension, spray-dried (SD) powder, and freeze-dried (FD) powder was measured in triplicate by photon correlation spectroscopy using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). The SD and FD powders were redispersed in Milli-Q water to the same detected concentration of the fresh suspension. The z-average diameter and size distribution in terms of PdI were measured in triplicate for each sample. The initial size distribution of the drug substance, esculetin, and nanosuspension was measured by the LD method using a Cilas 1090 granulometer (Cilas, Orleans, France). The saturated esculetin solution was used as the dispersing medium, and insoluble esculetin was removed by filtration prior to the measurements. The morphology and particle size of the SD and FD nanocrystals were observed using TEM (FEI Tecnai™ G2 Spirit Twin, Thermo Scientific, Hillsboro, OR, US) at 120 kV. After the powders were resuspended in water, one drop was placed on a 300-mesh ultrathin Formvar film grid. The grid was left to dry at room temperature before the test. The morphologies of the raw materials, SD and FD powder were observed using SEM (FEI Quanta™ 250, Thermo Scientific, Hillsboro, OR, US). Samples were measured at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV, and images were acquired at a magnification of 400–6000x. The solid-state crystallinity of esculetin, Povacoat™, mannitol, FD nanocrystal powder and SD nanocrystal powder was measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetry (TG). DSC curves were obtained using a DSC-50 cell (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Approximately 2 mg of sample was weighed into an aluminum pan and hermetically sealed. The samples were heated to 350 °C from 25 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min under nitrogen flow (100 mL/min). TG was performed using a TGA-51H model thermobalance (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) in the temperature range of 25–600 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min. Approximately 5 mg of sample was weighed into a platinum pan. The test was conducted under nitrogen flow (50 mL/min). The XRPD patterns of esculetin, Povacoat, mannitol, FD nanocrystal powder and SD nanocrystal powder were measured using a Siemens/Bruker D5000 diffractometer (Billerica, MA, USA) to further investigate crystallinity [ The saturation solubility of esculetin, the physical mixture (esculetin, Povacoat™ and mannitol at the same nanocrystal concentration), and the dried nanocrystal powders was analyzed in different media (simulated gastric fluid (SGF), acetate buffer (pH 4.5 USP), and simulated intestinal fluid (SIF)) by the shake-flask method [ The stability of the esculetin suspension, FD powder and SD powder was assessed in a short-term storage study. The samples were stored in capped glass vials at 4 °C for a period of 6 months. The dried powders were redispersed in Milli-Q water before each measurement. The particle size and PdI of the samples were measured on the day after preparation and after 30, 90 and 180 days.  The influence of the esculetin concentration (% w/w), Povacoat™ concentration (%w/w) and milling time (days) on the particle size was evaluated using 14 independent experiments. The experimental particle size (nm) values at the design points are shown in ANOVA ( The average particle size of the nanocrystal formulations varied from 163.4 to 337.3 nm, and the PdI values were <0.3 (data not shown). An outline of ANOVA for the response surface model of the esculetin nanocrystals is shown in The best-fitting model was selected from the regression analysis according to a comparison of the following statistical parameters: the coefficient of determination (R Equation From the contour plot of the regression model ( The experimental and predicted values of particle size of the two independent experiments used to verify equation The mean particle size of the freshly prepared esculetin nanosuspension was 191.9 ± 1.6 nm (PdI: 0.162 ± 0.008), as determined by DLS. LD revealed that the diameter at 10, 50 and 90% of the cumulative population distribution was 60.0 ± 0.0 nm, 220.0 ± 10.0 nm and 500.0 ± 70.0 nm, respectively. The particle size and PdI of the esculetin nanosuspension before and immediately after spray-drying and freeze-drying are shown in Particles within the range from 100 to 500 nm were observed in the redispersed SD and FD powders under TEM ( The thermal properties of the esculetin raw material, excipients, and formulations were evaluated by TG and DSC, and the curves are shown in Similar thermal behavior was observed for both SD and FD powders, with two endothermic events in the DSC curves; the first was between 133 °C and 160 °C (T The XRPD patterns are shown in The saturation solubility of the esculetin raw material, physical mixture, and nanocrystal powders in different media (SGF without enzyme, pH 4.5 buffer, and SIF without enzyme) are listed in The particle size and PdI of the nanosuspension, SD powder and FD powder stored at 4 °C were assessed over a period of 180 days. Samples were collected after preparation and after 30, 90 and 180 days, and the results are summarized in The small-scale wet-bead milling method is valuable in assessing the comminution ability of crystals, screening formulations and investigating physical stability because it can conserve both active compounds and time [ However, compared to surfactants, polymeric stabilizers are adsorbed on particles and/or form a thick surface layer to prevent Ostwald ripening, and they do not affect the drug crystal structure [ Particle size and PdI are relevant not only to the stability of the system but also to the rate and extent of drug release. The PdI is an indication of the size distribution, and generally, a small PdI (<0.2) illustrates the uniformity and homogeneity of a nanosized system [ As shown in Povacoat™ is an aqueous polymer comprising polyvinyl alcohol, polyacrylic acid and polymethyl methacrylate groups. According to the manufacturer manual, the amount of Povacoat™ that can be used in the dosage form is up to 22% [ In this study, the RSM allowed the identification and characterization of a design space in which the esculetin concentration and milling time were optimized to provide the lowest particle size ( For the solid preparations, both approaches, spray-drying and freeze-drying, have their own advantages. Spray-drying is a conventional industrial process and preferred over freeze-drying because of its simple operation and cost and time effectiveness [ In this study, mannitol was added in both processes as a supporting agent to inhibit particle aggregation and achieve adequate redispersion. To facilitate the crystallization of mannitol during the freeze-drying process, a thermal treatment called annealing should be incorporated into the freeze-drying process. The annealing step recrystallizes smaller ice crystals to form larger ice crystals and shorten the primary drying time [ As observed by TEM ( The broad endothermic event observed in the DSC and TG curves of Povacoat™ ( When nanocrystals are prepared, a change in the crystalline state can occur during both the milling and drying processes [ The saturation solubility of the esculetin nanocrystals was 1.2- to 1.5-times higher than that of the esculetin raw material ( Dry powders should be shelf-stable, pharmaceutically elegant and able to instantly redisperse into a suspension [ In this study, an esculetin-Povacoat™ nanocrystal formulation with a particle size of 200 nm was successfully developed by a reduced-scale wet milling process with the help of a systematic DoE approach. The design space approach allowed the description of the particle size performance of the formulation as a mathematical function of the stabilizer and esculetin concentrations and the milling time. Furthermore, it was possible to identify the critical components and factors and the limits within which variations in the component concentrations have minimal or no effects on the particle size. The formulation containing 3.0% (w/w) esculetin and 3.0% (w/w) Povacoat™ presented a significant increase in saturation solubility compared to that of the micronized esculetin powder. This approach has the potential to enable the development of innovative commercial products for the treatment of hyperuricemia. The authors declare no conflict of interest in this article.  The work was supported by