The loading of gold and copper, both individually and simultaneously, from thiosulfate solutions onto ion exchange resin columns and the subsequent elution of these species have been investigated. In the presence of copper, effective loading with good selectivity for gold can be achieved at pH 11, which balances the stability of the solution and minimizes the formation of poisoning polythionates. The loaded metals can be eluted with high efficiencies using a number of composite eluant solutions. These include sodium tetrathionate stabilized with sodium sulfite and ammonium thiosulfate (ATS), sodium sulfite coupled with ammonia, and sodium chloride with the addition of ATS. The addition of thiosulfate to the eluant seems to have a negative effect on the gold elution efficiency and should be avoided wherever it is possible. Of all the three eluants investigated, the sodium sulfite/ammonia combination is found to be the most efficient, but the sodium chloride/ATS combination is likely the most economical.The leaching of gold from its ores using thiosulfate solutions has been extensively studied in the last two decades However, one of the problems associated with thiosulfate leaching is the difficulty in recovering gold from pregnant solutions. For example, it has been shown that the gold–thiosulfate complex does not effectively adsorb onto activated carbon Another problem associated with the use of thiosulfate is its oxidation by dissolved oxygen, which is also strongly catalyzed by copper Commercially available strongly basic anion exchange resins were obtained in their wet forms and used without treatment. The resins involved in this work, including Dowex G51, Dowex 21K and Amberlite IRA-410, were selected from a group of resins that had been investigated previously Synthetic solutions prepared with deionized water were employed for the study. Ammonium thiosulfate (ATS) obtained from Aldrich was 99% pure. All other chemicals were of analytical grade. Gold was introduced to thiosulfate solution in the form of AuCl An automatic fraction collector was used to take solution samples during either loading or elution if the kinetics were to be followed. In other experiments, the loading or elution effluents were collected as a whole only for the final results. Gold and copper in solution were analyzed by commercial analytical laboratories using fire assay and ICP, respectively. The loading The results for gold loading from 0.1 M ATS solutions onto the columns of Dowex G51 and Dowex 21K resins are shown in In real leach solutions, however, copper is almost always present, usually in much higher concentrations than gold, since it is added as a catalyst for gold dissolution. Therefore, the interaction between copper and the resins was investigated. Typical kinetic curves for the loading of copper on Dowex 21K resin from 0.1 M ATS containing 500 ppm Cu are presented in The kinetics for the co-adsorption of gold and copper on Dowex 21K resin from a solution containing both metals is demonstrated in The kinetic curves for copper loading in the presence of gold are shown in The co-loading of gold and copper was repeated a number of times under the same conditions as described in The concentration of gold in practical leach solutions may well be below 20 ppm, the level used in the above experiments. Therefore, it is necessary to demonstrate that gold can be loaded effectively on resins from solutions containing very low levels of gold. In the elution experiments, gold and copper were pre-loaded onto the resin columns from a solution containing 0.1 M ATS, 20 ppm Au and 500 ppm Cu using a flow rate of about 15 BV/h. The elution was conducted immediately after the completion of the loading. A number of eluant solutions were used to strip the gold and copper from the resins. First of all, tetrathionate was selected as an eluant since it strongly competes with the metals to adsorb onto the resins  The kinetic curve for the elution of copper from a copper loaded column using the tetrathionate eluant is shown in  Sodium sulfite alone was also found to be very effective for gold and copper elution. However, copper hydroxide precipitated in the eluate solution and this was prevented by the addition of ammonia. A separate experiment showed that ammonia itself was not able to strip the metals. Interestingly, gold was stable in the eluate solution and may have been present as Au(SO Further experimental results given in Another effective eluant studied was sodium chloride. The addition of not only ammonia, but also thiosulfate, was necessary to stabilize the eluted metals in the eluate solution. In practical operations, it is required that the columns be used repeatedly. Therefore the regeneration behavior of different resins was tested by repeating the loading and elution for five cycles. In each loading cycle, a total volume of 1 L (333 BV) standard loading solution, composed of 0.1 M ATS, 20 ppm Au and 500 ppm Cu, was passed through the column at 14–16 BV/h. The loaded column, after washing with 3–5 BV deionized water, was then eluted with 40–50 BV of an eluant solution at 2 BV/h. The compositions of the eluants used were: 0.25 M Na 2 M Na 4 M NaCl and 0.1 M ATS (pH 9.2). Two different resins were tested for each of the eluants. After elution with Eluant A, the column, being saturated with tetrathionate (or trithionate as it might appear in the solution), was reconditioned before it was reused for loading in the next cycle. This was done by washing the column with 10 BV 0.05 M NaOH at 5 BV/h, followed by a wash with deionized water. In the case of Eluant B and Eluant C, however, no column reconditioning was necessary. The concentrations of Au and Cu in the initial loading solutions, loading effluents and eluates were analyzed so that the loadings of the metals and the elution efficiencies could be determined for the individual cycles. At the end of the experiments, the resins were also assayed for the remaining metals and the overall elution efficiency for a particular metal was calculated based on the total amount of the metal eluted and remained. Some of the results from the cycling experiments are presented in It is perhaps worth noting that, with Eluant A In the absence of copper, gold can be loaded onto strongly basic ion exchange resin from thiosulfate solutions rapidly and to high loading concentrations. In the presence of copper, effective ion exchange operation can only be performed under limited conditions due to the instability of the thiosulfate solution and the possible formation of poisoning polythionates. For a typical solution of 0.1 M ATS with 500 ppm copper, the optimum operation pH is about 11 and there is not much allowance for changes. Under such conditions, the adsorption of gold onto the resins is much stronger than copper. With a large excess of copper in the loading solution, the resin column is usually first loaded with copper, some of which is then gradually replaced by gold. Effective elution of the loaded gold and copper can be achieved using a number of composite eluant solutions. The eluant containing tetrathionate is disadvantageous due to its instability and the need of resin reconditioning before returning the resin to loading. Sodium sulfite is the best eluant in terms of efficiency, while sodium chloride is likely the most economical. The addition of thiosulfate reduces the elution efficiency of the sulfite eluant. The mechanism of thiosulfate inhibition of elution requires further study. The loading/elution cycling experiments demonstrate that the resin can be used repeatedly without deterioration in the resin loading or elution performances. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Anglogold, Barrick Gold, Kinross Gold, Newcrest Mining, Normandy, Placer Dome and Teck Cominco for this work.