Zinc chloride and hydrochloric acid extraction from solutions of high zinc concentration by tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) diluted in ShellSol 2046 (an aliphatic solvent) has been studied with a combination of experiments and mathematical modelling. Above 0.4mol/L aqueous zinc chloride, zinc is extracted predominantly as ZnCl2 accompanied by small amounts of an acido–metal complex, most likely to be HZnCl3. The Pitzer and Hildebrand–Scott models are used to estimate the activity coefficient of ions in the aqueous and organic phase respectively. Both the thermodynamic equilibrium constants and Hildebrand–Scott solubility parameters are fitted for the extracted species: ZnCl2(H2O)3
                     ∙3TBP and HZnCl3(H2O)3
                     ∙3TBP. The modelling was able to predict both the extraction and stripping processes for aqueous zinc and acid concentration up to 1.6 and 1mol/L respectively.With increased environmental awareness and stricter legislation, there is a greater need for more sustainable treatment of industrial effluents. This is especially true for hot-dip galvanising industries where the major wastewater stream is a spent pickling liquor rich in both FeCl TBP as an extractant has been extensively studied and a book series is even dedicated to reviewing these studies (  The extraction of di-solvates (ZnCl  The extraction of acido–metal species reported by With zinc chloride capable of forming various chloro complexes, from ZnCl Using a Lewis cell to study the extraction of zinc chloride by TBP, The effect of acid concentration on zinc extraction has been described earlier when presenting the extraction mechanism proposed by In order to independently study the effect of chloride concentration on zinc extraction,   The modelling of zinc chloride extraction to date is also limited to the determination of the apparent equilibrium constant based on molar concentrations ( Additionally, the acid co-extraction as an acido–metal species has been neglected. Acid co-extraction will play an important role in developing the process of zinc recovery from spent pickling liquors. With a knowledge of the amount of acid extracted along with zinc, the possibility of in situ zinc removal directly from pickling liquors, and the associated acid loss in the process, can be examined. Furthermore, as the operating conditions, and thus the waste liquid composition of hot-dip galvanizing plants varies between plants, a model of TBP extraction of both acid and zinc would greatly aid in predicting the performance of the solvent extraction process for varying waste compositions. The work presented here aims to investigate the extraction of both zinc and HCl at high aqueous zinc concentrations (up to 2 TBP (Consolidated Chemical Co., purity 99.0%) was used as supplied and diluted with ShellSol 2046 from Shell Chemicals (69 The organic phase was pre-saturated with water before use in experiments. Equal volumes of aqueous and organic phase were then contacted in a separating funnel and allowed to preheat to 30 The zinc concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by titration with 0.05 The modelling method outlined here follows the procedures developed in SXFIT, a computer program developed for the modelling of solvent extraction ( The Pitzer model for mixed electrolytes is shown in Eqs. The term F in Eqs. The ionic strength, I, of a mixed electrolyte solution is defined as: The terms, B The function Z in Eqs. (6a) and (6b) is defined as: The term Both C However, with symmetrical mixing where both ions carries the same valence (i.e. z The single salt parameter for zinc chloride has been evaluated by various authors (   The need for additional parameters is likely due to complexation of zinc chloride as ZnCl Similar to zinc chloride, the aqueous solution of cadmium chloride also forms chloride complexes. From   As the concentration basis of the Pitzer model is molality, and most concentrations reported in the literature and in this work is in molarity, a conversion factor from one scale to the other is required. The SXFIT program uses the Masson equation (Eq. While The organic phase activity coefficient model used by SXFIT is the Hildebrand–Scott model (Eq. The relevant parameters used in the Hildebrand–Scott model are given in The molar volumes of both water and acid in the organic phase were determined previously in the modelling of water and HCl extraction by TBP ( From the fitted molar volumes, the volume change, ΔV, due to the extraction of water, acid and zinc can be estimated using Eq. This volume change is then used to adjust the final concentration of the organic phase using Eq. The extraction of both water and hydrochloric acid has been previously modelled ( In order to ascertain the effect of acid concentration on zinc extraction by TBP, the chloride concentration was kept constant at 5 At constant chloride concentration ( The addition of NaCl results not only in an increase in zinc extraction but also in acid extraction ( It should be noted that while acid extraction is detected, the concentration of HCl in the organic phase is less than that of zinc above 0.2 The concentration of TBP was also varied to 30 and 70 In order to model zinc and acid extraction by TBP, the solvation number of the extracted species for this system first needs to be identified. This was achieved by varying TBP concentration from 20 to 80  The zinc distribution ratio does not distinguish between different extracted zinc species (ZnCl Activity coefficient effects are neglected; and The TBP concentration is based on its initial concentration instead of the un-solvated (free) TBP at equilibrium conditions. These limitations can be minimised by conducting the same experiment for the stripping of the loaded organic phase using water as the stripping agent. In this case, the acidic species in the organic phase are preferentially stripped ( The solvation number of 3 determined from  Using HCl extraction as an analogy, where the extraction of acid involves hydrated TBP instead of free anhydrous TBP ( Both the thermodynamic equilibrium constant and solubility parameters for the extracted species are fitted and shown in  The model was tested with experimental data from literature. The list of literature sources and their respective experimental conditions are listed in From  The extraction of zinc chloride from aqueous solutions containing above 0.4 This model of zinc extraction has allowed zinc extraction and also acid co-extraction to be predicted for concentrations relevant for the galvanising industry; the model was able to predict the extraction and stripping processes obtained from experimental data of current work and literature sources for the concentration of ZnCl The authors are grateful for support from the