This study investigates the effect of different grinding processes on the preg-robbing behavior of quartz. The adsorption of gold onto the quartz surface in a chloride medium is determined after grinding in a ball mill with steel media, and in a ring mill. The mechanical activation of the ground quartz is significantly influenced by the type of mechanical action in the mill; the compression–shear action of the ring mill seems to be more effective than the impact–attrition action in a ball mill. As a result, the grinding limit is lower in the ball mill, and agglomeration is not significant after the grinding limit. Grinding yields significant propensity towards adsorption of gold chloride complexes from solution, firstly due to an increase in surface area in material treated in both the ball and ring mills, and secondly due to the activation of the quartz surface, which mainly takes place in the ring mill. The preg-robbing of gold on the ground quartz was measured to be as high as 0.38μmol/m2 on the ring milled quartz, while the corresponding value did not exceed 0.15μmol/m2 after 360min of ball milling. The rate of preg-robbing in ball milled products is also slower compared to that of the ring milled products, indicating geometrical or steric constraints on accessibility of the distorted (defect) quartz sites to gold complexes sorbing from the solution, which is consistent with the existing understanding of the different defect site locations induced by these two different grinding mechanisms.The effect of high-energy milling on the surface reactivity of quartz as it relates to the preg-robbing of gold chloride has recently been investigated using a combination of sorption testing and spectroscopic techniques ( Extensive work has been done on the mechanochemical activation of quartz and other silicates in laboratory mills ( A quartz sample in the size range of 0.1–2.5 To investigate the nature of surface alteration by grinding, samples were characterized by nitrogen sorption, using an ASAP2010 instrument (Micromeritics, USA) and the BET method, after degassing at 110 The sorption tests were performed in glass beakers with 500  The energy intensity of a mill depends on the grinding mechanism as well as the operating conditions. The mechanical load in a mill can be delivered by mechanisms including compression, shear, attrition, stroke and impact ( The power intensity in terms of the ratio of installed motor power to volume of the grinding chamber has also been calculated for both mills. The disk ring mill with a power intensity of 1700 The grinding limit is lower in the ball mill compared to the ring mill (2.6 against 3.5 The results of sorption tests demonstrate interaction between dissolved gold, and the original and ground quartz surfaces ( The preg-robbing is measured to be between 0.01 and 0.38 An additional consideration is the kinetics of the reactions in two different types of ground products. The activated surface of quartz ground in the ring mill, which has been loaded under compression–shear, is preferentially concentrated on the exterior surface of the particles and is accessible for gold adsorption as soon as the interaction starts. In contrast, the impact of media on the particles in the ball mill creates deeper fractures and intraparticle disturbed areas which are gradually accessed by the gold pregnant solution. This hypothesis was introduced first by For comparative purposes, the maximum amount of gold uptake ( It is clear from The transition of grinding mechanism from particle breakage to mechanical activation was observed in the ball milled samples after 240 This work demonstrates the effect of different mechanisms of grinding on surface activation of quartz. It has been shown that grinding of the quartz has considerably increased the adsorption potential for gold, especially in a ring mill. Such increased adsorption is caused not only by an increase in the surface area, but is also a result of activation of the surface. The grinding mechanism appears to have a significant effect on the extent of mechanochemical activation and consequently the extent of gold adsorption. The combination of compression and shear in the ring mill gives a larger effect compared to that of the impact–attrition of a ball mill. Moreover, a conceptual model of arrangement of surface defects generated by different mechanisms of grinding has been examined. The results are explained by this model in terms of the trend of gold adsorption as well as rate of Si dissolution. The quartz grains are mechanically activated more extensively on the surface under shear–compression compared to impact–attrition grinding. These results, along with our previous studies on the mechanism of interaction between gold complexes and silicate surfaces, confirm that preg-robbing is a physico-chemical phenomenon, and that both the type and extent of surface activation of minerals play significant roles in this process. This study was funded by the