Background
                  Tibial plateau fractures are complex and may result in sub-optimal results despite a timely and excellent reduction. An important cause for this may be the inability to detect and correct sagittal malalignment consequent to a reversal of the posterior tibial slope. We describe here the surgical steps to restore posterior tibial slope in a series of our patients with tibial condyle fractures involving the posterior column fragment using a fixed-angle locking plate.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a prospective cohort study of 4 cases who had sustained closed, bicondylar tibial plateau fractures (AO/OTA 41-C3) involving the posterior column fragment and reversed sagittal slope. All patients were operated in a prone position through a posterior approach. The fixation was done with a fixed angle locking plate.
               
                  Results
                  The average time taken for fracture union was 12 (range 10–15) weeks. The posterior tibial slope was restored in all the four patients (mean posterior proximal tibial angle = 8.5°, mean medial proximal tibial angle = 88°). There were no procedure-related complications. All patients attained excellent Knee Society Score at one year follow up (mean score = 93).
               
                  Conclusion
                  A posterior approach in the prone position gives direct access to the fracture apex which eases the fracture reduction and fixation to correct the sagittal malalignment in tibial condyle fractures involving the posterior column fragment. We propose this approach as an critical surgical technique which helps in improved outcomes of tibial condylar fractures.Tibial condyle fractures are known for their complex management. Complex bicondylar fractures with separation of the articular portion from its metaphysis or diaphysis and alteration in the slope of the tibial articular surface (Schatzker type VI) constitute nearly one-fifth (20%) of the tibial plateau fractures and are the most challenging fracture patterns [ Looking at the burden of this problem at our center, we developed a strategic, feasible, and patient-tailored surgical approach to correct the posterior tibial slope. We prospectively applied this strategy in four patients, who had sustained complex bicondylar fractures of the proximal tibia with reversal of the standard posterior sagittal slope and had intact posterior cortical hinge for correction. The improved outcomes in our patients point towards the utility of this simple and feasible approach, especially in the over-burdened trauma centers in the developing countries and pave the way for more extensive clinical studies. Our center is a tertiary-level referral center catering to the vast majority of trauma patients from all of Northern and Central India. The annual burden of fractures in our trauma center is nearly 3200 patients with 600 knee injuries, including 80–100 closed tibial plateau fractures. In the Year 2015, from January to December, we identified 14 patients, who had reversed tibial slope. Of these, four patients had an intact posterior cortical hinge amenable to indirect reduction by our technique. These patients were selected as cases for the current study and were prospectively followed-up for outcome assessment. The study was approved by the Institutional ethics committee and the departmental review board. A written and informed consent was sought before enrolment for the study. All clinical demographics, radiological, and surgical details were recorded in a pre-structured proforma. All four patients had sustained closed, bicondylar, tibial plateau fractures(AO/OTA 41-C3) with a reversed sagittal slope of the posterior column fragment and, an intact posterior cortical hinge and anterior commination. All cases underwent the initial management in the emergency room as per the institutional protocol for triage and damage control, followed by a definitive treatment in the form of open reduction and internal fixation between 7 and 42 days of the injury.   Parameters used to assess adequate fixation include articular reduction with <2 mm of articular step, coronal alignment with medial proximal tibial angle (MPTA) of 87 ± 5°, and condylar width within 5mm of the healthy side. Sagittal plane alignment, which is essential for the stability of the knee joint, should ideally be 9 ± 5° [  The baseline clinical and surgical data has been summarized in Despite the widely discussed importance of maintenance of tibial slope during the management of ligament injuries, limited work is available on the optimal alignment in the sagittal plane while correcting proximal tibial plateau fractures. Our paper highlights that a fracture-specific surgical exposure and fixation of the posterior column as a priority while managing tibial plateau fractures with reversal of the tibial slope, leads to improved functional outcomes. Our technique is simple, feasible, and applicable even in the busy trauma centers with limited expertise. Erdil et al. evaluated the effect of the posterior tibial slope after fracture healing on the anteroposterior knee laxity, functional outcomes, and patient satisfaction in 126 patients of proximal tibial fracture treated at their institute [ The current management of proximal tibia fractures relies on understanding the complexity of the fracture, which has been revolutionized by the computed tomography-based three-column classification [ Firoozabadi et al. proposed the concept of AO/OTA 41C3.3 reverse slope extension fracture in 25 fractures of 23 patients with a reversal of tibial slope as ‘hyperextension-varus injuries’ [ Furthermore, local wound complications occurred in 38% of patients requiring repeat interventions. As a possible solution to several of these problems, our posterior midline approach for fixation in the prone position allows a direct exposure and simple, quick maneuvering of the fracture fragment without the need of bulky spreader and excessive soft tissue retraction which could reduce the risk of local complications. It also allows a direct reduction of the intact posterior tension fracture, and indirect, but more biological disimpaction of the comminuted anterior cortex, thereby reducing the need of bone grafting. Our surgical technique can also be applied in cases with a coronal split of the tibial condyle where exposure and reduction of the posterior fragment may not be possible from the anterior side as seen in case 1 and 2. We understand that our prospective series has a small number of patients, but we plan to extend this unique strategy in hyperextension type of the posterior condylar fractures as well to improve the functional outcomes. The importance of this technique lies in its feasibility and the ease of patient-specific modifications for optimal functional outcomes. Although case 2 in our series had a malreduction of the anterolateral fragment, probably attributable to the delay of 6 weeks in definitive intervention and an initial compartment syndrome with soft tissue problems, yet the excellent function recovery with KSS of 85 at a follow-up of 8 months was encouraging. The decreased range of movement secondary to low thigh-calf ratio bilaterally in this patient probably led to lower scores. In conclusion, we propose a fracture-specific, simple, and feasible surgical technique to correct the sagittal plane malalignment of the posterior articular fragment. A direct posterior reduction and biological disimpaction of the anterior cortex restores the standard tibial slope. Fixation of the posterior column first in the management of tibial plateau fractures with reversal of tibial slope improves the clinical and functional outcomes. The use of posterior midline gastrocnemius raphe-split approach also helps in minimizing the local wound complications for complex proximal tibia fractures. None. None. None.