This paper presents a simple method for predicting particle attrition during pneumatic conveying. The model calculates the changes in the particle size during pneumatic conveying (as a result of the collisions between the particles and bend walls) by using empirical correlations for both the machine and material functions. The method does not require the use of complicated simulations such as DEM–CFD. Furthermore, the computational model was written in MATLAB, and the results agree well with the experimental results for salt particles. The computation time was very short: a few seconds for the first collision (particles passed through one bend), and below one minute for six collisions. The experimental results and parametric study show that higher bend radius ratios caused less damage to the conveyed material. Moreover, higher air velocities and larger pipe diameters caused more damage to the conveyed material.empirical constants of fatigue function empirical constants of strength distribution function empirical constants of equivalence function empirical constants of breakage function Archimedes number [–] cumulative mass fragment ratio [–] mass fragment frequency ratio [–] pipe diameter shape parameter of particle velocity distribution [–] particle size fragment particle size mother particle size cumulative mass-related size distribution [–] breakage force equivalent force mass-related frequency size distribution - cumulative numbered fragment ratio [–] bend radius bend ratio [–] cumulative distribution [–] particle velocity superficial air velocity median particle velocity collision angle air viscosity air density particle density The attrition of particles in pneumatic conveying is an important phenomenon that should be considered during design or operation. When particles are being conveyed through a pipeline, they experience collisions at different velocities and angles, which result in particle breakage. Most of the damage usually occurs in bends, because the collision angles in bends are much higher and close to normal collision, compared to those in straight pipes. The ability to predict the final size of the conveyed product in a pneumatic conveying pipeline would increase the design accuracy of such systems. In previous studies, Kalman Currently, complicated numerical simulations such as Discrete Element Method coupled with Computational Fluid Dynamics (DEM–CFD) are commonly employed to predict the final size distribution of conveyed material. The computational breakage algorithm is usually based on the concept of two groups of comminution functions: the process functions and material functions In 2009, Kalman et al. Brosh et al. In this paper, we suggest an even more simplified method for the calculation of the particle breakage during pneumatic conveying. The paper is focusing on the calculation productivity of the machine functions since they are the primary factor, which are responsible for the computation time of the particle's attrition model. The proposed model calculates the changes in the particle sizes with empirical correlations for both machine and material functions and does not require DEM–CFD simulations. Because most of the damage occurs in bends, the model calculates the breakage as a result of collisions between the particles and bend walls only. The material functions are defined based on previous empirical studies and include five empirical comminution functions: strength distribution This section introduces all machine functions that were developed in the current attrition model. Several assumptions were made before the development. First, it was assumed that the material is conveyed in a dilute phase; there are no collisions between the particles. Second, each particle moves horizontally in a bend before the collision. Third, the particle collides only once with the bend wall without any secondary collisions inside the bend. In practice, not all particles follow this assumption. However, when the air velocity is sufficiently high, the assumption is reasonable. Furthermore, it was verified in visualization experiments conducted with a transparent bend. The captured frame sequence of the particle trajectory in the bend made by a high-speed camera is shown in The first and most important machine function is the particle steady-state velocity, which defines the collision velocity. Santo et al. The collision or impact angle between the particle and bend wall is predicted based on the impact angle distribution function. By assuming that the particles move along the axial direction of the pipe (either horizontally or vertically) until the collision, the impact angle can be calculated based only on the bend geometry. This assumption is supported by experiments performed by Santo et al. The cumulative distribution of particle impact angles with respect to various bend ratios is shown in A homogeneous distribution of particles in a pipe cross section ( This section introduces all material functions that were used in the presented attrition model. Most functions have been determined in previous studies. The characterization of material functions is complicated and takes time. However, those functions represent pure material impact properties and are independent of the machine functions. Hence, once the material functions are determined for a certain material, the same functions can be used not only for study of pneumatic conveying but also for other impact systems, such as jet mill. The computational algorithm is initialized by randomly defining the size of each particle. If the conveyed material consists of mono-sized particles, a constant size is chosen. If the conveyed material consists of particles with different sizes, each particle size has to be chosen randomly according to the measured size distribution. Usually, the size distribution of the particles is measured with sieves and defined by the mass-related cumulative distribution. In this case, the mass size distribution must be transformed into a numbered size distribution before the random selection of the individual particles. If the cumulative mass size distribution The initial strength of each particle in the presented attrition model was chosen according to the empirical model proposed by Rozenblat et al. The selection function defines the percentage of broken particles at a certain velocity, and is developed through impact experiments with various particle sizes and velocities. In the presented attrition model, the particle velocity is predicted according to Eqs. The model for the equivalent force in Eq. The breakage function defines the size distribution of the fragments (the daughter particles) due to collision and breakage of the original particle (the mother particle) at a certain velocity. Thus, the breakage function is affected by the size of the mother particle The empirical cumulative fragment ratio model is based on the particle mass/weight according to Eqs. Determining an analytical solution for The cumulative mass fragment ratio ( In the computational breakage algorithm, if the equivalent force acting on a particle is lower than its strength, its strength is reduced due to fatigue although it does not break. Therefore, the fatigue function should define the reduced strength of an unbroken particle. The determination of the appropriate relationship of the reduced strength consists of performing repeated impact tests with a certain velocity and size fraction. In addition, the strength of the unbroken particles is measured after each impact cycle through compression tests. According to Rozenblat et al. To validate the results obtained with the model, experiments were conducted with a short horizontal section of a pneumatic conveying system. The system consists of a straight, horizontal, The schematic employed computational breakage algorithm is shown in The model was written in MATLAB. Before the model validation, the minimal number of initial particles necessary to obtain accurate computational results was determined. Various numbers of initial particles were inserted into the computational algorithm with the same initial conditions (i.e., same material, particle size, air velocity, and bend geometry). The results are shown in All the machine functions, as they were developed, are suitable for any material, pipe diameter and bend radius. Therefore, it is sufficient to validate the model with only one material for which all the material functions are fully determined. In our case, salt particles meet all the conditions. If one will choose to work with other material, the machine functions will remain the same without any changes. However, the material functions should be determined separately because all the empirical parameters of the material functions are material dependent. In the computation, 2000 was chosen as initial number for the particles. The calculated and experimental results are shown in It should be noted that the calculations performed with six repeated collisions for the same bend represent the same behavior of real pneumatic conveying system constructed of six different bends. It is because after the first collision (first bend), whether particles break or not, the change in particle's size and strength distributions is kept in memory for the next collision (next bend). Moreover, particle's velocity, locations and impact angles are chosen randomly once again by the machine functions before the next collision with appropriate reduced particle size and bend geometry. Since the particle velocity model used in this study is suitable only for steady-state conditions, the current attrition model is suitable in case where the distance between the bends in real system is high enough for particles reach the steady state conditions. If the distance does not meet the requirements, the particle acceleration length and velocity distribution can be predicted by a recently developed model of Santo et al. In addition, it should be noted that in real pneumatic conveying system, the particles can pass the bend by either roping or impact collision with the bend wall. While roping phenomenon usually exists in dense phase conveying and very fine powders, impact collisions usually can be observed in dilute phase conveying. Recent experimental studies by Tripathi et al. The parametric study was performed to check the effects of various operational conditions on the particle attrition. The predicted median particle size was plotted versus the times the particles pass through the bend for various superficial air velocities, pipe diameters, and bend ratios in Moreover, the bend orientation affects the attrition of particles during pneumatic conveying. Three possible bend orientations were studied: horizontal–vertical (H–V), horizontal–horizontal (H–H), and vertical–horizontal (V–H). The calculated results are shown in In this study, an easy to use breakage algorithm was developed. The model does not require the use of DEM-CFD simulations, because the machine functions are defined based on empirical correlations and the bend geometry. The model includes three machine functions: the particle steady-state velocity distribution, impact angle distribution, and location distribution functions. Furthermore, the model includes five material functions: the initial size distribution, strength distribution, equivalence/selection, breakage, and fatigue functions. To validate the computational model, experiments were conducted in a short pneumatic conveying system with various bend ratios and particle cycle numbers. The size distributions of the broken particles predicted by the model for pneumatic conveying are in good agreement with the experimental ones. In addition, a parametric study was performed to check the effect of various operational condition parameters on the particle attrition. The following conclusions can be drawn: The computation time was reduced significantly compared with that of a complete DEM–CFD simulation. For the first collision (particles passed through one bend), the computation time was a few seconds. For six collisions (particles passed through six bends), the computation time was below one minute. The analysis of the number of initial particles revealed that 2000 initial particles are sufficient in the computational algorithm to obtain results with sufficient accuracy. More than 2000 initial particles can be used. However, this will increase the computation time. Both validation experiments and parametric study revealed that higher bend radius ratios cause less damage to the conveyed product because higher bend radius ratios produce lower collision angles with the bend walls. According to the parametric study, higher air velocities and larger pipe diameters lead to higher damage to the conveyed material. The proposed computational model provides a powerful and simple design tool to predict the breakage of particles during pneumatic conveying. Finally, although the computation time was reduced, efforts should be made in future studies to reduce the characterization time of the material functions.