The adsorption characteristics of acid activated sepiolite (AAS) for the removal of chlorophyll-a (C55H72MgN4O5) from rapeseed oil was studied as a function of different sepiolite dosages and bleaching temperatures. A correlation has been shown between the adsorption capacity and a combination of AAS amount, bleaching temperature and oxidative reactions of chlorophyll-a. The adsorption equilibrium was found to follow the Langmuir isotherm model with a maximum adsorption capacity of 0.36 mg/g on AAS and 
                        
                           K
                           L
                        
                      value ranging from 6.11 to 19.51 kg/mg at 80 and 100 °C. It was found that AAS is an effective sorbent for the removal of chlorophyll-a molecule which is believed to adsorb as a protonated species onto SiOH groups at the edge in the tetrahedral sheet of sepiolite. These findings reveal that chlorophyll-a molecules not only adsorb onto the external surface of AAS but replace the released Mg2+ ions in the octahedral sheet; they, depending on the pore size of AAS, are also incorporated in the channels and tunnels of sepiolite. A structural model is proposed to account for the orientation of chlorophyll-a in the sepiolite matrix.The bleaching process is a common method for the removal of color producing substances from the oil using an adsorbent material. Chlorophyll- The adsorption of pigment from vegetable oils with various types of adsorbent has been extensively investigated, and many studies involve the adsorption isotherms of coloring materials, such as chlorophyll- Sepiolite is a natural clay mineral with a formula of magnesium hydrosilicate Si It is therefore the objective of this study to investigate the mechanism of color removal from vegetable oil with an acid-activated sepiolite (AAS) using the parameters of initial chlorophyll- The sepiolite sample used in this study was received from Anadolu Industrial Minerals Co. in Sivrihisar, Turkey. This beige sepiolite ground to −75 μm produced an average particle size ( Experiments were conducted with the degummed (water and acid degumming followed by drying) rapeseed oil in order to eliminate the influence of different crude oil qualities on the bleaching process. Activation was carried out using analytical grade 65 wt% 1 N HNO Chlorophyll- All bleaching experiments were carried out at temperatures of 80 and 100 °C for a 15 min of contact time ( The amount of chlorophyll- The acidity of AAS was based on a titration with a 0.1 N NaOH solution and phenolphthalein as indicator. The results were expressed as % acidity. The BET surface area of original sepiolite and AAS was measured by N Zeta potential measurements were conducted using a Zeta-Meter 3.0, which is equipped with a microprocessor unit capable of directly measuring the average zeta potential and its standard deviation. The uptake of chlorophyll- Chlorophyll is structurally unsaturated Mg and thermally decomposed to the pigment pheophytin, which results in a dull, dark-colored oil. This pigment contributes to an off-flavor and may also promote the oxidation of the oil The partition of chlorophyll- In Eq. The linearized Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherms of chlorophyll- As seen from The quantitative treatment of adsorption at the solid/liquid interface requires, first of all, the mechanism of chlorophyll- The sorption distribution coefficient may be expressed in terms of enthalpy change ( The free energy indicates the degree of spontaneity of sorption process with higher negative value reflecting a more energetically favorable sorption. As apparent in Compared to the total adsorption energy, The coverage of the AAS surface by chlorophyll- Acid activation of sepiolite removes Mg Acid activation at the same time induces the loss of about half of the zeolitic and hydroxyl water from the sepiolite structure. This pre-removal afterwards limits the temperature effects on the plugging of micropores and collapse of the crystal structure Langmuir isotherm may suggest homogeneity of adsorption sites on solid's surface. This may be due to a homogeneous distribution of active sites on AAS surface. As apparent in Evidently, the isoelectric point (iep) of sepiolite at 0.2, 2, 3, and 5% solids concentrations yield 3.2, 5.0, 5.6, and 6.0 In fact, the Si Also noteworthy is the finding that the best correlation regarding chlorophyll- A sepiolite sample from Sivrihisar, Turkey, has been subjected a set of acid activation experiments to obtain a bleaching material suitable for abstracting chlorophyll-  Acid activated sepiolite (AAS) is a splendid adsorbent for the removal of chlorophyll- The AAS dosage and to a lesser extent bleaching temperature have significant effect on the uptake of chlorophyll- The partition of chlorophyll- The data obtained from adsorption isotherm models were used to determine the thermodynamic parameters such as the free energy of adsorption ( The packing area of chlorophyll- It can be proposed that extensive leaching of Mg The author appreciates the support of the Pilot Pflanzenöltechnologie Magdeburg e.V., Germany, in whose laboratory part of this work was done.