Though fragmentation is a key issue in opencast blasting and techniques like digital image analysis have been developed for its quick assessment, guidelines are yet to be evolved to improve upon it in various kinds of formations. Step-wise Multiple Linear Regression Analysis of the parameters obtained from 35 blasting events in the overburden benches of three large opencast mines led to ascertain the degree of dominance of various influencing parameters on fragmentation. Guidelines are prepared consequently to suggest the step-by-step remedial measures for improved fragmentation in jointed and massive formations.Good fragmentation is a subjective matter and depends on the end use of the rock. The desired degree of fragmentation also depends on the type and size of equipment, which is used for the subsequent handling of the fragments. Large loaders, trucks and crushers can allow large fragments. Yet, larger equipment are not made for handling larger fragments but for handling larger volume of materials. The ideally fragmented rock is that, which needs no further treatment after the blast. The desirable size of the rock fragment will be different if the blasted rock is to be transported to the dump area than that required if the blasted rock is sent to the crusher.  There are several models developed for evaluation of energy utilised in fracturing. The oldest theory of  In the early 1950s, The Bond's work index The model provided by  It is evident from the above literature that greater the explosive energy utilised in blasting finer will be the product. But the product size depends not only on the explosive energy input but also the initial size of the rock to be fragmented. In widely jointed rocks, the average block size is more and hence, more explosive energy must be utilised to obtain the desired product size. Whereas, in thinly bedded rocks, the explosive energy requirement would be less if similar size of the product is to be obtained. In openly jointed rock mass, the rock fragments get liberated from the rock mass instead of being fragmented. It is evident that the stress wave is responsible for such liberation and the gas pressure can be poorly utilised to extend the fractures created by the stress wave. A relation between the mean fragment size ( According to The importance of in-situ joints and fractures on the degree of fragmentation has been explained by  Digital image processing technique using sophisticated software and hardware is the latest fragmentation analysis tool and has replaced in many cases the conventional methods like visual analysis, photographic, photogrammetry, boulder count or sieve analysis techniques which have inherent problems. The method includes image capturing of muck pile, scaling the image, filtering the image, segmentation of image, binary image manipulation, measurement and stereometric interpretation. The method is quick and very accurate. Many problems are encountered while trying this technique. The individual rock fragments in the image must be delineated. Problems with non-uniform lighting, shadows, and the large range of fragment sizes make delineation very difficult using standard edge-detection routines. Other problem is correct extraction of three dimensional information from the two-dimensional images for which assumption and site specific calibration for the third dimension are to be made from the two dimensional images. Further, a correction is to be made for overlapping of fragments or estimating the fines which may not be detected individually. Finally, the wide variations in size may require different scales for calibration.  Substantial studies related to blast fragmentation, explosive energy uitlisation and optimisation have been carried out with the help of evolution of a fast and reasonably accurate method of fragmentation assessment technique by digital image analysis. In fact, a separate workshop was conducted during FRAGBLAST′5 on “Measurement of Blast Fragmentation” in Montreal during 23–24 August, 1996 and the workshop proceeding was published by A.A. Balkema of Rotterdam. Despite issues related to fragmentation have been dealt in details and a number of parameters are identified to predict fragmentation through number of publications, the relative importance of various influencing parameters are not well ascertained. A methodology on how to deal with minimum number of parameters for fragmentation improvement in different kinds of formations is not yet developed, as a result. This calls for a parametric study. An effort is made in the present paper, based on the field investigations, to evaluate the degree of influence of different rock mass properties, blast design and the explosive properties in various kinds of rock masses or formations classified as jointed and massive. The outcome will be used to evolve guidelines for the practising engineers to deal the fragmentation issue in opencast blasting in a more precise manner. A total of 35 rounds of blasts were conducted in the overburden of three large opencast coal mines like Jayant mine of Northern Coalfields, Umrer mine of Western Coalfields and Manuguru OCP II of Singareni collieries Jayant opencast mine came into existence in 1986 under Northern Coalfields, a subsidiary of Coal India. It is located in Sidhi district of Madhya Pradesh, India. The mine is divided into two, east and west sections. It is the largest coal mine of India in terms of total annual excavation volume. The total coal reserves of this mine is 348.9 Mt and 907 Mm Drill: 250, 259 and 265 mm Dumper: 80 and 120 t Shovel: 10 Dragline: 15 and 24 m The overburden rock mass in those mine is constituted of sandstone, shaly sandstone and shales. Umrer mine is under Western Coalfields (WCL), a subsidiary of Coal India. It is situated at about 50 km from Nagpur. Coal production-wise, this is the largest opencast mine of WCL. The average coal production per annum from this mine is about 2.6 Mt with a target of 6.12 Mm Drill: 150 and 250 mm Shovels: 4.6 m Backhoe: 1.1–2.8 m Dragline : 15 m Dumper: 35 and 50 t, Tippers: 10 t The mine is divided into two sections called east and west. The strike of the mine is in E–W direction but swings to SW and NE direction in the western part of the mine. The top rock layer of lameta beneath the black cotton soil is the most problematic zone as far as blasting is concerned. The PK OC-II mine is located at Manuguru area of Singareni Coalfields (SCCL) and is located at about 60 km from Kothagudem. Coal production-wise it is the largest openacast mine of SCCL. The yearly coal production from this mine is 2.75 Mt of coal for which an estimated amount of 7.5 Mm The configurations of the equipment used here for overburden removal are given below: Drill: 250 mm Shovels: 10 and 5 m Dumper: 85 and 35 t The availability of the shovels is about 78% and the utilisation is around 67%. The dumper availability is about 66% and the utilisation is about 53%. The explosives used are SMS and cartridge types of mostly 125 mm diameter and the annual explosive consumption is 1300 t. Different rock mass properties, blast design parameters and blast results were observed in various rounds of blasting. The rock samples were collected from the blast locations and were subjected to different static and dynamic properties evaluation. The rock mass RQD was determined from joint count using the following equation The explosives relative weight strength (RWS) were obtained from the manuals supplied by the respective manufacturers. The spacing and burden during blasting were determined for various initiation sequences like diagonal, V-pattern or extended V-pattern. The values remained same when row to row blasting pattern was used. The ratio of effective spacing (spacing during blasting, The blast design parameters in the above three mines were different mainly because of variation in the rock mass properties, the bench and equipment configurations and the designed production per annum. The mine-wise average values of the major rock mass properties and blast design parameters are provided in Digital image analysis technique using FRAGALYST software was adopted for assessing the mean fragment size ( The images of the fragments in the muckpile were captured in five stages: 1st stage—the undisturbed muck pile after blasting but before any loading operation, 2nd stage—nearly 20% of the muckpile was removed, 3rd stage—nearly 40% muck was removed, 4th stage—nearly 60% muck was removed, 5th stage—nearly 80% muck was removed. In every stage atleast three frames, representing coarse+others, medium coarse+others and fines+others, were selected for analysis. Thus atleast 15 frames or more frames were analysed for each muck pile. This method represented various cross sections of the muck pile and either exposed or hidden. It appears that RQD, obtained from joint count, is the easiest parameter to classify various kinds of rock masses as its determination does not require any sophisticated equipment or laboratory. Further, it can be determined quickly with reasonable accuracy by experienced geologist or trained site engineers working on the face. It resembles to rock mass categorisation by visual observation but is not qualitative only. The rock masses representing the blast locations are suitably categorised in It may be noted that the classification in The various pre-blast observations are briefed for various rock types in The mean fragment size ( Though it appears from Multiple regression analysis is performed to determine the combined effect of a group of variables upon a variable not included in the group. However, the correlation between only two variables eliminating the linear effect of other variables in a group of variables are obtained through partial correlation or partial regression (Gupta and Kapoor, 1999). Multiple linear regression analysis, used to assign relative importance to the independent variables which may be interrelated, can be performed with, (i) a forward selection process, (ii) a backward elimination process, or (iii) a stepwise selection process, which is a combination of the forward and the backward methods. In the forward selection, the independent variable having the largest partial correlation is first selected and its correlation is established with the dependent variable. In the next step, the independent variable out of the remaining ones having largest partial correlation is included in the list and the overall correlation is adjusted after inclusion of the new variable. The process is continued in this manner till the user defined probability criteria in terms of the Adding independent variables in the correlation results in steep improvement initially and mild improvement at the later stage. It is true that each time a variable is included in the equation, the correlation should improve if there is any positive relation. Including a large number of independent variables in a regression equation is not a good strategy unless there are strong reasons and the process proves to be conceptually logical. Including irrelevant variables increases the standard errors. On the otherhand, it is also important not to exclude potentially relevant independent variables The degree of influence of various parameters considered in The parameters considered for MLR are having different units and their ranges vary widely. It is therefore considered that all these parameters should be normalised using the following relation: By normalising the variables and recasting them in dimensionless units, the arbitrary effects of similarities between the objects are removed The gradual improvement in correlation between the mean fragment size with the thirteen independent variables for both jointed and massive formations are presented in Some parameters like rock mass density, Poisson's ratio, linear charge density and specific drilling were not considered in the MLR because of the availability of less number of blasts in massive formations in comparison to the number of independent variables. However, parameters closely reflecting the unconsidered ones have been carefully chosen. The critical parameters are marked in Based on The domination of the rock mass properties is more if the formation is massive than if it is jointed. In jointed formations, the blast design parameters and explosive properties are heavily responsible though the rock mass properties also count. RQD is the most important rock mass property in jointed formation; whereas, the rock mass strength is the most important rock mass property if the formation is massive. This is in line with the conclusion made by The drilling deviation plays an important role whether the formation is massive or jointed. Surprisingly, the role of firing sequence and relative weight strength of explosive are quite minor. However, the explosive density proves quite an important parameter. The stemming length, which is a major source of oversize does not look significant if the formation is massive. Its role is important in jointed formation. The specific charge, which is considered as a major tool by the site engineers to control the degree of fragmentation, seems to play a moderate role only. Based on the observations, the following guidelines can be formulated to command the controllable parameters for improved fragmentation in jointed and massive formations The The energy utilised in blast fragmentation can be assessed from the pre and post-blast fragment size. The desired fragmentation in opencast blasting is defined by the end use of the rock and the available resources. The task of fragmentation assessment has been quite easy and fast with the advent of digital image analysis technique using various hardware and software. Precise guidelines are yet to be evolved for fragmentation improvement in various kinds of formations. With a view to bridge the gap, detailed investigations on overburden blasting and fragmentation were carried out in three large opencast coal mines. Stepwise Multiple Linear Regression were carried out separately for jointed and massive formations keeping the observed mean fragment size ( The authors are thankful to Director, Central Mining Research Institute for permission to publish the paper. Thanks are due to Ministry of Coal, Government of India for sponsoring the study. The authors are grateful to the management of the mines where field investigations were carried out.