Production scheduling of open pit mines seeks to define such a temporal flow of ore and waste materials from a mine that maximizes a project’s Net Present value (NPV), while satisfying different physical and operational constraints. To achieve this objective, different mathematical formulations have been proposed in the technical literature. However, solving these formulations for a real sized open pit mine could be extremely difficult and computationally challenging job. In order to make this job computationally tractable, different heuristic and metaheuristic techniques are commonly used. This paper presents the results of a study where a real valued population based metaheuristic technique known as Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm has been used with the aim to solve the production scheduling problem of open pit mines with low to moderate computational cost with or without the condition of grade uncertainty. Three different case studies revealed the capabilities and efficiency of DE algorithm by producing sufficiently good solutions of the said with moderate computational cost.Long term production scheduling (LTPS) plays an important role in achieving the financial and production targets of any open pit mine. It commonly seeks to define such an extraction sequence of ore and waste materials from the ground that maximizes the discounted profit of mining operations, while satisfying different technical, processing and slope stability constraints. The ore deposit is divided into a three dimensional array of regular sized blocks for this purpose. This block model of the deposit can have millions of these blocks, depending upon the size of a deposit and of the individual blocks. Defining an optimal extraction sequence of these blocks for mine life typically ranging from 5 to 30 years could be extremely difficult and computationally challenging job. Over the last 50 years, a wide variety of approaches have been proposed in the technical literature, to model and solve this problem. These approaches can be broadly categorized as conventional/deterministic [ Irrespective of the approach being used to model this problem, the main difficulty lies in solving it for a real sized mine. These approaches either need prohibitively longer computational times for finding optimal solution of the problem at hand or alternatively they use a so called divide and conquer strategy to make the solution finding process computationally tractable. In the later approach, the original problem is commonly divided into a series of sub problems and then each one of these sub problems is solved individually in isolation from the rest of the sub problems. Though, this strategy may expedite the solution finding process and computational time, but it might compromise the optimality of the final solution produced. In recent years, the main focus of research in this field is shifted towards the development of computationally efficient techniques for generating sufficiently good solution. For this purpose different heuristic and metaheuristic techniques are normally used. The term “ Khan and Niemann-Delius [ The framework starts the search process by initializing a population of random feasible solution in the solution space. These solutions are then encoded using an encoding scheme which aims to determine the maximum depth to be mined in each column of the block model in each period. These depth variables are then updated and manipulated (in each iteration) using the governing rules and equations of a real valued metaheuristic technique (PSO in this case) in an effort to find better solutions to the problem. To find out the period in which a particular block has been scheduled to be mined a so called back transform scheme is then used. This back transformed solution could be infeasible as it may not meet the condition of required slope angles. This phenomenon is mainly caused by the one dimensional nature of the metaheuristic technique being used to update the depth variables. To convert this infeasible solution into a feasible one a so called slope normalization procedure is then used. A penalty method has been used to handle and account for the violations of the capacity constraint. This paper uses this same framework for production scheduling of the open pit mines, but instead of using PSO algorithm for searching the solution space Differential Evolution have been used this time. The aim of this study was to explore the capabilities and efficiency of different variants of Differential Evolution algorithm when it is applied to the long term production scheduling problem of the open pit mines while using the above mentioned framework. Two different mixed integer programming formulations representing deterministic and stochastic variants of open pit mine long term production scheduling (LTPS) problems will be presented in this part of the paper. These formulation will be later on solved using commercial optimization solver CPLEX. The solution so obtained will be used to assess the capabilities and efficiency of Differential Evolution (DE) Algorithm in terms of solution quality and computational cost when applied to long term production scheduling problem of the open pit mines. This variant of the LTPS problem is based on the assumption that all input data is known with 100% certainty and it represent reality ( Subject to: Where j represents the set of predecessors block of block i Where   N: Total number of blocks     This variant of LTPS problem is based on the assumption that input data like block grades cannot be predicted with 100% certainty due to availability of limited sample data. To quantify this grade related uncertainty geostatistical conditional simulation techniques could be used. These techniques quantify this grade or geological uncertainty by generating multiple equiprobable simulated realization of ore body. These simulations could be used to integrate this grade uncertainty into the optimization process for generating more reliable and robust production schedule for open pit mines. One such attempt was made by Ramazan and Dimitrakopoulos [ The objective function is comprised of two parts, the first part is used to maximize the expected NPV of production schedule and second part is used for minimization of expected recourse costs whenever the stochastic constraints (i.e. Eqs. The upper and lower processing capacity constraints i.e. Eqs. Where S: total number of simulations of the ore body,  Where      The mathematical formulations of the scenario independent constraints i.e. reserve constraints, slope constraints, mining capacity constraints remain similar to the one described in the deterministic variant of the problem. Though this formulation allows more direct integration of the grade uncertainty in optimization process though the use of multiple equiprobable simulated realizations of orebody but solving this formulation for real sized ore deposit could be extremely difficult and computationally expensive job. Differential Evolution (DE) is a population based metaheuristic technique, first presented by Storn and Price in 1995 [ The other most commonly used strategies for generating a mutant vector can be represented as [ Where      The mutation process is followed by cross over operation. During this process a so called trail vector ( Where    The cross over operation is followed by selection process, where a trail vector Algorithm 1: Pseudo code of the Differential Evolution (DE) Algorithm  A series of numerical experiments were conducted to study the behaviour and performance of Differential Evolution algorithm when it is applied to Long term production scheduling (LTPS) problem of the open pits mines with or without the condition of grade uncertainty. Three different data sets representing three different hypothetical copper deposits have been used to conduct these experiments. The first two data sets represents estimated models of a hypothetical copper deposits while the third one contains a set of 15 simulated realizations of a copper deposits generated using Sequential Gaussian Simulation (SGS) technique. An AMD Phenom IIX 4 945 (3 GHz) and 4GB Ram running under windows 7 have been used to conduct these experiments. During these experiments length of scheduling period has been assumed to be 1 year. The annual discount rate has been fixed to 8% per year. Mining and processing limits have been supposed to be within ± 15% of the average available quantity of ore and rock within the UPL for each period of the scheduling horizon respectively. To evaluate the performance of the DE Algorithm in terms of computational cost and solution quality with or without the condition of grade uncertainty bench mark solutions were needed, which were obtained by solving the deterministic and two-stage stochastic integer programming (IP) formulations of open mine production scheduling problem using commercial solver CPLEX. General information about the estimated and simulated data sets used during these numerical experiments and solutions obtained through CPLEX are given in Apart from the population size which has been fixed to 50 in all the experiments presented in this section, the following two main control parameters largely controls the behaviour of the Differential Evolution algorithm: Scale factor Crossover constant A series of experiments were conducted to study the effect of these factors on the behaviour of the DE algorithm when applied to LTPS of the open pit mines and to find out proper combination of these factors. The mutation scheme mentioned in Eq. Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is a stochastic optimizer by nature, therefore to get some reliable statistics about its behaviour, the stochastic and deterministic variants of the production scheduling problem has been solved 10 times using different parameter setting of DE algorithm and the data sets described in During these experiments the value of the Crossover constant was fixed to the value 0.1 while varying the value of Scale factor from 0.1 to 0.9. Maximum number of iterations has been used as the termination criteria during these experiments, for which the proper values were selected after considering the convergence behaviour of the DE algorithm for a particular combination of CR and F. Eq. Where   The DE algorithm was showing very slow convergence behaviour for F > 0.4 in the case of problem 1 (as can be seen in The basis for choosing these combinations is the smallest% gap of mean from the exact solution obtained by solving the respective mathematical formulations using commercial solver CPLEX. Algorithm 2: Pseudo code of the Differential Evolution Algorithm for production scheduling problem of the open pit mines  Once the proper combinations of CR and F were identified for problem 1, 2 and 3, further numerical experiments were conducted to explore the convergence behaviour and the efficiency of DE algorithm with other mutation schemes. The results are presented in In the case of problem 1 the mutation scheme no 1 i.e. DE/rand/1 produced relatively better results in terms of mean% gap with mutation scheme no 4, 3, 2, 5 and 6 in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th places respectively ( In the case of problem 2 mutation scheme 2 i.e. DE/best/1 showed relatively better performance both in terms of mean% gap and standard deviation with mutation scheme no 4, 5, 3, 1 and 6 in 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th places respectively ( In the case of both problem 1 and 2, mutation scheme no 6 i.e. DE/rand to best/2 produced comparatively poorer results in term of mean% gap and needed much longer time to converge. Mutation scheme no 3 showed comparatively showed comparatively faster convergence behaviour in case of both problem 1 and 2. In the case of problem 3 mutation scheme no 4 i.e. DE/best/2 showed comparatively better performance in terms of mean% gap with mutation scheme no 3 and 6 in the second place. Mutation scheme no of 5, 1, and 2 took the 3rd, 4th and 5th positions respectively ( The overall performance of the all the mutation schemes is reasonable well as they produce sufficiently good solutions of the problems 1, 2 and 3 with mean% gap less than 4%. In the case of all the mutation schemes the proposed DE based approach on average needed 98.5%, 99.34%, and 99.31% less time to produce sufficiently good solution of problems 1, 2 and 3 respectively in comparison to exact optimization techniques applied by commercial solver CPLEX. This paper explores the efficiency and capabilities of Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm when it is applied to long term production scheduling problem of open pit mines with or without the condition of grade uncertainty. DE Algorithm is a population based metaheuristic technique. Apart from population size, performance and behaviour of DE algorithm is mainly governed by two main control parameters i.e. Scale factor