The present study elucidates the organosolv treatment of wheat bran, the major by-product of the milling industry. The influence of temperature (160–200°C) and ethanol concentration (30–60% (w/w)) at a given process time of 30min was investigated. Enzymatic treatments of the organosolv extracts including solid residues led to an overall glucose yield of 75%. The conversion of hemicelluloses into xylose and arabinose was approximately 60% and 45%, respectively. Proteins could be almost completely dissolved, however, practically no free amino acids were obtained. Surprisingly, only around 30% of lignin and 65% of minerals were dissolved. Severe treatment conditions induced the disintegration of fat into glycerol and fatty acids as well as the formation of sugar degradation products. During the lignin precipitation step, proteins partially coprecipitated.As the world faces the progressive depletion of fossil resources, the conversion of biomass within biorefineries is seen as a possibility to essentially contribute in particular to the continuous supply of materials in the future. In order to avoid the competition with food production, the utilization of raw materials of high lignocellulosic content is an interesting option. Besides wood and non-food crops, agricultural residues like straw and corn stover as well as other by-products of various origins are of high interest as feedstocks. Wheat bran represents such a by-product, which accrues in enormous quantities during the production of white wheat flour. It is estimated that 150 As biomass generally shows a complex composition, a separation into certain fractions can be advantageous for subsequent processing ( Wheat bran was kindly provided by the VonWiller mill (Schwechat, Austria) and directly used without further comminution. The organosolv pretreatment was performed in a 2 In order to gain monomeric sugars, pretreated lignocellulosic biomasses have to undergo an additional hydrolysis step, in this work by application of amylolytic, cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzymes. Cellulase (0.017 Both the solid residue of the organosolv pretreatment and the supernatant of the lignin precipitation step were used for enzymatic hydrolysis. The former was first washed four times with ethanol at concentrations equivalent to those used for the organosolv pretreatment itself and then once with deionized water. To 1 All measurements were performed with the supernatants of the centrifuged organosolv-slurries before and after the lignin precipitation step as well as with the enzymatically hydrolyzed samples. The mentioned fractions were used for analysis of free and total sugars, degradation- and by-products, free and total amino acids, dry matter and ash content, ion chromatography as well as for nitrogen determination using the Kjeldahl method. The protein content was calculated using a nitrogen-to-protein-factor of 5.26 ( The sugar composition of the original bran, free and total sugar concentrations (glucose, xylose, arabinose and galactose) as well as the levels of degradation products (furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural, glycerol, acetic and levulinic acid) in solution were measured according to the Standard Laboratory Analytical Procedures (LAP) for biomass analysis provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( The amino acids were analyzed via HPLC using pre-column derivatization with ortho-phthalaldehyde (OPA) and 9-fluorenylmethyl chloroformate (FMOC) and fluorescence detection ( The mobile phases were prepared as follows: mobile phase A: 1.4 The following reagents were used for the derivatization procedure: 0.1 The pre-column derivatization was performed directly in the autosampler and accomplished by the programmable injector unit: 2.5 For the measurement of the total amino acids, a protein hydrolysis step was performed according to the community methods of analysis for the determination of amino acids in feedingstuffs ( The determination of cations was executed as follows: 25 Prior to the determination of anions, protein precipitation was performed using Carrez reagents. For this purpose, a sample aliquot of 500 The anion and cation detection was performed based on integrated conductivity measurement. The determination of Klason lignin of the unprocessed wheat bran and of the solid residues of the organosolv pretreatments was performed in accordance to The compositional details of the original wheat bran are shown in In the following sub-chapters, the results are presented in relation to the main bran fractions (glucose from starch and cellulose, hemicellulose, protein, minerals, lignin and fat). The formation of by-products (furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural, glycerol and levulinic acid) is discussed separately. As a universal substrate for microbial conversion into products of higher value, the extraction of glucose as a monomer is of high importance within a biorefinery processing chain ( In order to increase the yield and to obtain the glucose in its monomeric form, both the solid residue of the organosolv pretreatment and the supernatant of the lignin precipitation step were subjected to subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis. Corresponding results are shown in In the case of wheat bran, the hemicellulose is mainly composed of xylose and arabinose together with galactose at low levels and other sugar species in trace amounts. By organosolv treatment, the highest yields of total xylose and arabinose (in oligomeric and monomeric form) account for 45% and 43%, respectively ( Enzymatic hydrolysis of both the solid residue from the organosolv pretreatment and the supernatant of the lignin precipitation step partially led to an increase in hemicellulosic sugar yields. The maximum conversion of hemicellulose into monomeric xylose and arabinose was about 60% and 45%, respectively (Fig. Considering the amount of protein in wheat bran (up to around 15% based on dry mass), its separation and utilization within a comprehensive biorefinery processing chain is of great relevance. Additionally, proteins in bran are partially linked to carbohydrate polymers and lignin ( In the present study, the solubilized protein was characterized both via the Kjeldahl-method and by measurement of bound and free amino acids, thus also allowing to assess losses of amino acids. By monitoring these parameters also during the lignin precipitation step, the behavior of the protein could be elucidated. During the lignin precipitation step up to approx. 40% of the dissolved protein coprecipitated, depending on the pretreatment conditions.   A primary aim of the organosolv process is to delignify a feedstock and thus to improve the enzymatic digestibility by reducing the recalcitrance and minimizing the irreversible binding of hydrolytic enzymes to lignin (  Like under hydrothermal conditions, where fat hydrolysis into glycerol and fatty acids occurs to a large extent (  It is well known that, depending on the severity of the process, the treatment of biomass leads to reactions that yield a range of undesired degradation products. Regarding the coprecipitation of degradation products during the lignin precipitation step, results obtained do not really allow a specific interpretation. The organosolv process offers the opportunity to partially disintegrate and fractionate biomass. This work shows that in case of wheat bran the fractionation of lignin is not satisfactory. The performance of the organosolv-enzyme process is similar to the hydrothermal-enzyme one. In both cases, about 85% of the feedstock can be transferred into liquid phase. However, protein solubilization is higher with the organosolv treatment. The present and previous work (hydrothermal treatment) indicate that a remaining proportion of approximately 15% of the biomass is very difficult to disintegrate, thus processes of significantly higher severities seem to be necessary to increase the yields. This work was supported by