The processing of Cu, Co and Zn at El Boleo mine (Mexico) involves two stage (oxidation-reduction) leaching to extract Cu, Zn, Co and Mn into solution. After Cu recovery a solvent extraction circuit was used to extract both Zn and Co rejecting Mn into the tailing. Zinc is further recovered as Zn sulphate via crystallisation whereas Co is currently recovered via electrolysis to produce Co buttons at El Boleo mine. Alternative routes were tested to recover Co using hydrazine reduction and Mn cementation.
                  At optimized conditions of hydrazine/Co molar ratio of 0.5:1, 70°C, 7M NaOH, over 98% Co could be recovered as 99.8% pure Co metal powder, which could be subsequently briquetted to buttons for easier handling. Cementing Co powder using Mn at various Mn/Co ratios show losses of Mn and passivation causing low Co recovery. At >30% excess, >95% of Co is recovered as 93% pure Co powder. During processing Zn, Fe, Mn impurities were removed as sulphide, which also caused 10% of the available Co to co-precipitate as Co sulphide containing 13.5% ZnS. Roasting of this material at >1300°C produced >98% grade CoO-Co3O4, which can be recycled to the leaching stage.Korea Resources Corp is currently operating the El Boleo mines, recovering copper, cobalt and zinc. The mine is located near the port city of Santa Rosalía, Baja California Sur in Mexico. The mine was developed following extensive testwork at laboratory and pilot scales ( The DSX stage produces a Zn The solvent extraction stage at the El Boleo operation at this stage is having high Fe (> Reductants such as hydrogen ( The reduction of Co hydroxide to produce Co metal using hydrazine in a strong caustic NaOH solution involves the following reaction steps with standard reduction potentials quoted for each half-cell involved ( Co hydroxide Co(OH) The overall reaction: The reduction of hydrazine needs a strong caustic solution. From a concentrated 1 Zinc powder has been used to remove Co from Zn ( The cementation process using Mn to recover Co is represented by the following half-cell reactions ( The overall cementation reaction: The results of the optimisation study on this proposed process are reported herewith, evaluating the effect of various operating parameters on the recovery and purity of the Co metal product. Manganese powder, APS (mean particle size 10 Samples collected at different time intervals during the experiment were analysed using Optima 5300 DV (Perkin-Elmer) Inductively Couple Plasma–Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES). Co products from the study were analysed by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) using a (Cu-tube 60 The following stages were tested for the process presented in Purification using sodium sulphide – Known amounts of sodium sulphide were dissolved in water to make 2 Precipitation of Co hydroxide: A solutions of 2 Reduction of Co hydroxide by hydrazine: The decanted Co hydroxide slurry prepared from large batches was added to a strong NaOH solution (1–7 Cementation of Co using Mn: Mn was added at different Mn/Co molar ratios (1–1.8:1) to conduct the experiments, using 200  The process considered and evaluated in this study is shown in The Stabcal software (  As Zn is the major impurity in the Co solution, attempts were made to remove most of this element from the liquor. Sodium sulphide was added to remove dissolved Zn as ZnS according to reaction (7) below: The reaction is strongly dependent on the liquor pH, with a higher loss of Co (22% loss) due to the co-precipitation of CoS as shown in reaction (8) below: Zinc removal at pH Different quantities of sodium hydroxide above stoichiometric requirement were added to the purified Co solutions showing the precipitation proceeds very rapidly. Almost all Co was recovered as Co hydroxide after 3–4 The Co hydroxide precipitated was decanted from the previous steps then added to strong NaOH solutions at different concentrations (1–7 As theoretically predicted from the Eh-pH diagram only when the pH is well above pH Although so much NaOH was added at 7 Hydrazine reacts quantitatively with Co hydroxide to form metallic Co at 70 The Co fine powder produced from hydrazine reduction was expected to have 99.8% purity with major impurities analysed by ICP-OES to be < Large scale tests were also conducted using 20 The cementation of Co using Mn also has a potential secondary reaction in which Mn could corrode (dissolved by H By adding Mn powder to Co sulphate solutions at different Mn/Co molar ratio (0.9–1.8:1) the amounts (mmole) of Mn dissolved and Co recovered determined by chemical analysis of the solutions show stoichiometric reacted quantities ( The fact that the solution pH increases rapidly from pH To improve Co recovery, more Mn was required as shown in The Co powder recovered by cementation at different controlled pH's was analysed and their compositions confirm contamination of Mn in the products. The best Co grade obtained for the cemented Co is 93%. During the removal of zinc using sodium sulphide a percentage of Co (about 10%) is also precipitated. This material could be roasted to > Of the two techniques tested, hydrazine reduction to produce Co metal is the better option. A higher purity Co metal could be produced, compared to a product contaminated with Mn during cementation. During hydroxide precipitation although Zn co-precipitated with Co hydroxide it redissolved in excess of NaOH, thus did not contaminate the Co hydroxide. During the cementation process, the sulphide precipitation step required to remove Zn also causes significant losses of Co. A process was developed to recover Co from raffinate liquors produced from the solvent extraction of zinc at the El Boleo plant. Using synthetic liquors in the study, various schemes are proposed for the production of Co metal using hydrazine reduction or Mn cementation. The Co powder (9.5 We acknowledge the granting of scholarships from “Korea Energy and Mineral Resources Engineering Program (KEMREP)” to conduct this research.