Jordan has huge reserves of energy sources such as oil sand, oil shale, and olive cake. This work presents a part of an ongoing project to develop an appropriate low cost beneficiation technology for Jordanian oil sand. This study presents the utilization of a modified fluidized froth flotation process for beneficiation and bitumen recovery from Jordanian oil sand. This modification includes fluidization technology to replace the agitation process found in a typical flotation technology. Results of this research show that the recovery of bitumen from Jordanian oil sand reaches its maximum of 86% during the addition of 0.35wt% of a special cut of light cycle oil as a collector. The results show that the amount of hydrocarbon content (H.C) in oil sand has a minimal impact on floatability of oil sand. In addition, the results show that increasing the temperature enhances the bitumen recovery from Jordanian oil sand. The addition of NaOH is found to have a similar effect of increasing bitumen recovery. The results show that a special cut of cycle oil increases the bitumen recovery more than the normal cut of cycle oil.The history of oil sand or tar sand started with the development of oil sand separation in the 1930s by Clark Smith (1984) Miller et al. (1984) Schramm et al. (1991) Schultz et al. (1993) Bozak et al. (2008) The process distinguishes itself from others since it does not contemplate the use of elutriation vessels, clarifiers, separators, baths or similar devices to condition and/or to separate the oil and liquid from the solids fraction. An interesting aspect of this work was that bitumen separation was achieved during mixing within the jet pump and within the pipeline. The extraction of bitumen oil from the tar sand and the release of the solid particles from the oil sand matrix continue in the slurry at the discharge of the jet pump. Hupka et al. Long et al. (2007) The primary objective of this work is to investigate a suggested process for the recovery of bitumen from Jordanian tar sand. The suggested process depends on the replacement of a typical agitation process in floatation by fluidization in order to reduce the energy requirements as discussed in a previous study Representative newly excavated samples of Jordanian Oil sand obtained from the Wadi Isal deposit were collected in cooperation with the National Resources Authority in Jordan. Two samples of tar with different hydrocarbon contents (H.Cs) (10.5% and 7.5%) were selected to study the effect of H.C on the floatability of Jordanian tar sand. Samples were crushed using a standard laboratory jaw crusher. The average particle size (d50) is approximately 0.5 The XRD analysis of Jordanian oil sand is shown in Cycle oil cuts are a by-product of the fluidized catalyst cracking unit at the Jordanian Petroleum Refinery. Two cuts of cycle oil were used in the work. These products have aromatic composition with significant content of two and three aromatics rings and cycloparaffins (naphthenes). They have a high Solubility Blending Number (SBN) of approximately 110. It is known that oils with a high SBN, typically 80 or higher and preferably 100 or higher, will be highly effective in dissolving asphaltenic components (Meyer et al., 2008) Sodium hydroxide with 99% concentration was used as a wetting agent. It is also known that sodium hydroxide can react with the bitumen to form a natural surfactant. The effect of NaOH on the floatability of Jordanian tar sand was studied by performing a set of experiments with and without the addition of NaOH. A schematic diagram of a fluidized flotation cell for the experiments is shown in This flotation cell is a modified fluidized bed with an inclined plate on the top section to collect froth through tubing to the collection vessel. Two primary modifications were added to the flotation cell. The first modification is the use of air only at the conditioning and digestion step without using any kind of agitation as is normally used in the standard mechanical flotation cell. This modification will reduce the operation cost by reducing the energy consumption. The other modification is the fluidization nature where the particles are kept at a fluidized stage during the process to achieve a better mixing between oil sand particles and the added chemicals. It is believed that this modification will enhance the separation efficiency of the oil sand. The specific properties of the fluidized bed unit and the operating conditions are summarized in The flotation cell has a volume of approximately 1.70 A sample of 160 During the experimental work, several parameters were investigated to determine the maximum bitumen recovery of Jordanian oil sand. These parameters are temperature, H.C, type of collector, and NaOH concentration. The flotation time for each experiment was fixed at 30  Two samples of Jordanian Oil sand with different H.Cs were used to determine the effect of H.C on floatability of Jordanian tar sand. These samples had a H.C of 10.5   Two temperatures were selected to study the effect of temperature on floatability of Jordanian oil sand. These temperatures were 25 It has been shown earlier that increasing temperature from 25    Two types of collectors were used to study the effect of collector type on the floatability of Jordanian tar sand. This comparison was performed with a set of experiments having the same conditions, such as H.C. content, temperature, and NaOH concentration. The collectors were normal light cycle oil (C.Oil) for the first set of experiments and a special cut of light cycle (S.C.Oil) oil for the second set of experiments. It can be seen from It can be seen from  The effect of NaOH on bitumen recovery can be noted from Since using higher concentration of NaOH and higher temperature parameters during flotation produce a better bitumen recovery, a comparison between the use of C.Oil and S.C.Oil can be obtained from Based on the results of this work, the following conclusions can be drawn: The modified fluidized flotation process used in this research showed high performance on bitumen recovery from Jordanian tar sand. The maximum bitumen recovery reached 86 The addition of light cycle oil and its special cut showed a significant effect on the floatability of Jordanian tar sand. It was shown that the controlled addition of light cycle oil and its special cut enhanced the bitumen recovery to reach its maximum when 0.35 The effects of H.C of raw oil sand on floatability of Jordanian tar sand was studied and the results show that the rich oil sand (10.5 Two types of collector (normal cycle oil and a special cut of cycle oil) were used to study the effect of collector type on floatability of Jordanian Oil sand. The results showed that using a special cut of cycle oil is more effective in bitumen recovery than that of using of normal cut of cycle oil. The addition of 0.35 Using a special cut of cycle oil at ambient temperature (25 The relationship between bitumen recovery and NaOH addition was studied. The results show that addition of NaOH enhances the bitumen recovery. It is believed that NaOH reacts with bitumen to form natural surfactants, which enhances the flotation. It is recommended to add 0.6% NaOH to enhance the floatability of Jordanian Oil sand and reach the maximum bitumen recovery.