CdS hollow spherical particles with different sizes have been prepared using core/shell fabrication method with poly-(styrene–acrylic acid) (PSA) latex particles as template. The sodium salt of extractant P204 (di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid) was used firstly as the emulsifier in the template synthesis. The diameters of the polymer core decreased from 300 to 120nm on average with increasing of the amount of emulsifier from 1.56 to 3.54%. As a result the diameters of the hollow spheres ranged from 350 to 150nm. The products were characterized by TEM, IR and XRD, respectively.During the past decade, the hollow spherical nano-crystals have been studied extensively. Those are synthesized by using different templates to fabricate core/shell structures including liquid crystals The template of poly-(styrene–acrylic acid) (PSA) has been successfully used in preparing CdS hollow spherical crystals firstly in our lab, and the uniform CdS hollow spheres with big diameters of 800 and 850 The extractant P204 was purified by middle phase microemulsion method In the preparation of poly-(styrene–acrylic acid) (PSA) latex particles used as core materials (templates), we consulted the reference The emulsion polymerization reaction of monomers including styrene, acrylic acid, butyl acrylate, and butyl methacrylate in the presence of 2.6% emulsifier P204-Na salt (Wp The PSA/CdS core/shell composite structure is prepared by aging the colloid solution containing PSA latex, CdCl The CdS hollow spheres are obtained after dissolving the core particles with toluene and drying in a vacuum, and the TEM image is shown in TEM images indicate that, firstly, the PSA particles with average diameter of about 200 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of coated particles and CdS hollow spheres are shown in The FT-IR spectra for the PSA latex, coated particles, and CdS hollow shells reveal that PSA latex particles could be successfully removed from the core/shell structures to form CdS hollow spheres. Keeping all the experiment conditions as above except the amount of the emulsifier P204-Na salt, the well-distributed PSA particles with different diameters could be obtained. The diameters of the polymer core decreased with increasing of the amount of emulsifier. The TEM images of the PSA cores and the corresponding CdS hollow spheres are shown in It has been demonstrated that negatively charged sulfate stabilized polystyrene latex can be covered with a smooth inorganic layer by the hydrolysis of metal ion The organic phosphorous extractants have been used in metal extraction and hydrometallurgy for 100 years. P204, as a delegate of organo-phosphoric acid HA, has a strong affinity to metal ion and a good separation function for a mixed system. The reaction of extractant with metal ion will be easier when HA is changed to the form of NaA salt, owing to the ion exchange between M The P204-Na-stabilized PSA latex should have stronger ability to attract metal ions. More important, they can selectively extract metal ions from aqueous solution. This might be resulting in a hollow sphere to be made from a crude solution with several metal ions, or a hollow sphere to be composed of composite materials. The selectivity of the extractant to metal ions as a subject of our studies is in progress. CdS hollow spherical particles of different sizes in the range of 150–400