In many respects, the sampling and preparation of a sample are critical steps in any technique of food analysis. The objective of sampling is to ensure that the sample taken for analysis is representative of a defined whole, and the method of sampling depends on the size and nature of the defined whole. Obtaining a sample for analysis that is representative of the whole is referred to as sampling, and the total quantity from which a sample is obtained is called the population. An accurate and precise estimate of the quality of a population will only be achieved by using an adequate sampling technique because only a portion of the population is used for analysis. With a proper sampling technique, the estimated value will reflect the characteristics of the population. Special care, however, is required in the sampling and sample preparation for food analysis because of the peculiarities of food. Foods are derived from biological substances and contain various organic compounds. Many of these components are influenced by various external and internal influences such as temperature, light, moisture, microorganisms, metabolism, and ripening. Therefore, rapid preparation of food samples enough to prevent composition change is very important in food analysis. Preparation at low temperatures during processing or storage in the frozen state is also effective for preventing the composition change of food samples. In food analysis, analyses are generally performed on the edible portion of the defined food, discarding the nonedible portion, unless the compositions with respect to the total sample weight are required. Variations in moisture of food are relatively large, even among the same kinds of food. Therefore, values corrected on the basis of dry matter (values of anhydrous material) or values of moisture contents are used in evaluating the analyzed value. The general steps for sample preparation and sample processing are (1) sampling and size reduction, (2) comminution and homogenization, (3) pretreatments of the sample, such as predrying or defatting, (4) preservation of the prepared sample, and (5) cleanup of the analytical sample for instrumental analysis. This article covers the practical considerations of sample preparation necessary for food analysis. It is important to define clearly the population that is to be sampled. Populations are generally finite, such as the size of a defined lot, except for evaluating a process. The sampling methods selected depend on the purpose of the inspection, the nature of the product, the nature of the test method, and the nature of the population being investigated. The basic principle for sampling is probability sampling. This sampling plan provides a statistically sound basis for obtaining representative samples while eliminating human bias and, therefore, is the most desirable. The most useful sampling method is random sampling in which samples are simply taken at random from the whole population. The random sampling process allows all parts of the population to have the same chance of being sampled. The goal of providing the same chance can be achieved by means of random number tables or computer-generated random numbers. Sample size is determined by lot size, the degree of accuracy required, and the expense of the test method. However, a general standard for the number to be sampled is proposed. For instance, to select the sample flour from sacks, the number of sacks to be sampled is determined by the square root of the number of sacks in the lot. If the mass of the collected samples is too large for analysis, it is subjected to size reduction to obtain a smaller quantity for analysis. For granular or powdered material, such as cereals, pulses, nuts, and seeds, the sample can be spread on a clean surface and divided into quarters. The two opposite quarters are combined as shown in In order to prevent differences between samples each portion, should be ground. For the determination of moisture, total protein, and mineral concentrations, dry foods are generally ground to pass through a 0.75 Mechanical methods range from the simple mortar and pestle to power-driven hammer mills. The usable grinding devices among them are roller mills, food processors, coffee mills, and ultracentrifugal mills. Hammer mills wear well, and reliably and effectively grind cereals and dry foods. An ultracentrifugal mill grinds by beating, impacting, and shearing. The food is fed to a grinding chamber from an inlet and is reduced in size by a rotor. The small ground particles are delivered by centrifugal force into a collection pan. For small samples, especially if fine grinding is required, a ball mill is used. A ball mill grinds by rotating the material in a container half-filled with ceramic balls, which exert an impact grinding action. A chilled ball mill can be used to grind frozen foods without predrying. Grinding foods while frozen reduces undesirable chemical changes (i.e., the Maillard reaction) that can occur during milling. The grinding process should not heat the sample, and therefore the grinder should not be overloaded to prevent the heat produced through friction. Contamination by metals from the abrasives of the mill should be avoided if trace metal analysis is to be performed. In such cases, the working parts of the grinder should be made of an inert material (glass, ceramic, or agate). After grinding the sample, all the powder ground should be collected using a clean brush. For the disintegration of moist material such as tissues, tubers, vegetables, fruits, roots, or meats, various fine-slicing devices are available. The common devices are mortars and pestles, meat mincers or grinders, mixers or blenders, bowl cutters, and tissue grinders. Bowl cutters can be used for leafy vegetables and fleshy tubers, while meat mincers may be better suited for fruit, roots, and meat. Power-driven mortars and pestles can finely subdivide and are used for making fish meat paste. Tissue grinders ( Foods rich in fat or moisture are difficult to grind or disintegrate in their intact state. Predrying and defatting are often used as a pretreatment, except for the determination of heat-sensitive and easily oxidated components such as vitamins. If the components of a low-moisture, high-fat sample to be analyzed are heat-stable, predrying is recommended to the moisture level of air-dried material before grinding. For instance, an appropriate amount of the sample is cut (or loosened) into pieces and weighed. The material is placed in a porcelain dish, heated on a warm water bath (or in an electric dryer at 60–80°C), and dried. The dried material is kept for 24 When nuts and seeds, such as walnuts or sesame seeds, and processed foods containing a high level of fat are ground, the fat oozes out and clings to the surface of the grinder, and this consequently leads to a loss of fat. Therefore, defatting is required for samples rich in fat before grinding. In brief, the weighed material is roughly ground and dried. The material is placed in a flask containing diethyl ether and kept overnight. The content of the flask is filtered, and the solid material on the filter paper is air-dried. After a thorough evaporation of the ether, the solid material is dried at 60–80°C. The dried solid material is equilibrated with air and weighed. The fat in the filtrate (ether phase) should be measured separately. Defatting is suitable for fat-rich foods. However, it should be avoided when fat-soluble vitamins are to be analyzed. A general procedure cannot always be applied for a particular component such as dietary fiber and vitamins. Special attention should be paid to these components; a sample should be ground as finely as possible for dietary fiber analysis, and light and oxidation should be avoided for vitamin analyses. Estimates of fiber are most consistent when the samples contain little fat (less than 5–10% fat), are dry, and finely ground. If the sample contains more than 10% fat, fat should be extracted by mixing the sample with 25 parts (vol/wt) of petroleum ether or hexane. After centrifugation and decantation of the organic solvent, the lipid extraction is repeated two more times. Then the sample is dried overnight in a vacuum oven at 70°C and ground finely enough to pass through a 0.3–0.5 Nonsolid samples containing less than 10% fiber are best analyzed after lyophilization and treated as described above. Nonsolid samples containing greater than or equal to 10% fiber can be analyzed without drying if the sample is homogeneous and low in fat and if particle size is sufficiently small to allow the efficient removal of digestible carbohydrate and protein. Because some vitamins are adversely affected by conditions such as light, oxygen, pH, and heat, proper precautions need to be taken to prevent any deterioration throughout the analytical process, regardless of the type of assay used. Most vitamin assays involve the extraction of the vitamin from its biological matrix prior to analysis. This generally includes one or more of the following treatments: heat, acid, alkali, solvent, and enzyme. In general, extraction procedures are specific for each vitamin and designed to stabilize the vitamin. In some cases, certain procedures are applicable to the combined extraction of more than one vitamin, e.g., for thiamine and riboflavin and some of the fat-soluble vitamins. Typical extraction procedures are as follows: Ascorbic acid: Cold extraction with metaphosphoric acid/acetic acid. Vitamins B Niacin: Autoclaving in acid (noncereal products) or alkali (cereal products). Vitamins A, E, or D: Organic solvent extraction, saponification, and reextraction with organic solvents. Antioxidants are routinely added to these unstable vitamins to protect them from oxidation. Analysis of fat-soluble vitamins may require saponification, generally either overnight at room temperature or by refluxing at 70°C. In the latter case, an air-cooled reflux vessel provides an excellent control of conditions conducive to oxidation. Prepared samples should be analyzed immediately. If immediate analysis is not possible, samples should be chilled or dried, depending on the storage period and conditions, the analyte, and the analyses that are to be performed. The following factors should be controlled during storage: (1) moisture changes, (2) oxidation, (3) light decomposition, (4) enzymatic changes, (5) heat denaturation, and (6) microbial changes and contamination. To minimize oxidative changes, preservation at low temperatures under nitrogen is recommended for most foods. Compositional changes (desiccation or moisture absorption, volatilization) of relatively dry foods are reduced by storage in a closed container at ∼4°C. If such containers contain powdered materials and are opened frequently to remove samples, it is advisable to check whether moisture changes have taken place. Frozen foods should be wrapped in plastic material or placed in air-tight containers to reduce dehydration. Many food materials contain enzymes that may change the food components being analyzed. Enzyme activity should therefore be controlled using methods that depend on the nature of the food. Heat denaturation for enzyme inactivation (e.g., use of a microwave oven) and freezer storage (−20°C to −30°C) to limit enzyme activity are common methods. However, some enzymes are more effectively controlled by changing the pH or by salting out in the sample preparation. Oxidative enzymes may be controlled by adding reducing agents. To reduce or eliminate microbial attack, several methods can be used. They include freezing, drying, and the use of a preservative or a combination of any of the three. Commonly used preservatives include sorbic acid or sorbate, sodium benzoate, sodium salicylate, tylosin, formaldehyde, toluene, and thymol. The selection of a method or preservative will depend on the nature of the food, expected contamination, storage period and conditions, and the analyses that are to be performed. When the prepared sample is to be used repeatedly, it is recommended that the sample be stored by dividing it into several containers in order to avoid any deterioration of the sample by repetitive freezing and thawing or exposure to air. The container should be labeled so as to identify the sample name and number, the preparation date, and the person in charge of preparation even after a long storage period. Often, the crude sample extract is partially purified before the analyses. A cleanup procedure is frequently required for analyses based on various kinds of chromatography. The necessity for and the degree of cleanup required depend, to a large extent, on the instrumental detector to be used and, to a lesser extent, on the type of chromatography in the automated separation stage of the analysis. In general, the sample cleanup is the most time-consuming, labor-intensive, and error-prone step of standard analytical methods. Recently, several novel methods have been employed to decrease the time required to complete the operation and the quantities of solvents consumed in the extraction procedure. Solid-phase extraction (SPE) typically involves small quantities of dry 30–40 SPE has numerous advantages over traditional liquid–liquid extractions: (1) less solvent required, (2) faster, (3) less glassware needed (lower cost and potential for contamination), (4) better precision and accuracy, (5) minimal solvent evaporation for further analysis (e.g., GC), and (6) readily automated. The most recent version of this method is called solid-phase microextraction (SPME). In this adaptation, the phase is bound onto a fine fused silica filament ( Extraction processes for determining semivolatile organic compounds in food samples are not very discriminating, and the other constituents of a sample can be detrimental to the performance of the analytical method, causing deposits in the injectors of GC and GC-MS instrumentation. However, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) cleanup extracts the analyte very well from any number of other constituents. Various cleanup techniques can be used to remove these contaminants, but they are time-consuming, may remove target compounds, and cannot remove all interfering compounds. One of the primary classes of problem compounds is lipid in food samples. GPC cleanup is a technique that separates target compounds from a sample based on their molecular size. Since lipids are very large molecules compared to the target compounds in these methods, they are effectively removed from the extract prior to analysis. The packing gel used in GPC cleanup is porous and is characterized by the range or uniformity of that pore size. GPC operates on the principle of loading all components in an extract on the gel bed, and then selectively removing the components of larger molecular size. This procedure provides for the efficient separation of typical semivolatile and pesticide components from various higher-molecular weight compounds. This also improves method performance and extends GC column life, leading to more efficient analyses. With autosampling and automatic fraction collection as part of the GPC system, cleanups can be performed with little or no operator intervention, requiring only that the final extracts be concentrated. 