Intraarticular phalangeal fractures of the hand are difficult and challenging to manage. Dynamic external fixation devices offer the advantages of allowing distraction of the impacted fracture and early joint mobilization. We present our study of 100 patients with a variety of fractures who were treated with the S-Quattro technique over a 6-year period, with an average follow-up of 10.5 months. The mean active range of motion regained was 92° for proximal interphalangeal joints (81 fractures), 82° for distal interphalangeal joints (10 fractures), 91° for metacarpophalangeal joints (6 fractures) and 80° for interphalangeal joints of the thumb (3 fractures). Only nine patients complained of mild or moderate pain. Postoperative radiographic appearances were satisfactory in all but five out of the 100 patients. This device is a simple and effective technique for the management of these difficult fractures. It offers advantages in terms of versatility, ease of application, good tolerance by patients, few complications and good outcome.The management of displaced intraarticular phalangeal fractures of the small joints of the hand is difficult, challenging and controversial. These joints are uniquely susceptible to injury due to their limited, singular plane of motion ( A spectrum of joint injury pattern occurs depending on the direction, rate and force of loading. If the loading force is severe and axially directed, a pilon-type injury can occur ( Non-operative management, comprising of immobilization with splintage, produces poor results with pain, stiffness and reduced range of motion ( Surgical treatment is problematic for two reasons. Firstly, the fracture fragments are small and, often, comminuted. This makes anatomical reconstruction difficult. Secondly, there is a need for joint mobilization during the healing period to prevent long-term stiffness. Immobilization for longer than 3 weeks can result in permanent loss of motion (   A retrospective study was conducted on the use of S-Quattro for acute intraarticular phalangeal fractures of the hand. One hundred patients with a variety of fractures underwent the described procedure over a 6 year period. All fractures involved a single joint and were closed injuries. There were 81 fractures of the proximal interphalangeal joint ( In total, 71 of the patients were men and 29 were women. The mean age for all the patients was 39.3 (range 18–94) years. The mode of injury was a fall in 39 fractures, sports in 26 fractures, road traffic accidents in 13 fractures, industrial accidents in 11 fractures and assault in 11 fractures. Fifty-six fractures involved the right hand and 44 fractures involved the left hand. There were 33 fractures of the ring finger, 26 fractures of the index finger, 19 fractures of the middle finger, 19 fractures of the little finger and three fractures of the thumb. All patients were operated on by the senior author (N.F.). The procedure has been described previously ( Postoperative radiographs were obtained for all patients. Clinical outcome was assessed by measurement of joint ranges of motion, pain and patient satisfaction. The ranges of motion were measured for all the joints of the injured digit with a standard goniometer. Pain was measured as no pain, mild, moderate and severe pain. The range of motion, pain and patient satisfaction were assessed at the last follow-up appointment. Radiographs were evaluated for fracture union, articular congruity and joint space narrowing. Eighty-one patients sustained fractures of the proximal interphalangeal joint ( Ten patients sustained fractures of the distal interphalangeal joint ( Six patients sustained fractures of the metacarpophalangeal joint ( Three patients sustained fractures of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb ( There are two main principles in the management of intraarticular fractures. The first is to obtain good congruency of the joint by reduction and stabilization of fragments. This helps minimize the long-term sequelae of pain and arthritis. Ligamentotaxis helps to reduce the fragments by its action on the attached ligaments and the capsular structures. This may also improve some central depression ( The challenge in treating intraarticular phalangeal fractures has been to obtain, then maintain, anatomical alignment and stable fixation to permit early motion. The S-Quattro external fixation device works on the principle of ligamentotaxis. It has the advantage of restoration of the articular surface and early joint motion. Although the S-Quattro allows limited movement of the injured joint, it allows free movement of the other digital joints. This reduces swelling, prevents tendon adherence and allows quick recovery after the removal of the external fixator. The distraction stretches the collateral ligaments and the joint capsule. This also contributes to the increased postoperative range of movement. It has been designed to deal with all types of displaced fracture dislocation of the digit and can fit across any of the finger joints. It is a versatile system in terms of the number of positions in which its pins and springs can be positioned. Depending on the nature of the fracture, the pins could be introduced via the lateral approach rather than the dorsal approach. Although this allows more movement of the injured joint, the dorsal approach is easier and allows the patients to use their hands with minimal discomfort. Due to the inherent elasticity of the system, some movement of the injured joint is possible while maintaining reduction and allowing free movements of the uninjured joints. This helps mould the irregular joint surfaces and prevents, adherence and, hence, joint stiffness. This also allows a quick recovery after removal of the external fixator. It can be applied easily and quickly. It is light and is well tolerated by patients. It is relatively free of complications and the results are good. It is particularly suitable in cases where the fragments are too small to fix and there is comminution involving the articular surface. The device achieves good reduction of the fracture without interfering with the fracture site. Our results compare favourably with those in other published series. Although the reported follow-up period in this study was 6 months, or less in 12 out of the 100 cases, we have noted, in this study, that patients regained more movement and less pain after the second 6 months of the first year. This trend was also shown by