Graphene-supported BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 photocatalyst has been fabricated by simple hydrothermal and impregnation reaction. In BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 based on Reduced Graphene Oxide (RGO), this network renders numerous pathways for rapid mass transport, strong adsorption and multireflection of incident light; meanwhile, the interface between BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 and RGO increases the active sites and electron transfer rate. BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 based on RGO noticeably exhibited high photocatalytic activity than that of BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 and P25 under visible light irradiation for cationic dye (Rhodamine B), anionic dye (methyl orange) and 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) as a neutral pollutant, which are usually difficult to be degraded over the other catalysts. This enhanced photocatalytic activity of Graphene-supported BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 for all pollutants could be mainly ascribed to the reinforced charge transfer from BiPO4/Ag/Ag3PO4 to RGO, which suppresses the recombination of electron/hole pairs. Besides that, this photocatalyst can be used repetitively with a high photocatalytic activity and no apparent loss of activity occurs. The results reveal that the RGO nanosheets work as a photocatalyst promoter during the photocatalytic reaction, leading to an improved photocatalytic activity.At present, the environmental pollution caused by textile dyes has emerged as the global concerns and is associated with the industrialization. So, the decolorization and mineralization of textile dyes from wastewater is a pertinent issue Bismuth phosphate (BiPO Here, it is demonstrated that the addition of inorganic nonmetal salts of oxy-acid and their derivatives in combination with wide delocalization of negative charges on RGO nanosheets can promote the photocatalytic efficiencies. Individually, the application of these kinds of photocatalysts and RGO has shown advantages in prior studies All chemicals used were of an analytical grade and of the highest purity available. Rhodamine B (RhB), Methyl Orange (MO) and 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and selected as the probe molecules to examine the photocatalytic activity of the prepared photocatalysts in this study. Milli-Q water was used in all of the experiments. The crystal structures of the product powders were evaluated by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis using Philips X'pert instrument operating with Cu Kα (λ = 0.15406 nm) irradiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The morphology of the fabricated samples was characterized using a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (model XL30, Philips). The Fourier transformed infrared (FT-IR) spectra were analyzed in the transmission mode on ABB BOMER MB series spectrophotometer. Impedance analyses were performed by Voltalab10 electrochemical system. The BiPO The BiPO Photoirradiation experiments were conducted on the photochemical Pyrex reactor. The visible light source was provided by inserting the UV cut-off filter after the Xe lamp 150 W for absorbing the UV irradiation and this visible source covered the wavelengths of λ > 420 nm. This reactor set-up was surrounded by the circulating water jacket to keep constant temperature at 23 °C. Experiments were conducted as follows: 10 mg of the photocatalyst was dispersed within a 100 mL of RhB aqueous solution (20 ppm). Prior to the irradiation, the suspension was continuously stirred for 1 h in the dark condition to reach the adsorption-desorption equilibrium between the catalyst surface and RhB to exclude the effect of dye adsorption in the photodegradation process. At a given time interval (20 min), 5 mL of suspension was withdrawn and centrifuged to remove the remnant catalyst particles. The supernatant was then recorded in the UV-vis spectrophotometer for determination of RhB concentration. Crystallinity of the prepared samples is reported via XRD patterns which are illustrated in The morphology of the prepared samples was characterized by FE-SEM images. For comparison, SEM images of both RGO and BiPO In order to further ascertain the interaction between BiPO To verify the electron transfer facility in the BiPO  These results clearly demonstrated that introducing RGO into BiPO The TOC test was also done and the results are shown in For more clarification, the photodegradation of cationic dye (MO) and neutral benzene ring compounds (4-CP) was also employed to clarify the higher photocatalytic performance of BiPO As proved before, hydroxyl radicals ( The recyclability is very important factor for the photocatalyst. To further study the stability of the prepared sample based on RGO, the cycling degradation tests of RhB were also carried out. Results showed that the BiPO BiPO