Organic phosphorous compounds recently have received more attention because of the stronger affinity towards metals and metal oxides. In the present study, tributyltetradecylphosphonium chloride (TTPC), a quaternary phosphonium salt (cationic type), was introduced and evaluated in the system of bauxite reverse flotation. Although there were some limitations in the preliminary tests, the results still showed that TTPC exhibited superiority in bauxite reverse flotation to dodecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride. Quaternary phosphonium salts might have the promising application values in chemical engineering areas where quaternary ammonium salts were extensively applied.Flotation, a globally prominent technique, has permitted the mining and processing of low grade and complex ores which initially were considered uneconomical In the present study, a quaternary phosphonium salt, tributyltetradecylphosphonium chloride (TTPC, C Analytical grade of 1231 was purchased from Xiamen Pioneer Technology Co. Ltd. TTPC was synthesized through the reaction of 1-chlorotetradecane with tributyl phosphine under solvent   Although the results in present study showed superiority of quaternary phosphonium salt to quaternary ammonium salt, there are still some shortcomings and limitations needed further discussions and more experiments for other oxide-minerals. One is the differences of betoken carbon chain and substituent group between 1231 and TTPC. In our previous study, it was confirmed that the diaspore collecting ability of quaternary ammonium salts increased with the length increase of betoken carbon chain In the present study, a new quaternary phosphonium salt was introduced to evaluate its potential application in minerals engineering. Although there are some limitations, some significant conclusions can still be drawn: (1) TTPC could be used as a superior collector for bauxite reverse flotation compared with 1231. (2) Quaternary phosphonium salts might exhibit promising applications in chemical engineering areas where quaternary ammonium salts were extensively applied. The authors acknowledge the support of the