Mesoporous high surface area and high crystallinity MO2 powders (TiO2, CeO2, ZrO2, and HfO2) were synthesized by a modified sol–gel method using laurylamine hydrochloride, metal alkoxide and acetylacetone. The prepared MO2 powders, characterized by XRD, nitrogen adsorption isotherm, SEM, TEM, and SAED, had crystalline size of about 5–15nm, specific surface area of 44–80m2/g, and a narrow pore size distribution with average pore diameter of about 3–6nm. This synthesis method provides a new simple route to fabricate nanostructured materials under mild conditions.Metal oxides with wide or moderate band gap, such as TiO In this study, the surfactant-assisted process has been expanded to prepare other metal oxides. Mesoporous CeO For mesoporous TiO The crystalline structure of samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6500FE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-200CX), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED). The nitrogen adsorption isotherm and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of materials, which were outgassed overnight at 200 The X-ray diffraction pattern of the TiO   The XRD pattern of the CeO  TEM image of the CeO ZrO The modified sol–gel process using a surfactant enabled to fabricate various metal oxides with controlled mesopores. All products possessed high crystallinity with crystal size about 5–15 The authors would like to express gratitude to Prof. S. Isoda and Prof. H. Kurata, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of TEM apparatus and Prof. T. Yoko, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of XRD equipment. Cerium butoxide, zirconium butoxide, and hafnium butoxide were kindly supplied by Hokko Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. This work was supported by a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Education, Science Sports, and Culture of Japan under the 21 COE program and the Nanotechnology Support Project.