Column testing was performed on four commercially available ion exchange resins to evaluate their ability to remove ferric from a synthetic copper electrowinning electrolyte. Results from the loading test indicated that the sulphonated diphosphonic resin, Eichrom Diphonix, has significantly lower capacity than other resins tested. Stripping tests were performed using cuprous elution and showed that the aminophosphonic resin, LanXess Lewatit TP260, stripped more slowly than the two sulphonated monophosphonic resins, Purolite S957 and generic resin D416. Results from the various stripping tests indicate that the use of an ORP titration on the elution cycle appears to be an excellent indicator of the elution endpoint. Further stripping tests performed on the Purolite S957 resin indicate that total stripping time was approximately linear with the theoretical concentration of cuprous in solution, for theoretical cuprous concentrations between 0.4 and 0.8 g/L Cu+.The presence of iron in copper electrowinning electrolyte solutions is well known to have a deleterious effect on current efficiency. This loss of current efficiency is due to the fact that iron is involved in a parasitic reaction, diverting electricity from the plating of copper by being oxidized from ferrous to ferric at the anode, and by being reduced from ferric to ferrous at the cathode. In order to control the levels of various impurities in electrolyte, many copper electrowinning operations routinely bleed electrolyte from their tankhouse ( A specific/chelating ion exchange resin is generally used for iron removal from copper electrowinning solutions. Chelating ion exchange resins differ from standard ion exchange resins, such as those used in water softening, in that the reactive portion of the resin binds ions through the formation of complexes, instead of just ionic bonds ( In a review of commercially available chelating iron ion exchange resins, five main resin chemistries were identified for iron removal: iminodiacetic, picolylamine, sulphonated diphosphonic, sulphonated phosphonic, and aminophosphonic. These resins all have a much stronger affinity for iron present in the ferric, rather than the ferrous form. However, due to the very acidic nature of copper electrowinning electrolyte solutions, only the phosphonic resins are suitable for use in this application (  Loading of ferric onto these resins is an ion exchange with hydrogen ions and for the case of a sulphate based electrolyte can be described by Eq. The Diphonix resin is a sulphonated diphosphonic resin that was identified as being suitable for iron ion exchange from copper electrowinning electrolytes ( At least three chemical reactions occur in the elution process. The first is the formation of sulphurous acid by bubbling SO A much better elution process was subsequently developed which eliminated the need for sulphurous acid. In this elution process, cuprous sulphate was created by passing copper electrowinning electrolyte over a bed of copper cuttings ( This elution method was used in the FENIX Iron Control System installed in 2002 at the Mt. Gordon Copper plant in Queensland, Australia. In this application a sulphonated monophosphonic resin was used and the cuprous sulphate solution used for elution was generated by contacting a small volume of lean electrolyte, containing cupric sulphate, with copper metal ( This paper focuses on comparing the performance of four commercially available ion exchange resins. It compares both the ferric loading kinetics and the ferric stripping kinetics using the method of passing copper sulphate over a bed of copper cuttings to create the cuprous sulphate. Four commercially available resins were tested: Eichrom Diphonix (sulphonated diphosphonic), Purolite S957 (sulphonated monophosphonic), Generic D416 (sulphonated monophosphonic), and LanXess Lewatit MonoPlus TP-260 (aminophosphonic). Prior to testing, all resins were conditioned to ensure they were present in the acidic form. Resin volumes reported are based on the acidic form of all resins. Column loading experiments were performed on 25 mL of resin at 50 °C using a water-jacketed 50 mL burette. Loading was downflow at approximately 10 BV/h, using a synthetic loading electrolyte solution containing 30 g/L copper, 220 g/L acid, and 1.3–1.4 g/L ferric iron. All solution exiting the burette was collected in graduated cylinders and was sub-sampled for assay. Note that the ion exchange column was initially filled with de-ionized water, so the first few samples contained a significant amount of water. To correct for this, copper was used as a tie element to determine the amount of dilution water contained in the first few samples. For stripping, a second water-jacketed 50 mL burette was filled with ~ This stripping electrolyte, containing ~ To minimize the formation of copper powder once cuprous was present in the recirculating electrolyte, the columns were wrapped in cotton insulation and the norprene tubing connecting the system was wrapped in heating tape. Note that the equilibrium amount of cuprous increases with temperature in a copper–cupric–cuprous system, so any temperature loss can result in reprecipitation of copper metal. The hot water bath was used to control the return water temperature at 85 °C; and the temperature loss across the system was found to be 5–7 °C. The oxidation reduction potential (ORP) was logged every 30 s using a TPS-90P meter in some loading tests and in all stripping tests. ORP was measured using a platinum electrode with a silver/silver chloride reference electrode as the solution exited the burette. Before each test, the calibration of the silver/silver chloride electrode was checked using an Orion ORP standard solution (420 mV A series of loading and stripping tests was performed on a single 25 mL sample of the Purolite S957 sulphonated monophosphonic resin. In these tests, the loading curves were not generated, but otherwise followed the loading procedure described above. Stripping tests followed the procedure described above except that the stripping temperature and/or copper concentration of the stripping electrolyte was varied from test to test and performance was monitored by ORP alone (i.e. no stripping solution samples taken). Stripping was performed at a copper concentration of 45 g/L at 50 °C, 65 °C, 70 °C, 75 °C, 85 °C and 88 °C. Stripping was also performed at 75 °C with a copper concentration of 60 g/L and 80 g/L, and at 85 °C with a copper concentration of 50 g/L. All samples were analyzed at the Vale Inco Central Process Technology (CPT) Laboratory in Copper Cliff, Ontario. To determine iron and copper concentrations, solution samples were analyzed using an in-house inductive coupled plasma procedure (ICP-PMET). To ensure that the iron concentrations reported by this method were acceptable, a series of solutions were analyzed using both ICP-PMET and Atomic Adsorption (AA). The two methods trended well together ( The results for the various tests are discussed in the following subsections. The ferric loading curve depicts the concentration of ferric remaining in the solution after passing over the ion exchange column. As the resin becomes saturated, the concentration of ferric left in solution increases. The abscissa displays the number of bed volumes of solution that has passed through the column, while the ordinate displays the concentration of ferric remaining in solution as a fraction of the feed concentration. The ferric loading curves for the various resins are displayed in These results clearly illustrate that the sulphonated diphosphonic resin (Diphonix) has a significantly lower iron loading capacity than all other resins tested. The ferric loading capacity and kinetics appear to be similar for the sulphonated monophosphonic resins (Purolite, Generic) and the aminophosphonic resin (Lewatit). This suggests that the absence of the sulphonic acid group, which allows for quick, unselective uptake of cations into the resin matrix, does not appear to have significantly hindered the loading kinetics of the aminophosphonic resin. Stripping results are displayed with time on the abscissa and the concentration of iron in the recirculating solution on the ordinate. Once the resin is fully stripped, the concentration of iron in the recirculating solution will reach a plateau. The results for the stripping tests can be found in This graph shows that the stripping results for the two sulphonated monophosphonic resins (Purolite, Generic) are almost identical. It also shows that the stripping rate of the aminophosphonic resin (Lewatit) is significantly lower than for the sulphonated monophosphonic resins. Note that the aminophosphonic resin reaches a plateau at approximately the same iron concentration as the sulphonated monophosphonic resins, confirming that their ferric loading capacities are very similar. This is very interesting as it may suggest that the differences in the non-chelating portion of these resins may be affecting stripping kinetics, and warrants further investigation beyond the scope of this work. The sulphonated diphosphonic resin (Diphonix) reaches a plateau at a much lower value that the other resins, indicating once again the lower ferric loading capacity of this resin. In a commercial setting, it is useful to be able to monitor a process on-line without requiring samples to be taken and assayed. To understand the shape of the stripping ORP curve in Eqs. The Nernst Equation shows that if the ORP is greater than the standard potential, then the equilibrium is such that the activity of the species on the left hand side of Eqs. (7) and (8) (i.e. ferric and cupric) is greater than the activity of the species on the right hand side of these equations (i.e. ferrous and cuprous). Conversely, if the ORP is less than the standard potential, then the activity of the species on the right hand side of these equations is greater than the activity of the species on the left hand side. Also, if the ORP is equal to the standard potential, then the activity of the ions on both sides of the equation is equivalent. Examining There is a sudden large drop in ORP, centered at approximately 2:15. This is an indication that cuprous breakthrough has occurred and that the cuprous/cupric couple is now dominating the solution ORP. This is a classic example of an ORP titration curve for a reaction that has gone to completion. Note how the solution ORP is much greater than the standard potential for the cuprous/cupric half cell. This indicates that the activity of the cupric ions is much greater than the activity of the cuprous ions. This makes sense since only a small equilibrium amount of cuprous was expected to be formed in the copper column as per Eq. It is interesting to note that the shape of the ORP stripping curve for the aminophosphonic resin (Lewatit) was significantly different than for all other resins tested. As can be seen from The ORP curves for stripping at the various temperatures and a copper concentration of 45 g/L are shown in The ORP curves for stripping at various copper concentrations and a temperature of 75 °C are shown in Since the stripping reaction requires cuprous, it is interesting to take the data from the previous sections and plot the time required for stripping against the calculated theoretical cuprous concentration in the solutions. Note that all stripping tests were run with the recirculating electrolyte flowing through the ion exchange column at a rate of approximately 10 BV/h, and the effect of changing recirculation rate of electrolyte was not included in this study. For the purposes of this graph, stripping time was defined as the time taken until the ORP reached a value of 500 mV Theoretical cuprous concentrations were calculated using HSC data for the equation: Cu  Of the three resin types tested, the sulphonated monophosphonic resins appear to have the best performance characteristics for ferric removal from copper electrowinning electrolytes. The two sulphonated monophosphonic resins tested yielded very similar results. The sulphonated monophosphonic resins had approximately double the ferric loading capacity, compared to the sulphonated diphosphonic resin tested. While the aminophosphonic resin tested had a similar ferric loading capacity as the sulphonated monophosphonic resins, it had a significantly lower stripping rate, resulting in the stripping taking approximately 1.5 times longer than for the sulphonated monophosphonic resins. Measurement of the oxidation reduction potential (ORP) has been shown to be a useful tool for monitoring the ion exchange process. This is particularly true in the case of resin stripping as there is a sharp drop in ORP associated with cuprous breakthrough once stripping is complete. This work was done as part of a Vale Inco Ltd. sponsored MASc degree at the University of British Columbia. Vale Inco is gratefully acknowledged for providing the funding for this work and for performing the assay analyses. Thanks should also be given to Fenix Hydromet for providing the ion exchange resins for testing and to Dr. B. Wassink of the University of British Columbia for his guidance with the development of the experimental procedures.