A complete experimental investigation on the workability behaviour of nickel–chromium–molybdenum steel grades namely AISI 9840 and AISI 9845 of powder metallurgy preforms was performed. Cold upsetting of aforesaid composites with different aspect ratios namely 0.42, 0.63 and 0.93 was carried out with graphite lubricant and the formability behaviour of the preforms under triaxial stress-state condition was determined. A new formability strain parameter was proposed, evaluated and compared with formability stress parameter for all the above said preforms. The characteristics of various stress and strain ratio parameters with respect to relative density were also analyzed and presented for comparison.force applied on the cylindrical preform for deformation initial height of the cylindrical preform height of the barreled cylinder after deformation initial diameter of the preform bulged diameter of the preform after deformation top contact diameter of the preform after deformation bottom contact diameter of the preform after deformation Poisson’s ratio true stress in the axial direction true stress in the hoop direction true stress in the radial direction effective stress hydrostatic stress true stress true strain true strain in the axial direction true strain in the hoop direction true strain in the radial direction effective strain formability stress index initial preform density of the preform density of the preform after deformation theoretical density of the fully dense material relative density Ferrous powder metallurgy (P/M) processing is a net or near net-shaped production technology, which in many instances eliminates the need for secondary machining operations. Ferrous P/M offers a wide range of engineered materials for structural applications and satisfies close dimensional tolerance requirements for parts with complex geometries Workability is a term used to assess the ability of a material to hold up the induced internal stresses of forming prior to the splitting of material occurs. It is a complicated technological concept that depends not only on the material but also the various process parameters such as stress, strain rate, temperature and friction. Workability criterion of P/M compacts was discussed by Abdel-Rahman and El-Sheikh An experimental and theoretical research work was carried out by Gouveia et al. In the present work, a complete experimental investigation on the workability behaviour of nickel–chromium–molybdenum steel grades of AISI 9840 and AISI 9845 powder metallurgy preforms was performed. Preforms with different aspect ratios namely 0.42, 0.63 and 0.93 were subjected to cold deformation with graphite lubricant and their formability behaviour under triaxial stress state condition was determined. The variation of a newly proposed formability strain parameter with respect to relative density was evaluated. The formability strain parameter was compared with the formability stress parameter for the two different powder metallurgy steel grade preforms of AISI 9840 and AISI 9845. Also the characteristics of various stress and strain ratio parameters such as Atomized iron powder of −150 Initial dimensions of the specimen such as initial diameter ( The following are the mathematical expressions proposed and used for the determination of various upsetting parameters under triaxial stress state condition: The state of stress in a triaxial stress condition is given by Narayanasamy et al. The hydrostatic stress is given by As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture, Vujovic and Shabaik The axial true strain ( Like the stress formability parameter given in Eq.       The following conclusions can be drawn from the above results and discussion: In most of the cases, the strain parameters were found to have higher value compared to stress parameters. As the aspect ratio varies, the difference between two steels is evident in the case of strain plots, compared to stress plots. Further, the strain measurements were accurate and these plots represent values close to actual one because in the case of stress plots, stresses are determined by approximate plasticity theory.