Fe–TiC powder composite was successfully synthesized from mixtures of ilmenite concentrate (FeTiO3) and carbon black through mechanical activation and subsequent reduction at a temperature that was considerably lower than that used in conventional carbothermic reduction synthesis. Mixed ilmenite powder and carbon black were milled in a planetary ball mill for 10–40h milling time. The activated powders were then synthesized at 1200 and 1300°C for 3h in tube furnace under argon atmosphere. The synthesized powders were characterized using TGA–DTA, XRD and SEM techniques. It was found that the formation of TiC at 1200°C increases by increasing mechanical activation time up to 30h and no significant change was observed with increasing the milling time to 40h. On the other hand increasing the reduction temperature up to 1300°C leads to a lower formation of TiC.Metal matrix composites have many advantages over monolithic metals. Metal matrix composites (MMCs) have steadily found a wide range of applications in many areas, especially for high temperature applications ( Titanium carbide bounded by iron is a unique metal matrix composite. Its special properties such as strength retained at elevated temperature, good machinability, excellent wear resistance, and mechanical properties and suitable oxidation and corrosion resistance. Furthermore, this composite offers the opportunity to use relatively cheap and abundant raw materials ( Iron-based TiC metal matrix composite are currently available and produced by powder metallurgy routes involving the addition of TiC powders to iron powder ( The aim of this work is studying the feasibility of producing Fe–TiC composite from ilmenite concentrate and carbon black via mechanical activation under moderate conditions followed by reduction reaction under an argon atmosphere at a lower temperature. The effect of mechanical activation time and reduction temperature on the formation of Fe–TiC composite was also studied. The starting materials were ilmenite concentrate with mean particle size of 90 This mixture was milled in a vertical planetary ball mill with an agate cell containing silicon nitride balls of 20 The carbothermic reduction process is often monitored by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA); variation of weight loss of a sample during heating is an indication of reaction kinetics. A significant weight loss was observed above 1000 On the Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) graph in  X-ray diffraction of the reduced samples at 1200 On the other hand, increasing the reduction temperature up to 1300 The morphology of the sample milled up to 30 The morphology of the sample synthesized at 1200 The results of this study can be summarized as follows: The main phases in the original ilmenite concentrate were hematite and ilmenite. The only significant feature after 30 The carbothermal reduction of non-milled ilmenite at 1200 Increasing milling time to 40 Increasing reduction temperature up to 1300 Finally, mechanical activation of ilmenite–carbon mixtures decreased the formation temperature of TiC to 1200