An experimental study of temperature-dependent mechanical behaviour of Poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA) was performed at a range of temperatures (20 °C, 40 °C, 60 °C and 80 °C) below its glass transition point (108 °C) under uniaxial tension and three-point bending loading conditions. This study was accompanied by simulations aimed at identification of material parameters for two different constitutive material models. Experimental flow curves obtained for PMMA were used in elasto-plastic analysis, while a sim-flow optimization tool was employed for a two-layer viscoplasticity model. The temperature increase significantly affected mechanical behaviour of PMMA, with quasi-brittle fracture at room temperature and super-plastic behaviour (ε>110%) at 80 °C. The two-layer viscoplasticity material model was found to agree better with the experimental data obtained for uniaxial tension than the elasto-plastic description.Width of specimen Material constants Specimen's deflection at mid-span Elastic modulus Engineering strain Applied force Ratio of elastic modulus of elastic network ( Hardening parameter Thickness of specimen Elastic modulus of material at highest loading rate Modulus of elastic-plastic network Modulus of elastic-viscous network Beam span Slope of force-deflection curve Test temperature Reference temperature (room temperature) Glass transition temperature Translation in x-axis Translation in y-axis Rotation about x-axis Rotation about y-axis Norton-Hoff rate parameters Material parameters Tensile strength True strain Strain rate Reference strain rate Flexure strain Strain at fracture Total strain Steady-state creep rate Poisson's ratio Density Engineering stress True stress Proof stress Flexure stress Flow stress Stress in elastic-plastic network Total stress Stress in elastic-viscous network Yield stress and ultimate tensile stress Yield stress and ultimate tensile stress at reference temperature Poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA) is an amorphous thermoplastic with moderate mechanical properties at room temperature and strain rate of 10 In many of its applications, PMMA is exposed to a wide range of environmental and loading conditions Dissimilar to metallic materials, PMMA demonstrates initial yielding that depends on pressure, strain rate and temperature, but true strain softening after yielding, i.e., a drop in level of true stress with plastic straining can be observed. At large strains, the material hardens Various material models have been suggested in the literature to describe amorphous polymers; their main application is to simulate different processing techniques This work focuses on analysis of the temperature-dependent behaviour of PMMA and applicability of two constitutive models - elastic-plastic and two-layer viscoplastic - available in Abaqus 6.13 finite-element software. Tensile and bending tests of PMMA were performed over an application-relevant temperature range (20 °C, 40 °C, 60 °C and 80 °C) below its glass transition point (108 °C). The obtained experimental data were used to quantify parameters of the two constitutive models. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first study aimed at identification of parameters for two different material formulations of PMMA using an optimization simulation process flow 'sim-flow'. The material used in this study was standard-grade MD001 commercial poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) with mass density of 1.19 g/cm Dimensions of tensile test samples were according to BS 2782-3 Tensile tests of the PMMA were performed using an Instron 3367 system with a maximum load capacity of 30 kN equipped with an environmental chamber with a temperature range from −70 to 350 °C and feedback temperature control. Before a test, the chamber was preheated to the designated temperature and left until the temperature became stable. Then, each specimen was mounted and left for 5 min in the chamber to reach the desired temperature, see The tensile tests on PMMA were carried out at temperatures of 20 °C, 40 °C, 60 °C and 80 °C. In order to perform the test with a strain rate of 0.001 s Three-point bending tests were performed using a universal testing machine Zwick/Roell Z100 with a 100 kN load cell. A pair of supports was manufactured using tool steel ( Three-point bending tests were performed at the same temperatures as tensile tests. A dedicated heating chamber was built, with temperature measured with a thermocouple near the middle section of the specimen; a supply of hot air and temperature level were manually controlled. The test was performed either until fracture of the specimen or reaching a deflection of 0.7 of a half span length. Here, also, two specimens were tested for each temperature. A tensile FE model was used to identify material parameters for two material formulations for PMMA. The geometry and dimensions of the dumbbell specimen of uniaxial tension test of PMMA were used in a two-dimensional (2D) finite-element model (FEM) developed using commercial finite-element software ABAQUS 6.13. Following the setup of the uniaxial tension test, encastre boundary conditions (U1 = U2 = UR1 = UR2 = 0) were applied to fix the left-hand part of the specimen, whereas a ramp type displacement (U1) was applied to its right-hand part ( Various initial mesh sizes and element types were employed to reproduce the experimental stress-strain response obtained in the uniaxial tension tests. A number of the proposed mesh sizes and element types overestimated this response. Suitable results were obtained for an element type CPS8R, with a total number of 602 elements (1994 nodes); the average element size was 2 mm. The simulation used a static general step with a dissipated energy fraction of 0.0002 and an adaptive stabilization with a maximum ratio of stabilization to strain energy of 0.05. A 2D FEM of three-point bending was developed with geometry and dimensions exactly as those used in the experimental part of this study, see The PMMA specimen was modelled as a deformable material while the supports were rigid. Following the test setup, the bottom supports were fixed using an encastre type of boundary conditions, whereas a ramp-type displacement (U2) at the reference point was applied to the top support ( In this simulation, the same mesh-sensitivity approach introduced in the uniaxial tension test model was followed for the three-point bending model. The element type used for the PMMA specimen was CPE8RH (plain-strain quadratic with hybrid formulation), with a total number of 1280 elements (4177 nodes); the average element size was 0.5 mm. Increments were defined as in the uniaxial-tension-test model. Two material models implemented in Abaqus 6.13 The tension results obtained for the quasi-static strain rate of 0.001 s While the material showed almost brittle fracture with a limited strain of only 5% at room temperature, it demonstrated super-plastic behaviour at 80 °C, achieving strain over 110% without fracture (the test was stopped due to reaching the dimensions of the heating furnace). Also, as temperature increased, the stress corresponding to the onset of softening decreased. The material had high ultimate tensile stress (UTS) at 20 °C, demonstrating an inverse relation with temperature, see To describe the effect of temperature on yield stress, or ultimate tensile stress, the following relationship The yield stress (calculated here as proof stress The strain at fracture It is worth mentioning that linear reduction in tensile properties (elastic modulus, yield strength and tensile strength) with temperature was observed both below and above the glass transition point of four different types of thermoplastic composites. It was noted that two different slopes were identified for variations of strength and stiffness below and above the glass transition point of 30 wt% short–glass-fibre-reinforced polyamide-6.6 The load-deflection curves obtained in bending were converted into stress-strain curves using the following equations for flexure stress In fact, the classical formula used to calculate bending stress (Eq. The stress - strain curves for PMMA at different temperatures for three-point bending are presented in It is worth noting that the flexure stress –strain curves are different from those obtained in the uniaxial tension tests at the same temperature range; here, the yield drop is not obvious. Also, PMMA did not show a sudden softening after yield in bending as compared to its tension behaviour. This is, probably, due to the nature of the bending as the bending stress is considered as a combination of compressive and tensile stresses.  The difference of tensile strength The elastic modulus In the test, deflection values of 0.09 and 0.34 mm corresponded to 0.05% and 0.25% strains. The resultant values of the elastic modulus of PMMA are given in   As discussed, the stress-strain curves of PMMA are characterized by complex behaviour with the elastic response followed by plastic yielding accompanied by initial material strain hardening, with subsequent softening and then final hardening of the materials until fracture ( In this model, the flow stress In Eq. It should be mentioned that the material parameters provided for PMMA based on the model proposed by Nasraoui et al. A rheological idealization of the two-layer viscoplasticity model is shown in The two-layer viscoplasticity model is based on the von-Mises yield condition in the elastic-plastic network and the Norton power law (secondary creep) for the viscoplastic behaviour in the elastic-viscous network The viscous behaviour of this model is governed by the Norton-Hoff rate law given by In Eq. The slope of the plastic response Six material parameters need to be identified for the two-layer viscoplasticity model: the elastic properties of the two networks, In order to define the parameters Under the assumption that the hardening modulus Identification of the material parameters of this two-layer viscoplasticity model based on an optimization procedure is described in the next section. In this section, the unknown parameters of the two-layer viscoplasticity model (Eq. First, an initial guess was used for material parameters in the uniaxial tensile FE model, employing ABAQUS software - generated both the input and output files. Second, the optimization sim-flow was developed ( To verify the optimized parameters at each temperature, they were used to simulate the three-point bending test (see below). At the next stage of analysis, FE simulations of the uniaxial tension test were used to examine the two material models used in this work. The comparison of experimental and calculated stress-strain curves of PMMA at different temperatures are presented in Various mesh refinements were examined to investigate their effect on softening behaviour of the elasto-plastic model; however, no significant changes were found with a steep drop in the stress level after reaching the ultimate tensile stress level ( In contrast, the two-layer viscoplasticity model showed good agreement with the experimental data for all the temperatures for the entire curves. However, it slightly overestimated both the ultimate tensile stress When the two-layer material formulation was used to model the uniaxial tension test at 20 °C, there was no drop in the stress level, see The von Mises stress at 80 °C calculated with the two-layer viscoplasticity model ( The two material formulations were further used to simulate three-point bending tests. After their validation process with the tension tests, the same material parameters at each temperature were used for bending. The load-deflection curves of PMMA obtained with these FE simulations are compared with the experimental results at different temperatures in Although the two-layer material formulation showed some deviations from the experimental data, it captured the general load-deflection behaviour better. Both models overestimated the peak load in all the simulations, but the two-layer material model followed the load-deflection profile more closely. Distributions of typical von Mises stress at the peak load for three-point bending specimens tested at 20 °C and 80 °C are shown in An experimental study was performed to examine the influence of the temperature on mechanical behaviour of PMMA using uniaxial tension and three-point bending. Additionally, a numerical analysis was introduced to identify the parameters of two different material formulations for PMMA, namely, elasto-plastic and two-layer viscoplasticity constitutive material models. The following conclusions were drawn: The temperature rise significantly affected the elastic modulus, yield stress, ultimate tensile stress and strain at fracture of PMMA. PMMA demonstrated quasi-brittle fracture at the room temperature and super plastic-behaviour (ε > 110%) at 80 °C. The flow curves of PMMA were successfully described with the employed material models and their parameters were quantified. The optimal parameters of the two-layer viscoplasticity material model were defined with a developed sim-flow optimization tool. The two-layer viscoplasticity material model demonstrated better agreement with the experimental data compared to the elasto-plastic material model through the verification using the uniaxial tension data for PMMA. The FE simulations with the two material models were validated using the three-point bending data. The two-layer viscoplasticity model demonstrated good overall agreement with these experimental results, while the elasto-plastic material model showed acceptable results. The authors would like to show their gratitude to Dr Khaled Al-Ghefaili and Eng. Shajahan Khan at the Higher Institute for Plastics Fabrication (Riyadh, KSA) for assisting in production of the PMMA samples.