Low-grade magnesium hydroxide is being used with very promising results as flame retardant filler in polymeric materials and as aggregate in the formulation of mortars for passive fire protection, combining an economic and sustainable solution. Simultaneous TGA–DSC was used to evaluate low-grade magnesium hydroxide thermal decomposition in order to examine the suitability of this product for a broad range of temperatures. Thermal analysis in air shows an unexpected exothermic peak, as well as the endothermic peaks corresponding to the decomposition of magnesium hydroxide, magnesite and dolomite. Thermal decomposition using nitrogen as gas flow does not show the exothermic peak, whereas a new endothermic peak corresponding to decomposition of calcite appears. In situ XRD patterns collected in air atmosphere at high temperature allows determining the presence of anhydrite, which was related to direct sulphation of calcite from the sulphur trioxide generated during the combustion of petcoke adsorbed on the particle surface of the low-grade magnesium hydroxide.Magnesium hydroxide is widely used as a flame retardant and smoke-suppressor in polymeric materials However, magnesium hydroxide used as flame retardant filler is more expensive than ATH. The high purity of magnesium hydroxide together with the costs associated with the optimisation of its particle size and shape in order to improve its effectiveness in polymeric matrices are the main factors responsible for its high price. Low-grade magnesium hydroxide (LG-MH), an industrial by-product obtained in the calcination of magnesia, has been used by some researchers as flame retardant filler in polymeric materials with very promising results The endothermic decomposition of LG-MH is also relevant to the formulation of mortars for passive fire protection Since LG-MH consists of several hydroxide and carbonate phases and contains several impurities introduced during processing, its thermal behaviour differs substantially from that of pure magnesium hydroxide. In both applications, the thermal properties of the materials formulated with LG-MH differ several respects from pure magnesium hydroxide The LG-MH used in this study is produced and sold by Magnesitas Navarras During the calcination of natural magnesite in a horizontal rotary kiln at 1100 To carry out the physicochemical characterization, LG-MH was analysed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW2400 X-ray sequential spectrophotometer to elucidate the major and minor components. X-ray diffraction pattern was performed in a Bragg-Brentano Siemens D-500 powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation to obtain information about the crystalline phases. Bulk density was measured with helium pycnometer and the specific surface by the BET single point method with a Micrometrics Tristar 3000 porosimeter. Finally, particle size distribution was determined by light scattering with a Beckman Coulter LS13 320 apparatus. A TA Instruments SDT Q600 Simultaneous TGA-DSC was employed to evaluate LG-MH thermal decomposition by means of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). TGA were performed in two different atmospheres: air and nitrogen (N  To establish the parameters of the thermal decomposition of some natural carbonates contained in the LG-MH, a sample of the ore feeding the kilns of caustic magnesia was also studied and characterised. Also studied was the decomposition of petcoke used as a fuel during the industrial process of calcinations of the natural magnesite. The diffraction pattern at room temperature of LG-MH (   The thermal decompositions of dehydroxylation and decarbonation are both endothermic reactions. Hence, it was expected that the DSC curve would show only the endothermic peaks at temperatures close to those determined previously in the DTG analysis. However, the DSC curve of the thermal decomposition of LG-MH in air atmosphere (  The comparison of DSC obtained in the thermal decomposition of LG-MH at different gas flow is shown in The simultaneous TG-DSC up to 1000 Although the rotary kiln can be fired using gas, oil or solid fuel, the petcoke is the cheaper fuel and the most worldwide used. Taking into account this fact, it is possible that the observed exothermic reaction may be due to the combustion of the petcoke particles collected with the particles of LG-MH; or some by-products generated during the pyrolysis of petcoke. To elucidate this assumption, the thermal decomposition up to 1200 To remove the petcoke or char particles collected with LG-MH a solvent extraction of a sample was carried out. The extraction was made according to the Soxhlet's procedure using hexane as organic solvent. After solvent extraction, thermal analysis of the sample was conducted. As expected, the TGA–DTG curves showed the same stages and the same peaks as those determined for the sample without the extraction (  The sulphation of CaCO The chemistry involved in Eq. In the thermal decomposition of LG-MH, the direct sulphation of CaCO However, the TGA–DTG curves obtained up to 1400 The thermal analysis of LG-MH shows an important mass loss due to the endothermic reactions that take place during its decomposition. This thermal behaviour means that this by-product could be used as filler in flame retardant polymers or as aggregate in mortars used for passive fire protection. However, it has been also determined that the thermal decomposition of LG-MH in air atmosphere presents an exothermic peak due to the presence of small amounts of petcoke or char collected with LG-MH. A large exothermic heat is released due to the desulphurisation of petcoke or char under combustion conditions. The sulphur trioxide generated with the excess of oxygen reacts directly with the CaCO The exothermic peak has no impact on the effectiveness of LG-MH used as flame-retardant filler, because the petcoke or char combustion occurs at temperatures greater than the ignition temperature of most polymers. However, the effectiveness of LG-MH used as aggregate in mortars for passive fire protection may be affected by the combustion heat of the petcoke or char collected with the LG-MH. Since the petcoke or char particles cannot be removed by solvent extraction processes, the exothermic heat could be compensated for by adding other aggregates, whose endothermic decomposition takes place in the same temperature range, e.g. natural magnesite. The authors would like to thank Magnesitas Navarras S.A., the