A 2D segregation-dispersion model was utilized to study the transport mechanism of particle species in the Reflux Classifier (RC) with a wide channel spacing. The main objective was to study size classification and describe the internal state of the system under continuous process conditions with changing variables such as fluidization velocity, underflow rate and solids throughput. Moreover, the Richardson and Zaki hindered settling model was incorporated into the 2D model to study the separation of particle species based on differences in their settling velocities. A set of simulations was performed for binary and multicomponent mixtures, having a density equal to 2490 kg/m3 in both cases. For the binary mixture, particle species of size 200 and 300 µm were used, while for the multicomponent mixture eight particle species with sizes between 49 and 421 µm were selected. The partition curves obtained from the model predictions were successfully validated with published experimental results. The separation performance of the RC was characterised by analysing how the imperfection and the d50 values changed with the process variables. Furthermore, the simulation data were used for the first time to demonstrate the concentration distribution of the individual solid particle species in the fluidization and inclined sections of the RC. This study showed that the particle species with sizes closer to the d50 values had a larger presence in both the vertical and inclined sections of the RC. Thus, the total concentration inside the RC mainly consisted of those particle species.The separation of solid particles on the basis of size and density has been an important area of research due to its direct applications in a wide range of industries including beneficiation in the mining industry, and classification in the construction and wastewater treatment industries ( The Reflux Classifier (RC) consists of a set of parallel inclined channels above a fluidized bed ( Different modelling approaches such as Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) (  In this model, the inherent complexity of a multicomponent process is reduced to a remarkably simple theoretical framework through the introduction of two contributions, segregation and dispersion fluxes, which describe particle transport. The segregation-dispersion model of A significant amount of work has been carried out describing segregation and dispersion phenomena in liquid fluidized beds for binary mixtures under batch process conditions (  The purpose of this paper is to study the opposing problem to that investigated in The model predictions have been validated against the published experimental results of According to For a continuous process, it is necessary to consider the solid and liquid entering the system through the inlet and leaving the system as underflow and overflow. Therefore, the total volume flux, Similarly, below the feed point the total volume flux is given as, The segregation fluxes are written as a function of the slip velocities in the respective directions. Now the segregation velocity has x and y components and is given in terms of the corresponding sum of the particle slip and interstitial fluid velocities. The equations for the components of the segregation velocity become, The x and y components of the slip velocity were calculated using the The net flow (solid particles plus water) within the inclined channel was considered to have a parabolic profile. Therefore, the superficial velocity, At steady state the interstitial fluid velocity in the fluidization section is obtained using Eqs. The settling of particle species normal to the plane within the inclined channel was considered to be similar to that of batch settling. Thus, the interstitial fluid velocity normal to the plane (x direction) was obtained as, Therefore, The boundary condition at the base of the system was equal to the underflow flux moving out from the system. Similarly, at the top of the system a free boundary condition was assumed, and the dispersion flux was taken as zero at the top of the system. The boundary conditions for the 2D segregation-dispersion model are given as: The particle Reynolds number, Size partition curves were produced from the data generated from the simulations. The size partition curves describe the probability of the different size particles reporting to either the underflow or overflow. For the partition curve, the d The fluidization velocity, feed rate and underflow rate were applied from the beginning of the simulations. In modelling the Reflux Classifier (RC), only one inclined channel was used, with the angle of inclination with respect to the horizontal set at 70⁰. The height, H, and width, w, of the fluidization section was taken as 1 m and 0.006 m, respectively. Similarly, the length of the inclined channel was taken as 1 m and the width i.e. channel spacing In this study, a constant value of the dispersion coefficient equal to 0.00030 m The 2D segregation-dispersion model was used to study the size classification of binary and multicomponent mixtures. The binary mixture consisted of particle species of diameters 200 and 300 µm having an identical density 2490 kg/m During the simulations, an underflow flux of 0.00020 m Similarly, in the multicomponent mixture a total number of eight particle species having the same density but different sizes were used in the simulations. The density was taken to be equal to 2490 kg/m The computational domain of the Reflux Classifier (RC) including the fluidized and inclined sections was discretized into equally spaced shells and elements in the x and y directions, respectively, as shown in The segregation velocities in the x and y directions were calculated using Eqs. The dispersion flux depends on the concentration gradient. If the concentration gradient has a negative value, then the dispersion flux becomes positive and particle species Simulations were carried out for binary and multicomponent mixtures using the 2D segregation-dispersion model. In the 2D model, the segregation and dispersion fluxes are two opposing mechanisms and together define the movement of the solid particles within the system. The segregation term describes the separation tendency of the particle species whereas the dispersion term governs the random mixing of the particle species, both having a fundamental hydrodynamic origin. If the value of the dispersion coefficient is very high, the particles become mixed thus limiting any observed segregation ( In the 2D model, the segregation flux had x and y components. In the fluidization section of the RC, the x component was zero while the y component described the movement of the particle species. The particle species having a negative segregation velocity moved downwards, whereas, the particle species having a positive segregation velocity moved upwards relative to the container. Within the inclined channels, the x and y components both contributed to the movement of the particle species. The particle species that settled within the inclined sections had a relatively high segregation velocity in the x direction. Similarly, the dispersion flux had x and y components in the fluidization section of the RC. The x component helped in dispersing the particle species across the width of the fluidization section. In contrast, the y component of the dispersion flux contributed to the transport in the axial direction. Likewise, the two components of the dispersion contributed to the normal and parallel directions within the inclined section of the RC. The dispersion flux was the source of mixing and resistance to separation within the RC. Simulations were performed using the binary particle species shown in The model predictions in In   The 2D model was utilized to study the size classification and influence of variables such as fluidization velocity, underflow rate and solids throughput on the separation performance of the Reflux Classifier (RC) by assessing variations in the imperfection ( Simulations were performed to investigate the segregation of the particle species at two different fluidization velocities, 0.016 and 0.028 m/s. According to the partition curves, the coarser particle species discharged into the underflow while the finer particle species reported to the overflow. The imperfection,   Similarly, Simulations were performed to examine the performance of the Reflux Classifier (RC) at three different underflow rates 0.0065, 0.0045 and 0.0025 m The imperfection was also affected by changes in the underflow rate. The imperfection for the underflow rates of 0.0025 and 0.0045 m    In    Overall, the simulation results obtained in this study, showed that the best results were obtained for Run 1, in which a low fluidization velocity (0.016 m/s), gave a d The theoretical concentration profiles of the particle species generated through model predictions at different operating conditions within the RC were dominated by the particle species of a size close to that of the d This paper mainly focused on size classification, whereas the study carried out by In the present study, coarser particle species of sizes 274 and 421 µm having terminal settling velocities equal to 0.032 and 0.052 m/s ( The RC was modelled to investigate the size classification of binary and multicomponent mixtures comprising particle species of density 2490 kg/m In the second case, simulations were performed under different operating conditions for a multicomponent mixture comprising 8 types of particle species ranging from 49 to 421 µm in size. It was found for the case of the highest fluidization velocity, 0.028 m/s, that most of the species reported to the overflow and the values of the d Furthermore, the model predictions obtained for different underflow rates showed a poor separation performance with increasing underflow rate. The imperfection value changed from 0.065 to 0.085 for the underflow rates 0.0025–0.0065 m The 2D segregation-dispersion model was also used to describe the internal state of the system for a multicomponent system for the first time. The concentration profiles of the individual particle species in the fluidization and inclined sections of the RC were demonstrated. The results showed that particle species having sizes closer to the values of the d The authors acknowledge the University of Newcastle Australia and Australian Government RTP scholarship for this PhD research topic. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the The University of Newcastle holds international patents on the REFLUX™ Classifier and has a Research and Development Agreement with FLSmidth Pty Ltd. One of the report authors, K.P. Galvin, is the inventor of the REFLUX™ Classifier and is a beneficiary of the University’s intellectual property policy.  Similarly,