The bioleaching of high-magnesium Jinchuan nickel-bearing pyrrhotite using Acidithiobacilus ferrooxidans was investigated. The experimental results show that the bioleaching time can be reduced from 16 days to 10 days by sulphuric acid pretreatment of the nickel-bearing pyrrhotite and by using ore-adapted A. ferrooxidans. At pH 2.0, 30 °C, pulp density 5% (wt./vol.), cell transfer quantity 10% and rotary shaker at 180 min−1, the leaching of Ni was 88%, Co 78%, Cu 45% and Mg ∼50%. The leaching of Cu was poor due to chalcopyrite, which exhibited slower leaching rate by bacteria. Mg was dissolved from magnesium-containing gangue minerals by acid and its dissolution was related to the acid concentration of leaching liquor. Mineralogical examination indicated that the relative order of leaching for the sulphide minerals by A. ferrooxidans was nickel-bearing pyrrhotite > pentlandite > chalcopyrite and the relative order of dissolution for the gangue minerals by acid pretreatment was chlorite > antigonite > olivine > tremolite and talc.There is an increasing role for bio-hydrometallurgical processes in reducing the environmental impact of industrial activities and recovering valuable metals from low-grade ores ( The purpose of this work is to examine the influence of magnesium in the gangue minerals on the bioleaching of nickel-bearing pyrrhotite by bacteria. The unadapted Leaching tests were carried out at 30 °C, pH 2.0 and pulp density 5% (wt./vol.) on a rotary shaker at 180 min To make a comparison between uninoculation and inoculation, the leaching tests of nickel-bearing pyrrhotite were carried out at pH 2.0, 30 °C and pulp density 5% (wt./vol.) for 16 days with and without The rapid rise in pH can be attributed to the high content of MgO in the main gangue minerals. Therefore, an acid pretreatment of 24 h in 3.05 (wt./vol.) H After acid pretreatment the bioleaching was investigated using the same conditions as before, in these runs the pH was stable at 2.0. The leaching results are shown in The effect of using ore-adapted Optical microscopy was used to examine the relative rates of leaching of the mineral phases in the ore during bioleaching process. The Jinchuan nickel ore has an unusually high content of MgO in the gangue. The rate of bioleaching can be increased by either an acid pretreatment or by using ore-adapted About 50% Mg was leached from the gangue minerals by acid pretreatment and its dissolution was related with the acid concentration of leaching liquor. The relative order of dissolution for the gangue minerals was chlorite > antigonite > olivine > tremolite and talc. This project (No.59834150) was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China.