40Ar/39Ar dating of a bentonite associated with a cold methane seep deposit in the upper Campanian Baculites compressus Zone of the Pierre Shale in South Dakota yields an age of 73.79 ± 0.36 Ma. This is in close agreement with the previously published age of 74.05 ± 0.39 Ma for this zone (Obradovich, 1993) and nearly identical to an unpublished age of 73.70 ± 0.13 Ma for the same zone, both samples of which are from a more proximal locality near the base of the Bearpaw Shale in Montana, as recalculated relative to a Fish Canyon standard age of 28.201 Ma. We also report dates for two bentonites from the upper Campanian Exiteloceras jenneyi and Didymoceras stevensoni zones.The Upper Cretaceous of the U.S. Western Interior has been subdivided into faunal zones based on ammonites ( The bentonite from the This site also contains a cold methane seep deposit ( Fossils occur in the SAC's and in the surrounding shale. They are 3-dimensional and many of them retain their original mineralogy ( The outcrop was excavated to expose fresh material from the bentonite, which was immediately bagged. Small (∼100 μm) sanidine crystals were isolated from the bentonite using standard magnetic and density separation techniques. The purified sanidine separate was wrapped in Al foil and irradiated along with the 28.201 Ma Fish Canyon sanidine standard at the Oregon State TRIGA reactor in the cadmium-lined in-core irradiation tube (CLICIT) for 50 h. In the WiscAr laboratory at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, ten single crystal fusions were performed using a 25 W CO The weighted mean age of the ten single crystal fusions is 73.79 ± 0.36 Ma ( The weighted mean age of the bentonite from the The results of this study confirm the age of the lower part of the We thank several people for help in the field including Katya Larina (University of Southern California), Kim Meehan (University of Buffalo), Corinne Myers (University of New Mexico), Zbigniew Remin (University of Warsaw), Remy Rovelli (University of New Mexico), James Witts (AMNH), and the late Susan Klofak (AMNH). We thank Barbara Beasley (U.S. Forest Service) for helping arrange permission to collect on the Buffalo Gap National Grassland.  AMNH locality 3504,  90 -O-15, 90 -O-54, 93 -O-16, The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at