Projectile size effect is of great importance since the scaling researches are extensively applied to concrete penetration investigations. This paper numerically deals with the projectile size effect on penetration resistance via the recently developed Lattice Discrete Particles Model (LDPM) which is featured with mesoscale constitutive laws governing the interaction between adjacent particles to account for cohesive fracture, strain hardening in compression and compaction due to pore collapse. Simulations of two different penetration tests are carried to shed some light on the size effect issue. The penetration numerical model is validated by matching the projectile deceleration curve of and predicting the depth of penetration (DOP). By constant velocity penetration simulations, the target resistance is found to be dependent on the projectile size. By best fitting numerical results of constant velocity penetration, a size effect law for target resistance is proposed and validated against literature data. Moreover, the size effect is numerically obtained in the projectile with longer extended nose part meanwhile the shorter extended nose is found to improve the DOP since the projectile nose is sharpened.The response of high speed penetration of concrete target by projectiles has been a research hotspot for several decades, due to its relevance for both industry and military establishments. Usually, the concrete penetration investigations are carried out in reduced geometrical scale since the ballistic tests are dangerous and money-consuming. Issues concerning penetration of massive concrete targets by rigid projectiles have been dealt with empirical formulae, analytical model as well as the numerical modelling [ With the concept of non-dimensional formula based on the dynamic cavity expansion model, Chen and Li [ Although the projectile size effect was reported, few efforts have been made to address this issue. Rosenberg and Kositski [ In the present paper, the numerical simulation of rigid projectile penetration is performed with Lattice Discrete Particle Model (LDPM) which has been proven a robust model for concrete penetration and perforation in our previous study [ As a synthesis of the Confinement Shear Lattice model and discrete method, the theoretical framework of Lattice Discrete Particle Model was developed to simulate the mechanical interaction of coarse aggregate pieces embedded in a binding matrix [ The triangular facets forming the rigid polyhedral particles are assumed to be the potential material failure locations. Each facet is shared between two polyhedral particles and is characterized by a local system of reference featured by a unit normal vector In the elastic regime, the normal and shear stresses are proportional to the corresponding strains: For fracture behavior characterized by normal strains Normal stresses for compressive loading ( The incremental shear stresses rates are computed as The LDPM formulation is extended to incorporate rate dependent fracture mechanisms associated with the interpretation of thermally activated phenomena which is governed by the classical Maxwell-Boltzmann equation [ Compared to the crack opening rate, the elastic strain rate can be negligible [ A serious of experimental investigations on penetration in concrete targets with different projectile nose geometry, striking velocities were carried out by M.J. Forrestal et al. [ The concrete mixture proportion by weight is characterized by cement content Subsequent to calibration, the obtained LDPM parameters are used to simulate the response of concrete target subjected to ogival nose projectile impact. According to the penetration experiments [ The penetration prediction results are listed in To investigate the projectile size effect on penetration resistance, projectile constant velocity penetration of LDPM simulation is further conducted in this work to obtain the resistive force acting on the projectile nose. Right now, researchers deem that the target resistance Projectiles with 30 mm, 60 mm and 80 mm diameters are chosen herein for numerical study where common According to the widely recognized cavity expansion analysis developed by Forrestal et al. [ The validation is then conducted with reference to the penetration tests with A series of penetration test of 14.8 MPa compressive strength concrete targets impacted by abnormal nose projectiles was carried out by Chai et al. [ No apparent projectile deformation or erosion was reported by the authors and rigid projectile assumption is also made herein. With reference to the calibrated LDPM parameters for different strength concrete [ After LDMP simulation, the predicted DOP are comparatively listed with the test results in The numerical results of damage contour of the impact surface of shot ONP-2 is plotted in Similarly, the projectile constant velocity penetration in concrete is simulated to achieve the penetration resistance. For ONP, the cavity expansion analysis can be applied to get the target resistance More importantly, the constant velocity ( The numerical simulation of rigid projectile penetration is performed with Lattice Discrete Particle Model. Extensive numerical simulations of penetration are conducted to explore the projectile size effect on target resistance. The main conclusions are drawn as follows: The LDPM model with calibrated parameters can successfully simulate the projectile penetration in 23 MPa compressive strength concrete. The size effect phenomenon, i.e., larger projectile suffers less resistance, can be captured through the LDPM simulation. The size effect law for target resistance For the abnormal nose projectile penetration in concrete, LDPM simulation prediction agrees well with the experimental data. Also, the size effect can be numerically obtained for the projectile with longer extended nose part meanwhile the shorter extended nose can improve the DOP since the projectile nose is sharpened. This effort was supported by the