Introduction
                  Polyaxial angle-stable plating is thought to be particularly beneficial in the management of complex intra-articular fractures of the distal radius. The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether the technique provides stability to match that of conventional (fixed-angle) angle-stable constructs.
               
                  Material and methods
                  In seven pairs of human cadaver radii, an Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthese (AO) 23 C2.1 intra-articular fracture was created. One radius of each pair received a juxta-articular 2.4-mm locking compression plate (LCP) Volar Distal Radius Plate, whilst the contralateral one received a 2.4-mm Variable Angle Locking Compression Plate (LCP) Two-Column Volar Distal Radius Plate (both plates: Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland). Parameters tested were construct stiffness (static axial loading with 150N), range of motion and secondary loss of reduction (dynamic 150N axial loading over 5000 cycles). Stiffness and range of motion were measured both pre- and post-cycling.
               
                  Results
                  The polyaxial constructs were significantly stiffer, both before and after cyclic testing. However, the two-column plates showed a significant loss of stiffness during cyclic testing. The range of motion was significantly greater, both initially and at the end of cyclic testing, in the fixed-angle constructs. The conventional constructs had significantly greater secondary loss of reduction.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The polyaxial two-column plate tested in this study provides a biomechanically sound construct for the management of intra-articular fractures of the distal radius.The internal fixation of fractures of the distal radius is a subject of great interest amongst orthopaedic surgeons. The advent of angle-stable plates has made it possible to manage most cases with volar plating, regardless of the fracture pattern. The angle-stable plates must, however, be correctly positioned, and screws correctly selected, so as not to cause irritation of the flexor or extensor tendons. Another issue with these devices is the maintenance of reduction after the fixation of intra-articular fractures, especially where early postoperative mobilisation is being considered. In such cases, variable-angle (polyaxial) angle-stable plates may be beneficial, The present biomechanical study was therefore performed in a human cadaver fracture model (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthese (AO) classification 23 C2.1 – distal radius; articular simple; metaphyseal multifragmentary; with sagittal articular line), with a view to comparing a polyaxial angle-stable distal radius plate versus a fixed-angle angle-stable standard implant, to study the stability of the novel device in a clinically relevant setting. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the biomechanical properties of a variable-angle distal radius plate. The null hypothesis was that the polyaxial plate would be biomechanically equal to the conventional implant. The reference implant used was a juxta-articular 2.4-mm LCP Volar Distal Radius Plate (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland). This device was compared against a 2.4-mm Variable-Angle LCP Two-Column Volar Distal Radius Plate (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland). Both implants are made of titanium–aluminium–nitrite (TAN) alloy. The two plates are shown in Seven pairs of fresh-frozen radii (mean donor age: 79 The specimens were potted in a jig to ensure standardised axial load transfer. First, the shaft was potted. The radius was fixed in line with its longitudinal axis between the radial part of the lunate fossa and the centre of the head of the radius. Next, the specimens were shortened to an overall length of 130 An AO classification 23 C2.1 fracture was created with use of a bandsaw (CMI, Obi-Merchandise Center GmbH, Wermelskirchen, Germany). The intra-articular part of the fracture was produced by sawing through the ridge between the lunate and the scaphoid fossa. The fracture was then fixated following the manufacturer's techniques. The intra-articular fracture was compressed with use of pointed reduction forceps, following which four angle-stable screws were inserted into the distal row of holes. Care was taken to ensure that the plates were correctly positioned, so as to have two screws securely fixed in each fragment. In the polyaxial group, the fixed-angle end of the drill sleeve provided by the manufacturer was used. This end allows the drill bit to follow the nominal-angle trajectory of the locking hole. In the fixed-angle group, the middle hole of the distal row was left unoccupied, which meant that in this group, too, four distal screws were used. In the polyaxial group, all the four distal screw holes were occupied. A pilot hole was then drilled through the elongated hole in the proximal part of the plates, and a conventional cortex screw was inserted eccentrically. Next, a dorsally open 30° wedge of bone was removed from a site 20 All the plating was performed by a single, experienced orthopaedic surgeon (S.R.). All the tests were performed on a universal testing machine with a 1 The specimens were sinusoidally loaded with 5–150 Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) for Windows Version 16.0.1 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Normality was tested with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov and the Shapiro–Wilk test. The The results obtained are summarised in There was no significant difference between the two groups regarding the bone mineral density (BMD) of the specimens ( In each of the two groups, one construct failed during testing: in the fixed-angle group, one plate bent at the level of the elongated hole, at 1483 cycles. In the polyaxial group, breakage of a screw caused the ulnar articular fragment to displace during final static testing ( The two-column-plate constructs with polyaxial locking showed significantly greater initial and final stiffness ( The ROM of the conventional, fixed-angle plate constructs was significantly greater than of the polyaxial plate constructs, both before ( The conventional-plate constructs showed a mean loss of reduction of 0.9 Whilst internal fixation of fractures of the distal radius has been studied by many authors, The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether a polyaxial plate provides stability to match that of conventional (fixed-angle) angle-stable constructs in a type-C fracture model. We could show that the polyaxial locking two-column plate showed significantly greater initial and final stiffness and that the ROM of the conventional, fixed-angle plate constructs was significantly greater than of the polyaxial plate constructs. Loss of stiffness during testing was significant in the polyaxial group, but not in the fixed-angle group. The conventional-plate constructs showed a significantly greater loss of reduction. The reference implant was a plating system developed specifically for the management of intra-articular fractures of the distal radius, and used as the reference device in a prior study. The results may be attributed to several causes. First, the soundness of the union between the plate and the screws allows full use to be made of the benefits of the two-column plate geometry, making it akin to the three-column concept proposed by Rikli and Regazzoni On the other hand, we have seen a significantly larger decrease in the stiffness of the polyaxial group. This phenomenon is hypothesised to be caused by a progressive failure of the polyaxial locking and was also described by Hoffmeier et al. In general, the specimens showed decreasing screw purchase and gaping of the articular fragments, during cyclic testing. To counter this tendency, stability could be enhanced by the use of a larger number of screws per fragment (the two-column plate provides two more screw holes in the second row, which were left unoccupied) and inserting a screw across the fragments via the processus styloideus radii. As screw purchase lessens, the plate may bend and the fracture model may permanently deform, as seen in this study in the closing of the dorsal wedge. In each of the two groups, there was one construct failure. The fixed-angle plate showed considerable bending at the level of the elongated hole, during cyclic testing. Failure at this least-stable site is typical with excessive stress, and is, in the authors’ experience, a common clinical observation, especially in patients, who suffer renewed trauma. In the group managed with polyaxial plating, one construct showed displacement of the ulnar articular fragment with secondary breakage of one of the screws, in the final static test, after the full range of dynamic testing had been completed. The specimen concerned had displayed considerable elastic deformation of up to 6 In common with other biomechanical tests, this study had certain limitations. The method used in the study should have sufficed to answer the question posed and to test our hypothesis. However, the test employed was a gross simplification of the physiological patterns involved. Thus, the increasing bony union that would be expected to occur The intra-articular fracture model used in the present study (AO classification 23 C2.1) has been used by other authors. The determination and alignment of the bone axis were performed as described by Trease et al. The number of cycles was taken from the studies by Liporace et al., The full angular range of screw interlocking provided by the polyaxial plate was not used in this study. Further studies should be performed to investigate screw–head interlocking over the full locking cone provided. In conclusion, both fixation techniques tested apply sufficient stabilisation to restore anatomy after intra-articular-type distal radial fractures, and should be individually chosen, according to distinct criteria. The polyaxial radius plate investigated in this biomechanical study showed higher construct stiffness and superior properties under cyclic loading, and, therefore, was found to be a reliable and technically mature device. Clinical studies will be required for a definitive assessment. All authors disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. There is no conflict of interest including employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/registrations and grants or other funding.