Screens, which provide better separation efficiencies compared to hydrocyclones, have been attracted the attention of minerals industry for many years. However, low capacity in fine screening applications has limited the use of screens to classify the ball mill product in wet grinding circuits. In recent years, the separation efficiency of fine particles in a small footprint has been largely increased by the advances in high-frequency screening technology, thus increasing the use of screens to close fine wet grinding circuits. The potential of high-frequency fine screens to improve overall circuit performance was evaluated in this paper using lead-zinc ore grinding data. Data come from circuits at the lead-zinc mine in Turkey where both high-frequency screens and hydrocyclones are used to close grinding circuits. The ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit and the ball mill-screen circuit were sampled in order to measure and compare the performance of the circuits. The ball mills are different in design. Therefore, simulation studies were carried out to eliminate the differences in factors affecting the performance of the circuits such as milling conditions. Data indicated that using high-frequency screens in place of hydrocyclones in grinding circuit improves throughput by reducing the circulating load. Lower by-pass and sharper separation provided by high-frequency screens are the major factors affecting the capacity of the circuit and the results showed that 13% more throughput is achieved with 15% less grinding energy when hydrocyclones are replaced by high-frequency fine screens.The effect of classification in a grinding circuit has been very well understood over the years in minerals industry. Capacity of the mill to achieve the target product size mainly depends on the classification efficiency and it has been well recognized that improved classification efficiency in a closed grinding circuit results in reduced energy consumption with increased mill capacity. The performance of grinding circuit with respect to classification efficiency has been investigated by many researchers ( Classification in minerals industry has been dominated by hydrocyclones for more than sixty years. In early days, mechanical classifiers have been used to close the wet grinding circuits and then replaced by hydrocyclones for cost effective operations. Hydrocyclones are capable of handling high flowrates in a small footprint, able to cope well with the varying flow rates, and low in capital cost. Therefore, ball mill in closed circuit with hydrocyclones have become the most common design in minerals industry. Hydrocyclones are still widely used in all types of wet grinding circuits although their inefficiency. They produce high by-pass, poor sharpness, and high circulating loads. In contrast to hydrocyclones, there was little use of screens in grinding circuits due to blinding problems and high surface area requirement. However, the advances in high-frequency mechanisms and screen surfaces with very small apertures have overcome those problems to some extent and the interest in screen classification is then renewed. In this paper the emphasis is on the separation efficiency of the high-frequency screens in comparison with hydrocyclones. Data from a lead-zinc mine where high-frequency screens and hydrocyclones are used to close ball mills was evaluated through simulation and the impact of the separation efficiency on the overall performance of the circuits was discussed. Grinding plant at the lead-zinc mine prepares feed to flotation circuit and consists of five ball mills in parallel operating in closed circuit. One of the grinding circuits is operating with hydrocyclones to classify the mill product while the others are operating with Derrick® high-frequency screens, the so-called Stack Sizer® with 5 decks. Each deck consists of two screen panels of approximately 1.22 × 0.76 m (48 × 30″) each. The circuit closed with hydrocyclones and one of the circuits closed with high-frequency screens were considered for data collection. Sampling campaigns were conducted around the circuits in order to characterize the performance of the classifiers and the mills. The circuit layouts with the sampling points of ball mill-hydrocyclone and ball mill-screen and are illustrated in Sampling surveys were performed while the mills were operating at steady state. First the slurry samples were collected and then a belt cut was taken at the end of the survey to sample the feed material. The percent solids and the particle size distributions of the samples were determined to provide data for mass balancing. The particle size analyses were made by wet sieving followed by analysis of the sub 38 µm size using wet laser sizing technique. In the ball mill-screen circuit, the ball mill product is fed to three parallel high-frequency screens and each screen was sampled, but during the data analysis the total classification performance of the screens were considered and compared with hydrocyclone classification. In the ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit, two cyclones were running and combined streams of underflow and overflow were sampled. Operating conditions of the circuits during the survey are given in The particle size distributions and percent solids of the samples were mass balanced and the flowrates around the circuits were calculated. JKSimMet® was used to mass balance the survey data. Calculated and measured particle size distributions for ball mill-hydrocyclone and ball mill-screen circuit are given in Flowrates and percent solids around the screen in Mass balance results preliminarily showed that the ball mill-screen circuit is producing more final product and running with low circulating load as a result of sharper separation with low by-pass provided by high-frequency screening (  The ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit was modelled for the survey condition and it is referred to as base case simulation. Then, ball mill in the ball mill-screen circuit was modelled and its calculated model parameters were used in place of that of the ball mill in closed circuit with cyclones to simulate the mill design and milling conditions. The goal in the simulations was to determine the new circuit capacity that gives the same product size obtained in base case simulation. Feed from the ball-mill screen circuit, which is slightly coarser, was used as an input stream to the ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit and simulations were conducted until achieving the base case product size.  Nageswararao’s model includes dimensionless variables to correlate the design parameters and operating conditions of the hydrocyclone, i.e. capacity-pressure drop, corrected cut size, and water split. Details of the equations describing the performance of a hydrocyclone can be found in Both the Whiten model and the Nageswararao model have proved their success and they are widely used in grinding and classification circuit simulations. JKSimMet®, in which these models are incorporated, was used for modelling and simulation purposes. Simulation outputs then led to an accurate comparison of the ball mill-hydrocyclone and ball mill-screen circuit for the same milling conditions. Since the same ore type has been processed through the circuits, a default breakage function represented in After base case simulation of ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit, the ball mill in ball mill-screen circuit was modelled. Simulation studies aimed to determine the maximum achievable capacity of the ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit in case when it is fitted with the ball mill in ball mill-screen circuit. In this study, r/d* was fitted for the ball mill in the ball mill-screen circuit and used to simulate the capacity increase in ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit. The r/d* is a function of not only mill design parameters but also milling conditions such as ball charge composition and liner performance. Therefore, r/d* indicates the grinding performance of a ball mill for the given design and operating conditions. The r/d* values of the ball mills showed that size reduction efficiency of the ball mill in ball mill-screen circuit is higher at coarser sizes than that of the ball mill in ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit ( The original product of the ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit is the target product to be achieved during simulations whereas feed to the ball mill-screen circuit is used as a fresh feed. During simulations, one more cyclone was open to accommodate increased circulating load. The percent solids of the feed to the cyclones was finely tuned by adjusting the amount of water added and the model successfully settled to the correct pressure. Comparison of the circuits on the basis of classifiers’ efficiency regardless of the grinding performance requires eliminating the differences in milling conditions of the circuits. For this purpose, simulation was utilized and r/d* of the ball mill in closed circuit with hydrocyclones was replaced with that of ball mill in ball mill-screen circuit. Higher r/d* results in finer mill product leading to a reduction in circulating load; hence, enabling the introduction of more new feed to the circuit. Simulation results showed that the ball mill-hydrocyclone circuit runs at 46 tph after replacing the existing ball mill with the one in the ball mill-screen circuit. Then, it can be concluded for this case, that replacing the hydrocyclones by high-frequency screens to close the same ball mill circuit increased the circuit capacity from 46 tph to 52 tph which corresponds to 13% more throughput. Besides its impact on circuit capacity, high-frequency fine screening reduces the specific grinding energy of the circuit. In Sharper separation with low by-pass provided by high-frequency screening reduces the circulating load from approximately 400% ( Case studies presented by Results presented in this paper showed that 13% more capacity with 15% less milling energy is achieved with three Derrick® high-frequency screens fitted with 210 µm panels. As can be seen from Efficiency of the classification in a closed grinding circuit is the key factor to improve overall performance of the circuit. Screens that separate on the basis of size only offer more efficient classification compared to hydrocyclones which classify the particles according to size and specific gravity. Classifying the particles according to size and specific gravity results in misplaced particles when processing the ores with minerals of different specific gravity. Misplaced particles, mostly appear in classifying multi-density particles, cause high by-pass in hydrocyclone classification that leads to high circulating load and therefore overgrinding of denser minerals. In contrast to hydrocyclones, screens provide better separation efficiencies with low by-pass reducing the circulating load that leads to utilize the mill capacity. This study demonstrated that replacement of hydrocyclones with high-frequency fine screens results in 13% increase in capacity and 15% reduction in grinding energy for this particular case. The benefits of high-frequency fine screening in grinding and classification stages was discussed in this paper but potential benefits in downstream flotation stage of the lead-zinc mine was not investigated within the scope of this study. However, it is reported in literature that narrowly sized product and reduced overgrinding improve the performance of the downstream processes such as flotation, gravity separation and dewatering. It should also be noted that high-frequency fine screens are limited in capacity, higher cost than hydrocyclones and sensitive to variations in feed conditions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Author would like to thank Prof. Alban Lynch (Emeritus Professor, UQ, Australia) for his contributions, Ali Türkistanlı and Inan Çağlar (Eczacibasi Esan, Turkey), Berkan Arabacılar (MTM Makina, Turkey) for their support in collecting data, Alper Toprak and Deniz Altun (Hacettepe University, Turkey) for their assistance in sample processing. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: