Oxygen transfer reactions on carbon surfaces are of great interest for a variety of industries, as well as for the development of new technologies (e.g., NO gas detectors). They are also at the heart of the chemical surface properties and behavior of graphene-based materials. In this study we use quantum chemistry to discover the most probable ground and transition states of reactants, surface intermediates and products in the transfer of oxygen from nitric oxide and O2 to form N2 and CO/CO2. The graphene-NO reaction is more complex and dependent on site availability. Whereas O2 chemisorption is barrierless, adsorption of NO is a complex function of geometric and electronic factors. Thus, the desorption of N2 is highly favored both kinetically (from a C(NN) complex and O-down adsorption of N2O) and thermodynamically (especially via the N2O intermediate). These results are analogous to the experimental findings with a potassium catalyst. Adsorption of the NO dimer on H-saturated sites may account for the reversible chemisorption at low temperatures. These findings allowed us to propose a concise mechanism of oxygen transfer, which highlights the similarities and differences with respect to the graphene-O2 reaction. It is also consistent with the experimentally observed concentration dependence of these reactions.The reaction of graphene-based materials with nitric oxide is known to be important in carbon-based fuel combustion, as a solution to one of its most persistent air pollution problems (e.g., in NO Such findings have improved our understanding of the C–NO reaction. In our earlier report Density functional theory (DFT), as implemented in the Gaussian 03 quantum mechanics software The DFT model chemistry selected was B3LYP with the 6-31G(d) basis set as a reasonable compromise between chemical rigor and computational time. We compared the changes in self-consistent-field (SCF) energy (with, E Complementary molecular orbital analyses were made with the use of Chemissian software In Sections  Only for the O-down NO adsorption, in out-of-plane approach, have we found a transition state (TSI); for the surface rearrangement, however, the transition state (TSII) connects in each case the in-plane intermediate (Int. I) to the out-of-plane product. It is interesting to note that N-down adsorption of NO, like that of O The key structural aspects of the pathways shown in The mechanistic implication of the results summarized above (to be discussed in more detail in Section In our previous work The high-energy-barrier steps for the triplet NO adsorption path correspond to second monomer adsorption (TSI) and N The results for NO interaction with three contiguous sites  As a further perspective on the similarities and differences between the fates of NO and O Although H-saturated edges are not the (re)active sites  In an important experimental study, Teng and Suuberg  If N The process of N Finally, In our previous report Based on such considerations, the following mechanism is proposed to be necessary      Once the carbon-oxygen surface intermediates are formed, their fate is identical to that of analogous intermediates in the graphene-O Reaction F3 (see Pathway A represents dead-end adsorption (as far as the graphene-NO The five consecutive steps in pathway B account for the formation of the intermediate C(NNO), a more probable event than the formation of C(ONO) -- we explored the interaction of NO with the oxygen of a semi-quinone group -- and its rearrangement to facilitate the desorption of more The relative importance of these pathways can be assessed by comparison with reasonably well established facts and/or emblematic experimental results. In the discussion that follows, together with that provided heretofore, we claim a representative rather than comprehensive analysis of the relevant literature. A convenient point of departure for comparison with experiments The intuitively appealing argument regarding the key difference between triplet O It should be noted that pathway D accounts for irreversible chemisorption Reversible chemisorption of NO can thus occur both at a zigzag edge and on a relatively small portion of the basal plane surface: the typically reported uptakes – e.g., 3 mmol/g The theoretical conclusion by Zhang et al. All the important kinetic and mechanistic features of the reaction of NO with graphene-based materials can be understood by considering the interaction of its monomer and dimer with one, two or three zigzag sites. The desorption stage is strikingly similar to that of O This study was supported by