Fractures of the talar body are rare. Most are coronal or sagittal plane fractures. We present the case of a patient who sustained a simultaneous comminuted sagittal and coronal fracture of the body of the talus involving the postero-medial quadrant of the body with a fracture of the medial malleolus. He was treated with open reduction and internal fixation of the talus. Access was gained utilizing the medial malleolar fracture. At review after 6 months, he has returned to full function with no complications.A 16-year-old boy fell off his motorbike at low velocity sustaining an axial compression injury with rotation of his right ankle. On examination, the injury was closed and without neurovascular deficit. Plain radiograph of the ankle showed a displaced, oblique fracture of the medial malleolus extending into the mortice with an associated comminuted fracture of the talar body. ( A CT scan demonstrated a talar body postero-medial quadrant fracture with a fracture line in both the coronal and sagittal plane ( An open reduction and internal fixation of the talar body was performed to restore joint anatomy. The medial malleolar fracture was identified and reflected distally, thus acting as a medial malleolar osteotomy for exposure of the ankle joint. There was a postero-medial quadrant fracture (16×18 mm The medial malleolar fracture was reduced anatomically and secured with two lag screws. Dynamic screening confirmed full ankle range of movements. Postoperatively the patient was mobilised non-weight bearing for 8 weeks. At 6-month review, he has made a full recovery and there is no evidence of avascular necrosis or collapse. ( Fractures of the talus are rare constituting 3–6% of all foot fractures Talar fractures are potentially devastating injuries due to their inherent risk of long term disability from ankle osteoarthritis and due to the risk of osteonecrosis. The rate of osteonecrosis of the talar body is related to the soft tissue disruption of the tibio-talar joint, energy of injury and vascular damage Simultaneous fracture of the ankle and talus occurs in up to 1% of ankle fractures Sneppen type 2 shearing, talar body fractures are classified as sagittal or coronal, not both as we report. The mechanism of injury of these fractures is not clear but is thought to be similar to that of talar neck fractures, i.e. dorsiflexion but with added axial compression. These injuries may also be associated with subtalar joint subluxation or dislocation and CT is further recommended to look for this Displaced talar dome fractures should undergo open reduction and internal fixation as the outcome depends on the accuracy of reduction When managing ankle trauma it is vital to recognise the presence of talar body fractures and proceed to CT scanning with two-dimensional reconstruction so that accurate diagnosis can be made and surgical therapy implemented. This exceptional case reports a hitherto unrecognised biplanar talar body quadrant fracture with a simultaneous fracture of the medial malleolus. It demonstrates that with prompt, appropriate radiological investigation including CT scanning and timely surgery a highly satisfactory outcome can be achieved.