Glucometer electrochemical test strips (GETSs) required for the self-measurement of blood glucose by diabetic patients are designed for single use and expensive. Glucose monitoring portable electronic devices using GETSs is based on the principle of electrocatalysis. Used test strips are of considerable volume and hence require proper disposal and also recovery and recycling of the valuable metals present. In the present work, a mixture of H2O2–HCl was used for the leaching of palladium from GETSs. Effect of experimental parameters such as concentration of H2O2, HCl and waste to leachant ratio, contact time was investigated in detail to optimize the percentage extraction. The extracted palladium was supported on an amine functionalised chitosan. The supported palladium was utilized as an electrochemical sensor for nitrobenzene. Analytical techniques such as FT-IR, ICP-AES, FEG-SEM-EDS, TEM, XRD and UV-visible spectrophotometry were used for the characterization of the supported metal.An effective recovery of precious metals from secondary resources is an economically important process from the point of environmental concern and sustainable utilization of resources. Recovered metals such as gold and palladium can be used in various industrial processes ( Self monitoring of blood glucose level became popular in 1970 with test strips made for visual evaluation. For optimal management of diabetes, one can measure and record blood glucose levels with a glucometer kit ( Nitrobenzene (NB) is used extensively in organic industries, petroleum refineries, and in the production of insecticides, herbicides, soaps and shoe polishes. The maximum permissible limit of NB in drinking water is 17 Here, we report the recovery of palladium from used glucometer test strips and its further use in the preparation of palladium supported on amine functionalised chitosan (Pd-AFCHT) by reported method. The prepared composite was used as an electrochemical sensor for nitrobenzene. Used glucometer strips (Accu-Check) were collected from a local pathology laboratory as well as purchased from authorized pharmacies. Hydrochloric acid (36%) and hydrogen peroxide (30%, ICP-AES analysis were carried out with ARCOS M/s spectro, German with R. F. generator at maximum of 1.6 kW, 27.12 5.0 Amine functionalization of chitosan was done as reported ( 100 Colloidal solution (2.0 wt%) of the respective materials (AFCHT or Pd-AFCHT) was dispersed in double distilled water by ultra-sonication for 20 In chloride solution, chloro-complex of Pd (IV) and Pd (VI) with coordination numbers 4 and 6 are formed. The Eh-pH diagram of Pd-Cl system is given in H Thus, Cl The influence of the concentrations of hydrogen peroxide and hydrochloric acid were studied by varying the concentration of hydrochloric acid while keeping the concentration of hydrogen peroxide fixed and vice versa. Increase in leaching of palladium was observed in presence of 1.0% H Stabilization and dispersion of palladium particles in the colloidal solution can be due to the formation of co-ordination bonds between functional groups such as –NH  The Ipc (cathodic peak current) increases linearly with √ Herein, we report the recovery of palladium from used glucometer electrochemical test strips using H The prepared composite was used for electrochemical sensing of nitrobenzene. Pd-AFCHT showed improved electrochemical response towards nitrobenzene with 37 mV positive shift in reduction potential and 1.3 fold increases in peak current as compared to unsupported palladium. Sensing limit was 12.0 Authors are thankful to University Grant Commission (UGC) for providing Junior Research Fellowship under Special Assistance Programme and UGC Basic Scientific Research grant.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at