The aim of this study was to develop an apple snack which function as a probiotic carrier. For this purpose, apple slices were impregnated with Lactobacillus paracasei and dried with either convectional or vacuum drying at 45 °C, then stored for 28 days at 4 °C. The inoculation level of probiotics was 7.42 and 7.99 log CFU/g and the population remained above 6 and 7 log CFU/g after vacuum and oven drying, respectively. SEM images demonstrated well adaptation of the bacterial cells. The total phenolic content and antioxidant capacity of control vacuum dried (CVD), probiotic vacuum dried (PVD), control oven dried (CCD), and probiotic oven dried (PCD) apple samples were 2.96, 3.94, 2.42 and 3.77 mg GAE/g and 4.66, 6.06, 4.67, 5.61 mg TAEC/g dry matter at the end of the storage, respectively. Vacuum dried apple samples (CVD) had higher sensory acceptability (P < 0.05) compared to CD apple samples, no significant difference was found between control and probiotic-enriched apples. Impregnation of the probiotic culture on apple slices did not significantly (P > 0.05) change color of the dried apple samples. In conclusion, probiotic-enriched dried apple snacks were successfully produced with acceptable sensorial and bioactive properties and good carrier of L. paracasei.Availability of fruit and vegetables in diet has increased in recent years due to the increasing consumer demand for minimally processed and healthier food. Fruit and vegetables are characterized with numerous health advantages such as being low calorie, high dietary fiber content and abundancy of nutritional materials including vitamins and minerals ( Probiotics are defined as living microorganisms that are beneficial to health if they are taken at sufficient numbers into the body via foods ( Fresh apple fruits (var. Granny Smith) were supplied from a local market in Istanbul, Turkey. The fruits were selected considering their freshness, color, size and absence of microbial or mechanical damage. DPPH• (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical) and Folin & Ciocalteu's reagent were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. (USA). MRS Broth and MRS Agar were obtained from Merck (Germany). Firstly, apples were washed using tap water by gently scrubbing with hands and peeled with a knife. Then, they cut into disc shaped samples (5 mm thickness with 15 mm diameter) at vertical axis. In order to prevent enzymatic browning during drying and storage, the apple slices were kept at 80 °C for 2 min for enzymatic inactivation with indirect heating using a water bath. In this study, In this study, apple slices were dried using two different methods, vacuum and convectional drying. Drying process was performed using an oven (Memmert UF 110, Germany) and a vacuum dryer (Daihan WOV-30, Gangwon-do, South Korea) at 45 °C until reaching a moisture content of ≤12%. The vacuum and conventional drying periods were approx. 4.5 h and 6 h, respectively. The vacuum was regulated by a vacuum pump (EVP 2XZ-2C, Zhejiang, China) with 6 kPa ultimate pressure and 2 L/s pump speed at 45 °C and also the flow rate of the convection oven was 1.3 mb/s constant air velocity. Eventually, 4 types of samples were produced: CVD, vacuum dried control sample; PVD, vacuum dried probiotic apple sample; CCD, oven dried control sample; and PCD, oven dried probiotic apple sample. The ptohographs of the apples slices before and after drying are given in Following the drying process, the apple samples (100 ± 2 g) were put into the closed-lid plastic polyethylene (LDPE) bags and stored at 4 °C for 4 weeks. Analyses were performed at one-week intervals. For enumeration of In order to reveal the change in bioactive properties of the probiotic apple slices during storage, their total phenolic contents and antioxidant activities were analyzed. For this purpose, 2 g of the apple samples was incorporated with 40 mL of 80% methanol (v/v) and mixed at room temperature for 36 h using a mechanic stirrer at 200 rpm. The methanolic extracts were obtained by filtration of the mixtures using Whatman filter paper (0.45 μm pore size, 47 mm diam., hydrophilic) and used in the bioactive property assays. The total phenolic content of dried apple samples was determined according to the method described by Determination of antioxidant activity was performed according to The water activity of the dried probiotic apple samples was measured using a water activity meter (Novasina, LabTouch-aw, Switzerland). The Hunter color parameters were measured with a chroma meter (CR-400, Konica Minolta, Japan) using an illuminant D65 and the 10° observer angle. The color values of the samples were expressed as In order to check the success of the probiotic impregnation process and attachment of the bacteria on the intercellular parts of the apple slices, the SEM imaging was performed using a SEM device (Zeiss, EVO Sensory evaluation was performed using hedonic test methodology with 10 untrained panelists comprised from 6 females and 4 males at the ages of 25–30. The panelists assessed the color, structure and texture, odor, taste and flavor, chewiness and general acceptability parameters of the samples by giving scores from 5 to 1 (5 points, extremely good and 1 being extremely poor). Mean values and standard deviations of the data were calculated using Excel software (Microsoft Office 2016). Statistical analysis was carried out using a Windows based statistical analysis software (SAS 9.0, SAS Institute. Inc. Cary, NC, USA) with one-way and two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Differences between the data were evaluated by using Duncan's multiple comparison test at a significance level of 95%. All the analyses were carried out in triplicate. In this study,  The total phenolic content and the antioxidant capacity of the probiotic-enriched apples were also analyzed based on DPPH radical scavenging activity. The results are presented in Water activity is an indicator for microbial and physicochemical changes in food systems with low moisture ( Considering the effect of water activity on survival of the probiotic strains, bacterial numbers of convectional dried apple samples were found higher than those of vacuum dried apple samples ( In this study, In this study, probiotic enriched apple slices were produced as an alternative healthy snack food for human consumption. Therefore, it is crucial that probiotic apple snacks should have acceptable sensorial quality properties. SEM micromorphology of the control and probiotic enriched apple slices was analyzed in order to observe the surface structure of the dried apples and the presence/attachment of SEM micrographs of all samples at the beginning of the storage and at the 28 In this study, apple slices which were enriched with