A method for recycling aluminium alloy chips by cold and hot pressing followed by hot extrusion was studied as well as the possibility of using this method to recycle aluminium matrix composite chips. Hot extrusion of cold or hot pressed samples could satisfactorily promote the consolidation of the chips. Hot extrusion of hot pressed samples proved to be the best route, from the point of view of mechanical properties, but, on the other hand, hot extrusion of cold pressed samples route has higher cost profit. Aluminium AA6061 matrix composite reinforced with Al2O3 recycled by cold pressing and hot extrusion was compared with the primary material produced by conventional casting process from which the chips were obtained. Due to the refinement of the microstructure and the dispersion of the aluminium oxide caused by the extrusion process, the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and the hardness were higher for the recycled material than for the former composite.The chips deriving from the machining of semi-finished aluminium products are very difficult to recycle by conventional methods due to their elongated spiral shape, small size, surface contamination with oxides, machining oil, etc. In the recent years, some alternative processes have been suggested to recycle aluminium chips by powder metallurgical techniques. Zapata et al. These alternative recycling processes have in common the material transformation from chips to powder by milling. In this work a new technique is employed: recycling the material directly from the chips by cold or hot pressing followed by hot extrusion, avoiding the milling step, what results in a more economic recycling process. This new technique can also be employed to recycle chips deriving from aluminium matrix composites machining, what is still more difficult to obtain by other techniques. To optimise the process, aluminium alloy chips with unknown composition were employed. Once defined the optimum process, AA6061 aluminium alloy reinforced with Al Aluminium alloy chips were cold pressed at different pressures to determine the compressibility curve. A floating cylindrical die with 25 Hot extrusion was carried out at 500 cold pressed chips (650 hot pressed (500 The hot consolidated materials were characterised by optical and electronic microscopy, energy dispersion spectrometry (EDS). Hot extruded materials were also characterised by ultimate tensile strength (UTS).       These results corroborate that the material is properly consolidated. The difference between the extruded material from the cold and hot pressed chips is not significant, from the point of view of the statistics values. Although hot pressing and extrusion route can produce higher UTS medium value, the reduced costs of the cold pressing and hot extrusion route makes this route the optimum process from the point of view of the cost benefit ratio. The recycling process employed with the aluminium matrix composite was the optimum process defined with the aluminium chips: cold pressing followed by hot extrusion.  This alternative process was tested and developed and is able to recycle aluminium chips without the necessity of chips transformation into powder through milling. This alternative process is able to recycle aluminium composite chips without the segregation of the reinforcement phase. Authors would like to thank “Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid” for financial support.