The growing demand for biomass for energy use has led equipment manufacturers to focus their attention on the management of pruning wastes and on finding solutions for recovering such a huge amount of biomass. The first attempt consisted of adapting mulchers, which were used to incorporate these wastes into the soil; interest later shifted towards chippers and balers, which were able to produce a high-grade fuel. Two innovative prototypes for pruning waste collection were developed within the EuroPruning Project: a baler (PRB 1.75) designed by PIMR research institute (Poland), and a chipper (PC50) designed by the machine manufacturer ONG s. n.c. (Italy) with the scientific support of the CREA-IT institute (Italy). The main goal was to design special machines to harvest multiple types of pruning wastes from permanent crops and to build a sustainable and cost-effective supply chain. Both prototypes showed encouraging results. Their performances were largely comparable with those reported for similar machines, showing values of losses ranging from 36.2 to 46.2% and a maximum productivity of 2.80 (PC50) and 3.03 tfm h−1 (PRB1.75). Moreover, the particle size distribution in the feedstock produced by the chipper PC50 complies with the international standard for the commercial category P45. This study reports on the performance of both prototypes and the quality of the product obtained during the preliminary harvest-pruning tests carried out in vineyards and in peach and apple orchards.Energy biomass can be sourced from existing agricultural wastes, thus offering a strategic benefit wherever it is impractical to convert cropland to energy crop cultivation [ In several areas of Europe the largest pieces of pruned wood are used for ﬁrewood. Farmers usually obtain ﬁrewood pieces from thick branches, over 50 mm in diameter, using chainsaws and gathering the ﬁrewood manually or with a trailer [ Due to the lack of a well-organized pruning biomass supply chain in Europe, there is no real market for pruning wastes (<50 mm). Therefore, small branches and shoots that have been pruned are usually left on the ground uncollected, and are neither chipped nor used for energy production (except in rare cases); they are simply removed from the orchard, and then piled up and disposed of or piled up and burned at the side of the ﬁeld. Otherwise, pruning wastes are mulched and left on the ground and/or incorporated into the soil. The branch removal phase is usually carried out by a tractor equipped with a fork or a similar device which pushes the pruned branches down the rows up to an edge of the ﬁeld. Pruning wastes can also be left on the soil after mulching. Mulchers are mounted at the back of the tractor on a three-point hitch and are supplied with the power take-off (PTO) of the tractor [ In recent years, agricultural equipment manufacturers have focused their attention on the management of pruning wastes and offered different solutions which mainly rely on shredding and baling technologies [ The goal of this study was to determine the performance of both prototypes and the quality of the product obtained during the preliminary harvest-pruning tests carried out in vineyards and peach orchards in Italy (using the chipper) and in apple orchards in Poland (using the baler). These prototypes were not tested head-to-head on the same field, and no commercial machines were used as controls during the tests. Therefore, the study was not comparative but was aimed at determining the performance and functionality of each prototype, and to assess how mechanical innovations affected the product quality. The tests were carried out in Poland and Italy. In both cases, before the test, pruning wastes were characterized by diameter and length ( The PRB 1.75 baler ( The harvesting tests with the PC50 towed by a 66 kW Lamborghini 904 DT Turbo tractor ( The Pruning Round Baler (PRB) was designed to windrow and press into bales pruning wastes from permanent crops in different conditions and on different types of ground ( The windrower, which gathers together the pruned material at the centre of the row in one passage. It is equipped with two hydraulic rotary heads (collectors of branches) which make it possible to work in different field conditions and on the pruning wastes of various permanent crops. The pick-up system. This has a pick-up rotor – adjustable in height from the control panel in the tractor – which can be adapted to the different types of pruning wastes. The feeding rotor, which conveys the branches from the pick-up into the baling chamber, while separating soil particles and leaves, which are dropped to the ground. The rolling chamber, where bales of constant volume (1.2 m × 1.2 m) are produced by means of chains and rollers. A control system inside the tractor's cab, which can be used to adjust some operating parameters. The round bales produced can be wrapped with binding twine or net and then transferred to an open tailgate. Due to their shape, round bales are easy to store, transport, and process. The chipper (PC50) has an innovative chipping system based on an auger fitted with a helicoidal knife. This machine was designed for windrowing, picking, conveying, chipping, and discharging the final product into big bags, tilting boxes, or to an accompanying trailer ( The prototype is 1750 mm wide, 3900 mm long, 3100 mm high, and weighs 2200 kg. It is made of five main parts, all manufactured and assembled by the company ONG [ The windrowing system. The scattered pruning wastes are conveyed to a central windrow by two counter-rotating cylindrical rakes placed frontally at both sides of the machine. These rakes are mounted onto mechanically regulated movable arms for tuning the working width. The pick-up system, which collects the pruned material off of the ground by means of an 18-tooth roller (1570 mm wide). The height is adjustable from the control panel in the tractor. The feeding system, which conveys the pruned material towards the chipping device. It is made of an central chain above and two toothed counter-rotating rollers (CRR) placed below the chain. They are 350 mm long, with a diameter of 250 mm. To obtain a homogeneous product, the CRR pushes the pruned material longitudinally towards the chipping device. The speed of the feed rollers, windrowing rollers, and pick-up roller can be adjusted by the hydraulic system. The rotation speed of the rollers can be set for producing chips of a specific size. The higher the speed of counter-rotating rollers, the greater the size (length) of the chips. In the event of clogging, the movement of the chain, rollers, and pick-up can be reversed. Pruning wastes are chipped by a double-auger mounting blades. This solution has been developed to obtain a sharp wood cut and to require a minimum tractor power. The PC50 is able to cut branches up to a maximum diameter of 50 mm. The average length of the cut product can be hydraulically regulated from 20 to 100 mm. Chips are discharged through a gooseneck at a height of 2500 mm from the ground; its mouth can be rotated from the tractor cab by means of an electro-hydraulic control system. The system was designed to achieve the utmost versatility through a number of different handling options: Big bag: chips are discharged into a breathable plastic bag, held by the prototype. Machine tilting box: a container (3 m Trailer towed by the prototype: when operating on flat land with a large headland, the prototype can tow a dump trailer into which chips are discharged directly from the gooseneck; Side tractor-trailer unit: in this configuration, chips are unloaded into a trailer with an upper sideboard, which is towed by another tractor moving alongside the machine. Although these machines were conceptually different, a common data collection method was used during the harvesting tests to acquire the whole set of parameters required for both. Concerning the tests with the PRB 1.75 machine, branches from a total of 2 ha of the orchard were collected and baled during field tests of 2014 and 2016, one field test per year was performed. Regarding the tests with the PC 50 machine, prunings from a total of 0.65 ha and 0.26 ha were collected during one field test on vineyard and one on peach, respectively. All operations were analysed following the CIOSTA (Comité International d’Organisation Scientifique du Travail en Agriculture) method and the recommendations of the Italian Society of Agricultural Engineering (A.I.I.A.) 3 A R1 [ The particle size distribution of the wood chips produced by the chipper P50 was analysed following the European Standard [ The power consumption of the PRB 1.75 baler in idle state and during normal operation were monitored during the test. The power consumption was determined by measuring the torque transmitted by the PTO and its rotation speed. Torque and speed were measured by a Torque Sensor for PTO-shaft NCTE AG DFM70-3000 model – accuracy of 10 The statistical significance of the data obtained in the test performed on the PC50, after verifying the normal distributions of some acquired parameters, was analysed by ANOVA, while the Tukey test (P < 0.05) was used as a post-hoc test to separate the means. The maximum diameter of the harvest-pruned cuttings was 35.0 mm (mean 20.3 ± 12.36 mm) in 2014 and 25.5 mm (mean 12.2 ± 4.98 mm) in 2016. Pruning wastes were arranged in 1.8 m wide windrows, corresponding to the width of the baler ( The total collected biomass was 2.26 t These losses varied greatly, ranging between 24.3% in 2014 and 3.3% in 2016 ( To the best of our knowledge, no data are available in literature on the baling of pruned apple cuttings. However, some studies conducted with commercial balers reported an average biomass loss during harvesting of 21.6 and 23% on a peach orchard (palmetta tree form) with the balers Omarv 190 and Welger, respectively, and 43% on a peach orchard (Y tree form) with the Arbor RS170 baler [ The average bulk density of the bales was 180.74 kg The power consumption slowly increased from approximately 3 kW during the early stage of collecting the branches to approximately 30 kW when the bale rotating in the bale chamber was being wrapped in mesh. Fuel consumption was 2.6 l t Based on the previous data, it is possible to estimate the cost of baling. Assuming that the average price of diesel fuel in Poland was 1.2 € L According to [ The PC50 chipper worked on pruned peach cuttings with a maximum diameter of 30.0 mm (mean 21.6 ± 0.59 mm), and pruned vineyard cuttings with a maximum diameter of 20.0 mm (mean 15.3 ± 0.45 mm) ( The bulk density, a key parameter for logistics because it directly affects the cost of the biomass handling, resulted inversely correlated to the speed of the counter-rotating rollers (CRR): in both orchards the highest bulk density was obtained with the lower CRR speed (1 Hz), while the lowest bulk density was observed when 2.05 Hz of CRR was set ( As a general trend for both pruning types, the lowest CRR speed gave the lowest losses and the highest yields ( The wood fuel produced by PC50 was not mulched or frayed, highlighting the proper functioning of the chipping mechanism ( A survey among the stakeholders conducted during the EuroPruning project [ The baler and chipper prototypes tested in the present work showed encouraging results consistent with the objectives of the EuroPruning project. For the specific issue of pruned cuttings collection, the intent of the project was: i) to develop and implement a new, not-already-existing logistic chain for biomass from pruning wastes, and ii) to provide farmers with machines suitable for different logistic chains (bales or wood chip storage), also keeping in mind the logistics of the feedstock (hauling, storage, and processing) determined by the immediate comminution (wood chip) or baling. The performance of the prototypes was largely comparable to that reported for similar machines, and the PC50 produced a feedstock which meets the standard requirements. The round baler for branches (PRB 1.75) operated properly, and featured the advantage of free-standing drying, consisting of leaving the bales in a stack setup, for example, on or near an orchard. The chipper (PC50) appeared suitable for harvesting vineyard and peach pruning wastes for the production of wood chips suitable for residential use. The morphological and structural characteristics of grapevine and peach plants are fairly different. Thus, for the chipper, obtaining a product which meets the standard requirements, starting from significantly different pruning wastes, can be considered a valuable result. The chipper can be made to handle the variability of pruning wastes by changing the machine settings. One of the main outcomes was, in fact, the interaction of the pruning waste type with the mechanical setting (e.g. the speed of the counter-rotating rollers), while a specific setting adjustment might be needed for different types of pruning wastes and fruit tree shapes. Moreover, the adjustment of the counter-rotating rollers proved crucial for obtaining a feedstock which meets the international standard. Further room for improvement can be expected for biomass losses, a parameter heavily dependent on how the material is prepared to be collected and on the condition, type, shape, and thickness of the pruning waste. The losses observed for PC50 were slightly higher than average, although the results in peach orchards showed that they could be reduced by carefully setting the machine. Furthermore, in order to increase the flow of biomass to be chipped, reduce the clogging and the harvesting losses, a couple of augers at the sides of the conveying system of the PC50 will be mounted and tested in future trials. On the other hand, a great variability in losses was observed for the PRB 1.75, in this case dependent on the yearly variability of the type and amount of pruning wastes, but some adjustments have been experimented by fitting the machine with two windrowers. This work was supported by the project The authors wish to thank Mr Jerzy Mazur, Director, and the Employees of the Agriculture and Pomology Research Farm in Przybroda, an Experimental Farm of University of Life Sciences in Poznań, for the authorization to conduct the tests and for their assistance in performing them. Furthermore, we wish to thank Mr Domenico Naldoni and the employees of ONG snc for their professionalism and cooperation.