The use of internal fixation in the hand and wrist was initiated at the turn of the 20th century, Several developments can be credited for the basic shift in philosophy that has occurred: a better understanding of bone healing and the importance of stability and interfragmentary compression Credit for these advances is due to many orthopedic and plastic surgeons, but perhaps the most credit should go to trauma surgeons, including those who were war surgeons, for recognizing the deleterious secondary effects of “fracture disease” and resolving to minimize its influence on the ultimate functional outcome. The simple realization that the results of fracture treatment in the hand were not good was a crucial first step in this process. As the techniques of internal fixation in the hand have evolved, several fundamental principles have been established. Some are general and apply to all situations; others are limited in scope and specific in application. This article outlines and illustrates these principles. The reader should incorporate these principles into her or his thinking and apply them as indicated. Internal fixation can be useful in acute fracture fixation and secondary skeletal reconstruction. Although tumor surgery and secondary reconstruction sometimes pose extremely complex challenges, the most common indication for internal fixation is in acute fracture treatment. Although readers may think first of fractures, they should keep in mind that these principles apply equally elsewhere. To avoid being repetitive, we use the term The diagnosis of fractures in the hand and wrist is rarely difficult, but subtle aspects of fracture configuration or joint relationships frequently are overlooked. For this reason, it is important, if possible, to obtain a careful history of the mechanism of injury: Was it a crush, missile, torque, or axial load? The nature of the external force determines fracture configuration and may affect treatment. What are the associated injuries? The need to repair tendons, nerves, and vessels directly influences the timing and technique of fracture fixation. Finally, what is the nature of the wound? Is it “tidy,” or did the wounding agent impart debris and contaminated material to the wound? Did the crush or missile discharge energy on impact, and is there ischemic or contused soft tissue? Can the wound be closed safely, or must it be left open? In many cases, the surgeon also must make provision for wound coverage, either by a local or a distant pedicled flap or free tissue transfer. Fracture treatment always must be planned with respect for the requirements of soft tissue repair. The reverse is also true. The experienced surgeon usually can glean all the information he or she needs from a careful history and examination. Often a digital nerve block or wrist block permits painless motion and allows an accurate assessment of alignment and the detection of rotation deformities (Figure 1). Standard x-rays, taken in several planes, provide specific details and corroborate clinical impressions. Frequently, x-rays can be obtained after the patient has been anesthetized. This practice eliminates pain and allows careful positioning, providing optimal visualization of fractures. The primary reason for treating a fracture operatively is to improve the ultimate functional result.  A considerable body of literature exists on bone healing and, specifically, the importance of interfragmentary compression. Kirschner wires (K-wires) are a commonly used form of internal fixation and have many advantages: They are quick and easy to insert, and they are cheap. They are not compressive, however, and may loosen with time. Nevertheless, K-wire fixation is often adequate treatment. When correctly applied, as described by Belsky et al, The ideal state for the hand requires and depends on sensation, motion, and, most of all, use. When activity is limited or eliminated, there ensues an abnormal secondary state, characterized initially by pain, edema, and induration but progressing eventually to soft tissue atrophy and joint stiffness. Although this sequence is incompletely understood and its treatment is often piecemeal at best, it is well recognized. It is fracture disease, and the preferred treatment is to prevent it. The injured hand must be guided steadily toward a state of movement and use at the earliest possible date and must progress as rapidly as bone stability and healing permit. Experience has shown that this prevention is accomplished best when the fractures are stabilized, allowing earlier rehabilitation of soft tissue. Fracture fixation and bone carpentry must always be considered in the context of the wound in which they occur, whether induced by trauma or by surgical incision. Inherent in this principle is the notion of timing of bone fixation. If tissue viability is uncertain or the adequacy of wound déebridement cannot be ensured at the time of initial surgery, it is more prudent to débride and dress the wound open, stabilize bone in the simplest and most expeditious manner, and return for bone fixation and delayed primary wound closure within a few days. There has been a move away from obligatory secondary reconstruction of bone and soft tissue since World War II. At that time, wounds were débrided one or more times and subsequently closed. Several months later, after scar had softened and matured, wounds were reentered, and secondary reconstruction of bone, tendon, or nerve was performed. More recently, immediate reconstruction within the first several days of wounding has been made possible by antibiotics, careful débridement, and a better understanding of how to manage the surgically contaminated but uninfected wound. The importance of precise technique and gentle handling of tissue cannot be overstated because the effects of tissue trauma are cumulative. In performing bone fixation, surgeons must avoid rough handling, excessive stripping of periosteum, wound desiccation, and overuse of cautery, which all increase tissue injury. Curtis noted that “the surgeon should slip into the hand and slip out again without the hand knowing that he has been there.” This advice remains pertinent today, especially in patients in whom wounding already has produced considerable soft tissue damage. Fixation must be good enough to permit movement, but need not be excessive (Figure 3). Surgeons must have an array of techniques at their disposal (Table 2). A screw consists of a Bone may be drilled to either the core diameter or the thread diameter. If the former is selected, the drill hole must be tapped, either by a self-tapping screw or by a tap. If the screw hole is the same diameter as the thread of a screw, it becomes a The To lag a screw successfully, a fracture line must be oblique to the long axis, and the fracture length should be at least twice the diameter of the bone. In a long bone, a single screw prevents The The tension band, either wires or a plate, must be positioned dorsal to the mid axis of a bone and is configured in such a way that it stabilizes the dorsal cortex of the bone and resists separation. As the patient actively flexes the fingers, the force of flexion on the annular pulleys is transmitted directly to the attached bone, and the vectors of force are through the volar cortex toward one another. Because the dorsal cortex is fixed by the tension band, the effect is to force the volar cortices against each other and, by this process, produce compression of the fragments. The exact configuration of the tension band can vary with the individual fracture. Although the crossed wire over the dorsal cortex commonly is used, the dorsal interosseous wire A specific form of interosseous wiring, the “90-90” technique, is useful, especially for arthrodesis, replantation, and transverse fractures. Although not a tension band, it provides a stable enough construct through compression to permit immediate motion (Figure 9). In the hand, a No. 28 gauge wire is adequate for a tension band in small phalanges and a No. 26 wire serves in larger phalanges and metacarpals. Rotation frequently can be controlled and stability augmented by accurately fitting jagged edges of fracture fragments together. If uncertain, a temporary diagonal K-wire is recommended. The technique of two parallel K-wires through the dorsal cortices for tension band construction is probably excessive for routine use in the hand and largely has been abandoned, but the “sidewinder” technique of Belsole  Plates come in a variety of shapes and sizes, but their ultimate function depends on the mode of application, not their shape. A plate may serve the function of To secure a plate firmly to intact bone on either side of a fracture requires a minimum of two screws and purchase of four cortices. Additional screws may be added, depending on the nature of the problem being treated. When possible, a screw may be passed through a plate and lagged across a fracture site, adding to interfragmentary compression (Figure 12).  Articular surfaces must be aligned and held. Failure to do so results in pain, reduced motion, and, ultimately, arthritic changes. When treating comminuted fractures, articular surfaces first should be aligned, then fixed to the diaphysis. The rule of the majority states that if one successfully reduces the major fragments, the smaller ones will follow. This approach often simplifies comminuted fractures. Interosseous screws should be lagged whenever possible and when crossing major fracture lines. In metacarpals and phalanges, minor angulations may be acceptable; however, rotational deformities cannot be tolerated. Severely comminuted fractures in complex wounds may be better treated by simplification, not overly complicated reconstructions. An The overall function of uninjured or minimally injured parts should never be sacrificed by an attempt at a complex reconstruction of a single digit. The ultimate objective is useful hand function. Sometimes a simplified reconstruction or even amputation of a digit Postoperative therapy is based on the stability of fixation by the surgeon. Rather than referring all patients to a standard therapy program, the surgeon must decide how much load the construct would tolerate. This is determined best in the operating room and forms the basis for the therapy regimen. “For every nonunion, the hand surgeon sees a thousand stiff joints.” This succinct observation by Beasley describes the challenge posed by hand fractures. The role of operative treatment is simply to stabilize fracture fragments so as to minimize joint stiffness during the healing period. When successfully applied, these techniques can minimize or eliminate the common problems of pain, stiffness, and functional loss. Surgeons who would undertake operative fracture treatment also should heed Beasley's other admonition: “To open a fracture roughly doubles its healing time.” Surgery also increases scarring and the potential for its deleterious effect on tendon gliding and joint motion. The surgeon inevitably faces a dilemma: “Does the gain I make from fracture fixation and early motion outweigh the additional scarring plus the risk of surgery and added expense of the operation?” The answer varies with each patient and often depends on the quality of postoperative care. The operative treatment of hand and wrist fractures is a precise and demanding pursuit. When carefully selected and accurately applied, these techniques have the potential to improve functional recovery after injury greatly, but they require patience and touch, in addition to an understanding of the principles outlined here.