Filling stage for low pressure injection molding (LPIM) of alumina was simulated with finite element method (FEM). Experimental tests were conducted on alumina feedstock with 60vol.% powder at temperatures and pressures of 70–100°C and 0.1–0.6MPa respectively. The properties of injection molded parts including bulk density and four point flexural strength were measured. Liquid state jetting was observed during cavity filling at high injection temperatures and pressures. When the injection velocity exceeds a critical value (about 150mm/s in this study), the jetting of feedstock was occurred. This jetting gives rise to a lot of voids in the injected molded parts, which result in the variations of bulk density and flexural strength.Powder Injection molding (PIM) is a manufacturing technology to produce parts with complex shapes from metal and ceramic powders ( Filling stage is the most important stage in the PIM process so that many defects like voids, sinks, jetting, dead zones, welding lines, warpage, and cracks may occur in this stage ( A feedstock with 60 In the feedstock preparation, the alumina powder was dried at 140 Microstructural characteristics of powder and feedstock were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (MV2300, Cam Scan). Rheology was measured in a plate–plate system (PP25) of a rotating rheometer (MCR300, Paar-Physica) with a gap of 1 The green density of the parts was obtained by a water replacement method (Archimedes method). The four point flexural strengths were measured on green samples, according to the standard test method ( In this study, a cylindrical part with 10 The numerical simulation with finite element method (FEM) were carried out to investigate jetting phenomenon. The 3D model of cavity was used for computation in software is presented in  Results obtained from the viscosity modeling are tabulated in  The occurrence of jetting can be attributed to the rheological behavior of the feedstock. The lower values of the flow behavior index In order to observe the effect of injection process parameters on jetting phenomenon, the simulation was used. The filling simulation results are shown in The green density results are shown in   The possibility of liquid state jetting increases with increasing injection temperature and pressure. When the injection velocity is too high (>150 Simulation results indicate the jetting length increases with increasing injection temperature and pressure.