Higher matrix interference makes the multi-residue pesticide analysis in spices more challenging. A simple, sensitive, and robust large-scale multi-residue method was developed for the rapid analysis of 243 pesticides in cardamom matrix by gas chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (GC-MS/MS). Prehydration of cardamom in 1:4 sample:water for 30 min improved the homogeneity and extractability. QuEChERS extraction followed by cleanup with 25 mg primary secondary amine, 100 mg C18, and 10 mg graphitized carbon black to 1 ml supernatant was used for sample preparation. Reconstitution of final extract in ethyl acetate reduced matrix co-extract up to 60%. The method was validated according to the SANTE/11,945/2015 guidelines. The limit of quantification was ≤0.01 mg kg−1, and the recovery was within 70.0–120.0%, with ≤20% RSD for the majority of pesticides. The method was used for screening market samples, and the detected residues were devoid of any risk of acute toxicity related to dietary exposure.India is the largest producer, consumer, and exporter of spices in the world and exports approximately 50 different types of spices. According to the Spices Board of India, during 2016–17, a total of 947.8 MT of spices and spice products worth 2.63 Billion USD has been exported from the country. Cardamom ( Certified reference standards (CRS) of 243 pesticides having purity 93–100% were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO USA) and Dr. Ehrenstorfer GmbH (Augsburg, Germany). MS-grade extraction solvents such as acetonitrile (MeCN) were purchased from J.T.Baker, USA; dried ethyl acetate (EtOAc) and carbon tetrachloride (CCl Primary secondary amine (PSA), bonded silica (C An analytical balance (Model 420 ADJ, Adair Dutt, Mumbai, India) was used for weighing the samples, and a precision balance (Model Vibra, Adair Dutt, Mumbai, India) was used for weighing the CRS. A mixer and grinder (Model, Bajaj India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai) were used for sample comminution. Homogenizer (Diax 900, Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany), vortex mixer (Geni 2T, Imperials Biomedicals, Mumbai, India), high-speed refrigerated centrifuge (Kubota Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), micro-centrifuge (Microfuge Pico, Kendro,D-37520, Osterode, Germany), and low-volume concentrator (TurboVap Stock solutions of individual pesticide standards were prepared by dissolving 10 mg (±0.01 mg) of each standard in 10 mL of EtOAc. A standard intermediate mixture of 10 mg L The sample analysis was performed using a gas chromatograph (GC 2010; Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with an AOC-20i auto-injector and hyphenated to a triple quadruple tandem mass spectrometer (TQ8030, Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan). GC-MS solution software (Version 4.11 SU2, Japan) was used for instrument control, data acquisition, and data processing. A 2-mL volume of the sample was injected in splitless mode on Rxi The organically grown cardamom samples (dried ripe fruits) grown at the research field of Cardamom Research Station (CRS), Pampadumpara, Idukki, Kerala, India, were provided by Spices Board, Cochin (India). These dried fruits were finely ground by using a mixer and grinder (Bajaj electronics, Pune, India). Cardamom is a dry commodity (containing less than 9% water), and rehydration of the sample is essential to achieve better homogeneity and extractability of the incurred residues ( Whole cardamom was soaked in water at a sample:water ratio of 1:10 for 30 min and then homogenized. Water was added during homogenization of the cardamom at a sample:water ratio of 1:10. Whole cardamom was ground to obtain fine powder, which (2 g) was then soaked in water (10 mL) for 30 min before extraction. From each of the pretreated sample, six random samples were drawn and independently analyzed for homogeneity by using QuEChERS method ( For optimizing the sample to water ratio, to 2 g fortified (100 μg kg Three different sample sizes, 1, 2, and 3 g, were selected for determining the effect of sample size on the sensitivity and precision of analysis. Cardamom powder fortified at 0.100 mg kg Four different methods of sample extraction were evaluated by comparing the methods according to percentage recovery, percentage RSD, and amount of co-extracted matrix. This was achieved by analyzing 2 g cardamom powder (fortified at 0.025 mg kg The method described by The method reported by  In this method, the sample was extracted as explained in 2.5.3.3. After the cleanup step, 0.8 mL aliquot was evaporated under a gentle flow of nitrogen at 25 °C in a low-volume concentrator up to dryness, and residues were re-dissolved in 0.8 mL of ethyl acetate and analyzed by GC-MS/MS. Cardamom has 9.4–9.6% essential oils such as 1,8-cineole and α-terpinyl acetate The nonvolatile matrix co-extracts were evaluated by gravimetric analysis ( Method performance was evaluated according to SANTE/11,945/2015 guidelines ( The sensitivity of the instrument was expressed in terms of limit of detection (LOD) and LOQ. LOD is the minimum concentration of a pesticide giving a signal to noise ratio (S/N) of 3 compared to the blank matrix, whereas LOQ is fixed at pesticide concentration giving an S/N ratio of 10. Linearity for all the tested compounds in pure solvent and matrix was obtained by plotting the peak area against the concentration of the corresponding standards at 0.002, 0.005, 0.010, 0.020, and 0.050 mg kg Matrix effect (ME) was determined by comparing the peak area of post-extraction spike standard with the corresponding area in solvent standard at 0.020 mg kg A negative value of ME indicates average percentage suppression and a positive value represents enhancement in peak area. The recovery was evaluated at 0.010, 0.050, and 0.100 mg kg Thirty nine market samples collected form Idukki district of Kerala was screened for pesticide residue by the optimized method. Safety evaluations for the positive market sample were done by comparing the theoretical maximum daily intake (TMDI (mg person Cardamom contains 9.5–12.8% crude fiber ( For the sample of 1 g size, even though the matrix effect for 75% test analytes was less than 20%, 42% of the analytes gave RSD ≥20%. Further, the initial residue was diluted by 10 times resulting in a lower MDL and made it difficult to analyze incurred residue of compounds having MRL at or below 0.010 mgkg The diversity of substances that have to be analyzed and the matrix from which they have to be extracted make the sample preparation very critical. Analytes tested in this study have diverse polarities, ranging from nonpolar synthetic pyrethroids such as cypermethrin and permethrin to polar flonicamid and omethoate. In ethyl acetate extraction, the matrix co-extract was 69% less as compared to that in MeCN extraction ( Cardamom has 9.4–9.6% volatile oil ( Addition of PSA removed some volatile compounds such as methyl ester and aromadendrene oxides 1 and 2 from the acetonitrile crude extract ( These nonvolatile matrix co-extracts were evaluated by gravimetric analysis. This analysis showed that 25 mg PSA and 25 mg C To check the efficiency of optimized cleanup on detector response, repeatable injections of matrix-matched standard of 0.025 mg/kg prepared from blank extract obtained with optimized cleanup were performed, and the change in detector response was evaluated. Only ≤28% variation was observed in detector response after 120 repeated injections. This shows the efficiency of the optimized cleanup ( Linearity with r Out of the 39 samples analyzed, 26 samples (67%) were detected positive for one or more than one residue; however, all these positive detections were below the MRL level established by the EU regulations. Chlorpyrifos (67%), lambda-cyhalothrin (46%), fenvalerate (38%), and esfenvalerate (38%) were frequently detected, and chlorpyrifos was found at the highest concentration (0.761 mg kg The method proposed in this study enabled the analysis of 243 pesticides in a single extraction and makes the method suitable for commercial testing laboratories for routine analysis. Extraction of sample used less solvent quantity as compared to other methods used for pesticide extraction from cardamom matrix. Cleanup with GCB and C The authors are thankful to the The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at