A numerical approach to interparticle breakage is applied using the rock failure process analysis code, RFPA2D. A 2D particle assembly in a container is first numerically simulated to obtain the fringe patterns of stress fields that resemble the photoelastic test. Then, in addition, the interparticle breakage of the particle assembly in a chamber is conducted. The chamber consists of a steel container and a steel platen for transferring the load, and contains 15 particles of arbitrary sizes and irregular shapes. A plane strain condition is assumed. The particle bed is loaded under form conditions, in which the size reduction and the applied force are a function of the displacement. The numerical results indicate that, during the crushing process, three principal regimes appear: (i) the elastic deformation regime, where each particle deforms elastically; (ii) the fragmentation regime, where the particle assembly is crushed in a particle-by-particle fashion; and (iii) the assembly hardening regime, where the densified assembly recovers a significant stiffness. The dominant mode of failure is at first splitting, which is more or less parallel to the loading direction, and then progressive crushing, which mainly depends on the confinement from the chamber walls. The analysis of the load–displacement curves of the assembly obtained from the simulations reveals a high undulating load plateau, which suggests a macro-ductile behaviour.Crushing particles in order to obtain finer particles is an important process for many industrial applications. How to predict the output from crushers is a problem that has been focused on as the demands for higher quality and lower costs increase. To solve such a problem, understanding the crushing mechanisms inside the particles under compression is a primary prerequisite. It is desirable that the model developed for this understanding should take into account the growth and interaction of micro-cracks, which culminate in the formation of progeny particles under typical loading conditions. This will require consideration of material properties, particle shape and particle size. With such complex requirements, it is unlikely that any analytical approach would be adequate. The use of computer simulations seems to be the appropriate tool to obtain some clarification In Part I of this paper To our knowledge, the most relevant investigation regarding interparticle problems is maybe in the field of the mechanics of granular materials. The behaviour of granular particles in packings has been studied by researchers in many areas of science and engineering. In particular, due in part to the increasing capability of computers, a large number of publications on computer simulations of particle packings have appeared Recently, numerical simulation methods have been expected to become powerful tools for investigating directly the micro-mechanism of failure of particle assemblies Models describing interparticle breakage behaviour are relatively rare. Fewer studies have been conducted and reported for particle beds than for single particles. However, the way in which the rock particle size can be effectively reduced attracts much interest, not only from a theoretical but also, and even more, from a practical point of view, since there has been an increasing trend in the field of extraction of rock aggregates. Prasher The numerical approaches presented in Part I In the present Part II, the crushing mechanisms and the process of interparticle breakage inside a container are numerically studied. The numerical model used for the interparticle breakage tests consists of a crushing chamber and many rock particles within the chamber ( Different particles consist of different amounts of elements. The elements are defined mainly by three independent parameters: Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio and strength. For the rock particles, the average Young's modulus of the elements is 60 A constitutive model including crack formation and a pressure-dependent yield condition is used for describing the deformation and failure behaviour of the rock particles. A stress criterion specified by a Weibull distribution function is used to describe the cracking condition of the elements normal to the maximum tensile stress at the element integration points. In compression shear cracks will be formed once the stress state of an element meets the Mohr–Coulomb criterion. The elastic energy of the element transforms into surface energy and acoustic energy if the element fails. In the subsequent steps the modulus of this element will be greatly reduced and a residual strength, 10% of the element strength, is used for each individual element. The constitutive law also consists of a re-compaction mechanism of the rock material; i.e., the fractured elements can be re-compacted when the compression strain reaches a certain level. The average value of the individual parameter is the same for different particles. Therefore, the difference between the particles concerns their geometrical shape and size, as well as the contact conditions. In the heterogeneous particles, randomly distributed mechanical parameters statistically following Weibull's law The numerical model is designed to imitate the conditions in which a volume of material is compressed in a real crushing chamber. The numerical test corresponds to the compressing part of the machine cycle of the crusher, when the liners move towards each other. The material is then locked between the chamber walls and can only deform elastically or break into smaller particles. For the rock materials of interest, brittle fracture is the only fracture mechanism of importance. Since the maximum radial velocity of the mantle relative to the concave in normal operating conditions is below 0.5 When performing tests that investigate particle breakage whose behaviour is strongly dependent on the interaction between particles with different contact conditions, knowledge of the stress or strain distribution in the interior of the particle skeleton is helpful in understanding the behaviour. Since stress or strain cannot be measured systematically in situ in the interior of a particle assembly in the container, physical model tests, such as photoelastic tests, are often the only way to investigate a stress field under idealized conditions. However, in applying the optical method, some demands have to be met concerning the test technique. One of them is that a transparent and optically sensitive material such as glass or epoxy resin has to be used To overcome such a difficulty, RFPA Numerically generated fringe patterns in each particle and in the walls of the container are shown in The particles may be divided into two categories: boundary particles that have contact with a container wall plus the cover and inner particles that have contact with rock particles. The load acting via the cover breaks the particles through the boundary particles. In order to understand the process of interparticle breakage, a numerical model with exactly the same geometry as that shown in As will be discussed in detail later, the macro-scale mechanical behaviour of the irregularly shaped particles can be discussed, in part at least, in terms of the micro-scale behaviour of individual particles. However, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to observe the micro-scale behaviour of particles in a real particle medium. To overcome this difficulty, the numerical simulation of particle breakage has been carried out with an emphasis on the micro-failure behaviour of the particle. In such simulated tests, we can easily model micro-mechanical behaviour, such as the stress field in individual particles, contact forces and breakage. We first present the results obtained in the numerical simulation. Visual observations of interparticle breakage due to the system compression are shown in As shown in The total crushing force The spreading of the collapse from particle to particle continues, creating an undulating load plateau as shown in We have also been interested in the frequency of the fracture events inside the particle. The numerically obtained fracture events and the energy release are shown in During the initial deformation or linear elastic phase (as shown in An increasing rate of fracture events accompanied the inelastic phase and the load plateau. This agrees with the understanding that the fracture events are generated by micro-fractures that result in nonlinear deformation behaviour. It is important to note that, as shown in By integration of the crushing force Rock size reduction in the present study is mainly realized by the forces acting on the cover of the chamber. However, the friction force from the container's walls plays a certain role. In order to understand the role of friction, an additional numerical test was carried out. This additional test has exactly the same geometric configuration as that shown in A comparison of the fracture processes of the two different friction situations is shown in  In addition, the plateau of the force–displacement curve for the friction case shown in In compressing crusher machines, the comminution effect is achieved by two surfaces gripping the material between them and forcing the material with a compressive force imposed by the surfaces. The raw materials in question are different types of rock materials that are crystalline and often very heterogeneous. Two-dimensional granular materials such as a 2D particle assembly exhibit mechanical characteristics representative of many space filling particle materials. Because of this they have been used as models to study the mechanical behaviour of this class of materials. However, so far studies have concentrated on the behaviour of cohesionless particles with particular emphasis on the macroscopic response. Few studies have been conducted to investigate the behaviour of a particle assembly at the levels of particle or interparticle breakage. In In the breakage process of one particle with confinement studied in Part I of this paper The breakage mechanism of the particles confined in the container is rather similar to that of the single particle with confinement. A careful comparison between the breakage processes of the particles can verify that statement. For example, the particle numbered as 8 ( The present numerical simulation also reveals some peculiar features for interparticle breakage. The possibility of a single particle being selected for breakage when a population of particles is subjected to a compressive load depends on the following conditions: (i) the particle must be located in such a way that splitting failure easily occurs; (ii) the stress level must reach a critical value. It is shown that the initiation of crushing in the particle assembly is mainly due to tensile-type splitting between the contact points that are located in such a way that their connection line runs parallel to the loading directions. It is also found that under displacement-controlled loading the crushing propagates in a particle-by-particle fashion, while the average load remains relatively constant. The load plateau is terminated when 14 of 15 particles collapse and then the densified assembly recovers a significant stiffness. Simply stated, the interparticle breakage appears to consist of two phases. Phase I, made up of stiff particles, behaves as an elastic structure that dissipates little energy and imposes local deformation on Phase II particles. Phase II acts like a brittle-and-plastic material that dissipates energy at the contacts and serves as a restraint on Phase I. As the applied displacement increases, certain changes take place in the material structure in that some Phase I particles become Phase II particles. That is, more and more particles progressively fail, and the particle assembly, therefore, becomes less able to carry the load. The load is transferred from new chains that develop from other particles nearby. An anisotropic fabric is established corresponding to the direction of the applied loading. Due to the direction changing, a new fabric develops. It is worth noting that more uniformly distributed compression from the surroundings of a particle could make the particle stronger (see Particle Number 6 in The mechanism of the interparticle breakage process is rather important for crusher design. For example, in order to reduce the fines or to control the micro-cracks within the reduced particles, a careful design of the normal stroke is important. With the assumed mechanical properties, the sizes and the shapes of the assembled rock particles, as well as the height of the container, the present simulation indicated that a normal stroke of about 0.2 or 0.3 More recently, a similar study has been conducted by Tsoungui et al. on a granular material model with disks The present numerical model is based on the laws of mechanics and constitutive relations concerning the deformation and breakage characteristics of rock material. The simulations have shown that the use of this numerical model, based on the rock failure process analysis code, RFPA During the crushing process, three principal regimes appear: (i) the elastic deformation regime, where each particle deforms elastically; (ii) the fragmentation regime, where the particle assembly is crushed in a particle-by-particle fashion; and (iii) the assembly hardening regime, where the densified assembly recovers a significant stiffness. The particles in the chamber deform elastically under a small load. Large forces are carried by chains of particles that are more or less aligned in the direction of the maximum compression. These chains become shorter and more kinked with an increasing load. As the applied displacement becomes larger, the elastic structure gradually fails. The initiation of crushing in the particle assembly is at the beginning mainly due to tensile-type splitting between the contact points that are located in such a way that their connection line runs parallel to the loading directions. With a further increase in the applied displacement, more and more particles progressively fail, and therefore the particle assembly becomes less able to carry the load. The crushing propagates in a particle-by-particle fashion, while the average load remains relatively constant. The load is then transferred from new chains that develop from other particles nearby. An anisotropic fabric is established corresponding to the direction of the applied loading. Due to the direction changing, a new fabric develops and breaks again. The strength of rock aggregates is reached when tensile cracks form from the contact “points” between particles or between a container wall and particles. An analysis of the load–displacement curves of the assembly obtained from the simulations indicates a high, undulating load plateau, which suggests a ductile behaviour on the macro-scale, even though the constitutive law for the elements is brittle on the micro-scale. Most of the large load drop in the load curve corresponds to a high fracture event rate and a large event energy release. It is recognized that the fracture-released energy seems to have a closer relationship with the load drop. A combination of the numerically obtained load–displacement curve and the step-relevant visual breakage process provides a possibility of estimating the necessary stroke and input energy for effectively breaking aggregates to a desired extent; and The compressive stresses in the particles are attenuated from the top to the bottom due to the friction between the boundary particles and the walls. This causes greater breakage for the top particles than for the bottom ones. The work presented in this paper forms part of the research collaboration between Luleå University of Technology, Sweden and Northeastern University, People's Republic of China, which was made possible by funding from the Rut and Sten Brand Foundation, Sweden and from the National Natural Science Foundation of People's Republic of China, (Grant No. 59525408).