This work presents the effect of autoclave, microwave and ultrasonication pretreatment on anaerobic digestion of food waste co-digested with poultry manure. Four batch reactors with 2 L volume each were used for the study. The reactors were operated with a hydraulic retention time of 30 days and stirred twice a day. The daily biogas production, cumulative biogas production, methane and carbon dioxide composition were measured. The pretreatment of the substrates with autoclave, microwave and ultrasonication caused an increase in cumulative biogas production of approximately 4.67, 6.43 and 10.12% respectively. The degradation efficiency also showed positive result for substrates with pretreatment. The highest cumulative biogas yield was obtained with ultrasonication technique (9926 ml), followed by autoclave, microwave and untreated substrates. The results obtained from the experiments were evaluated to determine the kinetic constants of the process. Modified Gompertz model and Logistic model were used to determine the kinetic parameters of the reaction. The results obtained with the modified Gompertz model was more suitable than the result obtained with the Logistic model for describing the process kinetics.The widespread use of fossil fuels within the current energy infrastructure is considered as the largest source of anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide (CO Biogas, a clean and renewable form of energy, could be the best substitute for conventional sources of energy which are causing ecological–environmental problems and at the same time depleting at a faster rate In anaerobic digestion, the rate-limiting stage is hydrolysis Numerous pre-treatment methods have been tested, especially for complex substrates such as lignocellulosic biomass and municipal solid waste Thermal pretreatment is the most common type where the application of heat solubilizes the biomass substrates. They have long been used for enhancing particulate organic matter disintegration at temperatures from 50 to 270 °C. Most of the studies reported an optimal temperature in the range from 110 to 180 °C and treatment time from 20 to 60 min, while thermal treatment at a moderate temperature (70 °C) lasted from hours to several days The objective of the present work is to study the effects of ultrasonication, microwave and autoclave pretreatments on the anaerobic batch digestion of food waste. The effect of all the treatments on biogas production and degradation efficiency were determined and compared with the results obtained from the untreated substrates. Experiments were carried out in batch type laboratory scale reactors. Four reactors of volume 2 L each were made of glass vessel having water bath for temperature control and magnetic stirrer for agitation. All the reactors with 80% working volume (1.6 L) were run concurrently. The schematic configuration of the anaerobic biogas reactor is given in The food waste used in this study was collected from hostel mess of National Institute of Technology Calicut. The collected food waste was crushed with the help of kitchen blender. Poultry manure was collected from Regional Poultry Farm, Chathamangalam, Calicut. The food waste was adjusted to 7.5% TS, 7pH and C/N ratio 20.19 by co-digesting 30% of poultry manure as optimized from the previous studies The ultrasonic apparatus used in this study was Vibra Cell ultrasonic processor. This apparatus was equipped with a titanium alloy micro tip probe worked with an operating frequency of 20 kHz and power output 130 W. Ultrasonication was done for 30 min Modified Gompertz model (Eq.  As we know that, the main objective of the pretreatment is to convert the complex structure of the feed material into simpler form in order to enhance the reaction rate and to reduce the hydrolysis time. The change in the physical structure of the substrates was captured using Scanning Electron microscope (SEM). The SEM image of non-treated substrate, autoclave, microwave and ultrasonicated substrates are shown in The daily biogas production obtained from all the reactors were measured through water displacement method and shown in The maximum biogas yield for all reactors with different pretreatments is shown in Kinetic study for the cumulative biogas produced from all the reactors was carried out using modified Gompertz and Logistic model. The results obtained from the kinetic study using modified Gompertz and Logistic model are given in Results from anaerobic digestion of food waste showed a positive perspective in pretreatment techniques, especially in ultrasonication for improving gas production. The energy balance is considered very important in order to prove the economic feasibility of the pretreatment techniques used here. Application of ultrasound at full-scale treatment plants is only possible if the energy cost aspect could be considered. The biogas yield and TS, VS and COD removal were higher for the pretreated substrates than raw (untreated) substrate. Experimental studies clearly indicated that all pretreatment techniques used in this study improved biogas production and degradation efficiencies. Food waste treated with ultrasound showed higher biogas production compared to autoclave and microwave treatment. Compared to non-treated substrate, the biogas yield and VS removal of ultrasonicated substrate increased from 8921 to 9926 ml and 41.96–46.52 g/l respectively. Kinetic parameters of biogas production were obtained using modified Gompertz model and Logistic model.