The conversion of degraded arable land to permanent grassland is widely presumed to be amendatory and is therefore proposed as a climate-smart agriculture strategy, which may rapidly restore soil quality. However, the rate and extent of soil repair will largely depend, on the management practices, deployed in the permanent grassland. In this study, our objective was to assess the effects of no-till and no-renovation management, on aggregation, internal soil strength parameters and pore system dynamics of permanent grassland, established from degraded arable land. Also, we analysed the time dependence of these changes on the some functions of the soil. Undisturbed samples were collected at 3 depths: 0–10cm, 10–25cm and 25–40cm, from permanent grassland, aged 1, 8 and 19-years, and were used to determine water retention and saturated hydraulic conductivity for each sward age. Moreover, compression properties and shear stress parameters at these depths and sward-ages were determined. The results indicated remarkable improvement in pore structure in relation to the age of each sward, which resulted in improved water retention, air and water fluxes with the age of the grassland. The shear parameters and precompression stress data showed differences in the structural recovery timeline at the various depths, highlighting the difference in ecological engineering processes as a function of the time since the grassland was established and the depth considered. Our results indicate that permanent grassland management will contribute to a substantial recovery of pore functions, coinciding with enhanced pore rigidity and increased soil strength which may also influence sequestration potential in the grassland.Grasslands and integrated grassland systems makes up about 70 percent of the world’s agricultural area, and support the livelihoods of almost one billion people ( The sustainability of grassland management system, like any other agricultural systems, can be assessed from its preservation and improvement of soil physical quality over time. For instance, the maintenance of soil organic matter (SOM) is important for continuous forage production ( When degraded arable land is converted to permanent grassland, three major issues are of critical research interest, in relation to soil quality: (i) structural recovery in the soil matrix, (ii) the time and depth dependence of the recovery, and (iii) the effects of trampling and driving due to grazing or mowing on the soil structure recovery. The conversion of arable land to permanent grassland could cause a complete suppression or pronounced changes in pore functions of the soil, depending on the management intensities ( We hypothesized that (i) the conversion of arable land to permanent grassland for amendatory purposes, promotes a more rigid and less entropic soil system, which as an additional effect, will optimize the soil physical and physicochemical properties and functions; and (ii) structural recovery in the amendatory grassland is time and depth dependent. The objective of this study was therefore to evaluate the impact of no-till and no-renovation management, on some mechanical and hydraulic properties of eutric luvisols used for several years for arable farming and later converted to permanent grassland. We also seek to assess the effect of the soil depth and the time since the permanent grassland was established, on changes in the soil pore functions. Soil water retention curves, hydraulic conductivities, precompression stresses, and shear strength parameters at 1-, 8- and 19-years old swards were compared to examine improvement of soil physical and hydraulic properties and also to assess the changes in structural stability. The study was carried out at the Experimental Farm of the Faculty of Agriculture, Christian Albrechts University, Kiel, located in Lindhof (54°27‘N, 9°57‘E; 15 The experimental farm has been used for the production of potatoes ( In 1994, 2004 and 2012, some parts of the arable field were converted to permanent grassland (while the other part remained as arable land), as part of large experimental project, which was investigating the effects of grassland renovation and conversion of arable land into grassland, on nitrogen fluxes and carbon storage ( For this study, we sampled from the permanent grassland plots with no fertilization (no slurry treatment) and under a no-till and no-renovation management, established in 1994, 2004 and 2012. Thus, the sward ages were: 1, 8 and 19-years at the time of sampling. The dominant soil type in these plots is Eutric Luvisol derived from glacial till. The soil texture in the Ap/E horizons (0–40 Two sets of soil samples, collected in each plot (studied sward age) at 3 the depths/layers: T: topsoil (0–5 Water retention properties for each sampled layer in the different sward ages, was determined with 15 undisturbed soil cores. These samples were first trimmed in the laboratory to the exact sizes of their cylinder, slowly saturated by capillary rise with de-aired water. After saturation, the soil samples were gradually dewatered to the matric potential of −6, −15, −30, −50 Another set of 15 undisturbed cores, was used to determine the saturated hydraulic conductivity ( In order to furthermore quantify the effect of predrying, on changes in water flux, the samples were re-saturated by capillary rise and the The precompression stresses and shear strength parameters were determined at −6 The shear strength parameters (cohesion, Statistical assessments of possible difference in the measured parameters according to the sampling depth or the age of the sward were investigated in one-way analyses of variance. This was followed by post hoc testing against the control group (Holm-Sidak method) in which the one–year old sward serves as the control. The overall significance level for Holm-Sidak tests was p The bulk density of the soil samples were smallest at the topsoil layer (T:0–5 The results indicated that changes in bulk density of arable land that is converted to permanent grassland, depends on the time since it was converted and the depth of sampling ( The pore size distribution further highlighted the effects of the age of the sward and sampling depth on hydro-physical properties of soil. At the 0–5 In the 20–25 The available water capacity (AWC) at the 3 studied depths is presented in The air filled porosity or air capacity (AC) in the 10–15 The initial values of saturated hydraulic conductivity ( The average precompression stress was smallest in the 0–5 The shear stress-strain data fitted very well the Mohr-Coulomb equation, (r The conversion of arable land to permanent grassland for amendatory purposes is a strategy of climate mitigation in agriculture, which can, improve soil quality, increase carbon sequestration and reduce soil erosion ( Grassland soils undergo rapid cyclic changes within a short time span, because of the intense wetting and drying, rapid water uptake and release, trampling and fertilisation and harvesting procedure. Additionally, the no-till and no-renovation management in permanent grassland, results in the dominance of hydraulic stresses, over mechanical stresses during the soil structure development phase. Hydraulic stresses, concomitant with wetting and drying, shrink-swell and freeze- thaw cycles, or root penetration pressure ( The enhanced bio-activities in the permanent grassland due to no-till and no-renovation management stimulate the formation and preservation of biopores. These biopores, unlike the pores produced by tillage, are long, continuous, and constitute an effective pathway for root development, water movement and gas transport in the soil profiles ( The conversion of structurally degraded, cropped land into no-till permanent grassland improved the soil structure and formed a rigid pore system as the age of the sward increases. Mechanical and hydraulic properties of the soil were improved, albeit at different time-frames in the three studied layers. The bulk density, total porosity, available water capacity, saturated hydraulic conductivity in the topsoil layer (0–5 These changes coincide in the topsoil with decreasing cohesion with increasing age of the sward, while in the subsurface (10–15 The increase in porosity, water and air capacity, and fraction of mesopores are beneficial for water and air fluxes and may also improve chemical exchange processes in the converted land. Our result showed some difference in recovery timeline which varies according to the depth and may be influenced by type of cover, soil and management. The first author appreciates the Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship for the George Foster Research Fellowship. Special thanks for the colleagues in the Institute for assistance in sampling