Precipitation of iron- and sulfate-bearing prohibitive layers on the surface of coal particles during heap biodesulfurization is a problematic issue due to the decreasing of biodepyritization rate, causing permeability problems in bioheaps, and reducing the caking properties of coking coals. In this regard, the biodesulfurization of Parvadeh high-pyrite coking coal (Tabas, Iran) was conducted using a mixed culture of iron-and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms and the ferric level of the bioleaching solution was controlled by jarosite precipitation. The main and interaction effects of some critical parameters including temperature, retention time, the molar ratio of ammonia to iron (MR Ammonia: Iron) and seed addition on the removal of iron from the biodesulfurization solution was investigated by jarosite precipitation using a response surface methodology (RSM). The results were evaluated by the analysis of variance (ANOVA). It was found that 98.4 % iron removal and 62.1 % sulfate removal was achieved at the temperature of 95 °C, the retention time of 2.5 h, the MRAmmonia:Iron of 0.8 and seed addition of 40 g/L. Temperature had the most effect of iron removal efficiency. The precipitates were analyzed by SEM/EDS and XRD analyses. A developed flowsheet was proposed to treat the biodesulfurization solution of coals in bioheaps.Removal of sulfur from coal is one of the main challenges for utilizing coal in metallurgical and energy industries. Biodesulfurization by heaps or stirred tank reactors has a high potential to remove pyritic sulfur dissipated finely in coal matrix. In this process, pyrite is oxidized in the presence of biologically produced ferric ions according to Eq. During the last recent decade, a few studies have been carried out for the biodesulfurization of coal in heapss., From the technical and economic point of views, this process has showed a high ability to remove sulphur from coal [ Generally, in the biohydrometallurgy processes such as biodesulfurization of coal, ferric plays a key role in oxidizing sulfide minerals such as pyrite (FeS In a solution such as the microorganism growth medium that is rich in sulfate, the ferric forms jarosite precipitates at pH values higher than 2. Moreover, in the presence of the iron-oxidizing bacteria such as In general, the solubility of ferric is dependent on pH and its increasing lead to produce ferric precipitates such as jarosite, schwertmannite, goethite etc [ In the metallurgical industries especially in the hydrometallurgical circuits of zinc extraction, jarosite precipitation is used for removing iron from leaching solutions. This process can produce readily precipitates from solution at low pH (1.5–2) with relatively good settling, filtering and washing characteristics and also eliminate a large proportion of ferric and sulfate together [ Among all jarosite species, ammonium jarosite ( Precipitation of jarosite on the surface of coal particles in heap biodesulfurization decreases the biodepyritization rate due to the formation of a prohibitive layer on the mineral, causes permeability problems for the flow of air and solution in the bioheap, and reduces the caking properties of coal (a major index for using coal in coking applications). Controlling the concentration of ferric, as a main source of the prohibitive layer, has not been well investigated during coal desulfurization. The purpose of this study was to remove iron from the effluent of coal bioheap desulfurization by jarosite process and also to determine its optimum parameters, namely temperature, reaction time, the molar ratio of ammonia to iron (MR A coking coal sample was collected from Parvadeh Coal Mine located 85 km south of Tabas, Iran. The ultimate analyses of the sample were carried out based on the ASTM standard [ A mixed culture of moderately thermophilic iron- and sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms, including A coal biodesulfurization experiment was carried out in a period of 60 days, on a ground coking coal (<500 μm) in a 50-L stirred tank reactor containing 30-L suspension of the coal sample. The process was performed at 15 % pulp density pulp in a medium similar to the Norris nutrient medium by fertilizers having an initial pH of 1.5 at 45 °C with the stirring rate of 180 rpm. Sulfuric acid ( Iron was removed from the biodesulfurization solution using jarosite precipitation. In order to investigate the effect of several critical parameters on iron removal, experiments were conducted based on a response surface methodology. A Box-Behnken Design (BBD) was used to evaluate the effect of considered parameters including time, temperature, seed addition, and the MR The precipitation experiments of ammonium jarositewere carried out in a 250 mL of two-neck flask flat bottom containing 150 mL of leachate solution. The vessel was placed at atmospheric pressure. A magnetic stirrer hot plate was used for stirring and heating the solutions (Model: IKA C-MAG HS7). Ammonia solution (25 %) was used to prepare the source of ammonium ions. The solution was heated up to the desired temperature on a hot plate rapidly to minimize the heat up time. Then, the hot solution was moved on another hot plate with the desired and controlled temperature with a 400 rpm stirring rate. To minimize evaporation, a glass condenser was used. The pH value was measured through the precipitation experiments every 15 min. If needed, the pH was adjusted between 1.5–1.8 by using lime milk (15 % w/v). When seed addition was required, a specified amount of ammonium jarosite seed (<74 μm) was added at the beginning of the experiment. The instant of adding ammonia solution was considered as the start time of the precipitation test. At the end of the test, vessels cooled rapidly to prevent further reaction. Then, the slurry was filtered and washed. At the initial and end time of each experiment, the concentration of iron was measured by using the potassium dichromate titration method. Ferric concentration was calculated by subtracting the concentration of ferrous from total iron concentration. Furthermore, the efficiency of iron removal was calculated by Eq. Also, Eq. Where The pH was measured using a pH meter (Elela pH meter, model: pHm-2000) and redox potential was recorded using a Pt electrode in reference to an Ag/AgCl electrode (AZ ORP meter, model: AZ86505). The suspension was filtrated through a blue band filter paper (Whatman No. 42, UK) and the concentration of iron in the filtrate was analyzed using the potassium dichromate titration method with barium diphenylamine sulfonate indicator. The concentration of sulfate was measured using the gravimetric method by precipitating sulfate ions as barium sulfate. The X-ray diffractometer analyses (Asenware AW/XDM 300) was used for the analysis of precipitates. Coal biodesulfurization process was conducted using a mixed culture of moderate thermophile microorganisms. The variation of pH, ORP and the concentration of iron and sulfate ions are represented in The pulp density was stepped up from 2.5 % to 15 % gradually during 30 days ( In order to investigate the effect of critical parameters including reaction time, temperature, the amount of seed addition and the MR The range of iron and sulfate removal were from 88.6–98.4% and 46–64.4% respectively. Also, the initial concentration of iron and sulfate were 3.36 and 12.80 g/L. The maximum iron removal (98.4 %) was obtained at the retention time of 6 h, the MR The analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for evaluating the quantity of the fitted model. The fit summery showed that the quadratic model was significant for analyzing the iron removal response. The calculated P-values with a confidence level higher than 93 % and the coefficient of determination (R- squared) implied that the model is significant. In brief, a model will be well fitted with the experimental data if model displays a significant regression and a non-significant lack of fit [ R-squared, predicted R-squared, and adjusted R-squared of the model were 0.98, 0.93 and 0.97, respectively, and the adequate precision was 31.14. These coefficients imply that the derived model fits satisfactorily. In this regard, the predicted R-squared and adjusted R-Squared coefficients must be verged on each other. Moreover, an adequate precision coefficient greater than 4 is desirable [ No transformation function was carried out to achieve the iron removal model. Some interactions between the considered factors which was displayed by Eq. The ANOVA results were presented in The effect of temperature in the range of 85–95 °C on the iron removal efficiency was shown in Dutrizac et al. [  Dutrizac et al. [ The effect of the MR This behavior can be related to the existence of other monovalent cations such as sodium and potassium ions in the solution that can intensifies the iron removal by precipitation of sodium and potassium jarosite ( According to It was reported that the rate of jarosite precipitation is accelerated by addition seed materials and the induction period for the precipitation is reduced [ The interaction effect of temperature (ranging from 85 to 95) and the MR From a kinetic perspective, a rise in temperature increases the average kinetic energy of the reactant molecules [ The interaction effect of retention time and the MR When the MR The response surface diagram of the interaction of seed addition with the MR Maximum iron removal efficiency for the related optimal conditions of parameters was investigated and the model was established. Numerical optimization was performed to find a maximum level for the desirability function by setting the values of temperature, time, the MR The XRD analysis confirmed precipitation hydronium jarosite with ammonium jarosite. Dutrizac et al. [ The thermal decomposition of the ammonium jarosite was conducted in an furnace (Azar furnace model: TF 5/40-1250) with air atmosphere at a heating rate of 5 °C/min to 800 °C. The decomposition of ammonium jarosite occurred based on Eq. 6. It has been reported that ammonium jarosite could be converted to hematite (∼55 % Fe) through thermal decomposition with the recovery of ammonia and sulfur dioxide as the byproducts [ The ammonia gas could be used as a proportion of necessary ammonium source for both biodesulfurization and ammonium jarosite precipitation processes. A schematic flowsheet for the treating of biodesulfurization effluents by ammonium jarosite precipitation was shown in The objective of this research was to optimize the removal of iron and sulfate from the biodesulfurization solution of Parvadeh coking coal using ammonium jarosite precipitation. Biodesulfurization process was carried out using a mixed culture of moderate thermophilic microorganisms during 60 days. The following concluding remarks were obtained: The main and interactions effects of several key parameters on jarosite precipitation was investigated. A quadratic model obtained from a response surface methodology was fitted to the process. The results demonstrated that the temperature and its interaction with the MR Maximum iron removal (98.4 %) was obtained under optimum condition at retention time of 2.5 h, the MR Using of lime milk for pH adjustment not only intensified the iron removal by providing an extra surface for jarosite formation, but also eliminated a part of the sulfate ions mainly as gypsum. The XRD and EDS analyses and SEM images showed that a mixture of four jarosite species and basanite were formed during the process. A flowsheet was proposed to treat coal biodesulfurization solutions for controlling the concentration of iron and sulfate ions, as the main agents to form inhibitive precipitates during biodesulfurization especially in heaps. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors are thankful to Parvadeh Coal Processing Company, for providing and analyzing the coal samples. Dr. Seyed Mohammad Raouf Hosseini is acknowledged for his helps during some experiments.