Water treatment has become a source of concern as new pollutants and higher volumes of waste water must be treated. Emerging biological approaches, namely the use of bioreactors, for cleaning processes have been introduced. The use of bioreactors requires the development of efficient monitoring tools, preferably with real-time measurements. In this work, a couple of flow injection systems were developed and optimized for the potentiometric determination of fluoride to monitor a rotating biological contactor (RBC) bioreactor and a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) with off-line and on-line sampling. Both the RBC and the SBR bioreactors were set up for the biodegradation of the halogenated organic compound 2-fluorophenol and, as fluoride was a degradation byproduct, the process was monitored by following up its concentration.
                  The described flow injection potentiometric methods enabled the fluoride determination within the required quantification range 0.10–100mM. The possible interferences from the growth medium were minimized in-line. The determination rate was 78h−1 for the off-line monitoring of RBC and 50−1
                     h for the on-line monitoring of the SBR, with a sample consumption of 0.500mL and 0.133mL per determination, respectively. Furthermore, the overall reagent consumption was quite low. The accuracy of the system was evaluated by comparison with a batch procedure. The SBR efficiency was monitored both on-line by the flow system and off-line by HPLC, for comparison purposes.The awareness of water pollution as a significant environmental problem has led to a tighter control of water quality. The new regulations and more strict limits have created awareness of the importance of cleaning effluents to prevent water contamination. Treatment plants are required to carry out more efficient cleaning procedures both in terms of new parameters and higher effluent volume. Due to the exponential increase of the volume of waste water to be treated, treatment plants must become more efficient, avoiding the need to increase their operation area. So, bioremediation processes are becoming quite common nowadays, namely involving the use of microorganisms and plants. The use of microorganisms for waste water treatment is very promising and provides an effective solution for the treatment of new pollutants. In this scenario, bioreactors have been the aim of intensive study as new methods for cleaning water effluents. To assure efficient working conditions, it is crucial to monitor key parameters, otherwise the entire process can be lost. The monitoring process should be in real-time, preferably on-line, enabling immediate action when and if necessary. Parameters that can be assessed with probes such as pH, oxygen level and temperature, are fairly easy to monitor but normally they do not provide information upon the bioprocess itself. The aim of this work was to devise automatic flow analysis methods to monitor the efficiency of a rotating biological contactor (RBC) bioreactor and a granular sequencing batch reactor (SBR), with off-line and on-line sampling, respectively. Both the SBR and the RBC bioreactors were set up for the biodegradation of 2-fluorophenol, a halogenated organic micropollutant of some industries that can be present in the waste waters at low (but worrying) concentrations (unpublished results). At the polishing level of cleaning waste waters effluents the aim is to remove minimal amounts of highly toxic pollutants, such as the 2-fluorophenol. To monitor the 2-fluorophenol removal, chromatographic techniques are generally employed. But these techniques imply expensive equipment (as well as high maintenance costs) and also involve time-consuming sample preparation and analysis. So, an alternative strategy would be to measure the by-products of the biodegradation process. The overall mineralization process of the 2-fluorophenol in aerobic conditions is the following: Flow injection analysis (FIA) In this scenario, two flow injection potentiometric methods were developed for the determination of fluoride to monitor the two aforementioned bioreactors, set up for the 2-fluorophenol biodegradation. The FIA method devised for the RBC monitoring involved an off-line determination using a commercial combined fluoride. The operation conditions of the fluoride electrode in the aimed dynamic range were studied and an extensive interference study, due to the use of growth medium in the bioreactor, was carried out. To monitor the SBR, the developed FIA system enabled the on-line determination of fluoride using a laboratory made tubular fluoride selective electrode, previously developed and studied by Santos et al. All solutions were prepared with analytical grade chemicals and boiled deionized water (specific conductance of less than 0.1 The stock solution of 0.1 The carrier solution was also prepared by dilution of the fluoride stock solution to a final concentration of 2.0 The inner solution of the tubular fluoride electrode was obtained by dissolution of 500 The total ionic strength adjuster buffer solution (TISAB) was prepared by dissolving, in 1 For the RBC bioreactor, the samples were collected from the “In” of Unit 1 ( The SBR consists of a column where the biomass grows without any physical support and works in cycles of 4 Due to the on-line sampling process, no sample pretreatment was necessary. The sampling point was at the top of the bioreactor, as shown in In this way, the collected sample had less biomass interference ( The flow injection systems comprised a Gilson Minipuls 3 peristaltic pump and a Rheodyne Type 5020 six-port rotary injection valve. The flow channels were assembled with Gilson PTFE tubing for propulsion and Teflon tubing from Omnifit (0.8 As detection system, either a Crison pH meter GLP 21 potentiometer equipped with a combined fluoride electrode (Thermo Orion 96-09), or a Crison micropH 2002 potentiometer equipped with a laboratory made tubular fluoride electrode To accommodate the combined fluoride electrode in the flow system, an option for a wall-jet arrangement was made. A Perspex device was used for a more robust arrangement and the flow inlet was from the bottom of the Perspex device in the so called “wall-jet” arrangement ( To carry out the in-line sampling in the SBR bioreactor, an additional peristaltic pump, Ismatec mini S-640, was used. The devised flow system is depicted in The proposed flow system is depicted in This extra peristaltic pump was manually activated for the sampling process and it could operate in two directions. This feature enabled the reversal of the flow, effectively avoiding the possible clogging along the connection tubes. The sample plug was injected through a six port injection valve (IV) in a carrier stream (2 To carry out some preliminary studies of the potentiometric determination and the detailed study of the possible interferences of the growth medium, a simple manifold using the combined fluoride electrode set up, as shown in Having set the design of the FIA manifold, the operation parameters were studied. Injection volumes of 80.0 Reactor lengths of 17, 25 and 100 Before testing different flow rates for the carrier and TISAB solutions, the influence of the proportion between them was assessed. A proportion of 1:1 carrier:TISAB was compared to a proportion of 2:1 carrier:TISAB. Although no significant difference was observed, the 2:1 carrier:TISAB proportion was selected to minimize sample dispersion. Flow rates of 3.6, 1.7 For obtaining a faster return to the baseline, different fluoride concentrations were tested. For this study, solutions with no fluoride (deionized water), 1 The TISAB solution composition was studied in order to obtain a good adjustment of both the ionic strength and pH. Four TISAB solutions were tested ( Calibration curves were established for all the solutions and, although the slopes obtained were very similar, the TISAB solution IV provided a better sensitivity and linearity and so this was the composition chosen. This was the basic composition used for further studies. The application of the developed FIA method to the bioreactor required an extensive interferences study. The pollutant (2-fluorophenol) is added to the RBC and SBR bioreactors together with the minimal growth medium (synthetic waste water) so the possible interferences from this medium had to be assessed. The minimal growth medium composition is presented on The concentrations of the interfering agents were obtained by dissolving the appropriate solid in the fluoride standard solution. The studied concentrations of interfering agent, the respective solids used and the interfering percentages are summarized in The percentage of interference was calculated by comparing the potential of a 1.0 To the basic TISAB composition, two different chelating agents, EDTA and EGTA, were added in three different concentrations (1, 2, 3 The results obtained showed that some ions did interfere even in the presence of lower concentrations of chelating agents. These interferences were effectively minimized with higher concentration of both chelating agents, EGTA and EDTA. When the two chelating agents are compared, EGTA proved to be more effective, reducing all interferences to <5% ( The determination of the detection limit (DL) and lower limit of linear response (LLLR) of the commercial electrode was assessed both in batch (1.4 A typical electrode response (in the range 1.0 The set operation parameters were: an injection volume of 500 In order to assess the efficiency of the developed methodology, six samples were collected from a RBC bioreactor. To evaluate the accuracy, the results obtained by the developed FIA method, The degradation of 2-fluorophenol was assessed by the correspondent increase in fluoride concentration along the RBC bioreactor. Samples were collected from the feeding inlet (In), stages 1, 3 and 5 from unit 1 and the outlet (Out), according with the ( The concentration of the 2-fluorophenol fed in the inlet was about 0.3–0.4 For the on-line monitoring of the SBR bioreactor, a tubular electrode was used. Some of the previous studies were revisited to readjust the determination conditions. Injection volumes of 80.0 From the studied flow rates of 2.73, 3.52, 4.46, 5.01, 5.90 The composition of the TISAB solution had been previously studied in Section The chosen parameters of an injection volume of 133 The determination of the detection limit (DL) and lower limit of linear response (LLLR) was carried out by injecting fluoride standard solutions within the concentration range from 6.6 The overall consumption values per determination were: 252 For the on-line determination, several aspects had to be considered: how and where to establish the connection between the FIA system and the SBR. To achieve the on-line monitoring, a physical connection between the FIA assembly and the bioreactor was required. The ideal approach was to use one of five bioreactor sampling points already in place for off-line sampling, but three were already occupied. Two were used for the pH and the oxygen probes, and one was used for draining out the synthetic water at the end of the cycle. One possibility was to use the same exit used for empting the bioreactor between cycles, but then the fluoride determination could only be carried out during the empting procedure. Another possibility was at the bottom of the bioreactor, but there would be a problem with the biomass accumulation. The chosen location was at the top of the bioreactor. This way, there would be less biomass accumulation and the sampling could be carried out through most of the cycle. At the end of the effluent withdraw, to renew the minimal growth medium (synthetic waste water), and the feeding phase, sampling cannot be carried out. This is due to the low medium level inside the SBR bioreactor. In order to ensure that the sampling loop was an effective approach and that the chosen location for sampling was appropriate, two complete cycles of the SBR were monitored. A complete cycle ( The on-line determination of fluoride was carried out starting just before the stop of the air flow until the next stop of the air flow ( The results obtained proved that the choice of the sampling point was suitable for the fluoride monitoring and that the flow direction of the sample loop did not affect the determination. The flow reversal was important to ensure that there was no clogging in the sample loop. The increase of the fluoride concentration in the SBR results from the degradation of the 2-fluorophenol, so the degradation profile should be the mirror image of the fluoride concentration profile. This was proved by following both profiles ( The 2-fluorophenol concentration was determined by HPLC, and the samples were manually collected at the indicated hours. The preparation of the sample included centrifugation at 8000 The results obtained proved that the developed method was effective in the on-line determination of the fluoride along the degradation of the 2-fluorophenol, enabling a real time follow up of the process. Even when there was a problem in the bioreactor, affecting the biodegradation process, the fluoride determination also showed an altered profile suggesting that there was in fact something wrong ( The developed methods proved to be an efficient alternative for fluoride determination as a monitoring procedure of the 2-fluorophenol biodegradation process. The on-line monitoring of the SBR resulted in avoiding the laborious process of manually taking a sample and pre determination steps such as centrifugation and/or filtration. Even with the off-line method for the RBC bioreactor, a faster determination time and real time analysis was obtained. As the fluoride formation correlates directly with the efficiency of the biodegradation process, the real-time fluoride determination, provided by the developed methods, enables a better control of the bioreactors. Therefore, it proved to be an effective alternative to monitoring 2-fluorophenol removal, using chromatographic techniques. The possible interferences from the minimal growth medium were assessed and minimized with the presence of an additional chelating agent, the EGTA. Despite the requirement of an extra reagent an overall reduction in reagent consumption was obtained with the developed method. For the on-line procedure, the use of a sampling loop with a secondary peristaltic pump, enabling the change of the flow direction (forward and backwards), was a successful solution to prevent clogging of biomass along the tubes connected to the bioreactor. Also the location chosen for the connection enabled a cleaning procedure to be carried out between working days. Because the tubes were connected to the top of the bioreactor, at the time of replacing the growth medium, the tubes could be filled with air to improve cleaning and avoid bacterial growth. R.B.R. Mesquita and A.F. Duque thank to