In the present investigation, the effect of blast load on column of a multi-storied building is studied using Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian (CEL) method with the help of ABAQUS®/Explicit software. Concrete and reinforcement are modeled using Lagrangian formulation while explosive and air are modeled using Eulerian formulation. Jones-Wilkins-Lee (JWL) equation of state is used to define the behavior of TNT modeled herein. Response of the column is measured in terms of deflection at mid-height at varying TNT charge weights. Blast damage is mitigated by fitting the column with a layer of energy absorbing polymeric foam sandwiched with a steel sheet. Further, parametric analysis is conducted considering foam thickness and stand-off distance of the explosive from the column as variables. The results indicate that the displacement reduces significantly on application of foam on the column by absorbing the blast energy up to a considerable amount.Over the last few years, many important public building have come under explosive based terrorist attacks leading to collapse of structures and casualties. Prime examples of such unfortunate incidents are Oklahoma city bombing where Alfred Murray Federal Building collapsed killing 168 people and injuring 680 people in year 1995 and bombing attack on Khobar Tower in Saudi Arabia in 1996 in which 19 air men died and more than 350 got injured. In such incidents the explosives were carried in vehicle in large amount causing a great extent of damage. However, collapse of multi-storeyed building can still be caused if the most vulnerable structural component is damaged. Columns are one of such structural elements which are an integral part to the main load bearing system of any building. Damage to such component could lead to progressive collapse of the entire structure The behavior of Reinforced Concrete (RC) column subjected to blast loading employing experimental and numerical analysis has been studied in the past Hence, in present investigation, the blast response of RC column is studied under air burst using Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian (CEL) method provided by ABAQUS®/Explicit software. The column is fitted with a layer of polymeric foam with a thin sheet of steel as a mitigation measure. The mitigation capacity of foam is further studied by conducting parametric analysis by varying values of foam thickness and stand-off distance. For the present investigation, a column at the ground level of a multi-storied building with dimensions 355 × 355 mm and length 3.48 m is considered. The reinforcement details of the column is illustrated in For initial investigation, bare column is subjected to blast loading of 10 kg TNT charge weight. The column is then retrofitted with a 5 mm thick layer of polymeric foam. A steel sheet of thickness 1 mm is fitted on top of foam for uniform distribution of blast load. Both foam and steel sheet is modeled using 3D deformable solid elements of size 20 mm with hourglass control. Material parameters used to define concrete and steel has been taken from ABAQUS® manual and are shown in TNT is modeled in spherical form using Jones-Wilkins-Lee (JWL) equation of state which defines the pressure in terms of volume and initial density of the fluid. The density of TNT considered here is 1654 kg/m The response of column is studied with three varying TNT charge weights of 10, 25 and 50 kg in terms of displacement at mid-height of column, time histories of which are shown in The stand-off distance is further varied to determine its effect on foam fitted column and the variation can be observed in In present study, the blast response of reinforced column is studied using Coupled Eulerian Lagrangian (CEL) method provided by ABAQUS®/Explicit software. The column is retrofitted with a layer of polymeric foam to mitigate the damage induced by blast load. Thickness of the foam is varied to arrive at a value which reduces the damage sufficiently. A significant decrease in mid-height displacement of column is observed when the foam thickness and stand-off distance are increased. The observations obtained from this investigations concludes that further study can be carried out for mitigation of blast damage of structural elements using different types of foam.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.