The effects of a mechanical pretreatment were determined on the methane yield of giant reed stems (Arundo Donax) and wheat straw. The feedstocks were pretreated using a two stages dry milling device, whose working capacity - up to 1,2 t h−1- can meet the requirements of medium and large-scale biogas plants. Untreated and pretreated materials were anaerobically digested in batch reactors under mesophilic conditions for 28 days. The cumulative biogas production from the pretreated giant reed stems exceeded 212 Nm3 t−1 of volatile solids, showing a 137% gain as compared to the raw material; furthermore, a significant decrease in the acid detergent fiber content was observed in the processed material. Pretreated straw reached a cumulative methane yield of 250.3 Nm3 t−1 of volatile solids, gaining a 49.1% as compared to the feedstock; no statistically significant differences were observed in physicochemical composition following pretreatment. The aforementioned gains resulted far above the known range for mechanical pretreatments. The specific electric energy requirement for pretreatment decreased from 76.5 kWh t−1 of processed giant reed stems to 66.0 kWh t−1 for straw. With reference to the use of biogas in CHP plants, the net electric energy output from pretreated materials was enhanced by about 111.7% and 38.3% as compared to the feedstocks for reed and straw, respectively. The cost for the extra electric energy produced by pretreatment was estimated at 0.034 and 0.048 € kWh−1 for giant reed and straw, respectively, resulting fully compatible with the selling price for the electric energy produced from biogas in force in Italy.Within the European Union, 17,662 biogas plants reached an installed electrical capacity of 9.98 GW in 2016, and 62.6 TWh of electricity were delivered to the network in 2015. A 70% of these plants (12,496) runs on agricultural substrates, representing 62% of the installed power. The number of biomethane plants on the same year was far short, 503 units, which produced 17.2 TWh with a strong domination of Germany [ In October 2014 the Italian Ministry of Economic Development introduced the obligation of placing primarily on the Italian fuel market the so-called “advanced biofuels”, that are those, including biomethane, being produced exclusively from specific feedstocks, such as straw, corn stover, forest residues, and dedicated lignocellulosic crops such as, for example, The residues of the agricultural activities in the European Union exceed 200 million tons every year and they are mostly constituted by cereal straw, which represents the most abundant biomass available in the Union for bioenergy production [ Among the lignocellulosic crops allowed for production of advanced biofuels, giant reed is gaining increasing interest because of its high biomass yield and tolerance to drought. Furthermore, giant reed, being a non-food crop, can be cultivated in marginal or polluted soils not used for agriculture requiring reduced agronomic inputs; thus, the total cultivation costs are quite low [ Despite such desirable features, giant reed and straw are of limited use for methane production due to their low biodegradability. They have a poor content of easily degradable fractions as lipids and starch, and a high content of structural carbohydrates and lignin. Moreover, the lignin content of giant reed stems is about twice that of the leaves [ Thus, to improve the biodegradability, a pretreatment step is needed to weaken the lignocellulosic structure, remove the lignin and increase the surface for enzymatic attack. Several pretreatment techniques have been used to improve the anaerobic degradability of both giant reed and straw. It is well known that acid pretreatments have several drawbacks with regard to anaerobic digestion processes, due to formation at high temperatures of compounds that usually inhibit the microbial growth and fermentation, resulting in low biogas production [ Alkali pretreatment is more compatible with subsequent anaerobic digestion than acidic treatment, since any alkali remaining with the treated solids is useful in the process, which requires alkalinity addiction for pH control. A mild alkaline pretreatment of giant reed using sodium hydroxide, 24 h residence time at 24 °C, produced 11.4%, 17.4% and 20.9% increase in the cumulative methane yield at NaOH concentrations of 2%, 4% and 6% (w/w), respectively [ Among physic-chemical processes, wet explosion of wheat straw (heating at 180 °C and 10 bar pressure with H In the field of physical pretreatments, steam explosion has received substantial attention for both ethanol and biogas production. Steam exploded wheat straw reached a methane production of 273 Nm Microwave heating was also used to improve the degradability of cereal straw. Despite the strong increase in methane yield of the substrates, the process resulted not sustainable, because of the high demand of electric energy [ Size reduction pretreatment has been extensively used to process cereal straw and other lignocellulosic feedstocks. The objective of size reduction, or comminution, is to increase the specific surface area available, thus facilitating the exchange of mass and heat and the action of anaerobic microorganisms. The comminution also causes a reduction of the crystallinity of the cellulose and its degree of polymerization [ Koullas [ Sharma et al. reported the effects of particle size of agricultural and forest residues on biogas generation through anaerobic digestion under mesophilic conditions [ A recent work [ Mechanical treatment of wheat straw improved methane yields from 285 to 334 Nm No studies were found in the literature on mechanical pretreatment of giant reed. In summary, size reduction of straw to 0.088–20 mm produced a yield gain not larger than 56%. Furthermore, comminution of other biomasses enhanced methane yield by no more than 30% and, occasionally, reduced size decreased biogas production [ In the present study we evaluated the effectiveness of a milling pretreatment on giant reed stems and wheat straw; milling was carried out by an industrial scale device. Through a set of anaerobic digestion experiments, it was defined the methane yield of both untreated and pretreated materials, including the biogas composition. A detailed analysis of chemical composition and particle size on both raw and processed material was performed, to help in interpreting the results. Lastly, we carried out an evaluation of both the specific energy consumption and the energy balance of pretreatment. Arundo donax was harvested in late July 2016 in a natural grove of reeds near Rome, Central Italy (41°53′02.1″ North, 12°36′11.4″ East); only plants born in the growing season 2016 were collected. They were sun dried in the field until early October 2016, the remaining leaves were removed from stems. Naturally dried straw from a soft wheat grown in central Italy and harvested in June 2016 was also used. The abovementioned feedstocks were chopped in a knife mill to an average length of about 20 mm, which is a typical dimension used in anaerobic digestion plants. Portions of these materials were used as a reference and named WS (Wheat Straw) and GRS (Giant Reed Stems). The milling device has been designed to process feedstock with a high dry matter content (>70%). It comprises two milling stages ( Preliminary tests on the harvested material showed that milling of Arundo in a wet state, namely about 30–35% moisture content, could not be carried out continuously at mass flow rates exceeding 200 kg h As a consequence, the initial moisture content of the processed materials is not considered as a variable in the present study. After the preliminary assessments, two samples of chips of both the raw materials, 50 kg each, were processed in the described mill. A screw conveyer fed the mill at the constant mass flow rate of 900 kg h From here on out, the products will be named GRSMP (Giant Reed Stems Mechanically Pretreated) and WSMP (Wheat Straw Mechanically Pretreated). The power drawn by the pretreatment device was measured using a wattmeter (MTME-485, ABB-SACE, Italy); power, supply voltage, current and time were logged into a PC card at 1-s intervals. The energy required for milling (kWh) was determined by integrating the area under the power demand curve for the total time required to grind the 50 kg samples. The specific energy demand (kWh kg The raw and the processed materials were analysed for total and volatile solids (TS and VS, respectively) according to the APHA standard methods [ The particle size distribution of the processed materials was determined according to the ASABE standard S319.3 [ Biogas production experiments were carried out on samples of both the raw (WS, GRS) and the processed materials, to assess the biogas and methane yields. The experiments were performed in batch anaerobic reactors with a working volume of 2 L, equipped with mixing and thermostating systems. The reactors were operated in mesophilic conditions (38 °C). Anaerobic sludge from a mesophilic digester, containing 3.67% total solids and 2.68% volatile solids, was used as inoculum to start the biological process. The inoculum/substrate ratio was in the range 0.504–0.507 on a VS basis, and the final substrate loading was in the range 69–70 g The experiments lasted 28 days and each of them was performed in triplicate, including two controls with inoculum sludge only; the gas produced by controls was subtracted from the actual gas produced through digestion of the media. Biogas production was measured daily in averaged samples following standard methods [ The masses of GRSMP and WSMP amounted to 96.8% and 98.9%, respectively, of the processed samples. In both cases, the processing lost was mainly due to the reduction of the moisture content in the products respect the raw material. Processed reed stems showed a median particle size (d It is worth noticing that, after processing, the ADL and NDF contents of giant reed remained unchanged, whereas the ADF decreased significantly (P < 0.05) from 58.8% The untreated giant reed stems (GRS) showed a methane yield of 89.5 (±3.1) Nm The untreated straw reached a methane yield of 167.8 (±4.0) Nm Methane concentration in biogas was significant higher in WSMP (52.2%) respect the raw material (49.3%); no statistically significant differences in the biogas composition where observed for giant reed stems. As expected, the methane production was quite faster in the processed materials than in the unprocessed ones. As depicted in The methane production rates for the pretreated materials were high, reaching maximum values of 27.4 and 15.6 Nm The overall energy consumption, including the need for the feeding conveyer and the pneumatic transport of the processed material, was 2.295 (±0.204) kWh for GRSMP, which leads to a specific energy requirement of 76.5 (±6.8) kWh t Electrical energy (E The electric energy gain was obtained by subtracting from the energy produced by the pretreated material the sum of the energy obtained from the raw material and the energy consumption of the process. The results are shown in As regards biofuels production, primary energy (E Studies carried out on industrial scale pretreatment devices are rare in the literature and data concerning the operating conditions are often largely incomplete. A recent work [ It is worth noticing that the mill size and the mass flow rate are necessary for an accurate evaluation of the energy balance, having a strong influence on the energy consumption. Using bench scale hammer mills (1.5 kW), the energy consumption to grind air dried Miscanthus and switchgrass through a 1 mm screen was about 55 kWh t As discussed in the introduction, size reduction of biomass by milling up to few microns achieved a methane yield gain not larger than 56% for wheat straw and 30% for other agricultural residues. The pretreatment studied in the present paper strongly enhanced the cumulative methane yield from giant reed stems and wheat straw, 137.7% and 49.2% respectively. Although very interesting, the methane gain for wheat straw was far below the impressive yield gain observed for pretreated giant reed. The particle size of the processed Arundo (d Before discussing about the energy efficiency of the studied pretreatment, it is worth noticing that, although it was carried out on a full-scale device, the anaerobic digestion was studied at a laboratory scale in 2 L batch reactors. This methodology is useful and effective for the determination of optimal pretreatment conditions, and it has already been used in other studies carried out on full-scale pretreatment devices [ In view of the above, the following considerations have the purpose of evaluating the efficiency of the studied pretreatment method starting from a correct evaluation of the energy consumption to allow comparisons with other results published in the literature. A comprehensive assessment of the performances of the pretreated materials in a full-scale digester is beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, it should also be taken into account that several studies carried out in full scale AD plants demonstrated that the results of BMP tests can give a good prediction of the actual biogas production, especially when mechanical pretreatments are concerned. Holliger et al. [ Similar results were also found by studing the effects of a full-scale hydrodynamic cavitation pretreatment in a 725 KWe agricultural biogas plant, whose HRT was 30–35 days [ The differences between the batch digestion test and the full scale actual methane production for mechanical pretreated straw-based horse manure were negligible. The study was carried out in a full-scale, mesophilic, double-stage, continuous CSTR biogas plant over a period of 160 days [ In the light of the above, and also considering that the HRT of the batch test carried out in the present study were shorter compared with the full scale ones, it can be assumed that the batch methane yields presented in this study can be used to predict the methane yields from the same materials in full scale operation. The energy efficiency of the investigated pretreatment was high. With reference to the use of biogas in CHP plants and to the results for GRSMP, the net electric gain from pretreated giant reed stems was 325.1 kWh t Energy consumption for pretreatment was 19.0% and 23.7% of the gross electric energy gain for GRSMP and WSMP, respectively. With reference to the use of biomethane as a biofuel, the investigated pretreatment produced a net extra output of primary energy of 861.6 kWh t With reference to previous studies carried out on industrial scale, a commercial extruder, running at a mass flow rate of about 1.5 t h Extrusion of a mixture of ensiled rice straw together with corn and triticale silage was also studied on an industrial device, whose working capacity was up to 5 t h In comparison to these results, the energy consumption of the device investigated in the present study was high. The electric energy gain was in the previously investigated range for wheat straw and far better for pretread Arundo, which enhanced of over 110% the electric energy yield of the raw material. From an economic point of view, and assuming an average purchase price of about 0.15 € kWh A double stage, industrial scale mill was investigated for pretreating giant reed stems and wheat straw. The methane yield of the pretreated stems was enhanced by 137% compared to the untreated material. Such impressive gain was far above the known range for size reduction and mechanical pretreatments. The chemical analysis showed that the ADF content in the processed stems decreased significantly compared to the raw material. Such a reduction was not observed for pretreated straw, whose methane yield gain was 49.3%. Pretreatment enhanced the electric energy output from the Arundo stems by over 118%, net of the energy consumption for treatment, and by over 41% for straw. Given that many studies carried out on full scale biogas plant using mechanical pretreatments demonstrated that the results of BMP tests give a good prediction of the actual biogas production, the results of the present study suggest that the investigated pretreatment could be successfully implemented to improve methane production efficiency in anaerobic digesters. In fact, the working capacity - up to 1.2 t h 