A large amount of an etching waste containing indium is wasted by plants manufacturing liquid crystal displays. In this study, the recovery of indium from the etching waste by solvent extraction and electrolytic refining was investigated. Initially, major impurities, such as aluminum and molybdenum, were removed by dissolution using sodium hydroxide. From the resulting etching cake, solvent extraction of indium was studied for the extractant of PC88A. Indium was extracted efficiently in an acidity range of 0.1 to 0.5mol/dm3 (MH
                     +). PC88A extracts indium, aluminium, molybdenium, and iron from the HCl medium, but indium could be selectively stripped from the loaded solvent. The conditions for continuous running on a pilot scale using PC88A were obtained. The resulting indium solution was further purified to metal by electrolytic refining so that the final purity of the indium metal was 99.997%.Due to its specific functional applications, indium is an important element in electronic and energy-related industries. Indium oxide plays an important role in transparent conducting oxide (TCO), which is an essential material for liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and solar cells. Therefore, the recovery of indium from industrial wastes, such as used TCO sputtering targets, has been intensively investigated ( Solvent extraction is a commonly used method for the purification of indium in process metallurgy, particularly in zinc refineries, where indium is usually recovered from sulfate solution ( The etching waste from the process of LCD display fabrication contains a small amount of indium (~ The scheme of the separation procedure is shown in The filtered cake was dissolved by concentrated hydrochloric acid and used in solvent extraction experiments. The hydrochloric acid was added in an amount of 130% of all the metal chlorides formed after dissolution such as InCl After the solvent extraction, the indium solution was further purified by electrolytic refining to obtain a purity of > The etching cake contained about 2% of indium with metal components such as Mo, Al, Cr, Mg, and Na. The chemical analysis results of the etching cake are listed in To increase the indium concentration, the impurities of Mo, Al, Cr, and Mg were dissolved by an alkaline solution of NaOH ( As seen in To find the optimum conditions of the etching cake, a preliminary study on extraction from the indium solution of an indium ingot was carried out. PC88A was used as a 1 As shown in With respect to the OA ratio, the fraction extracted was evaluated with M To calculate the time to extract the indium, the time dependency of extraction was evaluated with M Based on the preliminary study on extraction from the solution of the indium ingot, an experiment on the etching cake to find the optimum condition was carried out. First, the influence of saponification on extraction was studied. PC88A was saponified by 20% and 40%, and was compared with unsaponified PC88A with pH As shown in For extraction using unsaponified PC88A, the M The fractions extracted of indium were 97%, 92%, and 92% for initial indium concentrations of 25, 50, and 100 Further experiments with varied M  The extraction conditions and results can be summarized as follows; 1) dissolution of impurities by alkaline solution, 2) dissolution of the cake by HCl (M We made an attempt to conduct scrubbing of the organic phase by acid solutions (HCl, HNO The remaining impurities could be removed in a subsequent metallization process. In the subsequent process, the indium ions in solution were metalized by electrolytic refining. The final impurities were removed below 5 Based upon the experiments in a bench-top scale, the separation and purification of indium were carried out with solvent extraction apparatus for continuous running on a pilot scale. In the first stage, the fraction extracted of indium was an almost constant value of about 94%. The impurities, Sn, Mo, and Fe showed a decreasing fraction extracted as the extraction time increased. No extraction of Cu was observed. The fractions of indium in 2 to 4 stages increased to about 99.7%, compared to the first stage. The fraction extracted of the final solution was found to be about 99.9%, while those of Fe, Mo, and Sn are < Using the indium solution obtained by solvent extraction, the purification of indium by electrolytic refining was performed to obtain an indium metal with a purity of > The chemical analysis results after electrolytic refining are shown in The recovery of indium from an etching waste by solvent extraction and electrolytic refining was investigated. The indium was purified by dissolution using alkaline and solvent extraction using PC88A. The experimental conditions may be summarized follows: (i) dissolution of impurities by 12 This work was supported by the Energy & Resource R&D Program under the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at