The damage of vertical oil/gas wells in longwall mining areas is mainly a result of strata movement induced by coal extraction. Strata with contrasting lithology vary dramatically in their movement and potential for well damage, with some special combinations of strata in particular having the greatest potential for damage. This study investigates the effects of specific combinations of strata transition structures ((i) topsoil-bedrock, (ii) a thin weak interlayer sandwiched above and below by two stiff beds, and (iii) the key-stratum sandwiched above and below by two soft beds) on the magnitude, severity and distribution of various anticipated well deformations, and explores the optimal drilling path for wells to maximize well integrity. Results indicate that: (1) Effects of various combinations of strata on well deformation lie essentially in the mismatch in the mechanical properties of the strata and weak interfaces, with the stratum thickness and vertical distance from the coal seam to the stratum/interface also exerting a significant influence. (2) Wells in the upper part of the topsoil are subject to horizontal tension, while the lower part is laterally compressed following the extraction of either one panel or both panels. Large lateral tensile strains normally arise at the upper part of the hard strata which directly underlie the soft strata. Large lateral compressive strains are concentrated in the strata within ~5m above and below the coal seam and peak in the seam. Longitudinal well deformation is dominated by compression in soft strata, especially in the upper part of the layer, and is dominated by tension in stiff strata, within the lower portion in particular. Vertical compression at the interface is larger below the key-stratum, and peaks at the interface between the coal seam and its immediate roof. Well distortions in soft strata are 3 to 5 times those of ones in stiff strata. (3) Well deformations developing both at interfaces and within layers significantly intensify in the vicinity of the seam. An integrated consideration of various deformations of five candidate well paths indicates that the optimal position for well stability is the one that deviates from the pillar centerline and is close to the second mined panel.In the last two decades, the extraction of unconventional hydrocarbon resources (e.g., shale gas, shale oil, tight sandstone gas, etc.) has developed rapidly. However, in some sedimentary basins where coal, gas and oil coexist, ensuring the stability of wells traversing longwall-mineable coal seams is becoming a barrier impeding their simultaneous recovery ( Resulting from the simultaneous recovery of coal and hydrocarbon resources, the importance of well survivability has been noted since the early 20th century ( Further investigations have defined and then investigated the effect of key factors influencing the stability of gas wells as they traverse mineable coal seams. The factors examined include topography, coal seam burial depth, the presence of weak interfaces between alternating soft and stiff layers, and sequential extraction of coal faces on both sides of well-protecting coal pillars ( In this work, the geologic model is examined with a two-dimensional continuum finite difference program, representing deformable strata and “interfaces”. We follow (1) the horizontal shear slippage and vertical compression occurring at interfaces between alternating layers, (2) axial distortion and, (3) tension and compression occurring within layers both in the horizontal and vertical directions. These deformations represent the anticipated failure mode for oil/gas wells that pierce the intervening coal protective pillars between longwall panels (LWPs). These pillars are part of typical panel development plans (3 entry gates) and include a set of two pillars between LWPs ( in terms of elastic shear offset, The Mohr-Coulomb criterion, is applied as the strata yield criterion, where the cohesion ( A shear dislocation occurs along interfaces as the key factor inducing the shear and distortion of the well. The FLAC model comprises two types of interfaces formed by soft and hard strata, which is distinguished by Eqs. (1) Coulomb criterion of shear strength If | (2) Tensile yield criterion where The mechanical parameters of the strata and interfaces dictate the shear, tensile, and compressive deformation and distortion arising in the wells. The authors have already explored the sensitivity of well deformations to these mechanical parameters involving Young's modulus, Horizontal shear offset and vertical compression occurring at interfaces between alternating layers of hard and soft strata are not sensitive to the difference of Young's moduli of adjacent strata, and are only weakly sensitive to contrasts in Poisson ratios. As Poisson”s ratio increases, the horizontal shear and vertical compression increases slightly and linearly. Horizontal shear offset and vertical compression occurs at interlaminar interfaces and these are insensitive to the cohesion and internal friction angle of adjacent strata. In comparison with the vertical compression at weak interfaces, the horizontal shear offset is susceptible to the difference of tensile strengths of adjacent strata. Horizontal shear offsets and vertical compression which occurs at weak interfaces between alternating layers is critical for well integrity. These offsets are largely dominated by the shear stiffness, normal stiffness, and internal friction angle of the interface ( We take this understanding of the key influences of strata response and its dependence on key properties to define the key combinations of strata properties implicated in well failures. As noted above, these focus on the properties of the interfaces, and the combination of soft or stiff layers above and below. Based on this, we examine these key combinations accommodating the mechanical parameters for the strata and interfaces in a numerical model ( The central pillar between panels is divided into a yield pillar (15 We compare the impacts of longwall mining on well stability. In particular we examine the shear, tensile, and compressive deformation and distortion of wells excavated in various combinations of strata. Spatially, well deformation contains two parts, comprising deformation within the strata and at the interfaces between layers. The first part can be represented by horizontal, vertical, and shear strains. The second part is calculated by the horizontal and vertical relative motion of the strata directly above and below the interbed interface, which is characterized by both horizontal shear displacement and vertical compression. In the numerical model, five measuring lines are arranged corresponding to the five schemes of well trajectories (W1  The horizontal shear displacements ( The interfacial shear displacement in the shallow roof, largely determined by the axial distribution of well shear displacement, is caused primarily by the high concentration of shear stress resulting from mining activities. The axial distribution of well shear displacement is also responsible for the insignificant shear displacement in the topsoil-bedrock and HSH strata interfaces, i.e., the shear displacement of interfaces is inversely related to its vertical distance to the coal seam because of the difference in intensity in the mining activities. After the extraction of panel 2, the horizontal shear offsets mainly concentrate at interfaces immediately above and below the key-stratum and at roof interfaces within 30 In the cross section of the pillar, horizontal shear offsets of well W1 are significantly greater than those of W2–W5 after LWP 1 is removed. In addition, W1 is at the left edge of the pillar and suffers the greatest from the excavation of panel 1. The peak shear offset of well W1 is 138.5 According to The extraction of panel 1 may significantly damage well W1, which is present in the yield pillar and closest to panel 1. The maximum interfacial compression for well W1 (−  Along the longitudinal direction, no evident increment in well distortion within the weak interlayer (mudstone, 0.3 The above analysis identifies that the axial distortion of the well depends on strata mechanical properties and the vertical distance from the stratum to the coal seam. Specifically, wells traversing overlying weak strata and shallow roof above the seam are prone to large distortions.  Longitudinally, the vertical strain also fluctuates as the rock mechanical properties alternate between stiff and soft. Axial deformation in the soft strata is dominated by compression, which is especially true in the upper part of the soft layers. Vertical tension accounts for a major portion of the axial deformation of the well in hard layers, and in the lower part in particular. As the rock mechanical parameters and bed thickness differ widely ( In conclusion, different combinations of strata sequences influence the magnitude and distribution of horizontal and vertical strains of the wells to various extents. The magnitude of well deformation within the layer is also determined by the layer thickness and the spacing between the layer and the coal seam. Even in the topsoil with uniform properties, the horizontal and vertical strains along the axial well are non-uniform. More specifically, wells in the upper part of the topsoil are subjected to horizontal tension, while those in the lower part are compressed. The shallow topsoil has a high vertical well deformation in tension. Ensuring the stability of deep wells penetrating longwall-mineable coal seams is an urgent issue affecting the efficient co-extraction of the coal seam and the underlying hydrocarbon resources. This work explores the effects of strata combination structures on well stability. Substantially, studies on stability of underground openings (shafts, oil/gas wells, boreholes, gateroads/entries, caverns, et al.) and change of fluid conductivity over and around LWPs are all concerned with overburden subsidence caused by coal mining and the resulting strata deformation (bending, rotation, distortion, shear, separation and compression, et al.). Actual levels of distress experienced by wells undermined in the manner mentioned above are not defined in this work as relevant field data in publications are rare. And available data remain proprietary. An up-to-date literature review suggests that these observations are not unusual. For example, Longwall mining causes various deformations to the overlying strata, including stretching, bending, shearing, bed separation, subsidence and compression. However, different deformations dominate in different zones. For example, overlying strata are mainly deformed by bending and sinking, tensile separation and compression. While at the edges of the panel or within the overlying strata above the coal pillar, strata deformations are generally characterized by tension and bending, axial distortion, interlayer shear and compression ( Among these deformations, shear is the main pattern of well/wellbore instability and is related primarily to the slippage of layers along weak interfaces within the overburden ( Similar to the compaction of a longwall gob, reservoir compaction during oil/gas extraction generates high shear stresses in the overburden material near the flanks of the reservoir. Through field observations, In this work, we find that apart from mechanical properties of the interfaces and strata, layer thickness and spacing between the coal seam and the stratum/interface are involved as secondary factors in controlling well deformation. Specifically, (1) various deformations (horizontal shear displacement and vertical compression occur at interfaces, axial distortion and the horizontal and vertical strains occur within strata) of the well generally increase as the spacing between the stratum/interface and the coal seam decreases, (2) a large shear displacement is more likely to occur at the interface of SHS strata structures comprising a hard and thick layer (the key-stratum) than at the weak interface alone, and (3) the vertical compression at the interface below the key-stratum dominates the total amount of compression in the overlying strata. These are substantially similar to results of Existing studies have evaluated axial strains along well trajectories for longwall mining around a gas well at the Cumberland Mine in Pennsylvania ( Seam depth, thickness and pillar width are congruent in all the studies ( We also make a comparison of casing/borehole strains between this new work and previous studies regarding the stability of methane capture boreholes and GGVs in gassy coal seams, and casing/wellbore failure induced by reservoir compaction in the petroleum industry. Statistical data from these previous studies are tabulated in Vertical strains induced by reservoir compaction and resulting from pore collapse of weak reservoir rocks after 5–6 The greatest vertical compressional strain of GGVs calculated from the Gaussian distribution function is of the order of − Similarly, shear strains of methane capture boreholes drilled from the tailgate roadway and across the shallow roof ( We conduct a thorough integrated evaluation of various deformations of the five well trajectories analyzed in the previous section, especially the horizontal shear offset which jeopardizes well integrity the most. Trajectory W3 is the recommended drilling path for the well. That is, positioning the well closer to the rib of the second mined panel favors well integrity. It is speculated that, based on our numerical modeling results, part of the deformation of the wellbore in the overlying strata can be recovered and that some deformations cannot be restored (and may even intensify) after the twin panels flanking the coal pillar are sequentially removed. Although the authors did not discuss the relation between the position of the well within the coal pillar and its stability, supporting evidence for this viewpoint is available from field engineering practice ( Increased demand for energy encourages the exploitation of unconventional hydrocarbon resources. In areas where the overlaying coal and deep hydrocarbon resources coexist, longwall mining may inevitably damage the transiting wells; therefore, maintaining the stability of these wells has become a significant issue impeding the co-extraction of these resources. This paper investigates the effect of strata combination structures on the magnitude and distribution of various well deformations, and explores the optimal well drilling path favoring the well integrity. The main conclusions are as follows: The effects of various combinations of strata on well deformation (including horizontal shear offset and vertical compression occurring at the weak interfaces between alternating layers, and the axial distortion, horizontal and vertical tension and compression occurring within the strata) lie essentially in the mechanical properties of the interfaces and strata. The stratum thickness and the spacing between the coal seam and the stratum/interface are also involved as secondary factors in controlling well deformation. Longwall mining-induced interfacial shear displacements at interfaces between a monolithic rigid bed (e.g. the key-stratum) and its immediate overlaying and underlaying soft beds (e.g. shales/mudstones, SHS strata structure), especially at the interface sandwiched above by a thick stiff layer and below by a thick soft layer, are much larger than those at interfaces with simply low stiffness. However, wells are not susceptible to large horizontal shear slippage at interfaces between one thin soft interlayer and the stiff beds directly above and below (HSH strata structure), and between the topsoil and its underlaying bedrock. Well deformations arising both at interfaces and within layers all significantly intensify in the vicinity of the mined seam. Wells in such areas are therefore at high risk of instability. Different types of strata combinations (the topsoil-bedrock, HSH, and SHS strata structures) influence the magnitude and distribution of various well deformations to varying extents. The horizontal and vertical strains in the topsoil change gradually then vary abruptly at the interface between the topsoil and its underlaying bedrock. Wells in the upper part of the topsoil are subject to horizontal tension after either one or both panels are removed, while the lower part is compressed. Lateral strains are dominated by tension in the upper part of stiff beds (e.g. the upper part of the bedrock, the key stratum, and the sandstone directly below the thin weak interlayer) which directly lie beneath the soft beds. The larger lateral tensile strains are for wells in the shallow roof (~ Longitudinal well deformation in soft strata is dominated by compression especially in the upper part of the layer. Vertical tension plays a dominant role in well deformation in stiff/hard layers, especially in their lower reaches. The shallow topsoil has a greater vertical well deformation that is dominated by tension. The vertical interfacial compression is larger at interfaces below the key-stratum, peaking at the interface between the coal seam and its immediate roof. The key-stratum behaves like a barrier layer, preventing the overlying strata from bending and subsiding and preventing mining-induced damage from propagating upwards. Small increases in vertical interfacial compression are detected at interfaces between 1) the key-stratum and its immediately underlying soft layer, 2) a thin weak stratum and its immediately overlying hard layer, and 3) topsoil and the bedrock after either one or both panels are removed. Since the strata beneath the topsoil alternate as soft mudstones and stiff sandstones, the axial distortion of wells traversing these strata fluctuate. Well distortion within the soft strata exceeds that in the stiff strata, generally reaching 3 to 5 times the distortion of the latter, and reaching a peak distortion of ~ After extraction of the twin LWPs, the interfacial horizontal shear offsets and the intra-formational axial distortion of the well rebounds to some extent in the upper part of the overlying strata, due to the symmetry of mining geometry. However, in the seam and its shallow roof (within 30 In the cross section of the pillar, various deformations of wells W1 and W5, which traverse the edges of the longwall pillar, are greater to varying extents than those of wells W2-W4 after the twin LWPs are sequentially excavated. The maximum lateral shear offset of well W3 is 97.5 Spatially, magnitudes of various deformations of strata directly over the gob, pillars and edges of the panel differ. Due to the larger subsidence of overlying strata above the gob compared with that occurring within the overlying strata above the pillar, vertical compressive strains of the GGVs are usually greater than those of wells in the overlying strata of the pillar. As for methane capture boreholes sidetrack drilled from the tailgate and across the shallow roof of an LWP, the shear strains of boreholes occur as the strata in the overlying edges of the panel bend, tilt and subside during the panel-advance cycle and these are far larger than those for wells piercing the pillar. While for the hydrocarbon wells, the vertical casing strains (both compressive and extensile) induced by reservoir compaction as a result of pore collapse of weak reservoir rocks after long-term production are generally larger than those of wells penetrating the longwall pillars by more than one order of magnitude. Financial support for this work, provided by