In this study the purity of the germanium end-products obtained by two different precipitation methods carried out on germanium-bearing solutions was evaluated as a last step of a hydrometallurgy process for the recovery of this valuable element from the Puertollano Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) fly ash. Since H2S is produced as a by-product in the gas cleaning system of the Puertollano IGCC plant, precipitation of germanium as GeS2 was tested by sulfiding the Ge-bearing solutions. The technological and hazardous issues that surround H2S handling conducted to investigate a novel precipitation procedure: precipitation as an organic complex by adding 1,2-dihydroxy benzene pyrocatechol (CAT) and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to the Ge-bearing solutions. Relatively high purity Ge end-products (90 and 93% hexagonal-GeO2 purity, respectively) were obtained by precipitating Ge from enriched solutions, as GeS2 sulfiding the solutions with H2S, or as organic complex with CAT/CTAB mixtures and subsequent roasting of the precipitates. Both methods showed high efficiency (>99%) to precipitate selectively Ge using a single precipitation stage from germanium-bearing solutions.Germanium is a valuable element used in the production of novel and high technological industrial applications. For instance in the manufacture of advanced electronic and optical devices, fibre optics, as a polymerisation catalyst in polyethylene terephthalate plastics, in the field of photovoltaic cells and in the manufacture of thermal solar cells The industrial recovery of Ge is usually based on hydrometallurgical processes with high economic and environmental cost. Most of the industrial processes for the recovery of Ge involve the generation of a Ge-bearing solution by acid leaching of raw materials followed by production of Ge end-products. The proposed recovery processes of Ge from fly ash are similar to those proposed from the recovery from Zn ores. Zouboulis et al. As an alternative to the extraction methods mentioned above, the occurrence of Ge as water soluble species (GeS The adsorption onto activated carbon process These results led towards the investigation of precipitation processes for germanium from the Ge-bearing solutions as a last step of a hydrometallurgy process for the recovery of this valuable element from the Puertollano IGCC fly ash. This article focuses on evaluating the feasibility of two different methods for the precipitation of germanium from Ge-bearing solutions arising from the Puertollano IGCC fly ash leachates was reported. Due to the low solubility of GeS Furthermore, the use of this gas stream for the precipitation of Ge may reduce the economic costs of the recovery process. However the handling of H The CTAB is a quaternary ammonium salt used as surfactant on detergent industry. Quaternary ammonium surfactants widely provide crystalline molecular complexes with various aromatic compounds as catechol. Barreto et al. The Ge–CAT complex has a high solubility in water probably due to its polarity, but when CTAB is added to an aqueous solution that contains the Ge–CAT complex, the CTA Germanium precipitation as GeS A number of precipitation tests were carried out using solutions with low (35 Experimental equipment for Ge precipitation tests with H Precipitation tests sulfiding the solutions were carried out by controlling pH (0–7), HCl concentration (1–6N), H The Ge precipitates obtained were subsequently roasted at 500–700 The precipitation tests with CTAB were focused on evaluating the selective precipitation efficiency of germanium, and the optimisation of the experimental parameters (reagents order of addition, amount of CAT and CTAB and pH). The effect of the SX separation procedure prior precipitation on the purity of the germanium end-product was also evaluated. The following Ge-bearing solutions were used as starting materials for the germanium precipitation with CTAB: (a) standard germanium solutions (50 and 100 The batch experiments were carried out by controlling pH and CAT/Ge and CTAB/Ge molar ratios. The CAT and CTAB were added to the Ge-bearing solutions as complexant and precipitation agent, respectively. After complete dissolution of both, CAT and CTAB, the pH was adjusted by adding the appropriate amount of 4N NaOH or 2N H The content of major and trace elements were analysed in the solutions before and after the precipitation experiments, and also in the precipitates as well as in the Ge end-products after digestion, by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). A special two-step sample digestion method for the analysis of potentially volatile elements devised by Querol et al. The results of the precipitation tests by sulfiding Ge-bearing solutions revealed that >99% of germanium can be precipitated from leachates by a single sulfiding step using 100% H As, Sb and Ni are the major impurities to take into account in the precipitation process for obtaining high purity of Ge end-products, due to the relatively high contents in IGCC fly ash and their relatively high water extraction yields Regarding the major impurities (As, Sb and Ni), A different pH precipitation of Ge from those was found for 100% H As: close to 100% of the As in the leachates is precipitated for all the pH range selected. Sb: from pH 7 to 1 around 100% of Sb was precipitated, but only a low proportion of this element (close to 30%) precipitated when HCl 6N (pH 0) was added to the leachates. Ni: only partial precipitation of this metal occurred at pH from 7 to 5 (∼50%), close to 100% remained in solution at pH This differential precipitation of Ge from major impurities could allow isolating Ge by applying two sulfiding steps at different pH and/or HCl concentrations improving the purity of the precipitated and consequently that of the Ge end-product. Nevertheless, when the Ge content in the solutions was high (100–1625 The precipitates obtained show the occurrence of hexagonal-GeO Relatively high purity Ge end-products (91–93% GeO It can be noticed that the use of NaOH for the stripping of Ge during the SX enrichment results coupled with the acidification with HCl results in a high NaCl content (84%) in the precipitate obtained after sulfiding. Since NaCl is stable up to 800 It can be concluded that relatively high purity GeO The precipitation tests of germanium as CAT–Ge–CTA organic complex revealed that 99% of Ge can be precipitated from enriched Ge-bearing solutions by adding CAT (CAT/Ge molar ratio of 5) and CTAB (CTAB/Ge molar ratio of 3) at pH 11 and room temperature, after 1 The following effects of the experimental parameters on the precipitation of Ge as organic complex were observed: The pH is a very important factor in the Ge precipitation. The highest Ge precipitation yield was obtained at pH 13 (>99% Ge precipitated) decreasing slightly down to 97% when pH decreases to 8.9 and down to 40% at acid pH (4.1). The pH also affected the size of precipitated particles, enlarging them as pH was increased. On one hand this would allow an easy filtration; but on the other hand, pH increased viscosity of the solutions, most probably due to the oxidation of catechol The germanium precipitation is high (>97% of Ge precipitated) when the pH was adjusted after CAT and CTAB addition. When the pH adjustment was previous to the addition of both reagents, the precipitation of germanium decreased most probably due to the oxidation of catechol that avoids the ion pair formation. At pH As expected from the precipitation equilibrium (Eq. The occurrence of remaining catechol in the final solutions from the SX enrichment process accounts for a slight increase of the precipitation yields of germanium (98.7% (1N NaOH solution) and 92.2% (1N HCl solution)) as compared with that obtained with standard solutions (94%) at pH 9. On the other hand, the occurrence of impurities in fly ash water leachates produces a slight reduction of the precipitation yields of germanium (23.5 Apart from Ge, only Sb (36 and 50% when HCl and NaOH enriched solutions from SX were used, respectively) and Na (only when NaOH enriched solutions from SX were used) precipitated, so the precipitation method is highly selective for germanium. Other elements such as As, Mn, Ni, V or Zn remained in solutions. The SX Ge-enriched solutions (purified extract) contained catechol, so the precipitation without adding fresh CAT to the solutions was also checked. To this aim only CTAB (CTAB/Ge molar: 3) was added to a purified extract (1N NaOH) obtained using the SX enrichment method. The pH was then adjusted to 13. The Ge precipitation yield reached only 5.4%, probably because the amount of catechol or the form of the reagent in alkaline solution (or both factors) did not allow the precipitation. Total removal of organic matter was not achieved in tests and analyses of roasted solids showed organic matter (after several experiments the organic content was around 20%). In It can be concluded that relatively high purity GeO High purity Ge end-products can be obtained by two different precipitation procedures (as GeS For the precipitation of germanium as sulfide, 93% hexagonal-GeO A 90% tetragonal-GeO The complete hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of germanium from IGCC fly ash proposed may be summarised as follows: (a) extraction of germanium from IGCC fly ash at 90 Using the above-mentioned optimal conditions, the total germanium recovery from IGCC fly ash yielded 50–62%, enabling a theoretical production of 3500 We wish to thank European Commission—DG Research, Research Fund for Coal and Steel for supporting this study (ECSC 7220-PR145). This work was carried out with a grant from the Research Fund for Coal and Steel of the European Community.