We describe the use of a fully volumetric geophysical imaging approach, three-dimensional electrical resistivity (3D ERT), for bedrock detection below mixed sand and gravel deposits typical of fluvial valley-fill terraces. We illustrate the method through an analysis of terrace deposits of the Great Ouse River (UK), where up to 4m of sand and gravel have filled the valley bottom during the latest Pleistocene. We use an edge detector to identify the steepest gradient in first-derivative resistivity profiles, which yields an estimate of bedrock depth (verified by drilling) to a precision better than 0.2m (average) and 0.4m (standard deviation). Comparison of a range of drilling techniques at the site has revealed that borehole derived interface depths suffered from levels of uncertainty similar to those associated with the 3D ERT — indicating that the reliability of bedrock interface depths determined using these two approaches is comparable in this case. The 3D ERT method provides a high spatial resolution that enabled a previously unknown erosional bedrock structure, associated with the change from deeper first terrace to second terrace deposits, to be identified in the Great Ouse valley. The method provides a relatively quick method to quantify terrace fill volume over large sites to a greater degree of precision than currently available.River terrace deposits are a focus of considerable scientific, archaeological, and economic interest. Terrace architecture can provide important information regarding uplift, incision, and landscape evolution (e.g., River terrace deposits can be highly variable and difficult to characterise in terms of structure and lithology, particularly where the deposits of multiple or dissected terraces are present ( To provide greater insights into subsurface heterogeneity, geophysical techniques such as seismic refraction, ground penetrating radar, and electrical methods are being increasingly applied ( The principal benefits of ERT are that it provides high resolution images of the subsurface and is noninvasive. It is an effective means of characterising the subsurface because of the sensitivity of resistivity to variations in hydrogeological (e.g., saturation, pore fluid composition) and geological properties (e.g., mineral grain composition, porosity). In unconsolidated sediments, such as river terrace deposits, the major lithological control on resistivity is the type and proportion of clay minerals ( Limitations of the technique include inaccuracies because of 3D structures to the side of the survey line or area and the indistinct appearance of boundaries resulting from the smoothness-constrained inversion techniques typically used for ERT imaging. Most previous ERT surveys of river terrace deposits have employed 2D, rather than 3D, imaging, because of its comparative rapidity and simplicity. However, for heterogeneous subsurface conditions, the two-dimensional (2D) assumption is violated because of the influence of 3D features in close proximity to the survey lines, which can cause significant inaccuracies in the resulting 2D resistivity models ( Here we present a study in which fully volumetric 3D ERT imaging is used to investigate river terraces from the Great Ouse valley, Bedfordshire, UK. The principal advance described here is the development and validation of an approach to bedrock surface detection in a river terrace setting based on 3D rather than 2D imaging. We propose that a fully volumetric approach is particularly preferable for highly variable deposits that have a fundamentally 3D structure. The specific aims of this study are (i) to quantitatively assess an automated approach to bedrock surface detection below highly heterogeneous valley fill deposits from the 3D resistivity model and (ii) to consider the respective merits of 3D ERT and conventional intrusive approaches for river terrace deposit characterisation. The study area is located within the valley of the Great Ouse, near the village of Willington, 4 The study site is situated on terrace deposits of the undifferentiated Felmersham and Stoke Goldington members ( Drilling at the site was carried out using a flight auger supplemented with holes drilled using other standard techniques, including shell and auger, reverse circulation, and sonic drilling. A total of 11 locations were drilled within the 3D ERT imaging area; five of the locations were drilled using only the flight auger; whilst the remaining six locations were drilled with a combination of two or more techniques. At each location bedrock was proven. For locations where multiple drilling techniques were applied, boreholes were drilled within ~ The application of ERT can provide fully 3D volumetric models of subsurface resistivity distributions from which features of contrasting resistivity can be located and characterised. Methodologies for 3D data collection and modelling are well established in the literature (e.g., The 3D ERT survey was carried out within an area of 93 A real-time kinematic global positioning system (GPS) survey was undertaken to measure surface elevations across the area for incorporation into the resistivity inversion and forward modelling procedure. Although most of the survey area was very flat, the GPS survey was required to capture the topography of a 3-m-high bank of topsoil that encroached on the eastern corner of the ERT imaging area ( The combined data set from the survey lines comprised 11,270 pairs of normal and reciprocal measurements. In general, data quality diminished with increasing geometric factors, which cause smaller measured potential differences. Data points with a reciprocal error of > Amongst the most widely used approaches to edge detection are gradient techniques, which assume that interfaces are located where changes in image properties are at a maximum (e.g., Here we adopt a similar technique to Our implementation of the steepest gradient method involved extracting resistivity data, The drilling results for the 11 locations ( Good convergence between the observed and model data was achieved, as indicated by the mean absolute misfit error of 2.4%. The resulting resistivity model has dimensions of 93 The distribution of inverted resistivities is shown in The geological sequence at the site – comprising a thin layer of alluvium at the surface, river terrace sand and gravel, and Oxford Clay bedrock – is apparent in the 3D ERT image ( The primary structure is an arch-shaped feature ( The bedrock surface extracted from the 3D ERT model using the steepest gradient (first derivative) method extends between 20 and 24 Examples of interpolated resistivity depth curves from the 3D ERT model, showing the location of the steepest gradient and ‘known interface’ resistivities, are given for borehole locations 11 and 15 ( These results also confirm the findings of Drilling and ERT produce very strongly contrasting types of information. Boreholes provide very detailed, very high resolution (centimetre to decimetre scale) information for vertical profiles at discrete locations but provide very poor lateral resolution, even for dense drilling grids or profiles considered here, because of separations that are typically on the scale of at least tens of metres between holes. Moreover, drilling can provide direct samples of subsurface materials. Conversely, 3D ERT provides high resolution (metre scale) spatially continuous volumetric subsurface models but provides indirect information on material properties. Interestingly, the uncertainty associated with bedrock surface elevation for both drilling and ERT was of a similar magnitude (i.e., tens of centimetres), with an average discrepancy between drilling techniques of 0.46 In this geological setting, the spatial information provided by ERT was essential for resolving the structure of the bedrock surface, due the complexity of the deposit, in terms of thickness variations and sediment heterogeneity. The relative success of ERT was a function of the spatial resolution (in the Boreholes were also important for deposit characterisation in this case, as they were able to differentiate between river terrace and alluvium. The 3D ERT model did reveal a thin, relatively conductive layer across much of the surface of the model, but in places alluvium was indistinguishable from the underlying sand and gravel due to insufficient resistivity contrasts (e.g., Automated bedrock detection from 3D ERT imaging at a site in the Great Ouse Valley, UK, using the steepest gradient (first derivative) method was shown to correlate well with borehole-derived bedrock elevations. Comparison of the borehole and steepest gradient methods has enabled the performance of 3D ERT for bedrock detection to be quantitatively assessed and uncertainty associated with sediment volume calculations to be determined. Whilst the steepest gradient method was shown to provide a good quality bedrock elevation model, isoresistivity lines were shown to provide a very poor indication of bedrock rock surface depth and geometry in this situation. Interestingly, a comparison of a range of drilling techniques deployed at the site has indicated a level of uncertainty for borehole derived interface depths similar to that associated with 3D ERT steepest gradient edge detection — indicating that intrusive sampling cannot always be regarded as providing inherently more reliable information than geophysical investigations. Subsurface geological variations (including the distribution of major formations, and lithological heterogeneity, and river terrace deposit thicknesses) were captured within the 3D ERT model. Crucially, a major erosional feature on the bedrock surface was identified as the boundary between first and second terrace deposits of the Great Ouse valley. Three-dimensional ERT image analysis using the steepest gradient method has been shown to be an effective bedrock detection method in this locality, owing in part to the strong contrast in resistivity between the bedrock and river terrace deposits. It is therefore reasonable to presuppose that ERT would be similarly successful in other river terrace settings with strong resistivity contrasts between valley fill and bedrock materials. In particular, in areas of clay or mudstone bedrock, a good resistivity contrast could be expected with river terrace sand and gravel because of the large difference in the proportion of clay between the two material types. The appropriateness of 3D ERT for any given setting will also be dependent on a number of other factors, including the required spatial coverage and level of resolution. The practical limit of survey coverage using 3D ERT is probably in the order of a few tens of hectares for individual surveys and, as such, is not equivalent to surface mapping approaches using remote sensing or towed ground-based systems that permit very rapid large-scale data collection. Therefore, in the context of river terrace deposit investigations, 3D ERT is best suited to targeted site-specific surveys associated with complex deposits displaying significant lateral variations where detailed information on subsurface structure is required. The research was funded by