The purpose of this paper is to summarize recent advances in our understanding of the physiological role of 24(R),25(OH)2D3 in bone and cartilage and its mechanism of action. With the identification of a target cell, the growth plate resting zone (RC) chondrocyte, we have been able to use cell biology methodology to investigate specific functions of 24(R),25(OH)2D3 and to determine how 24(R),25(OH)2D3 elicits its effects. These studies indicate that there are specific membrane-associated signal transduction pathways that mediate both rapid, nongenomic and genomic responses of RC cells to 24(R),25(OH)2D3. 24(R),25(OH)2D3 binds RC chondrocyte membranes with high specificity, resulting in an increase in protein kinase C (PKC) activity. The effect is stereospecific; 24R,25(OH)2D3, but not 24S,25-(OH)2D3, causes the increase, indicating a receptor-mediated response. Phospholipase D-2 (PLD2) activity is increased, resulting in increased production of diacylglycerol (DAG), which in turn activates PKC. 24(R),25(OH)2D3 does not cause translocation of PKC to the plasma membrane, but activates existing PKCα. There is a rapid decrease in Ca2+ efflux, and influx is stimulated. 24(R),25(OH)2D3 also reduces arachidonic acid release by decreasing phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity, thereby decreasing available substrate for prostaglandin production via the action of cyclooxygenase-1. PGE2 that is produced acts on the EP1 and EP2 receptors expressed by RC cells to downregulate PKC via protein kinase A, but the reduction in PGE2 decreases this negative feedback mechanism. Both pathways converge on MAP kinase, leading to new gene expression. One consequence of this is production of new matrix vesicles containing PKCα and PKCζ and an increase in PKC activity. The chondrocytes also produce 24(R),25(OH)2D3, and the secreted metabolite acts directly on the matrix vesicle membrane. Only PKCζ is directly affected by 24(R),25(OH)2D3 in the matrix vesicles, and activity of this isoform is inhibited. This effect may be involved in the control of matrix maturation and turnover. 24(R),25(OH)2D3 causes RC cells to mature along the endochondral developmental pathway, where they become responsive to 1α,25(OH)2D3 and lose responsiveness to 24(R),25(OH)2D3, a characteristic of more mature growth zone (GC) chondrocytes. 1α,25(OH)2D3 elicits its effects on GC through different signal transduction pathways than those used by 24(R),25(OH)2D3. These studies indicate that 24(R),25(OH)2D3 plays an important role in endochondral ossification by regulating less mature chondrocytes and promoting their maturation in the endochondral lineage.24(R),25(OH) This concept was supported by a number of studies. However, the most convincing of these were experiments in which difluoro analogues were used While these experiments seemed to resolve the issue of a role for 24(R),25(OH) Evidence that 24(R),25(OH) It soon became clear that efforts to demonstrate in a definitive manner that 24(R),25(OH) Many of the animal studies suggesting a physiological role for 24(R),25(OH) All of these growth plates share certain features. Chondrocytes remain in reserve in a zone called the ‘resting zone’ or ‘reserve zone.’ These are fully committed cartilage cells. They produce a type II collagen matrix containing the cartilage specific proteoglycan, aggrecan, in the form of high molecular weight aggregates. In addition, the glycosaminoglycan side chains associated with aggrecan are highly sulfated. When stimulated by signals we are only now beginning to understand, cells in the resting zone undergo proliferation. Because the growth plate cartilage is subjected to physical stress, particularly in weight bearing long bones, the proliferating cells tend to align in columns. For this reason, the growth plate has been particularly useful for sorting out factors that are involved in mesenchymal cell differentiation and maturation. Once proliferation has ceased, the cells enter into the endochondral differentiation cascade. Since they are aligned in columns, it is relatively easy to monitor their progression through the endochondral lineage. The post-proliferative zone is called the prehypertrophic zone. At this point the chondrocytes undergo maturation to a hypertrophic phenotype. The maturation process is characterized by an increase in production of matrix vesicles Following the maturation phase associated with prehypertrophy, chondrocytes undergo the process of hypertrophy. This is associated with a change in oxidative metabolism Vascularization of the growth plate and subsequent bone formation are only possible if the cartilage becomes calcified, and this requires 1α,25(OH) It is evident that the growth plate is particularly sensitive to vitamin D regulation Studies using vitamin D replete rats have shown that both 1α,25(OH) Endochondral bone formation can be induced in mesenchymal tissues by implanting bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) or demineralized bone The secondary cartilage of the mandibular condyle also uses endochondral ossification as a means of growth and remodeling in response to stress Local injection of 24(R),25(OH) To better understand the role of 24(R),25(OH) The results of the initial studies are now history but it bears some retelling. As expected, RC cells were different from GC cells in shape and growth characteristics, and there were biochemical differences as well 24(R),25(OH) These results clearly show the target cell specificity of 24(R),25(OH) The stimulatory effect of 24(R),25(OH) In our initial studies, chondrocytes had been treated with the seco-steroids for 24 h, long enough for new matrix vesicle production via genomic mechanisms. The experiments using isolated matrix vesicles were less easily explained, however. Matrix vesicles contain no DNA or RNA, so a classic response to a steroid hormone was unlikely. Certainly matrix vesicle composition could be regulated by 24(R),25(OH) Studies using analogues to 1α,25(OH) Related studies in our lab Parallel studies in the literature supported our conclusion that 24(R),25(OH) Collectively, these studies provided strong presumptive evidence that RC cells have a specific receptor for 24(R),25(OH) The putative 24(R),25mVDR appeared to work via receptor-mediated pathways similar to those used by peptide hormones. When RC cells were treated with 24(R),25(OH) To better understand the mechanisms involved in the response of RC chondrocytes to 24(R),25(OH) These studies helped explain how 24(R),25(OH) This has proven to be the case. Our early studies showed that 24(R),25(OH) Clearly changes in phospholipid metabolism would alter the fluidity of the membrane, as noted above Arachidonic acid release is reduced by 24(R),25(OH) We had already noted that 24(R),25(OH) Studies with indomethacin confirmed these results Other aspects of phospholipid metabolism are affected by 24(R),25(OH) Ca The results presented above show that 24(R),25(OH) The target cell specificity of the 24(R),25(OH) Studies using 24R-hydroxylase knockout mice Circulating levels of 24(R),25(OH) Our studies have confirmed that RC cells produce both 1α,25(OH) These studies show that local production of 24(R),25(OH) 24(R),25(OH) Matrix vesicles produced by RC cells also contain the 1,25-mVDR The authors wish to acknowledge the support of Sandra Messier in the preparation of this manuscript. We also thank our technical staff, students and fellows for their contributions to the studies from our lab that are summarized here. We are indebted to our collaborators, particularly Drs. Ilka Nemere and Gary Posner. A special note of recognition goes to Dr. Anthony Norman who has collaborated with us on several of the studies presented and who has provided insight and support throughout our investigation. We dedicate this paper to him. The studies from our lab were supported financially by US PHS grants DE-05937 and DE-08603, and by the Center for the Enhancement of the Biology/Biomaterials Interface at the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.