The influence of deposition temperature, methyl trichlorosilane (MTS) concentration, hydrogen carrier-gas flow rate and gas inlet design on the strength of silicon carbide coated TRISO particles was investigated using whole particle crushing strength. Crush strength was measured using soft aluminium anvils. For comparison a selection of particles were also measured with hard anvils. The influence of silicon carbide thickness was determined to allow for normalisation of all crush strength measurements to a crush strength at an equivalent thickness of 35μm.
                  It was found that the strength of the underlying pyrocarbon coated particles had a significant influence on the crush strength of the silicon carbide coated particles. Deposition temperature and gas inlet design were the only process parameters that influenced the coated particle crush strength. No evidence was found for MTS concentration and hydrogen flow rate having any influence on particle crush strength.High Temperature Gas Cooled Reactors (HTGR) have been proposed as a viable option for next generation nuclear reactors to be used for electricity production as well as potential heat sources for industrial applications and hydrogen production. Previously operated HTGR research reactors (e.g. Peach Bottom, Dragon, AVR) as well as commercial reactors (e.g. Fort St. Vrain, THTR) made use of fuel particles coated with a single layer of pyrocarbon, Bistructural Isotropic (BISO) or Tristructural Isotropic (TRISO) coated particles. Currently operational HTGR research reactors in Japan (High Temperature Test Reactor – HTTR) and China (HTR-10) make use of TRISO coated particles. TRISO coated fuel particle will also be used for the Chinese HTR-PM commercial prototype reactor. In addition to the programs in Japan and China investigation of the manufacturing and behaviour of TRISO particles is also ongoing in the USA, Russia and Republic of Korea. TRISO particles consist of a fuel kernel containing fissile elements; a buffer layer of low-density, porous, pyrocarbon; a dense pyrocarbon layer; a silicon carbide layer and a final coating of dense pyrocarbon. The layers making up the TRISO coating are applied to the kernel by means of a spouted bed chemical vapour deposition (CVD) coater. Processing conditions are known to influence the properties of the coating layers. In this paper, the influence of process conditions on the crush strength of the silicon carbide coating will be investigated. Each of the layers within the TRISO coating performs specific tasks. Silicon carbide acts as a diffusion barrier preventing the escape of fission products and provides the mechanical strength required to resist internal gas pressure. During use, pressure builds up within the particle due to the release of gaseous fission products and, in the case of oxide fuels, the release of oxygen. At normal operating temperatures, oxygen released from the fuel will react with carbon to form CO and CO In addition to the stresses resulting from internal gas pressure, coated particles may be damaged during handling and manufacture of fuel elements. Although the risk of damaging the coated particles during these operations may be minimised by careful design of particle handling and fuel manufacturing operations, the particles will need to exceed a minimum strength to prevent damage. Various methods have been used to measure the mechanical properties of CVD silicon carbide layers within TRISO coatings. Methods reported in the literature include: Crush testing of whole particles or hemispherical shells using flat anvils Crushing of hemispherical shell by means of a punch placed inside a hemispherical shell Compression or tensile testing of rings polished out of coated particles Internal pressurisation of hemispherical shells or tubes using gas pressure Bend testing of micro-beams produced by ion beam milling Crush testing of whole particles using hard flat anvils has been the most commonly used. For the majority of crush tests hard anvils made of steel, alumina or silicon carbide were used. Recently the use of soft anvils has been reported Typical values of published crush strength of TRISO particles are presented in Heat treatment of the particles has ambiguous effects. Researchers have reported a decrease in crush strength Several studies have noted the large spread of crush strength results. Reported Weibull modulus values range between 2.2 Particles were coated in a spouted bed coater. The process tube consisted of a graphite tube (50 Coating was carried out using hydrogen as a carrier gas and methyl trichlorosilane, CH Two designs of gas inlet were investigated; one using a water-cooled feed tube while the other used an alumina feed tube without any cooling. These will be referred to as the cold and hot inlet respectively. In the case of the hot inlet, severe problems were experienced with blockage of the gas inlet due to deposition in the gas feed tube and inlet. These problems were reduced, but not fully solved, by changing the design of the inlet to minimise heat conduction to the gas feed tube. When viewed using an optical microscope deposits in the gas feed tube appeared to consist of two phases, possibly silicon and silicon carbide. Only silicon carbide was deposited during this test work. The starting material consisted of 500 Particles were heated to the deposition temperature in argon. Gas flow was then switched to hydrogen, the temperature stabilized and finally the MTS introduced. After silicon carbide deposition, the gas flow was switched back to argon while the furnace was cooled. No outer pyrocarbon was deposited. Four groups of test runs were carried out. A summary of these are presented in The equipment used in these tests was previously described by van Rooyen et al. For each test run, at least 50 particles were crushed. When using the soft anvils each particle needed to be placed on a separate position on the anvil as the particles left an indent in the soft aluminium. In the case of the hard anvils, each particle was placed in the centre of the alumina plate. All test runs and the starting material (i.e. pyrocarbon coated zirconia particles) were tested using the soft anvils, only a selection of test runs were tested using the hard anvils. Equipment was calibrated each day before use. The test equipment was also characterised to test the variability of the crush test equipment in terms of equipment calibration, anvil used and position on the anvil. Long-term stability of the test procedure was also checked. No statistically significant differences were found between the aluminium plates, between measurement positions on the plates or between daily set up. For the starting material and all the test runs it was found that the crush strength of individual particles was equally well described by the normal and Weibull distributions. Although Weibull statistics have often been used to describe failure probability of brittle materials, including silicon carbide in TRISO coated particles (for example Normal probability plots of the crush strength of the carbon coated particles measured using hard and soft anvils is presented in In It was found that there was considerable variation of the crush strength of individual particles within each test. Although the particle to particle standard deviation of the particles tested using soft anvils was higher than that of particles tested using hard anvils the coefficient of variation was lower when soft anvils were used to test coated particles. For starting material the type of anvil used did not have a large impact on the coefficient of variation. A summary of the coefficient of variation measured for the starting material and all test runs is presented in For a number of the test runs a few (5 or less) individual particles were found to have crush strengths significantly lower (3.2–7.2 standard deviations below the mean value) than expected for normally distributed data. As the majority (74%) of the test runs did not have any outliers, and were well described by a normal distribution, it was assumed that these particles were in some way defective and did not represent the true strength of the material. Two test runs had outliers with crush strengths significantly (3.2–9.0 standard deviations above mean) higher than the normally distributed data. All outliers were excluded from the data analysis. The impact of silicon carbide layer thickness on the crush strength of the particles is shown in To facilitate analysis of the impact of deposition process conditions the crush strength of the particles was normalised to the crush strength of particles with a 35 Deposition temperature was found to have virtually no effect on the crush strength for temperatures above 1310 MTS concentration and hydrogen flow rate were both found to have no influence on the crush strength of the particles. As shown in It is clear that soft anvils result in a higher crush load than hard anvils. For coated G140 particles, the average crush load was 1506 It is interesting to note that when hard anvils are used, complete TRISO particles (i.e. including the outer pyrocarbon) fail at a higher load than particles with a silicon carbide outer layer Soft anvil testing appears to be more sensitive to changes in particle strength than testing with hard anvils. For example, in At temperatures of 1310 Deposition temperature has been identified as a key process variable, affecting a number of material properties as well as crush strength. Stinton and Lackey Currently there is no explanation for the increase in crush strength at low deposition temperatures. Changes in crush strength do not correlate well with changes of other material properties investigated in the larger study of silicon carbide properties. Silicon carbide properties investigated included density; micro hardness; nano hardness; fracture toughness; grain size; crystallite size and phase composition. Although silicon carbide properties do change with changing deposition temperature the changes are gradual or the temperatures of step changes do not correspond to the temperature where crush strength increases. One tenuous correlation is between the silicon content and crush strength. As part of the wider study of the impact of process conditions the silicon content of the deposits were measured using electron microprobe, X-ray diffraction and Raman spectroscopy. Microprobe analysis indicated that there is a rapid increase in silicon content of the deposit at deposition temperatures below 1310 When coated particles are tested, the silicon carbide shell is highly stressed in comparison to the pyrocarbon. This is due to the high elastic modulus of silicon carbide in comparison to that of pyrocarbon. The direct contribution of pyrocarbon to the strength of the silicon carbide coated particle is therefore small. Considering a silicon carbide shell without a pyrocarbon coated kernel, it would be expected that the crush strength of the shell would decrease linearly to zero as the silicon carbide thickness is decreased to zero. When the pyrocarbon layers and kernel are also taken into account the crush strength would be expected to decrease to the strength of the uncoated particle (i.e. the pyrocarbon coated kernel). Results from this study however indicate that for particles coated with a thin layer of silicon carbide the crush strength is lower than the crush strength of the uncoated particles. This is shown in Relating material properties to TRISO fuel performance is complicated by the variety of failure mechanisms. Crush testing only relates to the mechanical properties of the coated particles limiting its utility to the prediction of “pressure vessel” failures where stress due to internal pressure exceeds the fracture stress of the silicon carbide layer. Calculation of the fracture stress of the particles may be accomplished by means of finite element analysis. This approach was followed by van Rooyen et al. The crush strength of TRISO particles tested using soft anvils is dependent on the properties of the pyrocarbon layers as well as silicon carbide thickness and properties layer. This makes it impossible to draw conclusions about any single layer from the crush test results of complete particles. As a result; crush testing of whole particles is a poor test for the study of individual layers within the TRISO coating. Hemispherical silicon carbide shells may be isolated by polishing away half the particle and burning off the pyrocarbon as used by Byun et al. Crush testing using soft anvils always resulted in a significantly higher crush load than when hard anvils were used. Within-run standard deviation also increased when soft anvils were used. However the coefficient of variation obtained using the hard anvils was higher than that of the soft anvils. Detail design of the coater system was found to have an impact on the strength of the silicon carbide. The exact reason for this is not clearly understood. It is speculated that this may be due to a change in gas chemistry as deposition of silicon carbide occurs in the gas inlet when the hot inlet is used. This will result in a lower MTS concentration and by-products in the gas stream. Deposition temperature alone has little impact on crush strength over the range of deposition temperatures where this effect is observed. MTS concentration and hydrogen flow rate were found to have no influence on crush strength. Deposition temperature was found to have no effect on crush strength for temperatures above 1310 As a test of the strength of the complete TRISO coating, without the need to measure the properties of the individual layers, crush testing using soft anvils may be a useful test method. As such, this test may be a useful quality test of production particles where conformity of the entire coating process is checked. However due to its inability to determine the strength of the individual layers it is a poor test for investigating individual layers within the complete deposition process due to an inability to isolate the effect of individual layers. Use of soft anvils appears to provide a more sensitive test than the use of hard anvils. A disadvantage of the soft anvils is the need to position each particle to avoid the indents formed in the anvils. Also soft anvils introduce another variable, anvil hardness, into the measurement system. It appears that if the anvils are sufficiently soft anvil hardness will not have an influence on the result. Due to the variability of crush test results and the lack of sensitivity of the crush test to variations in process parameters this test will only be of utility for detecting gross coating errors. These errors may be better detected using other existing tests rather than implement additional new tests. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (Propriety) Limited for the supply of carbon coated particles used in this study.