In kaolin classification, the final product is isolated from the overflow of a 50mm hydrocyclone with an underflow containing fine sand and residual kaolin. For a higher kaolin recovery, the underflow is usually further treated using a washing cyclone. This paper presents a new development in fine sand washing using water injection in the conical section of the classifying cyclone. This washing results in a 45–50% reduction of the kaolin fraction (<10μm) in the underflow. Thus, water injection into the classifying cyclone leads to a separation comparable to downstream washing.In kaolin processing, hydrocyclones are the favored devices for the selective separation of fine particles (kaolin) and coarse particles (sand). The advantages of the hydrocyclone include its simplicity, ease of operation, and high volumetric throughput as well as relatively low capital investment, operating and maintenance costs. However, the physical principle of the hydrocyclone includes two disadvantages: (1) varying feed conditions that lead to considerable fluctuations in cut size and separation sharpness and (2) fine particles that are inappropriately discharged with the liquid of the underflow. To compensate for these difficulties, a special hydrocyclone control has been developed by Further attempts have focused on the washing of the sediment in the conical section of the hydrocyclone (  A schematic of the new concept for water injection is shown in The wash effect depends on the flow rate of the injected water, the number of injection points and the location of the injection. The distance from the injection point to the inner vortex becomes shorter as the injection approaches the end of the conical section. The new technique developed for small cyclones should result in a minimum fine particles recovery in the underflow with low consumption of injection water. This has been achieved by operating with the injection at the cone end. The water injection was implemented in a 50-mm hydrocyclone. The cyclone geometry is listed in  Before experimenting with kaolin suspension a test series was conducted with water only to determine the distribution of injected water in the overflow and underflow. From    In summary, the water only experiments indicate that water injection gives optimal results at moderate injection rates. In these conditions, a water exchange of the underflow exists, which results in the desired high solids content in the underflow.  The new technological concept involves the installation of a water injector in the desliming cyclone stage. The goal is to replace the washing stage currently used with this water injection. The 50-mm hydrocyclone has been operated at 1.0 The most important conclusion derived from  The sieve retention (>25 The fraction (<10 The addition of water injection to small hydrocyclones with diameters of 50