Super-high-strength maraging stainless steel (MSS) is of great interest for the next generation aircraft. The ultrasonic fatigue behavior was studied for a 1.9 GPa grade ultra-high-strength MSS with a composition of 13Co-13Cr-3.5Mo-4.5Ni-0.5Ti (at. %). The ultra-high cycle fatigue limit was 560 MPa. Cracking initiated on the surface or at non-inclusion interior sites. A crack initiation and propagation model was proposed through a discussion of the fracture mechanism: (i) the surface defect-induced failure was caused by machining marks with a critical size of 0.6 μm; and (ii) the interior matrix induced failure was caused by a defect larger than 3.3 μm. The fatigue number (N
                     f) of the surface induced failures ranged from 6 × 104 to 1.4 × 105, while that of the interior induced failures was much longer, ranging from 8.6 × 106 to 3.2 × 108.Since firstly developed in 1946 by Carnegie-Illionois Steel Corporation, maraging stainless steels (MSS) have been widely used for many applications, for example, aircraft landing gear parts, petrochemical applications, and nuclear reactor components, because these steels present excellent comprehensive performance including ultra-high strength, excellent fracture toughness, good weldability and adequate corrosion resistance [ Usually, In this work, UHFC behaviour of the new 1.9 GPa grade MSS with composition of 13Co–13Cr–3.5Mo–4.5Ni–0.5Ti (at. %) was investigated. The crack initiation sites were observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM). The mechanism of fatigue damage of this advanced MSS is discussed. The new 1.9 GPa grade MSS was melted in vacuum-induction melting furnace, followed by remelting in a vacuum-arc melting furnace, as has been presented elsewhere [ The rods with a diameter of 20 mm and a length of 1000 mm were forged from the as-cast ingot. The rods were then austenitized at 1050 °C for 1 h, air cooled to room temperature, cryogenically treated in liquid nitrogen for 8 h, and tempered at 500 °C for 12 h. These rods were machined into the smooth hour-glass specimens as depicted in Before the fatigue test, the specimens were ground longitudinally with 2000# sand paper and polished with 2.5 μm SiC polishing paste to remove lateral lines left by machining to avoid their influence on the fatigue test. The roughness ( The microstructures of the specimens were characterized using optical microscopy, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Tensile tests and fracture toughness measurement were conducted according to ASTM Atomic-scale chemical analysis of the specimens was revealed using Local Electrode Atom Probe (LEAP) [  TEM features of the above microstructure are revealed in   For medium and low strength steel, the fatigue crack generally initiates from the surface matrix, and the fatigue limit is about 1/2 of the tensile strength. Fatigue sensitivity to defects increases with the increase of strength, that is, the fatigue crack is easier to initiate from the stress concentration such as surface machining traces or internal non-metallic inclusions, rather than from the matrix, which results in the fatigue limit often being less than 1/2 of tensile strength. Therefore, for high strength steel, especially for ultra-high strength steel, it is a common phenomenon that the ratio of fatigue limit to tensile strength is less than or much less than 1/2. In the present work, after heat treatment, the ratio of fatigue limit to ultimate tensile strength (   Usually, fatigue strength is related to the yield strength of the material [  The fatigue fracture morphology of an I-mode specimen with a stress amplitude of 580 MPa and a longer fatigue life (2.68 × 10 The fatigue strength Therefore, under ultra-high cycle fatigue, a critical inclusion size (CIS) for surface defects, which is defined as, can be estimated as [ For an interior inclusions, the CIS As the Vickers hardness in the present study was 535 MPa ( Grain refinement can prevent initiation and propagation of a fatigue crack, and accordingly improve the fatigue limit. The fatigue strength ( The GBF stress intensity factor, Δ    The new 1.9 GPa grade MSS with a composition of 13Co–13Cr–3.5Mo–4.5Ni–0.5Ti (at. %) has the potential to increase its fatigue life up to over 10 There are two kinds of fracture modes, i.e. fatigue crack initiation at the surface defect and crack initiation in the interior. Crack initiation occurred when the notch or inclusion is larger than the critical inclusion size. In this MSS the critical inclusion size was 0.6 μm for surface notches, and 3.3 μm for interior inclusions. The crack initiation did not happen easily for the steel that should have a potential in high fatigue strength limit. But once the crack was initiated, it propagated at a fast speed and then final fracture occurred. This steel is more sensitive to surface cracks, so surface defects should be removed as far as possible. Thus a surface treatment like shot peening should be an effective method to avoid occurrence of surface cracking. Financially supported by