Critical coalescence concentration (CCC) was determined in a laboratory-scale mechanical flotation cell for a series of coalescence inhibiting inorganic salts (KCl, NaCl, Na2SO4, CaCl2 and MgSO4) compared to two commercial frothers (methyl isobutyl carbinol, Dowfroth 250C). The salt CCC values ranged from 0.07M (MgSO4) to 0.31M (KCl and NaCl) and correlated with ionic strength. The CCC values are compared to transition concentrations in the literature. The effect of salts on gas dispersion in flotation systems is discussed.Certain inorganic salts in flotation systems have been shown to inhibit bubble coalescence which helps explain decreased bubble size in the pulp phase (  A common measure of the effect of inorganic salts on bubble coalescence is the transition concentration (TC). There is, however, no consistent definition. Using data from The studies recognized that some inorganic salts inhibit coalescence and others do not and rules were established to predict the behavior ( The usual method of reducing bubble size in flotation systems is through addition of frother. To characterize frothers the concept of critical coalescence concentration (CCC) proposed by  As the measure of CCC, Nesset et al. used CCC95. The CCC has been determined for many commercial frothers ( The CCC concept can be transferred to inorganic salts as the same general shape of the The experimental set-up is shown in  An automated image analysis procedure using ImageJ software was utilized to determine the bubble size distribution. The software tabulated projected bubble area, The Sauter mean bubble diameter, The procedure for CCC estimation (     The data in The two frothers were included to establish the technique by comparing the CCC values with literature, MIBC and DF250 probably being the most well characterized of the frothers. This sample of MIBC has given a CCC slightly above the literature range while the DF250 is comfortably in the range. An issue with small scale tests is possible coalescence in the sampling system in the McGill bubble viewer technique at concentrations well below the CCC ( Researchers have attempted to compare the salt transition concentrations determined by the various techniques. Based on the bubble size vs. concentration data of Transition concentration and the CCCX values are given in Following the literature that suggests a role of ionic strength in controlling the processes ( Bubble size in the flotation pulp directly impacts flotation performance, e.g., flotation kinetics increase as bubble size reduces. For a given flotation time this means recovery increases as bubble size reduces. This recovery-bubble size relationship can be examined for the salt case. While relationships with ionic strength for some salts can be demonstrated it is not clear what the underlying mechanism is. Given the usual explanation that bubble size reduction as a function of solute addition is due to inhibition of coalescence this implies the ionic strength influences coalescence. For the case of frothers, coalescence inhibition mechanisms based on surface tension gradients and hydrogen bonding have been discussed and inorganic salts may likewise work through these mechanisms ( In flotation systems with high enough salt concentration to give minimum bubble size (i.e., ionic strength Critical coalescence concentration (CCC) was determined for a series of coalescence inhibiting inorganic salts (KCl, NaCl, Na Funding for this work was sponsored by Vale, Teck Resources, Xstrata Process Support, Barrick Gold, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec through the Chair in Mineral Processing under the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) program. J. Sovechles was working at McGill University on exchange from the University of Newcastle, Australia and the authors would like to thank Professor G. Jameson for this arrangement.