While most fractures of the proximal humerus can be treated nonoperatively, prosthetic hemiarthroplasty has become an accepted method of treatment. The reported results of hemiarthroplasty in comminuted proximal humeral fractures have given over 80% satisfactory results. In cases of fracture, the main advantage of the reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is that function and stability are not dependent on tuberosity healing. Therefore, malunion and nonunion may not have the same negative influence on outcome as with conventional arthroplasty. At present, hemiarthroplasty is the safer, cheaper option with more reliably reproducible results.Fractures of the proximal part of the humerus are common. While most can be treated nonoperatively, prosthetic hemiarthroplasty has become an accepted method of treatment for several well-defined subsets of these fractures. This includes four-part fractures, fracture–dislocations, head-splitting fractures, fractures with an impression defect encompassing more than 50% of the humeral head, and fractures with marked comminution of the tuberosities. These fractures usually occur in elderly patients with some degree of osteoporosis and poor bone quality. The possibility of avascular necrosis in these patients indicates them for shoulder arthroplasty as opposed to conservative or open reduction internal fixation treatment. In addition, the degree of comminution often makes reduction with internal fixation techniques difficult and unreliable. In elderly patients with little comorbidity, which would preclude surgery or appropriate rehabilitation, hemiarthroplasty for complex comminuted proximal humeral fractures has given stable, longstanding, and durable results according to a number of different studies The reported results of hemiarthroplasty in comminuted proximal humeral fractures have given over 80% satisfactory results. In older patients this technique can usually be utilized to a satisfactory result; however, there are some cases in which comminution of the tuberosities and proximal humerus may make tuberosity reconstruction more difficult. This would be one indication for a reverse prosthesis. This is a rare indication. Recently, there has been a trend in Europe to carry out more reverse prostheses for these cases. The reverse prosthesis has been utilized as a salvage-type implant system, which, based on its biomechanical design, creates a stable fulcrum for the deltoid to work without a functioning rotator cuff. In cases of fracture, the main advantage of the reverse arthroplasty is that function and stability are not dependent on tuberosity healing. Therefore, malunion and nonunion may not have the same negative influence on outcome as with conventional arthroplasty. This also makes early range of motion possible without the need to protect the tuberosity repair. The common sequela of postoperative stiffness in the hemiarthroplasty population makes this an appealing option at first glance. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty for any use is not without serious complications, including dislocation, infection, nerve injury, disassociation, and scapular notching to name a few. Hemiarthroplasty is indicated in cases of complex trauma in patients who are medically suitable for such extensive surgery and who are able to participate in the long rehabilitation process that is mandatory for successful outcome. Surgery begins with deconstruction of the fracture by separating the greater and lesser tuberosities, removing the humeral head, and preparing the humeral canal. Appropriate sizing and positioning equipment, including extra- and intramedullary devices, are readily available depending on the choice of the surgeon. Once the humeral canal has been prepared and the appropriate-length prosthesis has been chosen, the humeral component is cemented into place with care being taken to ensure proper retroversion and implant height. This is done by flexing the elbow to 90° and placing the transverse epicondylar axis of the elbow at 0°. The arm is externally rotated to the desired degree of retroversion, usually between 20 and 30°. Excessive version in either direction could lead to problems with stability of the implant and/or compromise the greater tuberosity fixation. At present the great majority of shoulder arthroplasty is performed by physicians who do two or fewer per year. Most of these are hemiarthroplasties for fractures, so the technical skills of these surgeons may be less than those that have been reported in the literature. The technique of reverse shoulder arthroplasty is challenging and carries with it a high complication rate, even in the hands of the most respected shoulder surgeons. The complication rate is likely to increase as the reverse prosthesis is used by surgeons who have less experience with the shoulder. The situation is further complicated by the issue of implant failure. As the indications for the reverse prosthesis increase, so will the failures and the need for complex and even more difficult revisions. At present the salvage operations available for a failed reverse arthroplasty are less than promising. An often ignored issue regarding the use of reverse shoulder prosthesis is cost. At present the cost of a reverse prosthesis in the United States is more than two times that of a primary hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder. When one includes the risk of complication and the extended postoperative care in the hospital, it makes the cost an impressive factor in the decision-making process if all things are equal. The one indication for the primary use of a reverse prosthesis is in the case of the patient with a severely comminuted proximal humeral fracture in whom a tuberosity reconstruction because of bone loss will be impossible. The key to success for tuberosity healing remains appropriate fixation, bone grafting, and bone-to-bone contact. Those patients who, preoperatively by imaging, are felt to be unable to achieve this fixation should be considered for immediate reverse prosthesis by a surgeon who is capable of undertaking this most complex and difficult procedure. Hemiarthroplasty is also a difficult procedure, but one that has been performed for many decades and has gained a measure of comfort in the orthopedic population. It is a technically demanding procedure that requires meticulous attention to surgical detail but that can be reproduced continually. With all things considered, the reliably reproducible results of hemiarthroplasty for complex proximal humeral trauma, when appropriate surgical technique and rehabilitation is performed, makes the use of reverse prosthesis in the greatest majority of cases unnecessary. In the rare case of severe comminution, rendering tuberosity reconstruction impossible, the reverse prosthesis can be considered as a viable option. Overall, however, the use of the reverse prosthesis in cases of acute primary complex trauma cannot be justified when one considers the clinical outcome, complication rate, and overall appropriate financial concerns. The use of hemiarthroplasty for the treatment of fractures of the proximal humerus is also a complex procedure and should be performed by surgeons who are comfortable working in the shoulder. The results of hemiarthroplasty are sensitive to proper surgical technique. For this reason, the surgeon performing these procedures must be aware of the nuances and difficulties of the implant and instrumentation of the system that is chosen to be used. In taking the opposing view to reverse shoulder replacement for acute proximal humeral fractures, I feel that, at present, hemiarthroplasty is the safer, cheaper option with more reliably reproducible results. It offers the patient and the surgeon the best opportunity for reconstruction of a normal shoulder from both a cosmetic and functional point of view. The reverse shoulder arthroplasty should be reserved for patients without a reconstructible rotator cuff until the literature demonstrates comparable results and more promising salvage options become available.