Fundamentals of the transport mechanism discussed in Chapter 4 relate to natural sedimentary processes involving the development of paystreaks in stream channels. Particles of diverse shape size distribution roll or slide along a natural streambed or are transport sorted arranging themselves stratigraphically with coarse low-density particles further downstream of smaller high-density particles deposited upstream. In this chapter the transport mechanism is enlarged upon expanded as an introduction to studies of sedimentation under controlled conditions of shear flow. A brief theoretical analysis of the basic physics of gravity concentration processes commences with a statement of formulae associated with flow conditions around a free-settling particle in a quiescent ideal flow. Models based on a diffusion mechanism also incorporating Bagnold’s normal stress are presented to help gain a better understanding of additional problems associated with predicting quantitatively differences in the hindered settling concentration of gold particles with a given size density distribution in a gravity concentration device.The key to good performance of a lateritic gold treatment plant is the amount of attention given to scrubbing, screening and size classification in the feed preparation section. Design calculations, which call for a hypothetical balance of all materials (solids and water) entering into and leaving the plant, nominate the quantities involved at each stage of treatment. Recovery plant types can then be selected in which the controlling factors balance the probable behaviour of the gold. The best-known separation devices, sluices, jigs, tables, and more recently cones, spirals and centrifugal separators have been developed from research over the past 70 years. Each type of separator has a particular size range of gold particles within which it operates economically but there are many constraints to the recovery of gold smaller than 150–200 microns. Centrifugal separators offer hope for future gravity separation of gold particles down to a few microns in size. Chemical leaching processes, which usually have a gravity component designed to scalp out coarse gold released from crushing and grinding circuits, are finding increased application for the treatment of lateritic/saprolitic ores in which gold occurs both in a primary form and as supergene enrichments. The key to good performance of a lateritic gold treatment plant is the amount of attention given to scrubbing, screening and size classification in the feed preparation section. Design calculations, which call for a hypothetical balance of all materials (solids and water) entering into and leaving the plant, nominate the quantities involved at each stage of treatment. Recovery plant types can then be selected in which the controlling factors balance the probable behaviour of the gold. The best-known separation devices, sluices, jigs, tables, and more recently cones, spirals and centrifugal separators have been developed from research over the past 70 years. Each type of separator has a particular size range of gold particles within which it operates economically but there are many constraints to the recovery of gold smaller than 150–200 microns. Centrifugal separators offer hope for future gravity separation of gold particles down to a few microns in size. Chemical leaching processes, which usually have a gravity component designed to scalp out coarse gold released from crushing and grinding circuits, are finding increased application for the treatment of lateritic/saprolitic ores in which gold occurs both in a primary form and as supergene enrichments.  The theoretical analysis of gravity concentration processes usually begins with an examination of the forces acting upon a single particle settling in ideal conditions, i.e., in an infinite still viscous medium. A simplified equation of motion can then be written from Newton’s second law of motion ( where where For a spherical particle with diameter The settling particle ultimately reaches a maximum or terminal velocity The value of the drag coeficient Stokes flow (fine particle settling) transitional flow Newton flow (coarse particle settling). Viscous forces prevail within the fine particle size range, and the resistance to settling is proportional to particle diameter, flow velocity and viscosity. Stokes For quartz density particles, the Reynolds number condition limits Viscous forces become negligible for higher values of Re (~ where  Methods used to calculate terminal velocity in the transitional regime can also be generalised to include the Stokes and Newton regimes. It is found experimentally that for Re values greater than about 270, the terminal velocity of a free settling sphere can fluctuate from the calculated value as the sphere follows a zigzag or spiral trajectory pattern ( Consideration of the free settling of individual spherical particles under ideal conditions is unrealistic as a description of practical gravity concentration where   where  The above equations of motion have been developed for spherical particles. In practice, the particles will be irregularly shaped and this will increase the drag and reduce the terminal velocity. The problem of describing and accounting for particle shape is discussed in  where For the most part, sizing analyses in gravity concentration are carried out by projected area diameter. British Standard BS3406 (Part 4) 1963 suggests multiplying sieve aperture size by a factor of 1.40 to obtain projected area diameter. This factor implies a shape factor of 0.2 and should be applied with caution if the particles are of extreme shapes. Heywood’s tabulated data is also readily incorporated into computer programs enabling the terminal velocities of non-spherical particles to be calculated, as shown in The quiescent fluid condition is inappropriate to gravity concentration devices such as the spiral, cone, sluice, etc., where particle stratification takes place in a shear flow. The assumption that such particles will simply settle to the bottom at  where Gaudin also analysed the transport of particles qualitatively at the bottom of the thin laminar flowing film by considering the action of fluid gravitational and frictional forces. He noted that particles rolling or sliding along the bed are transport sorted, arranging themselves with the coarse low density Using a multi-exposure photography technique, rolling or sliding, in which the particle always maintains contact with the bed saltation, in which the particle made jumps up into the fluid following a ballistic trajectory before once more coming into contact with the bed suspension, in which the particle made longer and higher trajectories that differed from those in saltation; the upper part appeared wavy due to support from turbulent eddies. With the mode adopted by the particle being established by the transport stage: where  rolling as before uninterrupted saltation (the saltation of Francis) uninterrupted partly suspensive saltation in which the normal ballistic saltation trajectory is modified by the effect of fluid turbulence (the suspension of Francis) interrupted partly suspensive saltation, as mode 3 above, but with the addition of upward acceleration due to inter-particle collision interrupted suspension, in which the particle is maintained in suspension by both fluid turbulence and inter-particle collisions uninterrupted suspension, in which there is true suspension of the particle by fluid turbulence.  Modes 1 to 5 are all modes of bed-load transport. Particles travelling in those modes are operated on by a combination of solid and fluid momentum transfer. Modes 3 to 6 rely upon the effect of fluid turbulence, which is suppressed by high concentrations of particles. Suspended load (mode 6) can be defined as those particles held in true suspension against gravity by fluid momentum transfer alone, i.e., by random eddy currents of turbulence having velocity  Applying Bagnold’s suspension criterion to gravity concentration devices suggests that 100   where where In the macroviscous regime, stresses are transmitted by interstitial fluid friction and are therefore dependent on fluid viscosity, but independent of fluid density. Based on experimental observations, Bagnold proposed the empirical relationships: i.e., the stresses are linearly dependent on shear rate and are independent of particle size and density. Bagnold attributed the normal stress to an anisotropy in the spatial particle distribution. In the particle-inertia regime, Experimentally verified, this quadratic stress-dependence as well as the strong dependence of the stresses on the volume concentration of particles for The stresses are thus independent of fluid viscosity but dependent upon particle size, density and concentration and hence likely to be significant in gravity concentration processes. Bagnold noted that when a range of particle sizes of constant density is sheared together in a gravity flow, the larger particles should tend to move towards the zone of least shear strain (the free surface) and the smaller particles towards the zone of greatest shear strain (the bed). Although Bagnold did not explicitly consider particles of different density, the likely significance of the Bagnold force for the segregation of particles has been widely noted. In applying Bagnold’s results to natural sizing and gravity concentration of quartz and heavy mineral assemblages, Bagnold’s results have stood for some 30 to 40 years under the conditions for which they were formulated: steady, uniform, simple shear flow of neutrally buoyant spherical particles. However, in cases involving more complex flows, application of Bagnold’s relationship lead to unrealistic constraints. In particular, in Bagnold’s formulation, the stresses disappear for ‘vanishing’ mean velocity gradient because there is no source for particle velocity variations other than mean shear (  Of greater relevance to the significance of the Bagnold normal stress in gravity concentration, pinched sluices and Reichert cones give adequate segregation only at high densities in which a significant normal stress would be developed. The results of a sampling programme on a ‘pinched’ sluice are summarised in  The classical approach to the modelling of particle transport by suspension in turbulent flow (the suspended load) is through a diffusion process (for example  The flow sheet component of a materials balance evolves from bench and pilot scale studies of the behaviour of the ore materials during preliminary testing. It nominates the type of plant and equipment and the order in which the various fractions are to be processed, and as shown in The materials balance in the ‘production mode’ is an average of results from each production period. The flow rates ascribed to materials passing through the plant are predictions based upon interpretations of bench scale test data. The overall quantity of water entering into the plant is obtained from dams set up for the purpose and includes retained water in feed materials and make-up water  The nature of raw plant feed as derived from fluvial gold concentrations is determined by the type of material dug at any one time and hence is most variable in type, form and gold content. Particle size is reduced progressively with distance of travel and time, paystreaks are common when erosion and transport of gold-bearing sediment occur, but end abruptly with sudden changes in the conditions of flow. A rough distinction can be made between overburden and ore but wet deposits are typically dredged to a predetermined pattern and cannot easily differentiate closely between high and low grade ore horizons in their daily routine. Inevitably, this will include a proportion of finer grained material that moves essentially parallel to it and from sources other than the paystreaks (e.g. bedrock, overland flow, tributaries and caving from the banks). Palaeoplacers usually provide the most diverse types of mill feed. In addition to normal depositional complexities, the older deposits have been subjected over time to the inter-granular deposition of transported clays, possible dissection, slumping and varying degrees of lithification. Simple diagenetic effects are seen in the adhesion of thin films or coatings of extraneous materials to the surfaces of individual grains. More intensive diagenetic processes such as the lithification of Witwatersrand-type banket deposits have resulted in a cemented and compacted ore that must be crushed and ground to release the gold for recovery by chemical leaching. In between these extremes, varying degrees of alteration require some elements of the raw feed to receive more rigorous pre-treatment than does feed from other sectors. Optimisation of plant feed depends upon the ability to access ore freely from all sections of the face at all times. For example: Refractive materials can be blended with easily processed materials and fed gradually and selectively into the plant in a controlled fashion. Very clayey material can be mixed with coarse gravels for better slurrying. High-grade ore can be blended with low-grade ore so as not to periodically overload and underfeed the cleaner circuit. In extreme cases, very difficult material can be stockpiled and treated separately under specially designed conditions.  Lateritic materials harden on exposure to the atmosphere, typically forming a tough indurated layer of hard-pan (duricrust) or a mixture of oxides of iron and aluminium in a generally clayey matrix. Differences in distribution of calcrete are attributed to the different conditions of weathering and landscape development ( Recovery plant efficiency depends primarily upon the capability of the feed preparation section to produce a balanced flow of size-classified feed materials for treatment. Scrubbing and slurrying processes are designed to meet the needs of the recovery units by sizing, desliming and distribution. Operational control is strongly influenced by the amount of water used at each stage of processing.  Difficult scrubbing applications may require more rigorous treatment than can be given by a stationary grizzly and larger operations require shaking or vibrating grizzly types. Vibrating grizzlies help to avoid blockages and reject more material at reduced aperture, because their shaking movement tends to keep the feed materials in constant motion. Whereas fixed grizzly bar spacings may be 150 A belt conveyor or other transfer system (e.g. chute) carries the grizzly undersize to the scrubber. The purpose of the scrubber is to disintegrate clay-bound wash The scouring action of a jet is a function of its momentum (mass times velocity) and time (duration of the scouring action). Water jets direct the main hydraulic forces onto the upward moving side of the scrubbing cylinder where the unbroken material is thickest and starts to tumble downwards. At this stage, the lumps have no cushion of slimes to protect them against the jet; the tumbling action provides additional energy for scouring and continually exposes fresh surfaces of each unbroken lump to attack. Experience has shown that retaining about 20% of the total load in the form of plus 20 Some clayey materials have tempering qualities, in that changes in cohesion follow exposure to the atmosphere or soaking in water. Materials that display high degrees of plasticity are typically difficult to slurry when freshly mined. At Moolyella in Western Australia, clayey gravel responds readily to treatment only after a preliminary stage of spreading and sun drying ( A typical rotary scrubber-trommel arrangement comprises a conventional trommel screen to which is attached a non-perforated tubular section at the feed end for scrubbing. The scrubbing compartment is fabricated from heavy wear-resistant steel plate and is fitted with lifter bars, heavy chains (optional) and baffles. Water jets are incorporated in a sparge pipe water system and usually operate at pressures of about 7 Scrubbing capacity is determined by such features as the length and diameter of the scrubbing section, the internal features (chains, lifters, etc.), jet water supply (volume and pressure), and speed of rotation. Drive mechanisms employ mainly friction rollers, or chain and sprocket arrangements acting through reduction boxes. The optimum speed of rotation is based upon the diameter of the cylinder and is slightly less than the critical speed of rotation for that diameter; its purpose is to present the material most advantageously to the action of hydraulic jets, and to maximise the mechanical rubbing and impact forces. Lumps of partly lithified and very clayey materials that are very difficult to disperse effectively in rotary scrubber-trommels may result in the carry over and loss of significant amounts of gold in the screen overflow. The installation of a secondary scrubbing system is sometimes considered as an alternative to increasing the size of the primary scrubbing unit, but such a course of action is seldom successful. Secondary scrubbing systems are both expensive to install and to run and any decision to install a secondary scrubbing system can be justified only by the certainty of thereby recovering sufficient gold to justify the added cost. Although some form of compromise may occasionally be reached, there is rarely any satisfactory resolution to problems that should have been identified and dealt with at the start. If there are any doubts that cannot be addressed at the sample dressing stage, the possible future need for secondary scrubbing can generally be avoided by providing a generous degree of overdesign in the primary scrubbing circuit. In dry mining operations where floor space is not a critical issue, the ore may be scrubbed and screened separately, the most difficult materials being given special attention. Trommel screens are used universally in primary screening service because no other current screening method provides the required conditions of high capacity, low floor space and high recovery in the treatment of clayey ore materials. Modern bucketline dredger trommels and other trommels of massive construction have walls of heavy wear-resistant steel plate. The plates are punched with round holes that taper outwards to minimise blinding. Aperture dimensions for alluvial gold ores usually approximate 10 The trommel screen rejects a barren oversize fraction of stones and organic trash and recovers an undersize fraction for further processing. Screen apertures are usually sized to reject plus 8–10 Features influencing the potential capacity of trommel screens are mainly diameter and length, slope, aperture size and total aperture area. Screen capacity is also influenced by operational factors such as the nature of the feed material, the size range and proportion of feed that is near the critical aperture size, and the presence or absence of plant fibres, peat and other extraneous materials that might cause clogging. Small-scale operations typically utilise light mesh trommels of the type designed to screen surface gravels for minor road making and light construction work. A scrubbing compartment is fabricated and fitted to the feed end and the operators make their own running repairs as required. Trommel diameter is generally accepted as a determining factor for capacity and length for efficiency of washing. But this is only an approximation and published performance figures such as those given by  screen apertures that are either too small or too large for the required service failure adequately to slurry clay balls. The clay ball problem is a feature of screens that are either too short or have apertures so large that insufficient retention time is provided to disperse the wash. Unslurried clay balls rejected from on-going sections of the treatment plant frequently contain entrained particles of gold. Only when the manufacturer is made aware of the true nature of the deposit can design be carried out satisfactorily. In one Indonesian project the wash contained only 15% of gravel larger than 1.5 The most suitable device for secondary sizing is a sieve bend located between the trommel underflow duct and the head feed pump bin. The sieve bend is a stationary screen type, constructed from profiled wedge bars to form a concave, slotted surface ( The purpose of slurrying is to liberate free gold from the matrix in which it occurs and to produce a water-solids mixture in which all of the particles (including gold) can move freely. Constraints to achieving ideal slurrying conditions are failing to achieve a balance between the amount of water and the type of material being fed to the trommel at any one time. Ideally, the amount of water used should be just sufficient to disperse the clays and provide slurry of the correct pulp density for presentation to the treatment units. Insufficient water will result in inefficient liberation with consequent losses of gold in the trommel oversize. Any carry-over of undispersed feed material due to too much water in the feed will almost invariably be accompanied by losses of entrained gold when the excess water overflows or is purged from the system. Response to such changes is slow without some form of sensing to rapidly trigger control mechanisms to adjust the solids/water flow.  Nuclear density transmitters contain radioactive materials, and all measures must be taken to maintain safe environmental protection. The ‘Class 1 White’ safety grade is obligatory and should be maintained in the worst possible conditions, e.g. open-source shutter and empty pipeline. An example of the type of slurry measurement system used in modern slurry transmission systems is given in Solids feed rates and pulp density must be closely monitored and controlled for the efficient operation of plant recovery units. In jigging practice for example, The problem of having too much or too little water in the slurry depends upon how quickly the control mechanisms can be activated in response to fluctuations in the raw plant feed. Clayey material requires more water for slurrying than do gravel and sand and for a rapidly fluctuating feed equally rapid responses are needed to correct the flows of water and/or solids and so maintain design levels of pulp density. A sudden rush of clayey wash should quickly initiate emergency measures to adjust the solids/water flow and re-stabilise the plant operation. Response to such changes is slow without some form of sensing perhaps triggered by a TV monitor or other sensing device. The usual response is an immediate reduction in the raw feed rate or an increase in the jet water pressure to increase the supply of energy per unit mass of feed. Neither measure should be continued for long enough to upset the water-solids relationships in the rest of the plant. Control is achieved most readily in medium to large dry-mining operations by selective loading of stockpile materials and by the provision of adequate surge capacity to even out the water flow. Hydraulic dredgers are the most affected by excess water. Although manufacturers usually claim an average pulp density of dredged slurry at around 24% solids by weight, this value can be obtained only with the digging mechanism in full production mode. At other times, the solids intake fluctuates widely according to such factors as differences Designers of the Grey River Dredger, New Zealand considered adjusting the trommel slope to vary the residence time of the solids and so helping to achieve the optimum regulation of water pressure and volume. An attempt was also made to increase the solids throughput per unit of water by increasing the screen aperture availability. The screens were made of high-density plastic with rectangular holes and the objective was to achieve a total effective screen area of nearly twice that of conventional trommel screens. The results were apparently disappointing. All modes of transport can exist simultaneously in gravity treatment devices when slurry of heterogeneous particles is passing through the unit. As already described the particles will have different values of critical shear velocity, which result in different transport modes for different particles. Higher density solids segregate along the lower parts of pipelines and the coarser gold particles tend to settle out preferentially along the line of flow. Self-driven turbine distributors also suffer from some measure of differential settling. Simple steady heads with an overflow pipe have no means of avoiding segregation and the resulting splits will inevitably vary considerably in both quantities and grades. The problem of distribution is compounded when the total feed from a common source is split between a multiplicity of process units. Although secondary and tertiary plant units of all types deal with much smaller quantities of solids that are both smaller in size and better classified, unresolved problems are still attached to splitting feed evenly through different and multiple feed lines. The difficulty increases with the number of splits made. Flow to primary jig units are split between a few units only and distribution usually requires only the mechanical division of hydrocyclone underflow in a baffle box. A feed rate of 400 Slime to the chemical engineer is any ropy or viscous matter, usually of mud size. To the mineral processing engineer the upper size limit of slime particles is determined by the balance between the Hydrocyclones are preferred units for sizing or desliming large slurry volumes cheaply and because they occupy very little floor space or headroom. They operate most effectively when fed at an even flow rate and pulp density and are used individually or in clusters to obtain desired total capacities at required splits. Sizing capabilities rely on centrifugal forces generated by high tangential flow velocities through the unit. The primary vortex formed by the incoming slurry acts spirally downwards around the inner cone wall. Solids are flung outwards by centrifugal force so that as the pulp moves downwards its density increases. Vertical components of the velocity act downwards near the cone walls and upwards near the axis. The less dense centrifugally separated slime fraction The geometry and operating conditions within the spiral flow pattern of a typical hydrocyclone are described in  The CBC (circulating bed) cyclone is claimed to classify alluvial gold feed materials up to 5 Gravity processing design calculations are based primarily upon the results of sample dressing at the drill site and laboratory-scale investigations of the sedimentation characteristics of the gold. Significant aspects of these studies include the nature of the feed material and scale-up relationships that incorporate all that has been learned from sampling and small-scale experimental work. Recovery plant types are selected in which the balance of factors matches the expected behaviour of the feed materials at each stage of processing. Typical of these are devices that separate particles of high density from non-valuable particles of lower density in solids/fluid mixtures by exploiting differences in the hindered settling of particles of different size and density. Slime fractions, which usually comprise significant proportions of the total load, account for most losses of detrital gold smaller than about 100 Riffled sluices have been used to recover gold since antiquity and are still the preferred units for small-scale mining operations where deposit size and capital cost are limiting factors. Jigs are the best all-round units for coarse gold separation in roughing service but good recovery is limited to gold grains larger than 100–150 Benefication processes have since been extended by investigative research to include compound water cyclones and rotating bowl separators in which centrifugal forces are used to enhance gravity differences, and combined gravity/froth flotation techniques and centrifugal jig separation. An important aim has been to accurately predict the stratification of typically equant heavy mineral particles in shear flow and under the pulsatory conditions of the jig bed. However a common constraint is that all such devices operate by batch processing and hence pass through individual cycles of poor recovery, optimum recovery, and poor recovery before being shut down to recover the concentrate and start the next cycle.  Gravity devices, which separate particles of high density from non-valuable particles of lower density in solids/fluid mixtures, can be broadly divided into three groups: devices using shear flow (sluices, cones, tables, spirals) devices using vertical pulsations of water (jigs) devices of both groups that employ centrifugal action to enhance the force acting on mineral particles, particularly in the finer sizings (centrifugal separators, cyclone separators). Methods of ground and hydraulic sluicing described in Boxes may be either tapered or rectangular in longitudinal section. ‘Tapered’ boxes fit snugly into succeeding boxes, thus allowing a series of box sections to be dismantled and re-assembled rapidly when shifting from one location to the next. Effectively they act as a series of pinched-sluices and it is argued that the sudden deceleration of flow that occurs at the beginning of each succeeding box is beneficial to the deposition of gold. ‘Rectangular’ boxes, which are joined longitudinally by butt jointing with close fitting cleats around the joints to make them tight, provide an even flow rate down the length of the box. They have the advantage of being easily constructed, but are not as easily dismantled as tapered  Many different types of riffles have been employed, the most common being the block, longitudinal and Hungarian riffle types described by  Feed rates range from 2.5–125 Research has led to many improvements in operations and designs. Poling and Hamilton, on a grant from the Government of Canada and the Yukon Territorial government, studied fine gold recovery of selected sluice box configurations. The major objectives were to determine operating parameters capable of yielding high gold recoveries down to 150 microns in size. Available data suggested that gold recovery in the average sluice box declines significantly for particles smaller than 0.2 The authors found that each riffle type has a characteristic scour condition for which gold recovery is optimal. Their experiments covered the use of 1–10 However, the sluicing method as a whole is wasteful of both power and water; slurrying is rarely complete and surging is common. Modern practice is to replace sluices by jigs, which separate more efficiently and are less labour intensive. Performance data for the Capital Dredging Company California showed a dramatic rise in recovery efficiency (RE) from 0.76 to 0.99 following the replacement of sluice boxes by jigs. Spiral separators were originally developed by Humphreys in 1899 for coal treatment processes in the USA and adapted for separating heavy minerals from beach sands. However, their cast iron construction made them cumbersome and very heavy; the spiral pitch of about 345  Research by  Since the centrifugal force is strongly dependent on the water depth, and the pressure gradient is constant at any given depth, there is a net radial force that changes sign at some depth within the flow. This imbalanced force results in the secondary radial velocity  The possible role of other heavy minerals in the spiral feed in the entrapment of detrital gold at the base of the trough is another unresolved operational feature. The importance of a heavy mineral fraction in the feed was indicated by the author in Kalimantan, Indonesia, where a bulk sample of gold- bearing stream gravels was passed through a jig circuit to give a concentrate and a tailing fraction. Panning showed the presence of both fine and coarse gold in the jig tailing, which was then processed in a spiral concentrator to recover a spiral gold concentrate. It had been expected that this concentrate would contain any fine gold that had been lost from the jig. This was not so; in fact it contained neither finely divided nor coarse gold. This may have indicated an inability of the particular spiral to concentrate gold under the conditions of the test. More likely however, the failure of the spiral to recover the gold was due to the prior removal of most of the heavy minerals by jigging. With few heavy particles remaining in the jig concentrate, there would have been insufficient heavies in the spiral feed to entrap fine and flaky gold.  Cones, like circular jigs, are fed centrally. The concentrate is split off though an annular slot located towards the cone centre at about one quarter of the cone radius. The slot is formed by two annular polyurethane castings, which together form an insert in the cone surface. The inner part of the insert, the concentrate cutter, has a rounded profile and is movable vertically with respect to the outer insert. The manufacturers claim that the curved surface ( Cone units 2.0   Wash water usage is dependent upon the particle diameter and varies from as low as 0.7 The extreme sensitivity of water depths and corresponding current depths to obtain Jigs are undoubtedly the most important of all types of alluvial gold concentrating device; they are also the most complex and the practice of jigging still tends to be regarded as an art rather than a science. Theories of jigging also tend to describe the mechanism of separation in pulsating water in general terms but without any complete understanding of the processes involved. The most favoured explanation is that stratification occurs in the jig bed as a result of a combination of three mechanisms: The bed is lifted The particles are subjected to hindered-settling conditions during most of the downward flow. Interstitial trickling takes place during the final part of the downward flow before the pulse changes direction for the next cycle. The above mechanisms assume initial upward flow without stratification; the materials being lifted The practical importance of jigging is that stratification occurs with the denser minerals at the bottom of the bed and the lighter minerals at the top. Two main jig types, rectangular and circular, are linked through a trapezoidal jig form.  Although each rectangular jig type has its supporters, all jigs suffer the common disadvantage of low recovery efficiencies for gold smaller than around 200 microns. This is due to two main factors: increase in cross-flow velocity over the jig bed resulting from the addition of hutch water to each cell in series, and the nature of the jig action. The combination of a continuous supply of hutch water and water displaced by the forward stroke of the diaphragm induces a rapid upward flow of water through the ragging and mineral bed, followed by a slower downward flow on the reverse stroke. The entire jig bed (ragging plus mineral bed) is dilated on the forward stroke and compacts on the reverse stroke. The tendency is for fine and flaky gold to be held in suspension and carried away in the tailing. The circular jig arrangement provides the potential for a very large throughput in a single unit, with a single feed point. The result is a feed distribution without splitters and an improved pattern of cross-flow with reduced side effects. The resulting better control of hutch water provides improved recovery of finely divided gold at higher feed rates. The limiting factor is the ability of the jig to recover a maximum amount of recoverable gold in the concentrate, and produce a tailing that can be rejected without the need of further treatment per unit time.  The modern circular jig is manufactured with diameters up to 7.6 Regardless of type, the jig is essentially an open tank filled with water with a slightly inclined screen at the top and provided with a spigot on the underside for drawing off the concentrate. Screen compartments comprise shallow flat trays having perforated bottoms loaded with coarse heavy particles such as haematite pebbles, steel punchings or steel balls to a depth of 25–50  The term ‘bed’ in jigging practice refers to solids on top of the jig screen ( Ragging variables affecting the separation character of the jig bed are density and size. The ragging should be intermediate in density between the gold and the tailing and sized so as to pulsate and provide open spaces for the gold to move about in. Ragging sizes usually vary from about 5 The thicker the layer of ragging the less concentrate will pass through and gold losses will be higher. Very dense ragging reduces the amount of concentrate recovered because excessive velocity of up-flow is needed to dilate the bed; this throws some of the heavies up with the lights making it easier for them to be lost. A larger ragging size will increase the amount of concentrate but this will be of lower grade. A disadvantage of all non-continuous jigging processes is that recovery falls away as the ragging becomes increasingly adulterated by the heavy rock- forming minerals (e.g., pyrite, tourmaline, pyroxene and magnetite). The jig bed becomes a mixture of mainly lighter heavy minerals and heavy minerals (including gold) and ragging. The grade of the gold-bearing concentrate passing through into the hutch rises and eventually reaches a point of virtual equilibrium at which both percentage recovery and concentrate grade are optimal. While this is happening, the lighter heavy minerals continue to accumulate in the ragging, and concentrate production declines as less space remains for movement of the heavies and smaller gold particles. Upward pulsations may be increased to move the heavier jig bed but the operation will ultimately become uneconomic, as more gold is lost to the tailing. At this stage the tray must be replaced with a freshly loaded tray of clean ragging. The contaminated ragging is washed and the gold recovered by panning or amalgamation. In a multi-stage rectangular jig the first compartment will normally require the most frequent cleaning. The sand bed is a layer of coarse and unclassified sand formed by the feed less the material passing in the ragging and the top flow. Freedom of movement of the mineral particles in this layer is essential for good separation during dilation and fluidisation of the bed. Optimal dilation of the bed is given by a fast, short The jig screen is the final point of separation between light and heavy particles smaller than screen aperture size. Aperture size, which typically ranges between 4.5 Collection and discharge of concentrates within the jig hutch are accompanied by the inflow of water to compensate for water passing out with the concentrates. Discharge of solids and water from the spigot alters the balance between upflow and downflow. Jig separating characteristics are held steady by increasing the intake of hutch water proportionally to the amount of water discharged. The balance between upflow and downflow is maintained by increasing the intake of hutch water to compensate for the lack of balance caused by removal of solids and water from the spigot. The concentrate discharge can be controlled in a number of different ways. A simple method is the use of a rubber plug with a cone-shaped orifice, generally tapering from around 12 Achieving a reasonable balance between stroke and frequency depends upon the nature of the particles, particularly the size-density relationships. The stroke The diaphragm is activated by drive systems ranging in type from simple eccentric drives to semi-hydraulic and hydraulic drives. The action of the diaphragm provides a continuous sequence of rapid pulses during which the direction of flow is reversed sharply, several times each second. Modern practice is moving away from the conventional harmonic waveform jigging cycle ( Metallurgical cyclones in combination with enhanced gravity devices have their greatest application in the circulating load of grinding circuits. Strategic arrangement of these devices ultimately produces a finely divided product for chemical leaching and a coarse gold concentrate for final upgrading and smelting in the gold room. The metallurgical cyclone is the most commonly used classifying device for fine particle sizing and desliming in both alluvial gold processing plant ( The maximum ‘pulp density’ is usually about 50% solids by weight; above that level small fluctuations in density will seriously affect separation. A coneshaped discharge of 20°–30° reduced angle usually produces optimum conditions for separation. Cyclone control is best obtained by optimising the feed density. With consistent ore types the cyclone feed density is a good indicator of cyclone overflow sizing. A ropy cyclone underflow indicates a very high-density state with a risk of plugging the ‘apex’. If control cannot be exercised either a larger apex is needed, or the addition of another cyclone. Striking an economic balance between high increasing the fine sands content of the overflow and build up of the circulating load until the cyclone feed density increases to the point of coarser separation higher hydrocyclone pumping pressures with consequent higher power and maintenance costs; if the mill is unable to grind the ore at the given feed rate the final grind will not be any finer no matter what adjustments are made to the cyclone. It is important to recover coarse gold as soon as possible to minimise fragmentation and smearing onto other particles during multiple passes through the grinding circuit. Unit capacity cost of an enhanced gravity concentration device is high and in order to minimise the capacity of an installed enhanced gravity concentrating device, conventional practice is to connect such a device to only a fraction of the cyclone underflow. It is considered that, statistically, any free gold escaping the grinding circuit via overflow processes will follow the laws of probability and eventually report to the gravity concentration device after several passes through the grinding mill. Gravity enhancement is an important design feature of modern grinding/ classification circuits. Most gravity treatment devices (e.g., sluices, spirals and The Nelson batch-type concentrator ( The Nelson ‘Continuous Variable Discharge’ (CVD) concentrator has been developed and refined to its present use in largely hard rock gold milling circuits. The difference is in the rotating assembly of the CVD. The most significant differences relate to pinch valve geometry; pinch valves fitted at the base of the fluidised rings are significantly larger than are those of the batch machines. Apart from overcoming some of the disadvantages of batching, the most frequent maintenance requirement is replacing pinch valve assemblies, which can be done easily in an hour or two during stand down periods. The Kelsey jig has reached an advanced stage of experimentation since the concept was first patented in 1972. Features of the Kelsey jig, considered by the manufacturers to be unique, are flow continuity, feed rate variance adaptability, consistent high recovery efficiency and tolerance to slime. 90% recovery of plus 5-micron size gold is claimed for beach sand ores in a single pass at a throughput of 150 tph. The concept utilises all of the parameters of the conventional jig but changes the apparent gravitational field by applying higher centrifugal forces, up The model ‘J650’ jig (  Material fed in slurry form into a high-speed rotor mechanism in the concentrator system migrates up the concentrating zone retaining its desired The patented Falcon design ( the machine needs never be off-line for rinsing high wear resistance of all parts in contact with the flow no water added during processing minimum operator attention few moving parts high unit capacity due to high depth to diameter ratio for a given bowl diameter  factory produced metering head assemblies that are available on an exchange basis. All significant characteristics of a lateritic ore likely to influence eventual prototype design must be identified prior to commencing a chemical leaching programme. Preliminary data on how the various materials are likely to respond to conventional methods of slurrying and desliming are provided by pilot-scale testwork conducted in association with drilling and sampling. Laboratory log sheets provide descriptions of the mineralogy and distribution of the other heavy minerals reporting with the coarse gold. Pre-concentration and roasting may be required for some primary ores; coarse (+ Removal of the gold from solution at the time of dissolution minimises its exposure to organic material in the slurry, thus reducing the gold losses associated with those organics; residual gold deposits tend to be contaminated with significant quantities of organic matter and if this material is allowed to reach the leach circuit it will adsorb some of the dissolved gold The capital cost of a CIL process in which adsorption of gold occurs in the leach tanks is smaller than that of a CIP process; the CIP process requires an additional smaller series of CIP tanks although CIL operating costs may be slightly higher because of a larger carbon inventory. Run-of-mine material is passed over a grizzly screen to remove oversize and trash; lateritic boulders larger than about 150 Eliminating as much organic trash as possible away from the treatment plant and tailing pond water reclamation areas is a priority because of its deleterious effect on gold recovery. Although large trash is removed during the mining operations and most of the finer trash at the scrubbing-screening stage, the leach plant feed material will inevitably still contain a small amount of dilutionary material including any smaller plant fibres that have not been removed. Possible future problems such as fine screen blinding must be identified so that they can be compensated for in the leaching circuit design. Screen sizing as an adjunct to separation in gold milling circuits is limited in its applications because vibrating screens have increasingly poor performance characteristics at smaller apertures and the flow rates are comparatively large. Mechanically operated screens are restricted to aperture sizes larger than 2 Machines of the Dorr-thickener type and spiral classifiers are engineered to provide an effective pool area and overflow velocity for settling in accordance with the particular size separation requirements. However such traditional thickening device types have been replaced by metallurgical cyclones for sizing or Chemical leaching testwork will usually involve continuous pilot plant testing by some selected chemical leaching process (e.g., carbon-in-leach) of batch samples of ore, that are as near as possible representative of future mill feed. Environmental protection measures and hazard costs have militated against the use of cyanides as a gold lixiviant and ammonium thiosulfate is being extensively tested as a substitute to replace cyanide in gold leaching. Bacteria are also used for the purpose but in the following treatment of the subject cyanidation processes have been preferred. Ancillary bond mill grindability testing, thickening and carbon stripping studies will be carried out as ancillary processes. The test work should indicate: amount of gold that can be recovered by gravity methods of concentration alone size of optimum gold particle liberation settling characteristics of the ground ore work index based upon bond, ball mill grindability tests amount of gold that can be recovered by chemical methods of leaching and carbon-in-pulp processing from the slime and fines particles. SAG mills are particularly suited to the first stage of breaking down residualtype gold ores because they always produce a very fine overflow, which can pass to the leaching circuit as a final product. In addition to the benefits provided by good operational control, SAG mills have the advantage of low capital cost, usually about 25% below that of a conventional crushing/grinding circuit. By eliminating the need for crushing, maintenance costs are also reduced. Steel ball and liner consumption is lower although these savings are somewhat offset by higher power consumption charges per tonne of ore milled. Conventional ball or rod milling in closed circuit follows autogenous grinding. Fines from the SAG mill and the ball mill are combined with the scalp screen underflow and pumped to cyclone classifiers from which the coarse underflow will pass to jigs in a gravity concentration circuit. The presence of appreciable Cyclone overflow passes to the leach circuit surge tank where sodium cyanide solution and slaked lime is added to monitor and control slurry density, solution pH and cyanide concentration. A certain amount of gold is dissolved in the scrubbing and grinding circuit and will be present in the thickened overflow solution. Some recovery of this gold may be made by slurrying the ore using weak cyanide solution reclaimed from the tailing dam. Au stripping is carried out by washing the recovered carbon granules in a solution (cyanide The kinetic activity of carbon is an important factor in determining the efficiency of carbon adsorption. The use of activated carbon for gold recovery depends initially upon the physical resistance of the carbon granules when submitted to abrasion forces within the pulp and impact forces against agitators, pipes and tank walls. The production of fines results in costly losses of both carbon and of gold carried away by the fines during operation. The adsorption characteristic of activated carbon is a compromise between gold loading capacity and adsorption characteristics on the one hand and hardness on the other. The adsorption of gold from solution onto activated carbon generally obeys the following empirical relationship:   Carbon returning from the stripping circuit is introduced into the final leach tank and is moved through the leach circuit semi-continuously through five of the six leach tanks in a counter-current direction to the direction of the slurry flow. Carbon will advance through each stage to the second leach tank where it will be removed and transferred back to the stripping circuit. The first tank will not contain carbon and will be used only for leaching to ensure that solution gold tenor in the feed to the second leach tank is sufficiently high to enable optimum gold loading on the carbon. This in turn reduces the carbon inventory and the size of the subsequent stripping circuit. Leached slurry leaving the final leach tank passes to a vibrating emergency screen, which is placed in the circuit to prevent catastrophic loss due to screen failure in the main launders. The aperture of the final vibrating screen will be marginally smaller than that of the launder screens in order to minimise gold losses associated with carbon fines. The carbon fines so retained will be treated separately to recover their gold content. Screened slurry will report to an agitated tailing surge tank with a 30-minute or so residence time, before being transferred to the tailing pond. Despite environmental constraints, cyanide is usually chosen for leaching because of its almost universal applicability to all ore types. The use of other leachants (e.g., thio-urea, ammonia and chlorine) could be considered if the testwork does not respond favourably to cyanidation, or if the location is subject to environmental restraints. Gold is stripped from carbon by passing a caustic cyanide solution preheated to 90 Other acid-insoluble fouling agents such as organics may also build up on the carbon and lower its activity; provision is thus made to regenerate the carbon in a small vertical oil-fired furnace at 700 Loaded carbon recovered in the leach circuit is eluted for a pre-determined period in a series of columns, with hot 1% caustic solution containing 0.1% NaCN at atmospheric pressure. Stripped carbon is then washed with dilute hydrochloric acid and regenerated in an indirect oil-fired furnace to remove any impurities such as carbonate or organics that may build up on the carbon during leaching. Regenerated carbon is cooled and screened to remove degraded fine carbon prior to recycling to the last leach tank in the CIL process. Pregnant gold- bearing eluate from the carbon stripping section will be pumped to a pregnant solution storage tank to provide surge capacity ahead of the electrowinning circuit. Amalgamating barrels, centrifugal separators and wet shaking tables are used to upgrade gravity plant concentrates prior to smelting. Size classification is essential for efficient separation and supplementary equipment will normally include a small vibrating screen and a cyclosizer. Vibrating screens provide more precise size separations in the dry state than any other screen type. Dimensions of width and length, which determine the main separating characteristics of conventional screens, are matched to suit the characteristics of the plant concentrates. Screen capacity is a function of width; efficiency is a function of length. The associated heavy minerals (e.g., magnetite and ilmenite) are unlikely to cause any screening problems. The main difficulties are found with odd-shaped gold particles, angular fragments of some rock-forming minerals such as tourmaline, and fine rock particles that have held back with the heavies. Such fine particles may give rise to dust problems if dry, and clogging when damp. The Gemini Table is one type of dry shaking table for recovering gold smaller than 1 Slurries of particles larger than 200 microns may be sized on small vibrating screens to provide feed to wet shaking tables at the final stage of coarse gold concentration. Smaller sizings are made using some form of hydraulic sizing. Hydrosizing is a common, if rather inefficient procedure in dressing shed operations where sized fractions are required for feed to such units as shaking tables, belt separators and centrifugal separators. A hydrosizer comprises a series of compartments increasing in size in the direction of flow. The velocity of the surface flow is highest in the first, smallest compartment where only the largest, heaviest particles can settle out. The velocity reduces across each Gold-bearing eluate is pumped from the carbon strip column to a pregnant solution storage tank. The gold is recovered by passing the pregnant eluate through an electrowinning cell, which houses cathode baskets each measuring, say, 0.9 To ensure maximum recovery of gold, cathodes will be progressively moved from the back to the front end of the electrowinning cell in a counter-flow direction to solution flow. When the steel wool is fully loaded with the gold, it is removed from the cathode baskets and smelted with suitable fluxes in a small reverberatory furnace to produce a final product gold Dore bar.