Beneficiation and recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) from the major reefs involves a complex set of unit operations that has evolved greatly over the last few decades. Over time, a number of interesting flowsheets have been developed for the concentration, separation, and purification of PGMs. Gold from this source is estimated to be some 5 t/year and is considered to be a by-metal with the six PGMs— namely, platinum, palladium, rhodium, iridium, ruthenium, and osmium. The igneous techniques developed for the recovery of gold from primary and secondary sources mirror the state-of-the-art in the field of extractive metallurgy. In some respects, extraction techniques have in essence not changed for centuries; an example being fire assay practice. On the other hand, more advanced extractive techniques have only recently been developed; an example being selective solvent-extraction. Undoubtedly, economic considerations will continue to drive the ongoing discovery and development of metallurgical techniques and processes to perform cheaper, faster, and hopefully drive the industry toward more sound environmental practices.The major portion of platinum and a significant portion of the palladium produced today originates from the Bushveld Igneous complex in South Africa. Beneficiation and recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) from the major reefs involves a complex set of unit operations that has evolved greatly over the last few decades. Over time, a number of interesting flowsheets have been developed for the concentration, separation and purification of PGMs. The major reefs mined today are the Merensky, UG2 and Platreef, with ore grades ranging from 3 to 8 World resources of PGM are estimated to total more than 100 Gold from this source is estimated to be some 5 Minerals in the Merensky reef associated with the PGMs are Pt–Fe alloys [Pt The orebodies are milled and concentrated by froth flotation. Yields generally range from 60% for oxidized and high-chrome UG2 reef, to in excess of 90% for well-mineralized Merensky reef. The PGM content of this flotation concentrate varies between 100 and 1,000 Matte is composed of sulfides of Ni, Cu, Fe and PGM and at typical hearth operating temperature of 1200°C or higher the matte is very fluid. The distribution of gold between slag and typical Cu–Ni–Fe–S matte has been investigated ( The primary producers have developed two processes for the subsequent treatments of the converter matte. Amplats use the slow-cooled converter matte process, where matte is cast into thermally insulated moulds to facilitate a slow rate of cooling, allowing the Ni–Cu sulfide phases to form distinct crystal habitats. Iron as an impurity is forced into the interstitial spaces between the Ni and Cu sulfide crystallites and concurrently concentrates the contained PGMs. The iron alloy produced this way is virtually free of metalloids such as arsenic, selenium and tellurium. Crushing and milling liberates the iron–PGM phase and is separated magnetically from the bulk of the matte. The efficiency of PGM deportment to the iron phase is as high as 97%. The iron alloy is leached to yield a final concentrate for input to the precious-metal refinery (PMR). Impala and Lonmin practice a more traditional matte water-granulation process, as does Stillwater mining company (Montana, USA). This leads to a longer circuit to liberate the PGM contained and a poorer selectivity against metalloid elements. Granulated matte is first leached with sulfuric acid in a counter-current circuit for nickel extraction, followed by copper removal via a series of autoclaves using high temperature and high oxygen pressure. The finely divided leach residues are inputted to the PMR as final concentrates. The major disadvantage of this process concerns the metalloid elements that tend to concentrate with the PGMs, requiring further unit operations. Typical final concentrate feed assay to PMR is given in The three major producers have developed linear extraction circuits using crushing, flotation, smelting, converting and leaching to effect base metal/PGM separations. The typical process flow-circuits are detailed in The amount of gold that is recycled in the USA is substantial, and is in the range of 170–200 Recycling precious metals is an extremely competitive business. The first priority is driven by the need to reach agreement with the customer on expectations of metal content, so preparation for sampling is an important part of the process. Shipments are accurately weighed and homogenized; this may include burning, shredding, melting and grinding to obtain a blend that can be accurately sampled. It is not uncommon for a client representative to be present at this step. Once representative samples are obtained, it is not unusual for the sample to be assayed by more than one accredited laboratory to determine the metal content for monetary settlement. Next is the output of metal in high yield and low cost in an environmentally sound and acceptable way. Refining alloys of greater than 30% gold content are well suited to the Miller process provided that the feed is free of PGMs. Alloys of this type are high-grade jewellery scrap, typically karat gold alloys and fillings. The impurities are in the main silver, nickel and copper. The Miller process is based on the fact that gold does not form stable chlorides above 400°C, whereas base metals and silver do. The process involves melting the alloy and sparging chlorine gas into the melt with a quartz pipe. The first impurities to react are iron, zinc and lead, followed by copper and silver. The base metals and silver chlorides, being less dense, form a slag that can be skimmed off, and the end point is observed when a purple haze forms above the melt. The process is very effective in routinely producing gold purities in excess of 99.95%. This process is economical from the point of view that it is cheap to operate, is fast, and with experience very little gold deports to the slag, resulting in low metal inventory or lockup. Chapter 27 discusses the Miller process in more detail. Alloys containing gold, silver, PGMs and other metals are usually first processed using the Miller process to remove base metals and cast into anodes. Gold–PGM alloys are processed using the Wohlwill electrolytic refining process, also known as the gold cell. The Wohlwill cell uses impure gold alloy as anodes and deposits pure gold at the cathode. The electrolyte is made up as HCl and 100 The disadvantages of the gold cell method are the gold inventory required for the electrolyte, the long processing time to produce the anode slime and the subsequent time spent to refine the PGMs from the anode slime. A further disadvantage is the build-up of impurities in the electrolyte; this requires purging or complete change-out of electrolyte, with associated higher recovery costs. Au–Cu alloys containing base metals can be processed in oxidized sulfate medium as shown by the generalized flowsheet in Anode slimes high in copper can be roasted followed by sulfuric acid leaching for copper removal. A further established process is the recovery of gold and PGM from electronic scrap. These materials are usually derived from shredding and grinding electronic components and boards followed by incineration. The ash is induction-melted and de-slaged and cast into anodes. These types of alloys are extremely variable in composition; they are largely composed of copper and small amounts of gold, silver, palladium, platinum and sometimes ruthenium. The balance is composed of the less desirable metals like lead, tin, bismuth, iron and aluminum. The anodes are processed electrolytically using sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. Copper is recovered at the cathode and the insoluble gold and PGM are recovered as anode slime. Low surface area alloys such as grains are usually processed using aqua regia to achieve dissolution. The method of dissolution is very effective and is prevalent in the industry despite the cost disadvantage of specialized nitrous oxide scrubbing. Solutions generated are first de-nitrated by repeatedly boiling down with hydrochloric acid additions, followed by feeding into PMR separation circuits. The introduction of copper into PGM circuits is problematic, and additional steps are required to remove it without PGM losses. Lower-grade sweeps contain just about any combination of metals, metal oxides and salts. Typically, materials of less than 2–5% PGM are considered too low for hydrometallurgical leaching due to poor dissolution efficiency and high cost. Materials of this type are concentrated and separated from base metals via various smelting routes. Alloys produced are processed to further remove base metals, and final concentrates are dissolved and processed via hydrometallurgical circuits to recover gold and precious metals. Perhaps lead collection is the most well-known smelting process (see also Chapter 27). A feature of this process is the relatively low temperature that is required to perform this pyrometallurgical unit operation. A limited variety of feeds can be processed via this method due to the requirement of a low-melting flux in the range 1,100–1,300°C and so excludes high-alumina feeds. Low-melting slags are formulated with suitable mixtures of lime, calcium carbonate, silicates, iron oxide, iron sulfide and borax. Fluid slags are a requirement for good metal recovery with the objective of forming discardable slag. Lead oxide [litharge, PbO] is used with carbon as reducing agent to form the collector metal in the form of finely divided lead particles. As the particles collide and grow the influence of gravity causes the particles to drop through the molten slag and efficiently scavenge gold, silver and PGMs. The efficiency of the collection is promoted by using an excess of lead. Silver is inevitably present, and is often added to facilitate the melting and collection process by lowering the eutectic of the alloy formed. Smelting temperatures are in the range 1,100–1,300°C and lead, silver and gold remain molten since their melting points are 327°C, 962°C and 1064°C, respectively. The formation of intermetallic compounds such as AuPb Lead smelting is a versatile process; in the simplest form it is used for the assaying of gold bullion. The process can be modified to process complex feeds by adjusting the slag chemistry; iron can be removed by adding silica to form an iron–silicate slag phase such as fayalite [Fe A number of process routes have been developed to recover the gold, silver and PGMs from the lead phase. Cupel furnaces and more recently top-blown rotary converters, have been used to oxidize the lead into lead oxide (PbO). The volatile lead oxide is recovered for recycling by cooling the fume and filtering the stream though high-efficiency bag-house filters. The alloy, now deficient in lead, is called Lead alloys can also be treated using the Parkes process to recover the gold, silver and precious metals ( The long-term use of lead as a process option is limited by the health and safety concerns of handling lead and lead oxide fumes, and it is doubtful if any new plants would be built in the USA or elsewhere in the world. The availability of large volumes of catalytic converters from automobiles ( The smelter is a 2.5 The off-gas stream is passed through a thermal oxidizer to oxidize CO to CO A rather large variety of materials are available for smelting, and includes refinery residues generated from internal hydrometallurgical refining circuits; autocatalysts from internal manufacturing and after market sources, and spent catalysts from the chemical industry. Refinery residues are insoluble materials, typically leach resides containing significant PGM content, including gold and silver together with significant amounts of sodium and chloride. Autocat manufacture generates a considerable volume of waste materials with small but significant PGM contents. These ceramic substrates are high melting-point aluminosilicates, namely, cordierite [Mg Spent catalysts are refractory materials with a large spread of compositions ranging from alumina, aluminosilicates, zeolites, and silicates to silicon carbides. Metal content ranges from 0.1 to 5% PGM, and compositions range from single PGMs (Pt on Al The more traditional sweeps are also added to the smelting circuit and include jewellers sweeps that are typically less than 0.1% gold as well as polishing The collection mechanism in essence utilizes the carbothermic reaction between hematite and carbon to form finely dispersed iron particles that act as the collector. Smelting conditions are considered to be oxidizing, where most of the iron is deported to the slag as FeO, but some of the iron oxide is reduced to metal, forming a dense finely dispersed metallic phase. The finely dispersed iron collector rains through the molten slag, colliding with gold and PGMs, and once a critical particle size is reached gravitational forces cause the particles to settle on the hearth. The main carbothermic reactions are summarized as follows: The distribution coefficients  Hydrometallurgical techniques have the potential of low-capital costs and automation. Most recently, extensive use of solvent extraction and resin technologies has been successfully applied for the selective extraction and concentration of PGMs. PGM refineries input concentrates and alloys that are inevitably mixtures of PGMs, and base metals with gold and silver as minor constituents of the complex mix. The presence of other metals such as selenium, tellurium and arsenic often detract from the use of solvent extraction due to the co-extraction and formation of interface cruds. Hence great efforts are taken to remove these deleterious elements early in the process. Atmospheric dissolution and pressure dissolution with hydrochloric acid–chlorine is usually the method of choice. The dissolution process is greatly facilitated by the extremely fine leach residues obtained from high-pressure autoclave leaching of matte and Doré leach residues containing PGMs. Bulk alloys can be atomized to increase surface areas, facilitating the dissolution process. Once in solution as the The classic process involving reduction of gold to metal from chloride solution is a simple and effective process that is well suited to batch operation. A large number of reagents have been used, namely hydrazine, SO Hydrazine as the hydrochloride is an effective reducing agent for gold in the presence of significant concentrations of metalloids such as selenium and tellurium. Hydrazine is slowly added to the boiling solution and the solution potential is taken to 400 The reaction is given by A useful method for the reduction of gold chloride to metal makes use of SO Perhaps oxalic acid is the most selective reducing agent for the reduction of The reaction is given by The reaction is given by The Miller process can be used when PGMs are minor contaminants. Either the oxalate reduction process, or the ferrous salts reduction process, can be used after re-dissolution of the gold. Several commercial processes exist for the selective extraction of chloro-complexes of PGMs and gold from aqueous solution ( Amines have been extensively investigated as ion-exchange reagents, both in solvent exchange and in stationary-phase applications. In general, the strength of the interaction of amines with anions is given by the following sequence: Strong bases have not found much commercial application in PGM circuits other than as metal scavengers from dilute streams. Readily available commercial quaternary ammonium ion-exchange resins are used to recover small amounts of PGMs and gold from dilute solution. In practice, adsorbed metal is recovered by burning the resin. Ternary, secondary and primary amines have found commercial application in PGM extraction circuits ( Solvent-extraction circuits for primary producers of PGMs are complex due to the multi-component metal ions present, as illustrated by the flow of material shown in Secondary producers usually have less complex mixtures that include platinum, palladium, rhodium and minor amounts of base metals. Separation circuits typically include co-extraction of the anions PtCl Selective solvent extraction of the  The extraction of  The selectivity of dibutyl carbitol against PGMs and most base metals is very good, the exceptions being iron, and to a lesser extent, platinum. Iron, in the form of the tetrahedral The thermodynamics of extraction of AuCl Impurities are managed with dilute acid back-stripping of the loaded solvent. The process requires multiple contacts, leading to small but significant gold and solvent losses. Stripping is achieved using oxalic acid and heating to 50°C, to produce a granular gold powder that is isolated by filtration. The gold requires calcination to remove the organic. Gold that is produced is routinely 99.99% ( The reduction is given by Eq. A more recent commercial example of gold solvent extraction is MIBK (methyl Extraction kinetics are fast and virtually instantaneous. The distribution coefficient for Stripping is conducted with reducing agents such as oxalic acid, with gentle heating. Gold particles are recovered by filtration and purity after calcination is usually 99.95%. MIBK is relatively insoluble in water and mild acid, and only 0.3% of the solvent is lost per cycle. Selective solvent extraction of Stripping can be achieved using the oxalic acid reduction method to yield gold sponge that requires calcination to remove adsorbed solvent. Sponge purity is in the 99.99% range. Stripping the solvent of gold is also possible using a dilute carbonate solution to neutralize the proton, causing abstraction of the Selective adsorption of Stripping is conducted with a weak base to yield a solution of The igneous techniques developed for the recovery of gold from primary and secondary sources mirror the state of the art in the field of extractive metallurgy. In some respects extraction techniques have in essence not changed for centuries, an example being fire assay practice. On the other hand, more advanced extractive techniques have only recently been developed, an example being selective solvent-extraction. Undoubtedly, economic considerations will continue to drive the ongoing discovery and development of metallurgical techniques and processes to perform cheaper, faster and hopefully drive the industry towards more sound environmental practices.