Two series of quaternary ammonium salt Gemini surfactants with ester groups (n-m-n, where n represents hydrocarbon chain lengths of 10, 12, 14 and 16, m represents spacer group lengths of 2 and 6) were synthesized and characterized by 1H NMR. Surface activity and adsorption of these cationic Gemini surfactants were investigated by methods of measuring equilibrium surface tension and dynamic surface tension. The critical micelle concentration (CMC) decreased with an increase in chain length, while increased with the length of spacer group. Moreover, data obtained were analyzed in accordance with Word-Tordai equation, and the diffusion coefficients for ionic liquid molecular adsorption in the initial stage and final stage under different concentration were figured out respectively. The results indicated that the adsorption process was controlled by a diffusion step at low surfactant concentration while by a mixed kinetic-diffusion adsorption mechanism at high surfactant concentration.Surfactants could change interface property significantly and their adherence to the interface results in decreased surface tension, which is the foundation for its widespread application in commodity chemicals, agrochemicals, oil exploration and food processing Gemini surfactants containing two hydrophobic chains and two hydrophilic groups in one molecule have attracted more and more attention. The spacer group is a unique component in Gemini surfactant molecule, which strongly tightens the connection and reduces the electrostatic repulsion between the hydrophilic groups. Thus it is more probably for the alkly chain to generate more hydrophobic force. Those combined is the root cause of spacer group's superior properties in comparision with traditional single-headgroup and single-alkyl chain surfactants. Given this, it is possible to obtain different functional Gemini surfactants through changing its component Added the concentrated sulfuric acid (three drops) to a stirred solution of ethylene chlorohydrin (0.105 A solution of the intermediates (0.01 All the products are characterized using The surface tension of these aqueous solutions were measured with a Power Each JK99C tensiometer by the Wilhelmy plate technique. The dynamic surface tension was measured using a Kruss BP100 bubble-pressure tensiometer, necessary to blow a bubble in a liquid from the tip of a capillary. The measurements were conducted with effective surface ages ranging from 5 In addition, the chemicals and reagents were used as received, all of the surfactant solutions were freshly prepared in doubly distilled water, and all of the measurements were performed at 25 Static surface tension was measured to evaluate the surface activity of Gemini surfactants. In As can be seen from which made the micellization harder. Therefore, the CMC values were positively associated with spacer chain. Moreover, the CMC values of The saturation surface excess concentration, Γ From To investigate the kinetics of adsorption for the n-m-n Gemini surfactants, dynamic surface tension measurements were performed by the maximum bubble-pressure technique. These dynamic methods can measure the surface tension in a few milliseconds and are highly suitable for investigating the kinetics of surfactant adsorption. The variation of the dynamic surface tension as a function of the surface age for n As can be seen from The Word-Tordai equation can describe well the diffusion-controlled adsorption on freshly surface For one certain surfactant, the absolute gradient’ value of the plots in This kind of revelation is not uncommon When the ratio of the diffusion coefficient in initial stage (D The diffusion coefficient in final stage D The γ∼t curves, γ∼t For these two series of cationic Gemini surfactants, the adsorption process was controlled by a diffusion step when the aqueous solutions’ concentration was low as a reslut of the small ratio of the diffusion coefficient in initial stage (D Two series of cationic Gemini surfactants The work was supported by the