Flotation froth plays a key role in determining overall flotation performance. It has been well known that froth transportation has a significant impact on froth performance. Froth transportation is related closely to froth stability and viscosity. Little work has yet been performed in terms of investigating the relationship between froth stability and viscosity to better predict froth performance. In this work, the correlation between froth stability and viscosity was experimentally studied, for the first time, by conducting flotation tests in a 5 cm diameter flotation column operated in a continuous mode. Pure silica of two different particle size distributions was used as the model material. Solids concentration in the feed and the dosage of sodium oleate (NaOL) were varied to change froth behaviors. A negative correlation between froth stability and froth viscosity was observed in this study. The underlying mechanisms were discussed.Froth flotation, consisting of pulp and froth phases, is widely used in mineral upgrading. Flotation froth is of significant importance because it ultimately determines overall flotation performance. Froth recovery, the fraction of particles attached to air bubbles entering the froth phase that survive and are recovered in the concentrate ( Rheology is a measure of the flow characteristics of a substance. It is usually represented by a rheogram which plots the shear stress of a fluid when subject to different shear rates. In general, a substance can either exhibit Newtonian or non-Newtonian behavior, with the latter including dilatant, plastic, pseudo-plastic and Bingham behaviors ( The characteristics of froth stability and viscosity have been extensively investigated, respectively. Froth stability can be described in a number of ways, including bubble burst rate, air recovery and the froth stability column. Froth stability is related to the concentration and type of the surfactants, the nature (e.g. hydrophobicity, particle size, etc.) and concentration of the particles, as well as other operating conditions such as gas rate ( To date, very little work has been performed to study the correlation between froth stability and rheology, better understanding of which is expected to be able to facilitate the development of more conclusive prediction for froth transportation model with the aim of optimising froth performance. The present work is thus to investigate the changes of froth stability and rheology over changing the flotation conditions using silica as a model mineral, upon which the relationship between froth stability and rheology was investigated. Silica (>99.9% pure) was purchased from Yijing, China as the flotation material. Two different particle sizes (coarse and fine) were applied. Particle size measurement using a Malvern Mastersizer 3000E found that the coarse sample had a P80 of 81.2 μm and the fine one had a P80 of 22.8 μm. Sodium oleate (>98.0% pure, Macklin, China) was used as both collector and frother. Sodium hydroxide (>96.0% pure, SCR, China) was used to regulate the slurry pH. Local tap water was used in all flotation tests conducted in this work.  A froth stability column (5 cm in diameter and 100 cm in height) with a sparger of same aperture size as the flotation column was used to characterize froth stability. A ruler was placed along the column wall from bottom to top to measure froth height. The flowrate and pressure of air introduced into the froth stability column were controlled using the same way as the flotation column. The flotation tests were carried out in a continuous mode. For each test, the required mass of solids was mixed with a certain amount of water as needed to make 15 L of slurry agitated in the conditioning sump, by adding a required dose of NaOL for 10 min prior to starting flotation. The feed was then pumped to the column at a flowrate of 0.85 L/min and the discharge flowrate was regulated to maintain the froth depth at 10 cm throughout the work. Air was added to the column at a superficial gas velocity of 1.0 cm/s and at an air pressure of 200 KPa. Preliminary tests confirmed that the flotation system could achieve a steady-state at twice particle residence time, after which the vane was positioned concentrically with the flotation column and immersed into the froth with its upper edge 2 cm below froth surface. The torque values were measured by operating the vane at relatively low speeds with the aim of mantaining froth nature during measurement. The vane speed was increased from 2 rpm to 10 rpm with an increment of 1 rpm. The measurement at each vane speed was replicated five times with a 5-second interval in between, then was moved to the next speed. The vane was moved away after finishing the torque measurement. For some tests in which water holdup and solids concentration by volume in the froth was calculated, the froth overflowing the lip was collected for 3 mins right after the vane was removed. The masses of the collected samples were weighed before and after being dried in an oven. The method to calculate water holdup in the froth can be seen elsewhere ( In parallel, 590 ml of the slurry was added to the froth stability column which was placed on a magnetic stirrer platform with a magnetic stirrer rotating at the bottom of the column. The rotating speed of the stirrer was set to maintain the silica particles well dispersed and meanwhile minimize the turbulence generated. The flow rate and pressure of air introduced to the stability column were set at 1.0 cm/s and 200 KPa, the same as flotation work. Once air was introduced to the stability column, a froth was genrated and the froth surface rised continuously. The levels of the froth surface and the pulp-froth interface were recorded when froth rising stopped. The maximum froth height was calculated as the froth surface level subtracted by the pulp-froth interface level and Eq. After careful consideration of which parameters could potentially affect the characteristics of a flotation froth (as well as practical limitations), NaOL dosage and the solids concentration in the feed were chosen for investigation under the two different particle sizes as mentioned above. Specifically, the NaOL dosage was varied at 400 g/t, 600 g/t and 800 g/t; Under each NaOL dosage, solids concentration were tested at 3 wt%, 5 wt%, 7 wt% and 9 wt%, respectively. As the vane geometry used in this study was not the standard measurement configuration for the rheometer, the rheological parameters in terms of shear rate and shear stress could not be directly obtained. Therefore, only the vane rotating speed and the torque required to drive the spinning vane were measured. The method required to convert the vane rotating speed and the torque to shear rate and shear stress values for the current configuration can be seen elsewhere (  The correlations between froth viscosity and solids concentration in the feed as well as NaOL dosage were studied. Given that flotation froths in this study bear non-Newtonian flow characteristics, froth viscosity is shear rate dependent. This poses a challenge when one wants to compare the viscosities of different froths.  To study the underlying reasons of the negative correlation between froth viscosity and solids concentration in the feed and the NaOL dosage, the solids concentration by volume in the froth was calculated using Eq.   Furthermore, it is expected that bubble size was decreased when increasing the dosage of NaOL or the solids concentration in the feed, although bubble size was not measured in this study. It has been well known that in an aqueous foam bubble size influences foam viscosity negatively ( Gas holdup and water holdup are other important characteristics of flotation froth which are closely related to froth viscosity, the former is positively associated with froth viscosity while the later affect froth viscosity in a reverse way ( The change in To directly study the correlation between froth viscosity and water holdup in the froth, The viscous dissipation of energy in a froth results from the relative motion of neighboring bubbles. In a dry froth, each bubble is usually hexagonally contained. The lamellae are thin and the particles attached are closely jammed as shown in The results indicate that a competing mechanism was involved among froth properties (e.g. bubble loading, bubble size, and water holdup) in determining froth viscosity. Changing operating conditions always results in simultaneous variation of multiple froth properties rather than only one of them. It seems that in this study froth viscosity was dominated by water holdup when varying solids concentration in the feed and the dosage of NaOL. Note that, as mentioned before, To study the dependence of froth stability on solids concentration in the feed and the dosage of NaOL, froth stability as a function of solids concentration in the feed for three different NaOL dosages (i.e. 400 g/t, 600 g/t, 800 g/t) with coarse and fine particles is plotted in  The response of froth stability to solids concentration and NaOL dosage is in consensus with literature. Note that it was single mineral flotation performed in this study, and silica was rendered to be hydrophobic by NaOL. Hence, increasing solids concentration in the feed would improve the amount of hydrophobic silica attaching to the bubble surface. The presence of more hydrophobic particles on the lamellae can form a thicker packed solids layer, which would prevent bubble coalescence and burst (   The correlation between froth stability and froth viscosity was investigated in this study. The results showed that froth stability was correlated positively with solids concentration in the feed and NaOL dosage while froth viscosity responded to the two operating variables in opposite ways. The statistical analysis proved that froth stability is correlated negatively with froth viscosity in this study. Unexpected is the negative dependence of froth viscosity on solids concentration in the feed and NaOL dosage. The main reason was that water holdup in the froth was significantly increased over increasing solids concentration in the feed and the NaOL dosage, offsetting the effects of other froth properties which could potentially increase froth viscosity, while it was not the case for particle size. Note that the conclusions drawn from this study were obtained based on a single-component mineral flotation, which is relatively simple compared to a real ore flotation. The results may be different in real ore flotation. Thus, caution needs to be taken when studying rheology in flotation in future, especially in different flotation systems. More work should be performed by investigating other variables, for example, hydrodynamics, chemical type, the presence of salt ions, and liquid viscosity etc., to better understand the correlation between froth stability and rheology.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial supports for this study, provided by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: