Here we report on the control of CoFe2O4 (CFO) morphology (in the form of sphere, cube, and hexagonal nanoparticles (NPs)) by tuning the preparative parameters in facile thermal decomposition technique for fine tuning of the structural, optical and magnetic properties. X-ray diffraction study revealed the cubic spinel crystal structure of cobalt ferrite. Raman and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy confirmed the non-equilibrium cation distribution between sphere, cube, and hexagonal CFO-NPs. Strong correlation between optical band gap and magnetic properties with the CFO -NPs attributed to the non-equilibrium cation distribution between the octahedral and tetrahedral sites for different morphology with a quantitative analysis.Compared to the bulk materials, nanoscale dimension magnetic materials have drawn the significant attention of the researchers due to novel properties and a wide range of technological applications. In specific, superparamagnetism and magnetic single domain, are some of the unique features of the nanomagnetism, which are directly associated with the sizes, shapes, and compositions of the materials [ Iron (III) acetylacetonate, cobalt (II) acetylacetonate (TCI chemicals Pvt. Ltd.) Oleic acid and benzyl ether (Sigma-Aldrich) were used to synthesise CoFe The mixtures were heated at 100 °C under nitrogen blanket for 30 min. Subsequently, reaction temperatures were increased to 280 °C for 20 min with a heating rate of 7  °C/min. The reaction solutions were turned black indicating the formation of NPs. After completing the reactions, the heating mantles were removed. For purification of NPs, 20 mL of ethanol was mixed in reaction solution to collect the precipitate. Finally, CoFe For preparing the CFO-C NPs, amount of solvent was reduced to 30 mL and reaction time was increased to 40 min, keeping other parameters unchanged. In the similar way, further reaction time was increased to 90 min and solvent of amount reduced to 20 mL for preparing the CFO-H NPs. Hereafter, throughout the discussion, the CoFe Phase identifications and crystal structure analysis of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs were done using a Rigaku Smart Lab X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). All the data were recorded in the range of 2θ from 25 to 70° with step size of 0.030° per minute. UV–visible measurements were carried out using the Perkin Elmer Lambda 19, UV–Visible–NIR spectrophotometer with 500–1500 nm wavelength range. Raman measurements of all the NPs were carried out by micro-Raman model STR 500 with Nd-YAG laser source having 785 nm wavelength. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM, the Tecnai G2 F30 operated at 300 kV) was used to determine the morphology, size, lattice fringes, and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns of the NPs. The samples were prepared by placing a drop of the diluted suspension of NPs in ethanol on carbon-coated copper grids and evaporating the ethanol at room temperature. The magnetic measurements were carried out using Quantum Design SQUID VSM (model SVSM-050). Crystal structure and phase purity information of thermally decomposed technique grown CoFe The “goodness of fit ( The crystallite size ( The crystallite sizes were increased from sphere to cubic morphology and followed by hexagonal NPs. The atomic density ( Furthermore, the octahedral (B) site radii ( Further, the distance between magnetic ions at octahedral and tetrahedral sites is called hopping length and can be evaluated from the crystal structure of spinel ferrites. The octahedral hopping length ( According to Yadav et al., hopping lengths of electron affect the physical properties of spinel ferrites. Both, It is well known that nucleation rate plays a significant role in the synthesis of morphology-controlled NPs with homogeneous size distribution. A faster nucleation and growth rates are responsible for assembling the smaller size NPs with controlled morphology, whereas, slower nucleation rate and faster growth favoured the formation of bigger particles with homogeneous size distribution [ In the present work, CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs were grown When reaction time is increased to 40 min and amount of benzyl ether is reduced to 30 mL, in result, CFO-S NPs transformed to CFO-C NPs. TEM image of CFO-C NPs and their size distribution along with statistical analysis are shown in In the present study, shape evolution of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs may be ascribed to the relationship between the variation in the amount of solvent and reaction refluxing time. The relatively shorter reaction time (20 min) at reaction temperature 280 °C for 40 mL benzyl ether and 2.5 mL oleic acid favoured the isotopically growth from the nucleating seeds with no specified growth directions and in results CFO-S NPs obtained. Increasing the reaction time to 40 min and decreasing the solvent amount to 30 mL, favoured the relatively faster growth rate along the <111> direction, which lead to the formation of CFO-C NPs. When reaction time was further increased to 90 min, and the ratio of oleic acid to solvent amount increased significantly, the {111} surface shows saturated surface coverage, and {100} surface is also coordinated. Therefore, in CFO-H NPs both {100} and {111} surfaces are well developed [ From the TEM analysis, we found that CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs are in controlled morphology with homogeneous size distribution, which offer the engineering of the optical and magnetic properties. Raman spectroscopy is one of the most effective and non-destructive technique to investigate the atomic structure of NPs [ Raman active modes in spinel structure are attributed to the motion of oxygen ions with the octahedral (   The Co In order to get more insight into the electronic structure, XPS measurements were carried out to investigate the cation distribution and electronic state. The high resolution Co 2p spectra of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs is associated with two spin-orbit characteristics of Co2p The binding energy of CFO-S NPs at 780.66 eV reveals that CO The obtained binding energy values of Co Further, By considering the 1:2 ratio of Co to Fe, the occupation formula of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs can be mentioned as Therefore, on the basis of these two characterization tools, we conclude that CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-C NPs possess non-equlibrium cation distribution due to different morphology.  Enhanced saturation magnetization due to the shifting of Fe Sharma et al. reported that enhancement in the saturation magnetization, increased with annealing temperature, was associated with redistribution of cations (Co The magnetic ordering in spinel ferrites is associated with the superexchange interaction (A-O-B) between the magnetic ions in the octahedral and tetrahedral sites, mediated by oxygen ions. The non-equilibrium cationic distribution over the tetrahedral and octahedral sites modify the dominant superexchange interaction and as a result, change the saturation magnetization of CoFe  Raman and XPS analysis confirmed the non-equilibarium cation distribution between the tetrahedral and octahedral sites. According to XPS and Raman results, the occupancy of Fe Raman and XPS analysis revealed that the Co  Saturation magnetization is obtained from the magnetic hysteresis loops by employing the “Law of approach (LA) to saturation” method [ The dependence of magnetization ( The fitted Law of approach to saturation of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs at 10 K and room temperature is depicted in The high applied magnetic field is the cause of the aligned spin in the direction of field. The higher value of magnetization, achieved in this state, is called the saturation magnetization. The ferromagnetic materials possess residual magnetic moment at zero field. The magnetization at zero field is called the remnant magnetization. The ratio of remnant magnetization to saturation magnetization,  The temperature dependent magnetization ( FC and ZFC curve show irreversible ( CFO-S, CFO-C, CFO-H NPs were successfully synthesized by a simple and economical thermal decomposition technique. A detailed study on the structural, optical, and magnetic properties of CFO-S, CFO-C, and CFO-H NPs were investigated. The optical band gaps were tuned from 1.41 to 1.32 eV which are associated with the variation in morphology of NPs. The higher coercivity of 17845.8 and 1577.76 Oe were obtained at 10 K and room temperature, respectively, for CFO-H NPs as compared to CFO-S and CFO-C NPs. This tunable coercivity is a consequence of change in morphology as CFO-H NPs have high surface to volume ratio and more structural facets. Further, the tuneable saturation magnetization of CFO-H, CFO-C, and CFO-S NPs are due to morphology dependent non-equilibrium cation distribution, which are significant for specific room temperature magnetic applications. In addition, morphology dependent optical band gap and remarkable magnetic properties revealed the potentiality of CFO-H, CFO-C, and CFO-S NPs for simultaneous application in high density magnetic recording media, magneto-optical devices, photocatalysis, and optoelectronics. Hence the present work is important for basic and applied branch of science. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at