Abstract – Percutaneous instrumentation of thoracolumbar fractures: current concepts
               
            
               Numerous evolutions in minimally invasive spine surgery (MISS) have taken place during the past decade. MISS in thoracolumbar spine trauma management should achieve the same goals as conventional treatment in terms of stability but with less morbidity. The spread of MISS technologies in spine trauma has been closely linked to the development of more versatile implants making fixation possible at all thoracic and lumbar levels. Additionally, balloon-assisted techniques were applied to support the anterior column in a stand-alone manner or in combination with open or percutaneous pedicle screw fixation. Fluoroscopy-assisted pedicle screws insertion is associated with less pedicle violation as compared with open surgery, but with increased radiation exposure for the surgeon and the patient. Surgeons should be aware of this issue; new technologies are available to decrease irradiation. The advantages of percutaneous pedicle screw fixation as compared to open surgery are discussed: preservation of the posterior musculature, less blood loss, less operative time, less infection, less postoperative pain, less rehabilitation time as well as shorter hospital stay. Limitations of percutaneous fixation are its inability to achieve direct decompression of the spinal canal and its lack of fusion possibility. Nevertheless, these limitations can be overcome with combination of MISS and open techniques. Indications for percutaneous spine fixation alone or in combination with MISS or open techniques are discussed according to the AO classification. The benefits of percutaneous spine fixation for unstable spine fractures in polytrauma patients are discussed. Posterior instrumentation can be easily removed with a minimal access after consolidation, to restore mobility in young patients. Large well-controlled prospective studies are needed to establish guidelines for less invasive procedures in spine trauma. In the future, the development of new technologies may expand the indications and treatment possibilities of MISS techniques in spine trauma.