An experimental approach to develop a new building product consisting mainly of limestone dust, which is considered as waste or by product material of aggregates industry and a small quantity of ordinary Portland cement, is presented. Limestone dust and cement were mixed, humidified and compacted under high pressure in a cylindrical mould, to form specimens. The design of the trial mixtures was based on factorial design method. Results indicated that all specimens have compressive strength greater than 7 MPa, while cement-to-limestone dust ratio was recognized as the most important factor with the regard to compressive strength. Preliminary results showed that quarry dust–cement mixtures can be used for the production of moulded masonry bricks with acceptable mechanical properties.During the production of crushed aggregates fine material such as silt and crusher dust can be generated. Silt is a material between 2 and 60 μm reduced to this size by natural processes and it is found in aggregates won from natural deposits. On the other hand, crusher dust is a fine material formed during the process of comminution of rock into crushed stone. This fine material is present in aggregates in the form of surface coating which interfere with the bond between aggregate and cement paste. BS 882:1973 limits the content of fine material in crushed coarse aggregates for structural concrete, to 1% and in crushed stone sand to 15% ( In Greece, the majority of the aggregates are extracted from limestone deposits. More than 300 small to medium size quarries produces about 60 million tones of crushed limestone aggregates annually ( Limestone dust compared with aggregates used in structural concrete, has higher specific surface, higher values of water absorption and this results to higher water demand. High water-to-cement ratio results in higher shrinkage and creep of the hardened concrete. However, the disadvantages of limestone dust in structural concrete mix can be avoided in concrete mixtures for moulded concrete bricks and pavement blocks. Concrete bricks are manufactured by using mechanized moulding machines, where the mixed materials are moulded under a compacting action. The amount of water needed to make these mixtures is minimal, so the shrinkage and the creep of the moulded brick are reduced significantly ( A recent study at the Technical University of Crete, which aims to develop a method for using limestone dust in moulded concrete products like masonry bricks or pavement blocks, is presented in this paper. Laboratory trials were carried out to prepare and test moulded specimens consisting of limestone dust and ordinary Portland cement. For the investigation of the simultaneous effect of mixture composition and compaction pressure to the mechanical properties of the fabricated specimens, the factorial design of the experiments was used. The materials used for the specimen preparation were ordinary Portland cement (type I35) and limestone dust, produced during quarrying operations in the area of Heraklion (Crete, Greece). Mineralogical and chemical analysis results indicated that limestone dust consists mainly of calcite (∼98 wt%) with traces of quartz and dolomite. Specific surface of limestone dust, measured according to BET method, varies from 1.1 to 1.6 m Limestone dust and cement were mixed and homogenized in a laboratory rod mill. The mixture was humidified by spraying an adequate amount of water and then was compacted in a cylindrical stainless steel mould with an internal diameter of 50 mm and height 80 mm. An adequate compression force was applied in order to achieve the predetermined values of compaction pressure. The formed specimen were then removed from the mould and cured in a closed steel storage cabinet in room temperature for 28 days. A series of tests were conducted to determine density, compressive strength, and modulus of elasticity. The density of the specimens was determined by measuring their dimensions and their weight at 105 °C. Compressive strength of the age of 28 days and the modulus of elasticity were measured by using a compression testing machine with maximum load capacity of 1600 kN. Compressive strength at the age of 28 days is a critical parameter for building concrete bricks and must be more than 7 MPa according to the requirements of BS 6073 for masonry units. For paving blocks compressive strength at the age of 28 days must be more than 49 MPa according to the requirements of BS 6717 ( Full factorial design was used to evaluate the simultaneous effect of cement content in the mixture and compaction pressure, to the properties of the fabricated specimens. Cement-to-limestone dust ratio ( Laboratory test results for compressive strength at the age of 28 days, modulus of elasticity and density are given in In order to estimate the simultaneous effect of The correlation coefficient of measured values of This first experimental work showed that quarry dust–cement mixtures can be used for the production of moulded masonry bricks with acceptable mechanical properties. For the evaluation of the effect of process parameter to mechanical properties of the fabricated specimens, factorial design of experiments was approved a useful tool. However the complete investigation of limestone dust–cement moulded bricks, should include further tests concerning mainly with their durability. To investigate the utilization of limestone dust for the production of high strength building products, like concrete paving blocks, new specimens with higher cement content must be prepared and tested. Also the use of other types of cements, like cements with high Blaine value, has to be investigated.