This article reports the extraction of Hg(II), Cd(II) and Cr(III) ions from acidic media using new supported liquid membranes (SLM). The novelty of this work is the use of an ionic liquid (IL) (isooctylmethylimidazolium bis-2-ethylhexylphosphate) as carrier for the SLM. The ionic liquid was synthesized under microwave and characterized (volumetric mass density, viscosity and thermal stability). The influences of the membrane support hydrophobicity and of the operating conditions (carrier concentration, metallic ions nature and concentration, acidity of the aqueous phases and temperature) were studied. Fluxes, permeability, diffusion coefficients and association constants were determined by kinetic studies. The SLM appeared more suitable for the extraction of Cd(II) ions at pH = 3 (higher permeability coefficient: 40.3 × 10−7 cm2 s−1, extraction ratio: 35% after 4 h run; selectivity coefficients: αCd(II)/Hg(II) = 1.8 and αCd(II)/(Cr(III) = 1.5). Thermodynamic data were gathered by studying the influence of temperature. In view of future applications to the purification of real wastewaters, the effect of the competition in multimetallic mixtures and the stability of the membrane were also studied. The extraction ratio order was Cd(II) > Hg(II) > Cr(III) and an increase of the Cd(II) extraction ratio was observed with the number of reuses. The transport performances were correlated to the absolute hardness of ions and the structure of the carrier. All data highlighted that the transport mechanism should be of mobile-site jump type.The presence of toxic heavy metals in wastewaters resulting from industrial activities represents an important environmental concern due to the toxic effects of metals ions, even at very low concentrations. The accumulation of heavy metals ions throughout the food chain leads to serious ecological and health problems. Mercury, cadmium and chromium are of most concern because of their non-degradability and high toxicity. Causing damages to human health more specifically, mercury is responsible of serious damages to the central nervous system, spinal cord, chromosomes, and to pulmonary and kidney functions. Nevertheless, other less toxic ions such as copper or zinc may nevertheless prove harmful at high concentrations. Because of their high toxicity, World Health Organization (WHO) defines for drinking water at a maximum permissible concentration as low as 6 µg L Therefore, the removal of metal ions in wastewaters is a technological challenge. Because of the low concentrations, an efficient pre-concentration step is usually necessary. The conventional techniques used to remove metal ions from wastewaters are mainly precipitation by chemical and biological agents However, membrane processes have some drawbacks such as insufficient life time requiring frequent replacements, fouling and ageing and low selectivity for high fluxes. These drawbacks are technical problems that can be solved by the development of new types of membranes. The low selectivity is generally solved by reaching a compromise between permeability and selectivity. One solution for more selective membranes consists in introducing a carrying agent into the membranes. The carrier should form easily separated complexes with the substrates to extract. This method, which is called facilitated transport, is based on the recognition of a substrate (S) by the carrier molecule (C). This process involves the mobility of a complex (CS), within the membrane, produced by reversible reactions between the carrier (C) and transported substrate (S) between the interfaces of the membrane with the source and receiving phases. Several types of membranes have been developed, among which: supported liquid membranes (SLM) and polymer inclusion membranes (PIM). The membranes containing mobile carriers are highly permselective, because they allow the specific transport of species from a mixture. Indeed, this technique has been used to the selective extraction and enrichment of varied organic compounds, such as amino acids The main drawbacks that limit the development of liquid membranes on a large scale are the low stability of the membranes and the low long-term performance. For example, there is often a decrease of selectivity and reduction of flow in use. These effects are due to solvent or carrier loss by evaporation or dissolution in one of the phases. Consequently, the carrier and the solvent must be highly hydrophobic. One possible way to improve the stability of the SLM is to optimize the carrier using an ionic liquid (IL) Ionic liquids are organic salts that are liquid at room temperature. They are generally bulky, asymmetric organic cations associated to an inorganic or organic counter ion. ILs show unique properties such as non-volatility, high ionic conductivity, flame retardancy, high thermal stability and many electrochemical properties. They are highly investigated for their solvation properties and their electrochemical stability for fuel cells, batteries, solar cells and super conductor applications In this work, our attention was focused on the development of an SLM containing a dialkylimidazolium dialkylphosphate as carrier for metal ions. The nature of anion is fundamental in the transport of metallic cations (coordination, transport, decoordination), so we have chosen dialkylphosphate anions as conveying anions because there are well-known in hydrometallurgy, for example dibutylphosphate, dioctylphoshate or di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphate The transport of Cd(II), Hg(II) and Cr(III) ions from aqueous solutions across the SLM was studied. The transport of the ions was investigated under different operating conditions, namely, ions concentration, N-methylimidazole 99% and tris(2-ethyl)hexylphosphate (95%) were provided by Alfa Aesar and were used as received without further purification. Microporous hydrophilic PVDF membranes (Millipore HVLP09050) of thickness 100 μm, porosity 70% and pore size 0.45 μm were used as SLM support. The membrane area available for diffusion was 23.7 cm Cadmium, chromium and mercury nitrates and cadmium, chromium and mercury (1% wt/v in HNO Isooctylmethylimidazolium bis-2-ethylhexylphosphate (iOMim D2EHP) carrier (  The volumetric mass (g cm The viscosity of pure iOMim D2EHP was measured using a Discovery Hybrid Rheometer (HR2 from TA Instrument (U.K.)) with standard-size double concentric cylinder geometry. Flow experiments were performed between 10 and 1000 s The thermal stability of the IL was tested using TA Instruments Q500 TGA on 8 mg mass sample under nitrogen atmosphere (90 ml min MS(n) spectra were recorded on mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific). IL dissolved in acetonitrile was ionized by electrospray in positive ionization mode (ESI The surface and the section of SLM were observed by scanning electron microscopy (Carl Zeiss EVO® 40 EP). Beforehand, samples were prepared by fracturing under liquid nitrogen at 77 K and then by gold coating. Bubble point measurements were performed to assess the resistance of the membrane to the increase of pressure. The device used is a non-commercial set-up composed of a stainless steel sealed cell (Millipore XX3001200). The membrane was previously impregnated by IL solution and was placed between the two compartments of the cell on a calibrated grid. The upstream of the cell was connected to a pressure regulator, and the downstream was immersed in water. The pressure was increased stepwise, to drain the IL out of the pores. The bubble point (expressed in Pa unit) corresponded to the first bubble arising from the downstream of the membrane. The measurements were performed at 298 K; the pressure was increased in steps of 5000 Pa every 60 s. The measurement was repeated 3 times and the pressure values were averaged. The SLM was first prepared by soaking the PVDF membrane in 10 ml of iOMim D2EHP solution in dodecane (0.1 mol L The determination of the metal ions aliquots concentration was performed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), using a Spectra AA20 air/acetylene flame atomic absorption spectrometer from Varian. All AAS measurements were repeated four times and were reproducible within 0.4% accuracy. The wavelength value for cadmium, mercury and chromium measurements were 326.1 nm, 253.7 nm and 357.9 nm, respectively. The diffusion experiments were first performed on solutions of a single metal ion, and then on a mixture of the three metal ions in order to test the membrane under more realistic conditions. The principle of the calculation of permeability coefficients and initial fluxes has been previously published When the system reaches a quasi-steady state, the flux  Since the flux of Cd (II) is very large, When combining Eq. After integration: The term -ln ( The initial flux The transport through a membrane depends on the equilibrium of formation and further dissociation of the carrier-solute complex CS with In the rate-determining state, the flux ( At the feed phase/membrane interface, From Eq. In the initial conditions, there is a large excess of the solute ([S] The permeability coefficient  Therefore, a plot of (1/ Several factors can influence  On the other hand, it is known from the activated complex theory, that While the activation entropy ( Where After distillation, the yield of the iOMim D2EHP synthesis was 76% (w/w) of the maximum theoretical yield. The IL is a light brown viscous oil.  The volumetric mass density of iOMim D2EHP was 1.051 g cm The viscosity of iOMim D2EHP was 0.35 Pa s (350 cP) that is a large value compared to most common IL. iOMim D2EHP exhibited thermal stability until 463 K. The thermogram obtained by TGA showed a slight loss of mass of about 10% between 323 and 463 K which corresponds to the vaporization of small molecules linked to IL (water, traces of butanol). From 463 K, the loss of mass increased up to 553 K to reach 60% of the total mass. From 553 K to 763 K, the loss of mass reached 80%. The MS-MS spectra and the fragmentation mechanisms of the cation and the anion are given in the supporting information part. The SLM were first prepared by soaking the micro-porous PVDF supporting membrane into pure iOMim D2EHP ionic liquid for 24 h. However, the efficiency of the metal ions transport was very poor, probably due to the high viscosity of the ionic liquid, so it was dissolved in an appropriate solvent. The criteria for solvent selection was a good or total solubility of the carrier, non-solubility in water, good affinity with the PVDF support membrane and high boiling point. Ethyl acetate, carbon tetrachloride and cyclohexane were solvent of iOMim D2EHP, immiscible in water but very volatile (T The efficiency of the retention of the IL solution inside the support membrane was characterized by bubble point measurements. The obtained value was 25,330 Pa for the SLM. This value is close to those obtained by Ratieuville et al. The influence of the support hydrophobicity was studied. The porous membrane supports were PVDF Millipore HVLP09050 and Millipore HVHP09050, hydrophilic and hydrophobic, respectively. Diffusion experiments were carried with both supports in the same conditions. For all experiments, the hydrophilic support showed higher performances than the hydrophobic one. This may be explained by the design of our system. The hydrophobic ionic liquid and the hydrophobic solvent used as membrane phase have low affinity with the aqueous feeding and receiving phase containing the ions. The used of an hydrophilic support may improve this affinity and then may decrease the thickness of the diffusion boundary layers (Nernst diffusion layers) on both sides of the membrane. So, the hydrophilic support distorts the interface between the membrane and the solutions. This resulted in better metal ion extraction transport performances whereas the hydrophobic support obtained a lower performance. For example, This study was carried out for four feed metal ions concentrations For each The conclusion is that the transport is faster with the soft cations that form weaker complexes than with the hard cation that form a more stable complex. This idea was checked by calculating the formation constant of the complexes Using the Lineweaver-Burke linearization of 1/ It is widely accepted that  Extraction ratios ( The thermodynamic parameters of the system were determined using the Arrhenius Law and the activated complex theory (Eqs. With regards to Eq. Three mechanisms are often used to explain the facilitated transport through SLM In our study, the mechanism was studied by determining the stability constant The major drawback for the use of SLM is their lack of stability over time due to the gradual solubilization of the membrane liquid phase (carrier and/or organic solvent) in the surrounding aqueous phases. To check the stability of the SLM, four successive diffusion experiments were performed on the same membrane. They were carried out with Cd (II) ions ( In addition to the study of the diffusion of single metal ions, the possible competition between the metal ions was considered. In wastewaters, the presence of multiple competing ions is more frequent than the presence of a single ion, and extraction in multi-component systems is complicated due to the variety of metal ion – carrier interactions involved. For this purpose, the membrane selectivity for a mixture of the three metal ions was studied using the same initial concentration, 0.015 mol L For the extraction of individual ions, the ratio after 4 h were 31, 35 and 24% for Hg(II) ( Because the three cations compete for the same site of the carrier, when the extraction of an ion is fully or partially inhibited by another ion, a competition for the complexing sites is likely. On the other hand, it must be considered that the global concentration of the mixture (3 times 0.015 mM) is greater than that of the solutions containing only one ion, while the carrier mass in the membrane is the same. It should be associated with an increase of the global fluxes In this work, a novel ionic liquid has proven its ability to transport selectively metallic cations and appears to be a suitable carrier for SLM. Several transport parameters were determined. The transport performances were correlated to the ions’ absolute hardness, and the determination of The influences of the support membranes hydrophobicity and of the operating conditions (carrier concentration, metallic ions nature and concentration, acidity of the aqueous phases and temperature) were outlined. According to the gathered data, a mobile-site jumping extraction mechanism occurs characterized by a series of association and dissociation of weak complexes leading to large The authors thank Dr. Virginie Dulong (PBS, CNRS and University of Rouen – France) for the viscosity measurements. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 