High nitrogen stainless steel (HNS) is a nickel free austenitic stainless steel that is used as a structural component in defence applications for manufacturing battle tanks as a replacement of the existing armour grade steel owing to its low cost, excellent mechanical properties and better corrosion resistance. Conventional fusion welding causes problems like nitrogen desorption, solidification cracking in weld zone, liquation cracking in heat affected zone, nitrogen induced porosity and poor mechanical properties. The above problems can be overcome by proper selection and procedure of joining process. In the present work, an attempt has been made to correlate the microstructural changes with mechanical properties of fusion and solid state welds of high nitrogen steel. Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), electron beam welding (EBW) and friction stir welding (FSW) processes were used in the present work. Optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and electron backscatter diffraction were used to characterize microstructural changes. Hardness, tensile and bend tests were performed to evaluate the mechanical properties of welds. The results of the present investigation established that fully austenitic dendritic structure was found in welds of SMAW. Reverted austenite pools in the martensite matrix in weld zone and unmixed zones near the fusion boundary were observed in GTA welds. Discontinuous ferrite network in austenite matrix was observed in electron beam welds. Fine recrystallized austenite grain structure was observed in the nugget zone of friction stir welds. Improved mechanical properties are obtained in friction stir welds when compared to fusion welds. This is attributed to the refined microstructure consisting of equiaxed and homogenous austenite grains.High nitrogen austenitic stainless steel is a nickel free high Cr–Mn–N steel having a wide scope in defence sector for manufacturing battle tanks by replacing the existing armour steel. Austenitic stainless steel (>0.4% N) are becoming an important engineering material with combination of strength, toughness and wear resistance Nickel free high nitrogen austenitic stainless steel (HNS) plates of size (500 mm × 150 mm × 5 mm) in wrought form were used in the present study. Weld joint design for SMAW and GTAW processes is shown in Nickel free high nitrogen steel plates in cold worked condition is observed to have equiaxed fine grains of austenite and annealing twins at the grain boundaries as shown in Microstructural changes and solidification mode of high nitrogen austenitic stainless steel welds are determined on various factors like chemical composition of the electrode/filler and welding process. Heat input and cooling rates of the welding process may influence the dilution of the weld. Based on cooling rates, the extent of dilution also varies in the welds. Filler wire, which differs from base metal composition, also alters the solidification mode and extent of dilution Solidification mode as fully austenite structure in the weld metal of shielded metal arc welds is attributed to the high amount of chromium and manganese, which helps improve the solubility of nitrogen, enhancing the austenite phase stability. At the weld interface, along the fusion boundary towards the base metal, transition of coarse grains to fine grains was observed and is shown in The weld microstructure has a maximum austenite structure due to the dilution of adjacent base metal that has nitrogen, which is completely soluble in the solid solution. Scanning electron micrographs shown in In Friction stir welds of high nitrogen steel made with tungsten–molybdenum (W–Mo) tool has resulted in fine recrystallized grains of austenite due to severe plastic deformation. Weld nugget microstructure of the friction stir welds has an equiaxed and homogenous austenite grain structure, as shown in Strengthening has been generally observed by addition of nitrogen in steels. Nitrogen is a strong austenite stabilizer and reduces the requirement of nickel and improves microstructural stability and resistance to deformation induced martensite. Improvement in the strength of high nitrogen stainless steel is influenced by solid solution hardening and decrease in stacking fault energy  SMA welds made using Cr–Mn–N electrode have a fully coarse austenite dendritic structure and are due to the presence of chromium and manganese, which help in complete solubility of nitrogen in the weld metal. SMA welds resulted in reduction in strength and ductility and it is attributed to coarse dendritic structure. GTA welds made using MDN 250 filler has resulted in reverted austenite island pools in the martensite matrix. Unmixed zone is formed adjacent to the weld metal due the variation in base metal and filler wire composition. GTA welds have moderate strength and ductility. Autogenous EB welds were observed to have narrow width of weld zone and discontinuous network of delta ferrite in the austenite matrix. It has high strength and improvement in ductility. Friction stir welds made with tungsten–molybdenum (W–Mo) tool resulted in high strength and ductility and it is due to recrystallized fine grain austenite structure in the weld nugget. Improved mechanical properties are obtained in friction stir welding when compared to fusion welds. This is attributed to the refined microstructure consisting of equiaxed and homogenous austenite grains. Hence, friction stir welding is recommended as best welding process when compared to all fusion welding processes to achieve improved mechanical properties. The authors would like to thank the Director of Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory Hyderabad, India, for his continued encouragement and permission to publish this work.