This work devotes to designing the fault-tolerant output feedback controller for the hydraulic automation gauge control system of cold rolling mills. The mathematical model of the rolling mill is constructed, in which the possible actuator failures are considered randomly occurring and obey semi-Markov process. By constructing a desired controller based on the measured output, the stabilization and the dissipativity of the considered system are realized. Data from actual equipment are provided to test the practicability of the method.Cold rolling in ferrous metallurgy is the forming process that steel strip going through multiple single-stand rolling mills. The steel strip is gradually thinned after passing the rolling mills and finally meets certain thickness and performance requirements. The cold rolling process involves multiple control requirements including roll gap control, roll bending control, sheet thickness control, etc. Among them, sheet thickness control is an essential part, since it directly affects the quality of the steel strip Commonly, a rolling mill mainly comprises of signal amplifiers, servo valves, hydraulic cylinders, roll stack, and sensors. With these components, the desired thickness of the strip can be obtained via changing the size of the roll gap which is affected by the down pressure of the cylinder and the reduction position of the roll. The whole system is called hydraulic automation gauge control (HAGC) system. However, due to the complexity and compactness in the mechanical structure, in practice, not all the states of the system can be directly measured Moreover, after working for periods of time, the wear and tear usually occur in the actuators. It affects how the actuators work and the output of the system, and eventually causes failures of the actuators Unfortunately, the randomness of the failure itself is ignored in the works mentioned above. When in operation, the form of the failure may change because there exist shock and several kinds of vibrations in the rolling mill. The vibrations (especially the torsional vibration and vertical torsion-coupled vibration) adversely affect the thickness and shape of the steel strip Driven by the background aforementioned, this paper mainly investigates the problem of the output feedback fault-tolerant control with semi-Markov jump mechanism for an HAGC system. The unique features of the work are refined as follows: 1. To deal with the limitation of the unmeasurable states of the HAGC system, an output feedback controller is designed. Besides, the case that the actuator randomly fails is considered, which entails the system more suitable for the actual situations. 2. To evaluate the reliability and robustness of the system under consideration, the dissipative index is adopted. 3. The nonlinearity in the operating characteristics of some components of the rolling mill is taken into account, which makes the considered problem more general.   In this section, first, the mathematical models of each part in the rolling mill are given. And the description of an HAGC system is obtained. The structure of a cold rolling mill is shown in Considering the asymmetric structure and the dead zone features of the servo valve, the load flow of the valve can be represented as the formula below Since the servo valve works in its equilibrium point, the load flow The pressure of the fluid in the cylinder can be represented as the following characteristic equation: Then, formula According to the flow balance model of the cylinder, the force equation of the cylinder can be written as: When only considering the deformation resistance of the rolling piece, the rolling force The relationship between the roll gap and the displacement of the piston is: Moreover, the output thickness of the strip is not same as the size of the roll gap because of the elastic resilience displacement of the strip. The values of the two elements are constrained by The measured output of the system is the data from the thickness meter. Due to the inherent delay of the thickness measurement process, the actual thickness of the strip Furthermore, define the states of the system as: We denote the parameters as: Given a probability space The controller of system The randomness of the failure is described by the semi-Markov process. Unlike the Markov process, semi-Markov process does not have the restriction that the sojourn-time must satisfy exponential distribution The failure function takes the form of : To simplify the expression, let According to conditions To better illustrate the problem, some introductory definitions and lemma should be introduced before further discussion. Under every initial condition, when Preset a scalar Index  In the following, we aim to design a fault-tolerant output feedback controller with semi-Markov jumping parameters for the rolling mill system and to get some conditions ensuring the feasibility of the approach. First, the stability analysis of the system is given through the Lyapunov–Krasovskii functional approach. Then, by using certain decoupling techniques, the desired controller parameters are obtained.   More, it can be deduced from In the next theorem, the design method of the output feedback controller will be presented based on     In Based on the descriptions in With the obtained controller, the simulation results are shown in From the parameters of the controller and the initial values of the system, such as In this paper, the workflow of the HAGC system has been introduced. Several mathematical models describing the characteristics of the pressure of the servo valve, the force equation of the cylinder, the rolling force, and the output thickness of the strip have been given. Furthermore, nonlinearity and disturbance have been considered in the model, and the state space description of the HAGC system has been obtained. By using Lyapunov stability theory and linear matrix inequality approach, an output feedback controller with the fault-tolerant scheme has been designed, where a semi-Markov process has been used to describe the randomness of the failure in the actuators. Ultimately, the validity of the given approach has been demonstrated through the simulation. In future works, the singular perturbation method may be considered to model the systems with multi-time scales property, which may be more reasonable. Besides, some novel approaches