A description of the agitation leach plant used for treating gold-copper ores at Anglo Asian Mining’s Gedabek mine in Azerbaijan is given. The plant employs a unique resin-in-pulp system for gold recovery. The integration of the agitation leach plant into the existing heap leach/ADR/SART operation is described. Operational problems caused by increasing amounts of copper in the Gedabek gold ores are outlined. Previous work on the use of ammonia in copper-gold cyanide leach systems is reviewed. The test work leading to the introduction of ammonia in the industrial leaching plant is described. In the plant it was found that the extraction of copper was halved by the use of ammonia, thus leading to significant reductions in the amount of cyanide consumed in the full-scale leaching system.In July 2013, Anglo Asian Mining inaugurated a new agitation leach and resin-in-pulp gold ore processing plant at its Gedabek gold mine in western Azerbaijan. A few months after the start-up of this plant, changes in the ore mineralogy resulted in higher copper grades in the feed than originally envisaged. Although the resin-in-pulp plant coped adequately with the resulting high copper concentrations in the leach liquors, so that gold production was not adversely affected, consumption of cyanide by the soluble copper caused unacceptably high operating costs. In order to alleviate this situation, ammonia was introduced into the leaching circuit to reduce the cyanide consumption. This paper describes both the design and operation of the new leach-RIP plant and the successful incorporation of ammonia into the process. In May 2009, Anglo Asian Mining started open pit mining for gold on its Gedabek property in the Lesser Caucasus mountains in western Azerbaijan. The ore body at Gedabek is a complex copper-gold porphyry deposit. Ore from the Gedabek mine, which initially was mainly oxidic in nature, was treated by cyanide heap leaching to produce a pregnant leach liquor, from which gold was extracted by fixed-bed resin ion exchange. Resin ion exchange was used at Gedabek, instead of conventional activated carbon, because of the elevated copper concentrations in the leach liquors from the heaps, which typically contained about 1000 mg/L Cu. In spite of the high Cu/Au ratios in the Gedabek leach liquors, which usually ranged from 500 to 1000, the excellent selectivity of the Minix resin used in the process was such that the Cu/Au ratio on the loaded resin was about one. In order to prevent copper from building up in the recirculating leach liquors, a SART plant (Sulphidisation-Acidification-Recycling-Thickening) was incorporated in the circuit to remove copper from solution as a copper-silver sulphide precipitate. A full description of the operations at Gedabek, prior to the introduction of the agitation leach plant, has been published ( As mining progressed at Gedabek, the ore became less oxidised and harder in nature, with the result that gold recoveries in the heaps started to decrease. In 2012, it was decided that agitation leaching should be introduced to operate in parallel with heap leaching, with high grade ore (>1 g/t Au) going to agitation leaching and low grade ore (<1 g/t Au) going to heap leaching. Accordingly, a 100 t/h stand-alone agitation leach plant, including resin-in-pulp solution processing, was designed, built, and commissioned by July 2013. In the next section, the design of this plant and its incorporation into the existing heap leach process circuit is described. The flow sheet of the agitation leach plant at Gedabek is shown in Mined ore from the stockpile is fed into a silo by a front-end loader. The broken ore is moved from the silo by an apron feeder over a vibrating grizzly, with the oversize passing through a jaw crusher (1100 × 900 mm). Undersize and crushed ore at minus 15 cm size is conveyed to the SAG mill (5000 × 2800 mm, 750 KW), which reduces the ore to minus 1 mm. Return water from the tailings dam is added to the SAG and ball mills to maintain the correct pulp densities. The SAG mill discharge is cycloned, with a cut at 75 µm (P Underflow from the leach thickener (40 wt% solids) is pumped to the first leach tank at a rate of 160 m Leached pulp from leach tank 7 flows directly to the first tank in the resin-in-pulp section, together with the PLS solution from the heap leach operations. There are six tanks in this section, each of 150 m The agitation leach plant had to be integrated into the existing heap leaching and solution processing operations in a manner that minimized the use of extra fresh water, because of the positive overall water balance experienced at the Gedabek property due to the prevailing weather conditions at its elevated (1600 m ASL), mountainous site. The solution flow sheet of the integrated plant is shown in The Gedabek ore body is a very complex, highly altered and faulted, copper-gold porphyry, which is difficult to model accurately. Copper grades in particular vary widely across the ore body, from zero to 1.5 wt% Cu, or even higher. The copper mineralization comprises the usual suite of copper oxides, carbonates, simple and complex sulphides. The mining method used at Gedabek involves drilling on a 5 m × 5 m grid pattern ahead of blasting to define blocks of mineral as either, waste, low Au grade ore, high Au grade-low copper ore, or high Au grade-high copper ore. In the early years of operation, distinction was made between oxide and sulphide ore blocks, but currently there is little true oxide ore left, except for isolated pockets that appear amongst the now mainly sulphidic ore. Once identified, the blocks are mined selectively and then sent to various destinations, depending on their classification: waste to the dumps; low grade ore (<1 g/t Au) to heap leaching; high grade-low Cu ore (>1 g/t Au) to agitation leaching; and high grade-high Cu ore to the sulphide ore stockpile. The latter stockpile will be treated in due course through a flotation plant, which is currently under construction at Gedabek. Before the introduction of the agitation leach plant, when only heap leaching was used at Gedabek, the copper content of the ore was not a serious problem. In spite of the fact that much of the copper in the upper levels of the mine was in the form of oxide and carbonate minerals, which are highly soluble in cyanide solutions, the concentration of copper in the heap leach solutions was typically around 1 g/L Cu. While this is much higher than in most other gold heap leach operations, the combination of gold-selective ion exchange and SART technology used at Gedabek enabled these high copper solutions to be treated with relative ease, with comparatively low overall cyanide consumptions, which were typically in the range of 1–2 kg CN/t ore. However, since the advent of the agitation leach plant, copper has become a much more important issue in the operation of the Gedabek site. Grinding the ore to −75 µm for agitation leaching, instead of crushing it to −25 mm for heap leaching, exposes much more of the copper minerals to direct contact with the cyanide leach solutions, thus increasing the rate and extent of dissolution of copper. Furthermore, as the mine goes deeper, the copper grades of the ore are tending to increase. The result of these factors was that the consumption of cyanide and hence the overall operating costs for producing gold became unacceptably high, so that steps had to be taken to modify the process to bring down the operating costs. To do this, a little-used technique that was invented at the beginning of the 20th century in the early years of cyanide leaching was revisited. The technique involves the addition of ammonia into the cyanide leaching system to suppress the dissolution of copper, without adversely affecting the extraction of gold, as described in some detail in the next section of this paper. The use of ammonia to reduce the consumption of cyanide during the leaching of gold from copper-bearing ores was patented in 1902 by Much of the recent research work to elucidate the mechanisms of the behaviour of ammonia in the cyanidation of copper-gold ores was carried out by the late Dr David Muir and his colleagues at the Parker Centre in Perth, Western Australia and the current state-of-the-art was admirably summarized in a comprehensive review by Muir published in 2011 ( It is well established that oxidised copper minerals and secondary copper sulphide minerals readily dissolve in cyanide solutions, whereas primary copper sulphide minerals are much less soluble in cyanide ( Dissolution of the various oxide and secondary sulphide copper minerals during cyanide leaching can be represented as follows:- Hence, each mole of soluble copper (Cu(I)) will consume at least three moles of cyanide, or, in concentration terms, 1 g/L Cu will consume a minimum of about 1.2 g/L cyanide. The effects of adding ammonia during the cyanidation of copper–gold ores are complex, but under the right conditions, the consumption of cyanide can be substantially reduced. This is generally ascribed to the oxidation of Cu(I) in the cuprous cyanide complexes and the stabilisation of Cu(II) in solution, due to the formation of the tetra-ammino-cupric complex ion, Cu(NH Eq. Summing The results of some bottle roll tests on typical ore samples from the Gedabek mine are shown in It can be seen that there is a linear relationship between these molar variables with a slope of 3, which is as expected if the major copper species in solution is Cu(CN) An extensive series of bottle roll tests was carried out to examine the effects of adding ammonia to the Gedabek leach solutions. For each test, 500 g of ground ore taken from the grinding thickener underflow was leached with 1 L of process solution. The process solutions always contained copper, generally in the range 1000–2000 mg/L Cu, together with the equivalent amount of cyanide to form the Cu(CN) The outcome of these bottle roll experiments was to show that adding ammonia at concentrations where the molar ratio of ammonia to copper was two or greater resulted in increases in gold extraction of at least 10%. The addition of a small amount of hydrogen peroxide to the ammoniacal leach solutions generally increased gold extractions by a further few percent. In contrast to the behaviour of gold, it was found that the concentrations of copper in the final leach solutions decreased when ammonia was used and generally decreased further still when hydrogen peroxide was used in addition to ammonia. These effects are broadly in line with the reactions shown in Eqs. The agitated leach plant at Gedabek was started up in July 2013 and for the first year it was run without ammonia additions to the leach tanks. At start up, the copper concentration of the ore feed was about 0.4% Cu and the cyanide consumption was about 4 kg/t ore. During the first year, copper in the ore feed gradually increased, as did the cyanide consumption, until by July 2014, the ore was running at 0.65% Cu and the cyanide consumption had reached around 7 kg/t ore. By this time, it was clear that the copper concentration of the available ore would remain high for at least the next twelve months and so it was decided to introduce ammonia into the leaching system. The addition of ammonia led to an immediate decrease in the amount of copper leached from the ore and consequently, a decrease in the concentration of copper in the recirculating leach solutions. The behaviour of copper in the plant was similar to that observed in the bottle roll experiments. However in the case of gold, the increase in extraction seen in the bottle roll experiments was not reproduced in the plant: in the first year of operation, the average gold extraction was 72.6%; over the next thirteen months, while ammonia was being added to the leach solutions, the average gold extraction remained constant at 72.5%. Thus the advantage gained by the introduction of ammonia into the plant was not due to an increase in the extraction of gold, but instead it was due to the decrease in the extraction of copper, which in turn reduced the overall consumption of cyanide, in spite of the increased copper concentration in the ore feed, as illustrated in It can be seen from The third period of operation detailed in The average saving in NaCN over the 13 month period when ammonia was being added into the leach tanks was 4.2 kg/t ore treated, whilst the average quantity of ammonia consumed was 5.9 kg/t ore. Based on the delivered costs of these products, the total saving was about US$5/ton of treated ore. The improved gold recoveries seen in the bottle roll tests when ammonia was added were accompanied by considerable precipitation of copper due to oxidation and hydrolysis to form cupric hydroxide, i.e. completion of the chain reactions because of sufficient oxidation (Eq. In actual fact, ammonium-assisted cyanide leaching is best suited for process flowsheets where there is a solid-liquid separation stage between the leaching and adsorption stages, so that any precipitated copper is removed from the system before the free cyanide concentration of the solution is adjusted ahead of adsorption. At Gedabek, because the process involves a resin-in-pulp stage, the advantage gained by adding ammonia to the leach tanks was due, not to increased gold recovery, but instead to the fact that the dissolution of copper from the ore was decreased, thus lessening the overall consumption of cyanide.  A description of the agitation leach plant at Gedabek is given. The plant is fairly conventional in design, except for the resin-in-pulp section, where gold is recovered from the leach pulp by contact with a gold-specific ion exchange resin, DOWEX XZ-91419, in a series of six tanks equipped with Kemix pumpcell contactors. The integration of the agitation leach plant into the existing heap leach/ADR/SART operation is described. Operational problems caused by increasing amounts of copper in the Gedabek gold ores are outlined. Previous work on the use of ammonia in copper-gold cyanide leach systems is reviewed. Bottle roll test results show that the molar ratio of cyanide consumed versus copper extracted is three, confirming that the copper is in solution largely as the Cu(CN) Further bottle roll experiments show that adding ammonia at molar ratios of ammonia to copper of two or greater results in increases in gold extraction of at least 10%. The addition of a small amount of hydrogen peroxide to the ammoniacal leach solutions generally increase gold extractions by a further few percent. The concentrations of copper in the final bottle roll leach solutions decrease when ammonia is used and generally decrease further still when hydrogen peroxide is used in addition to ammonia. When ammonia was introduced into the industrial agitation leach plant, there was no improvement in the extraction of gold, in contrast to the bottle roll tests, but the extraction of copper was halved, thus leading to significant reductions in the amount of cyanide consumed in the full-scale leaching system. The overall saving in reagent costs when ammonia was used in the leach system was about US$5 per ton of ore treated.