The influence of prior cold working on the friction and wear behavior of Cu–0.65wt.%Cr alloy under dry sliding against a steel disk was investigated on a pin-on-disk wear tester. The worn surfaces and debrises of Cu–Cr alloy were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrum. The results indicated that prior cold working and aging had an effect on the hardness and wear resistance of Cu–Cr alloy; in other words hardness and wear rate increased with the amount of cold working. At constant aging temperature, the wear rate of Cu–Cr alloys increase with cold working and reached maximum at 50% cold working. At constant amount of cold working aged specimens at 500°C shows higher wear resistance than 450°C. Crack initiation and propagation in the tribolayer and at the interface of subsurface and tribolayer was the dominant mechanism during the sliding process.The combination of heat treatment and cold deformation on materials remain a topic of great interest due to development of commercial alloys with wide range of application. Cold deformation is often carried out between the solution treatment and aging treatment in the thermomechanical processing of a precipitation-hardenable alloy Precipitation-hardened copper–chromium (Cu–Cr) alloy which possesses a combination of high strength and high electrical conductivity is widely used in electrical applications. The high strength of the aged Cu–Cr alloy is caused by very small coherent chromium-rich particles which precipitate in a dispersive manner from a supersaturated copper matrix In this study, a Cu–0.65 A copper alloy with the composition of Cu–0.65Cr was prepared in a vacuum induction furnace. The ingots were homogenized at 1050 Hardness measurement was carried out on cubes using the ESEWAY DVRB.M Vickers hardness testing machine at 30  It is obvious that aging at 450 According to A more detail investigation on the influence of prior cold working on the age hardening of phosphorous containing Cu–0.61 From This is a conclusion contrary to Archard equation predicting the decreasing trend of wear rate with an increase in hardness  The presence of these particles is caused by a local increase in temperature at the tip of the asperities, the formation of oxide and their detachment in the wear process Cold-worked specimens do not show a continuous deformed tribolayer (see An Increase in the amount of cold working results in the increase of hardness, so that the asperities’ capacity for plastic deformation decreases. Therefore in cold-worked specimens the possibility of crack formation below the surface and wear rate increases due to increasing of contact stress caused by decreasing of real contact area. Thus specimens subject to cold work show higher wear rate than non-cold-worked specimens. The variation of friction coefficient with the amount of cold working and temperature of aging are represented in The following conclusion can be drawn from investigation on the influence prior cold working on the sliding wear behavior of Cu–0.65 Hardness increased with aging time, temperature and the amount of cold working and attained a maximum when the alloy aged for 1 During dry sliding wear, the wear rate increased with increasing amount of cold working. The Cu–0.65 The friction coefficient tended to decrease with increasing amount of cold working. In the specimens subject to cold work there is no continuous tribolayer, so the real contact area and adhesion of the surfaces between the pin and the disk decreases, and therefore the friction coefficient also decreases. From the examination of the worn surfaces and wear particles of specimens, it was found that the crack initiation and propagation in the tribolayer and at the interface of matrix and tribolayer was the dominant mechanism during the sliding process.