Background
                  Nanobacterium contributes to pathological calcification in human renal stones and psammoma bodies in ovarian cancer. Pathological calcification is also present in cardiac valves with rheumatic heart disease. The aim of this study was to detect, isolate, culture, and characterize nanobacteria-like material from human calcified cardiac valves with rheumatic heart disease.
               
                  Methods
                  Normal and calcified cardiac valve groups, as well as positive (nanobacteria strain Se90) and negative (serum radiated with 30 kGy of γ-ray) control groups, were included in this study. Part of each valve was immunostained with nanobacterial antibody 8D10, and the remaining parts were homogenized, filtered, and maintained in culture. The cultures were checked with a microscope weekly. Culture medium at different time points was analyzed with a spectrophotometer. The cultures maintained for 3 weeks were further examined with immunofluorescence double staining and transmission electron microscopy.
               
                  Results
                  While 26 of 29 calcified valves stained positive for 8D10 antibody, all normal valves stained negative. Mobile tiny particles were observed under a microscope in the calcified valve group and the Se90 group. Optical densities were significantly different among groups (P<.001). Immunofluorescence double staining displayed tiny green fluorescence particles in the calcified valve group, in the Se90 group, and in two samples of the normal valve group. Transmission electron microscopy analysis indicated that cultured particles from calcified valves ranging in size from 88 to 341 nm had an obvious cell membrane structure similar to that of Se90.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The nanobacteria-like material has been isolated and cultured from calcified cardiac valves with rheumatic heart disease, and its characteristics are similar to those of Se90.Nanobacteria (or calcifying nanoparticles) were first discovered by Kajander Calcified human cardiac valves ( Valves ( Valve segments fixed in 10% formalin phosphate buffer were embedded in paraffin, sectioned (5 μm), and stained with silver nitrate for calcium phosphate (von Kossa). The samples were divided into four groups: Group A: Calcified cardiac valves positive for von Kossa staining ( Group B: As controls, normal cardiac valves negative for von Kossa staining ( Group C: Negative control group of fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone, Logan, UT, USA) radiated with 30 kGy of γ-ray at room temperature ( Group D: Positive control group of nanobacteria strain Se90 from Dr. Kajander ( Each sample from Groups A and B was homogenized under Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Gibco, Grand Island, NY USA) at 4°C using a disperser with autoclave sterilization dispersing tool (T25 basic; IKA, Germany). Homogenates were centrifuged at 2300 rpm for 3 min. Supernatants were then filtered through 0.22-μm Millipore filters to remove cell debris. Filtrates were frozen at −20°C before inoculation. The filtrates were then centrifuged at 13,500 rpm for 45 min at 4°C, and 1 ml of the supernatant was saved, mixed with 1 ml of irradiated FBS and 8 ml of DMEM, filtered (0.22 μm), and then inoculated into 10-ml vented tissue culture flasks (Greiner bio-one GmbH). They were kept under tissue culture conditions (37°C, 5% CO Tissue immunostaining was performed on paraffin-embedded sections (5 μm) of valves from Groups A and B. Staining procedures using monoclonal antibody 8D10 (purified 8D10, 1 mg/ml, 1:20; Nanobac, Oy, Finland), omitting the antigen repair step, were recommended by the manufacturer. Staining sensitivity was enhanced using the catalyzed signal amplification kit (Maixin, Fuzhou, China). Sections were immunoabsorbed with IgG (matching isotype) as negative controls. Tissues were colored with 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Cultures were checked with an inverted microscope for levels of nanobacteria-like material growth weekly. Random flasks of Group A ( Pellets were prepared by centrifuging 1 ml of turbid inoculated 3-week cultures and 1 ml of Bacterium coli ER2738 (from the Laboratory Medicine Department, Second Xiang Ya Hospital) at 13,500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C, washed twice with 0.01 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4, 0.22 μm filtered), centrifuged (13,200 rpm, 5 min, 4°C), and resuspended with 30 μl of PBS. They were spread on slides and then dried for 10 min at 75°C. We made two identical slides from every sample (one slide as negative control slide staining without primary antibody). The slides were incubated for 5 min with PBS, blocked with 1–2% normal goat serum (Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA), and then incubated with primary antibody (purified 8D10, 1 mg/ml in 3% rabbit serum–PBS, 1:20) for 1 h at room temperature. To control slides, we added 3% rabbit serum–PBS. After the samples had been washed three times with PBS for 5 min each, they were incubated in the dark for 30 min with secondary antibody–Hoechst 33258 solution, washed three times with PBS (5 min each), rinsed with double-distilled water (ddH One sample from each group was randomly selected. Every 1 ml of culture at 3 weeks was saved, and 1 ml of Bacterium coli ER2738 was used as control sample. The samples were centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed and resuspended with the remaining 50 μl of liquid. Suspensions were piped to copper grids and incubated for 5 min. The grids were washed with ddH The statistical package SPSS13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for all analyses. All values were expressed as mean±S.D., and repeated-measures analysis of variance and Fisher's Exact Test were used to determine the significance of differences among groups. Twenty-nine (mitral valves, Twenty-six valves from Group A (89.66%) stained positive upon 8D10 staining ( Mobile tiny particles attached to the bottom of culture flasks were first observed after 1 week of culture in both Group A and Group D. They were more obvious after 2–3 weeks of culture ( Measurement of optical density reflects the growth property of nanobacteria in culture. The optical densities of each group at different time points are shown in All samples in Groups A and D showed green fluorescent spots on a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) filter ( The sample from Group A revealed highly electron-dense The calcified valves in this study were collected from patients who were clinically diagnosed with rheumatic heart disease but without endocarditis or other diseases. At the same time, the normal valves were obtained from patients who died of trauma within 24 h and who had no history of rheumatic heart disease or pathological calcification diseases. Von Kossa staining was performed repeatedly to guarantee the quality of the valves. Because nanobacteria can be detected from about 80% merchant FBS Nanobacteria cannot be detected by standard microbiological methods The overlap between the areas that stained positive for 8D10 and von Kossa staining in the slice of calcified valves suggested that there were certain relationships between nanobacteria-like material and calcification ( Jelic et al. In summary, we have detected, isolated, and cultured nanobacteria-like material from calcified cardiac valves with rheumatic heart disease that shared the characteristics of nanobacteria (Se90) recovered from mammalian blood. However, valvular calcification is a multifactorial process. It should be emphasized that the results of our study do not rule out the possible contribution of the mineralization processes of matrix vesicles, the chemical interactions of calcium with membrane-derived matrix vesicles We thank Shuang-Hong Mo (Department of Pediatrics, Second Xiang Ya Hospital, Central South University) for assistance with sectioning.