Particle size distribution (PSD) is an often used parameter to describe and quantify fragmentation of deformed rock. Our analyses of shock deformed sandstone show that dynamic fragmentation influences the PSD, expressed as fractal dimension (D-value). Image analysis was used to derive fractal dimensions from a hypervelocity impact cratering experiment (2.5 mm steel sphere, 4.8 km/s) and a planar shock recovery experiment (2.5 GPa). The D-values in the cratering experiment decrease from 1.74 at the crater floor to 0.84 at a distance of 7.2 mm to the crater floor. The D-values found in this experiment are closely related to the microstructural features found at distinct distances from the crater floor. The obtained values are in good agreement with the D-values reported for fault zones, impact sites and deformation experiments. The D-value measured in the shock recovery experiment is 2.42. Such high D-values were usually attributed to abrasive processes related to high strain. Since the strain in our experiment is only ∼23% we suggest that at highly dynamic deformation very high 
                        d
                     -values can be reached at small strain. To quantify this, numerical impact modelling has been used to estimate strain rates for the impact experiment. This is related to the activation of more inherent flaws and fracture bifurcation at very high strain rates ∼>102 s−1.Brittle failure of rock commonly involves a reduction of particle size. In general, this principle is scale-invariant and only determined by the development of fractures. It has been shown that particle sizes resulting from comminution are properly described by a fractal size distribution (e.g., Several methods have been used to estimate the PSD of faulted rocks. This has included sieving ( Depending on the methodology, two-dimensional or three-dimensional  The relationship between strain, strain rate and PSD is of fundamental interest for the investigation of meteorite impact-related damage on Earth and planetary surfaces. It could possibly be used to provide additional constraints to characterize an impact event by quantification of impact damage. A first attempt to relate PSD and damage to impact-induced deformation was made by Here, we provide the first-ever spatially resolved PSD measurements for experimental impact events. We compare the PSD of a mesoscopic sandstone target deformed by a hypervelocity impact cratering experiment with the PSD induced in a small sandstone specimen experimentally shocked at 2.5 GPa in a planar shock recovery experiment. Porous sandstone was chosen as target material to account for the ubiquitous porosity of earth and planetary targets. Of the 184 known impact structures on earth ca. 70% occur full or partly on sedimentary rocks which possess varying degrees of porosity (  A sandstone cube with dimensions of 20 × 20 × 20 cm³ was selected for this study (impact cratering experiment A6-5126). This experiment was conducted at EMI, using the so-called “Space Gun”, a two-stage light gas gun (SLGG) with an 8.5 mm caliber launch tube ( For a more detailed description of light gas gun operations and experimental setup, see, e.g., Shock recovery experiment 2-1, also performed at EMI (institute part Efringen-Kirchen, blast area Kandern), was used for this study. This experiment was performed on a sample cylinder (15 mm ∅, 20 mm length) of dry The impact generates a planar shock wave in the ARMCO iron container with the embedded sandstone cylinder. For a more detailed description of the experimental set-up see The applied shock pressure of 2.5 GPa in the sandstone cylinder was achieved by the specific combination of the high explosive, and thicknesses of the flyer plate and driver plate ( The experimentally produced crater was stabilized with low-viscosity epoxy and subsequently bisected (section c in Scanning electron micro-imagery of the samples from the impact crater was acquired with a Zeiss Leo 1525 field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, ALU Freiburg) in secondary electron (SE) and backscattered electron (BSE) mode, at 20 kV and 16 mm working distance. BSE mode allows for the strongest phase contrasts and, thus, was most suitable for a good detection of fragment and particle boundaries. Micrographs of the planar impacted sandstone were taken in BSE mode with a JEOL JSM-6610LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a LaB Automated digital image analysis was conducted on BSE images acquired with 400× magnification. For spatial calibration and automated object separation the free image analysis software JMicrovision developed at the University of Geneva ( For the 2.5 GPa shock recovery experiment an image with an area of 426 × 267 μm (0.114 mm Particle size was defined as the equivalent circular diameter The particle size reduction during fragmentation is directly related to an increasing surface area of the particles. The surface area can also be derived from the image analysis described above. As the perimeter for each particle is automatically determined, a simple addition yields the 2D cumulative grain boundary length per image (intercept line length). Dividing this by the cumulative grain surface area of the image gives a 2D particle surface density of the rock. By subtracting the particle surface density of the undeformed rock the 2D fracture surface density, Numerical simulations have been performed to provide information about the strain rate decay with distance from the crater floor. For this purpose, the two-dimensional multi-material, multi-rheology hydrocode iSALE-2D ( A general description of the subsurface deformation features within the impacted sandstone of experiment A6-5126 is given in As expected, comminution was strongest relatively close to the impact point source (i.e., along our profile, close to the actual crater floor). To quantify this initial observation, a series of 20 images beneath the crater floor was analyzed for their PSD. Each analysis covers an area of 660 × 883 μm (0.583 mm The decrease of For the shock recovery experiment we analyzed an image taken at 300× magnification of the uppermost center of the specimen in direct contact to the driver plate ( The newly created surface area density was determined by the afore-described method. The resulting fracture surface densities (FSD) in the cratering experiment decrease from 6.7 × 10 The FSD created in the shock recovery experiment determined from The strain distribution in the impacted sample from cratering experiment A6-5126 is highly variable. The highest strain is expected in the surrounding of the impacting projectile. With increasing radial distance to the projectile the strain converges to zero, similar to the strain rate. In the experiment local strain could not be measured. We estimate strain distribution from a change in porosity in the deformed material using image analysis. We assume that no volume change of the mineral components occurred, that the material transport in the hemispherical stress field is radial, and that tangential particle movement is small. Based on microstructural observations we also expect that porosity collapse mainly results from axial compaction The mean initial porosity of the undeformed sandstone was 23%. Porosity reduction in the impacted specimen was attributed to axial shortening. For example, a reduction of pore space by 5% was attributed to 5% axial shortening. In the absence of direct measurements, this approach provides a rough estimate of axial strain. Thus, the result should only be regarded as a rough estimation of strain. At depths <1.8 mm from the crater floor secondary tensile fractures obscured the microstructure from the impact. These fractures ( For the shock recovery experiment, the axial strain can be directly measured by the thickness difference between the initial and the shocked sample. Although we see fractures perpendicular to the impact direction, most likely indicating deformation by a secondary tensile wave, their aperture is relatively small and does not override the primary compaction. The initial length of the sample was 20 mm and the post-shock length was determined from images as 16.17 ± 0.03 mm. Secondary axial extension by tensile opening of fractures was determined to be 3.7% of the length of the analyzed micrograph. The transient axial compression during shock loading thus is ≈23% equivalent to an axial strain of No direct strain rate information can be obtained from the impact cratering experiment due to the dynamic hemispherical deformation, the shock wave attenuation, and the pressure plateau broadening. Numerical simulations of the cratering experiment provide estimates of the strain rate beneath the crater. The maximum strain rate estimated from these models for different distances from the crater floor is given in  For the shock recovery experiment the strain rate can be estimated by two different approaches leading to a minimum and maximum strain rate approximation for the sample. (1) The duration of deformation can be assessed by dividing the initial specimen length of 0.02 m by the velocity of the shock wave. At 2.5 GPa a shock wave velocity of 2321 m/s in sandstone can be calculated from a pressure-particle velocity graph using Coconino sandstone (data compiled in Zones of different microstructural deformation have been mapped in the sub-surface of the cratering experiment A6-5126 ( With decreasing distance from the point of impact the Closer to the crater floor, in the zone of pervasive grain crushing and compaction (orange colored in As the The distribution of these findings in the sub-surface of the crater is certainly dependent on the porosity of the target. To our knowledge there are unfortunately no other studies about the particle size distribution beneath a crater floor that could be compared to our results. To overcome this lack of information experiments on other target materials are planned within the MEMIN network. The particle size analyses for the cratering experiment and the shock recovery experiment display a broad range of  Gouge material from narrow shear bands in natural fault zones often exhibits relatively high  Therefore, an increase of deformation energy density by strain localization is not required for  In contrast to the strain rate range proposed for dynamic fragmentation in several models (see  A second attempt to characterize impact disruption of bodies was made by   In general the reported  A “fractal” particle size distribution expressed as Shock wave attenuation along a profile of increasing distance from the impact point source has a significant influence on the rock fabric. Measured The measured linear increase in The maximum The higher The activation of more microflaws at the same time in combination with crack branching at increased strain rates may allow the development of Strain rate decays strongly with time and with distance from the impact point. Numerical simulations provide a value of 10 The change in strain rate attenuation in the numerical model of the cratering experiment can be related to a change in the deformation pattern in the experiment. Pervasive comminution and pore space closure seem to have a major effect on the strain rate. Additional calibrated shock experiments at pressures <2.5 GPa are necessary to obtain better comparison with the conditions found below the crater floor in the cratering experiment. Further, fragmentation experiments of brittle materials under controlled strain rate conditions would be helpful to further develop a strain rate based fragmentation model. Transmission electron microscopy studies are planned to determine a lower cut-off size for the fragmentation. With this, the dissipated energy in the crater subsurface will be estimated. This work was supported by