Carnosic acid is a major polyphenol of rosemary and possesses potent anti-oxidant effects. The present study was designed to evaluate in 
                     vitro and in 
                     vivo effects of carnosic acid on bone formation and maintenance. Carnosic acid attenuated H2O2 levels in osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. This compound also inhibited the indices of osteoblast differentiation, such as alkaline phosphatase activity and calcium deposition in osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells at concentrations of 3–10μM. Furthermore, it decreased the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts in co-cultures of mouse spleen cells with ST2 cells. In addition, we identified a molecular pathway of osteoclast differentiation mediated by carnosic acid, which led to inhibition of the expression of receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand in ST2 cells. Interestingly, intraperitoneal injection of carnosic acid at 10mg/kg body weight did not significantly affect trabecular bone loss in the femurs of ovariectomized mice. Our findings indicate that carnosic acid may be used as an effective remedy in the treatment of the symptoms of osteoporosis.Bone formation involves a complex series of events that involve the proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells, resulting in the formation of a mineralized extracellular matrix. The deposition of calcium and sequential expression of type I collagen, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and osteocalcin are known as markers of osteoblastic differentiation. Preosteoblastic cells from mouse calvariae (MC3T3-E1 cells) are well-known as a model system that has been developed to study the proliferation and differentiation of bone-forming cells In bone tissues, both the formation and maintenance of bone are controlled by bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts, and an imbalance between these two cell types leads to bone metabolic diseases such as osteoporosis and osteopetrosis Carnosic acid, a member of the polyphenol class ( Carnosic acid was purchased from Enzo Life Science (Plymouth, PA, USA) and this compound was isolated from Preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells were obtained from RIKEN Cell Bank (Tsukuba, Japan). Cells were maintained in a 55-cm Intracellular reactive oxygen species were measured using the oxidant-sensitive probe 2′, 7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA). Cells (2 MC3T3-E1 cells were sub-cultured in 12-well plates in α-MEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 5 MC3T3-E1 cells were sub-cultured in α-MEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 5 Multinucleated osteoclastic cells were formed from spleen cells by co-culture with ST2 cells (RIKEN Cell Bank, Tsukuba, Japan) that had been stimulated by 10 Multinucleated osteoclastic cells formed were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 5 The mRNA expression of RANKL and M-CSF in ST2 cells treated with 100 BALB/c female mice (6-weeks old) were purchased from Sankyo Labo Service and were housed individually at 24 The bone mineral density of the femurs was assessed using an X-ray CT System (LA Theata LCT-100; Aloka, Tokyo, Japan). We monitored the bone mineral density of femurs at 0.3 Numerical data have been expressed as mean We first examined the effects of carnosic acid on hydrogen peroxide (H We evaluated the effects of carnosic acid on the differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells. We added carnosic acid to the culture medium of post-proliferative cells and assayed ALP activity (a middle-stage marker of osteoblastic differentiation) and calcium deposition (a final-stage marker of osteoblastic differentiation). Carnosic acid significantly decreased the activity of ALP in MC3T3-E1 cells on day 10 ( Multinucleated osteoclastic cells were formed from mouse spleen cells. We examined the effects of carnosic acid on bone mineral density using OVX mice. We used a dose of 10 It is well known that carnosic acid has anti-oxidant properties. Recent reports have suggested that reactive oxygen species play an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and metabolism. In particular, there have been some reports stating that H In this study, we demonstrated that carnosic acid inhibited the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts Carnosic acid markedly inhibited the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts in culture The authors declare no conflict of interest. Carnosic acid is a major polyphenol of rosemary and possesses potent anti-oxidant effects. In addition to its anti-oxidant activity, carnosic acid possesses anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, anti-cancer properties, and provides protection to neurons. However, little information is available on the effects of carnosic acid on bone metabolism with regard to osteoblast and osteoclast functions. The present study was designed to evaluate We would like to thank Mrs. K. Takada for mouse maintenance.