The intermittency of renewable energy systems remains one of the major hurdles preventing a large scale uptake of these technologies and concentrated solar power (CSP) systems are no different. However, CSP has the benefit of being able to store excess heat using thermal energy storage (TES). For the uptake of CSP with TES it must be demonstrated that the technology is both economically as well as environmentally feasible. This paper aims to investigate the economic and environmental impact of several TES options that are available for CSP systems. The investigated systems include an encapsulated phase change material (PCM) system, a coil-in-tank PCM system and a liquid sodium TES system. The economic impact in the current study refers to the capital cost (CAPEX) of each system including the tank, storage material, encapsulation cost (if applicable) and allowances for construction and engineering. The environmental impact of each system is accounted by calculating the embodied energy of each of the system components. Each storage system will be required to store a comparable amount of energy so that reliable conclusions can be drawn. The results from this analysis conclude that the encapsulated PCM (EPCM) and coil-in-tank system represent an embodied energy of roughly one third of the corresponding state-of-the-art two-tank molten salt system.
                  Furthermore, the EPCM and coil-in-tank systems result in CAPEX reductions of 50% and 25% over the current state-of-the-art two-tank molten salt system. The liquid sodium system was found to result in higher embodied energy and CAPEX than any previously studied TES system. Finally, the advantages and disadvantages of each system was discussed and compared to previous literature.concentrated solar power phase change material encapsulated phase change material life cycle analysis supercritical carbon dioxide heat transfer fluid number of transfer units thermal energy storage system thermal energy storage Capital Expenditure carbon dioxide/carbon dioxide equivalent global warming potential levelised cost of electricity computational fluid dynamics system advisor model balance of system density [kg/m enthalpy of fusion [kJ/kg] US dollars [USD] cost factor- shell material [$/kg] cost factor- tubing material [$/kg] efficiency of power cycle [%] heat capacity [kJ/kg temperature [°C] cost factor- filler material [$/kg] cost factor- heat transfer fluid [$/kg] discharge capacity [MWh operational days [–] The field of high temperature thermal energy storage (TES) has steadily been growing with several successful demonstrations showing the benefit of TES as a storage method for high temperature concentrated solar power (CSP), however the cost and environmental impacts of these system is largely unknown, unpublished or overlooked. Previous attempts at quantifying the embodied energy or carbon footprint of phase change material (PCM) TES have been performed by Oró et al. The embodied energy methodology has been selected as the environmental evaluation tool due to its versatility and ability to easily compare systems. This type of evaluation allows materials with large embodied energy values to be replaced by more favourable materials while still at the design phase, saving time and money. The embodied energy methodology can be defined as an energy accounting process investigating the energy used through the entire production chain. However, the main issue with this type of methodology is the lack of agreement on the system boundary: some of them consider the transport from the industry to the application, while others consider the disposal of the material or the percentage of recycled material in the production process. In the current study the embodied energy data has been taken from sources with known system boundaries so that a direct comparison can be made. The current method of storage for large scale CSP plants is the two-tank system utilising molten salt. While this method of storage has been successful in current plants, if CSP is to be economically competitive in the future the cost must be reduced. Furthermore, it has been shown that the two-tank molten salt storage method suffers from a significantly high environmental and health impact Current two-tank molten salt storage systems are unable to achieve these targets so new methods of storage must be investigated. To this end PCMs or liquid metals are seen as a promising solution. PCMs are materials that can store/release a large amount of heat as they undergo a change of phase. The high energy density of these materials allows the storage volume and therefore the storage cost to be reduced. However, the main issue with current PCMs is their inherent low thermal conductivity. This low thermal conductivity leads to long charge/discharge times, which is undesirable for power generation. To increase the thermal conductivity, the PCM can either be encapsulated or placed in a coil-in-tank arrangement. Alternatively, liquid metals, principally liquid sodium, have an inherently high thermal conductivity and high temperature stability which could allow them to be a suitable high temperature sensible energy storage option if the safety issues associated with them can be curtailed. To identify the potential benefits of PCM or liquid metal systems, an economic and environmental evaluation must be accomplished. Therefore, the aim of the current study is to quantify the environmental and economic impact of two (2) PCM-based and a liquid metal-based TES system. This will be done by utilising the embodied energy and CAPEX methodologies to identify if any or all of the proposed systems can reduce the environmental and economic impacts of the current two-tank molten salt system. In the current study three different TES systems have been investigated due to their promising suitability with the next generation of CSP plants. Two of the systems utilise latent heat while the other is based on sensible heat storage. The investigated systems are:    The system boundary of the studied technologies can be seen in In an attempt to increase the PCM thermal conductivity it can be encapsulated in another material. As well as increasing the overall thermal conductivity of the material, encapsulation of PCMs also helps to form a barrier between the PCM and the containment material and helping to control the large volume change that occurs during phase change. A variety of PCMs and shell materials have been studied and demonstrated for high temperature applications In the coil-in-tank arrangement a HTF flows through tubes to exchange energy as heat with the bulk PCM (see The amount and material of tubes is dependent on the corrosion capability and thermal conductivity of the HTF and bulk PCM. The materials proposed in the current study have been preliminarily studied to ensure feasibility As an alternative to molten salt receivers, liquid metals can be used due to their stability at higher temperatures and increased thermal conductivity. Recent studies have shown the benefit of using liquid metal receivers for future CSP plants The design of the two-tank system was performed using the system advisor model (SAM) software The specific methodology for the environmental and economic methodologies are given in the following section. The environmental evaluation used in the current study is based on embodied energy values found on specialised software (such as EcoInvent [EcoInvent] and CES Selector  Where embodied energy values were not able to be found from the aforementioned sources, an estimate based on the material price was used. It can be seen from The designs of the tanks used in the current study are based on previously reported designs found in literature The foundations of the tank consist of a steel slip ring, firebricks, foamglass insulation, a concrete thermal foundation, and a reinforced concrete slab. For all cases the steel slip ring is assumed to be 6 An example of the tank design for the EPCM system is shown in The economic evaluation performed in the current study is based on a slightly modified costing methodology described in Jacob et al. In this section the environmental and economic results are compared for each design. Each system has a desired storage capacity of 405 The effectiveness of thermocline systems is generally 69% The estimation of the size and configuration of the coil-in-tank system was performed using For the liquid sodium two-tank system, construction of the storage tank is assumed to be made from stainless steel. Usually for a two-tank system the ‘cold’ tank is made from carbon steel, however as sodium poses a major safety factor and corrosion rates of sodium on carbon steel are three times greater than for 316 stainless steel A comparison and breakdown of the embodied energy in the studied systems is shown in As the goal of the thermal energy storage system (TESS) is to minimise the use of heavy polluting fossil fuels, the system should not require a significant amount of energy to construct compared to the additional output that the system can achieve. To calculate the energy payback of the TESS, the additional energy generated from the turbine is calculated assuming the storage is charged and discharged once a day (see Eq. In Eq. From The major contributor to the embodied energy of cases 1 and 2 (see Reducing or substituting the sodium silicate binder in the EPCM system. Substituting the sodium HTF in the tubes/tank with a less energy intensive HTF such as solar salt or air. Producing energy/electricity from renewable sources for material extraction/production. Using the methodology previously discussed, the CAPEX of the studied systems could be estimated. The results from this analysis are shown in The cost breakdown for the studied systems can be seen in With no viable alternatives, the two-tank molten salt system was the only technology that could be used for large-scale TES in CSP until recently. With the successful pilot scale testing of concrete storage As previously mentioned there has been little work to date investigating the embodied energy of high temperature TESS. However, several papers have been identified with the results summarised here and compared to the current study. Lopez-Sabiron et al. Having sized the system, the carbon footprint could be found by including the PCM, HTF (diphenylether-compounds) and the heat exchanger area (330 In Miró et al. Using the data contained in From In comparison with previous studies the EPCM and coil-in-tank systems described in the current study are able to achieve lower or comparable embodied energies with the other studied systems presented in the literature. It should be noted that the embodied energy of the EPCM and coil-in-tank system is roughly a third of the corresponding state-of-the-art two-tank molten salt system as presented in Miró et al. CAPEX estimations are an important part of project development as it is usually one of the major deciding factors as to whether a project is likely to be implemented or scaled up. If a project proves unfeasible at the planning stage it is highly unlikely to continue to be developed. CAPEX estimations of various alternatives to two-tank molten have begun to be published recently to showcase the cost benefits of such systems over the costly two-tank molten salt system. While difficult to directly compare CAPEX estimations as system boundaries and cost data may differ, the reported CAPEX of the studied systems are shown where possible. As most of the studies shown in In the current study the embodied energy and CAPEX of three (3) high temperature TES options which have been proposed for CSP are estimated. The embodied energy of the studied systems was estimated using commercial software and relevant literature studies. Of the studied systems, the EPCM system resulted in the lowest value with an embodied energy equivalent to 38.9 This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by the Australian Government, through the