This paper presents an experimental and numerical study on the global buckling behaviour of doubly-symmetric Q460GJ steel beams under three-point bending. A total of eight simply-supported beams with different slendernesses and height-to-width ratios were tested in the experimental programme. To achieve the required loading and boundary conditions, a special loading system was designed for the beams so that the vertical load applied at the mid-span through a hydraulic jack could move with the beams in the lateral direction, and a set of steel rollers was placed in the supports. All eight beams failed in lateral-torsional buckling. Finite element models were also developed for the beams, in which initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were considered. The model was validated against experimental results, and a reasonably good agreement was obtained. A series of parametric study was carried out to gain a deep understanding of the effects of slenderness and height-to-width ratio on buckling factor. Comparisons were made between numerical data and calculated values in accordance with different national codes.High-strength steel (HSS) is a specific class of steel with the yield stress equal to or greater than 460 MPa To evaluate the global buckling behaviour of HSS sections, Ban et al. In addition to HSS columns, the lateral-torsional buckling of steel beams was also studied under different loading conditions. Yang et al. In this paper, the global buckling behaviour of doubly-symmetric Q460GJ steel beams under three-point bending was determined through experimental tests and numerical simulations. A unique test setup was designed to allow free lateral movement of the beam at the mid-span. Lateral-torsional buckling resistance and the associated deflection of steel beams were obtained in the experimental tests. Numerical models were developed for steel beams and validated against experimental results. A wide range of non-dimensional slenderness was considered through the validated numerical model so that comparisons could be made between different design curves and numerical data. Design recommendations were suggested in accordance with the numerical results. In the experimental programme, a total of eight doubly-symmetric welded Q460GJ steel beams were designed, as listed in Before testing, mechanical straightening was used instead of flame straightening to minimise the influence of residual stresses caused by flame cutting and welding, and the actual dimensions of all beams were measured, as listed in To achieve global buckling of laterally-unrestrained steel beams, a special testing system was designed, as shown in A total of six Linear Variable Displacement Transducers (LVDTs) were erected at the loading system to capture the deformations of steel beams under a concentrated point load, as shown in To determine the material properties, tension tests were conducted on Q460GJ steel plates in accordance with GB/T228.1-2010 All steel beams exhibited lateral-torsional buckling when subjected to a concentrated point load at the mid-span. During testing, significant lateral displacements were measured at the mid-span of steel beams.  To evaluate the global buckling resistance of Q460GJ steel beams, the moment acting at the mid-span was determined by using the measured material strengths and the method included in relevant design codes, and comparisons were made between the design values calculated from the codes and the experimental results, as included in Only a limited range of slenderness was studied in the experimental programme. To systematically evaluate the accuracy of different design methods, numerical simulations were established for doubly-symmetric Q460GJ steel beams by using ANSYS Initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were considered in the numerical model. To simulate initial geometric imperfections, eigenvalue analyses were performed through which the first mode of global buckling was obtained. Thereafter, initial geometric imperfections were incorporated in the numerical model in accordance with the buckling mode obtained through the eigenvalue analysis, of which the magnitude was equal to the values listed in The numerical model was used to simulate the global buckling behaviour of the beams in the experimental programme. Based on the validated numerical model, parametric studies were carried out in which the non-dimensional slenderness varies from 0.6 to 2.0. Material properties and residual stresses adopted in the parametric study are consistent with that in the verified model, whereas initial geometric imperfections were set to be  In this study, the global stability behaviour of welded H-shaped beams fabricated from Q460GJ structural steel plates was investigated. A series of experimental tests were conducted on laterally-unrestrained steel beams by using a special loading device at the mid-span. Numerical models were also established and validated against test data. Finally, comparisons were made between numerical results and design curves in various national codes for global buckling design. The following conclusions were drawn from the experimental and numerical studies. All steel beams developed inelastic lateral-torsional buckling under a concentrated point load at the mid-span. No local buckling was observed along the beam length. At failure, the beams could develop lateral deflections freely, indicating the effectiveness of the loading system. By considering residual stresses and initial geometric imperfections, numerical models could be used to accurately predict the critical bending moment of steel beams. The average ratio of experimental to numerical results is 0.95, with a coefficient of variation of 0.06. Parametric studies were conducted based on the validated numerical model, in which the effects of slenderness and height-to-width ratio were investigated. Numerical results suggest that increasing the slenderness or height-to-width ratio of steel beams leads to decreasing critical bending moment of the beam. Therefore, both of them should be taken into account in the design. Comparisons between numerical results and design curves in relevant design codes indicate that the methods for global buckling design of steel beams in GB50017-2003 and ANSI/AISC360-10 both overestimate the critical loads of welded Q460GJ steel beams subject to three-point bending, whereas the methods in GB50017-201X and Eurocode 3 are relatively conservative. Thus, these two methods could be used for the global buckling design of Q460GJ steel beams. This research is supported by