Thin-film Ni-NiO-Cr metal–insulator–metal (MIM) tunnel diodes with 1μm2 contact area and 1–3nm insulator layer (NiO) are fabricated for high sensitive far-infrared (IR) detection. Also, a 2.5GHz microstrip slot antenna is fabricated on a FR-4 substrate and integrated with a commercially available surface mount zero bias Schotky diode. Asymmetric current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the MIM tunnel diode is observed with a significant degree of non-linearity. Additionally, the sensitivity of the MIM diode is determined to be 5V−1 at V
                     bias of 0.1V. For the antenna coupled detector circuit, the radiation patterns, scattering parameters, output voltage and sensitivity are determined experimentally. Further, when the slot antenna is coupled with the schottky diode detector, a rectified output voltage of 56mV is obtained by radiating the device with a low frequency tube antenna.Terahertz imaging is one of the emerging technologies that has attracted considerable attention towards the next generation military, scientific, and commercial applications. So far, infrared imaging has been achieved by utilizing thermal and photon detectors, however, they require cryogenic cooling for better operation (photon detector) or they exhibit low sensitivity MIM diodes are utilized since they can operate at high frequencies up to 150 This paper primarily focuses on the design, fabrication and characterization aspect of a thin film MIM diode for IR detection. The scattering parameters and radiation patterns of the microstrip slot antenna are analyzed and compared with the simulated response. Also, the dc In order to validate the concept of electromagnetic rectification through a rectenna and the feasibility to develop a thin film MIM diode, a bi-level development module was adopted by designing a slot antenna operating at 2.5 A planar structure was designed for fabricating the thin film MIM diode on a Si substrate. For the target frequency, the capacitance and contact area of the diode were determined by utilizing the equation formulated by Sanchez et al. The antenna module operating at 2.5 The detector circuit begins with a piece of transmission line that is calibrated by a set of TRL calibration standards followed by a matching network to match the impedance of the antenna (50 The fabrication of the antenna coupled MIM detector was carried out in two modules. Initially, the MIM diode with a thin film dielectric was fabricated on a 2  For the fabrication of the antenna and detector circuit, the patterns designed using ADS were exported into a program to etch the design on to the substrate (FR-4 board). Since the feature size of the low frequency device was too large to fit in a 2 After the fabrication of the MIM diode and the antenna/detector circuit, the electrical behavior of the diode and the scattering parameters of the antenna were determined to study the performance of the system. The In order to measure the radiation patterns of the antenna, an automated rotational stage was used in conjunction with a vector network analyzer (VNA) HP-8753D. This set-up was tested in an anechoic chamber. The slot antenna was excited by a horn antenna and the radiation patterns were measured. Also, the return loss of the antenna was determined. A typical The performance of the diode is characterized by its current sensitivity and detectivity. Maximum sensitivity is obtained at a dc bias point where maximum curvature of the According to Wilke et al. The low frequency slot antenna was characterized for its radiation patterns and scattering parameters. The antenna was placed in a rotational stage and a tube antenna was used to irradiate the device. The test antenna was placed in line with the source and the stage was rotated automatically from 0° to 360° and its radiation patterns were recorded. Later, the properties of the detector circuit were measured by connecting it to the VNA. The return loss of the detector circuit was measured and compared with the simulated result. A thin film MIM diode with 1.45