Solvent extraction followed by electrowinning (SX–EW) is an economical option for the processing of low-grade and oxidized copper ore. Phenomenological models were developed to simulate the copper SX and the EW processes. The two models were linked together to make a SX–EW simulator. The simulator is used to predict the operation of the Mines Gaspé pilot plant put in operation in 1996. Results confirm the potential of the simulation that would subsequently be used for student training, process optimisation and to assess the performance of control strategies.Solvent extraction followed by electrowinning (SX–EW) has become in the last two decades a key process for the recovery of copper from solution obtained by leaching low-grade copper ore. Several operations have been commissioned in North and South America in the last decade Several models have been independently proposed to simulate the SX process  The organic solution from the first extraction stage feeds the stripping mixer–settler The proposed model describes the steady-state operation of mixer–settler units that are mostly used in copper SX plants. The proposed model is only concerned with the mixer unit, as observations in the studied pilot plant clearly demonstrated that the settler provides sufficient residence time to allow the complete separation of the aqueous and organic phases. Observations also confirm that the transfer of ions between the aqueous and organic phases in the settler is negligible. Future experimental and modeling work will, however, account for the operation of the settler in order to properly represent the dynamics of the process. The extraction process is due to the ion transfer between the aqueous (a) and organic (o) phases described by: Assuming a constant volume mixer hold-up, the volume conservation for the aqueous and organic phases is given by: The mass conservation equations for H After an initial transition period, the rate of transfer of the species from the aqueous phase is balanced with the rate of species consumption by the chemical reaction. If the diffusion process is slow, then the species activities at the interface will be close to those of the thermodynamic equilibrium conditions of the extraction reaction. On the other hand, if the chemical reaction is slow, the species activities at the interface will be close to those of the bulk solution. In practice, both mechanisms control the process and the interfacial species activities lie between the thermodynamic equilibrium species activities and the species activities of the organic and aqueous phases. The rates of transfer of the species (extracted species and hydrogen) from or to the bulk aqueous phase are modeled using: As the species reach the organic/aqueous interface, they react according to The equilibrium constant, the mass transfer coefficients, and the forward and reverse rate constants are estimated from laboratory tests and plant sampling according to a procedure described elsewhere The simulation of a mixer–settler unit requires the estimation of the bulk solution composition by solving simultaneously the mass balance equations and the extraction equations When a SX circuit consists of several interconnected mixer–settler units, as for the Gaspé process The technical aspects of copper EW from a solution enriched by SX are discussed by Biswas and Davenport As for the SX model, the development of the EW model is presented in two sections. The first section lists the material balance equations used to describe the macroscopic operation of the process, while the second section looks into the mechanisms occurring at the electrodes. The EW cell shown in The species mass conservation equations are written as: The simulation of an EW cell requires one to predict, for a given cell voltage, the composition of the discharged solution and the current circulating within the circuit from the feed electrolyte composition and flow rate. The methodology followed in this study assumes that each anode–cathode couple operates as the electrical circuit shown in The estimation of the voltage drops at the anode and cathode is the key to the simulation of the EW process. As it is shown in  If the reversible potential is positive or if the voltage drop at the electrode is larger than the reversible potential, then the reaction will proceed at a rate that is controlled by the electron transfer rate at the electrode and the diffusion rate of reactants from the solution to the electrode and of the products back to the solution. The rate of electron transfer in mol/min, When several reactions occur at an electrode, the equality of The EW cell model parameters, mainly the standard current density The procedure for the simulation of the EW cell involves balancing the electrochemical reactions for a given solution composition and balancing the species conservation in the cell according to the calculated current flow. The input variables for the simulation are the strong electrolyte feed rate and composition, the cell voltage and the hardware resistance. The first iteration assumes that the electrolyte in the cell has the same composition as the feed solution. An initial value of the voltage drop at the cathode is then used to calculate the cathodic current by solving the equality of Using the estimated current, the rate of species production and consumption are readily calculated allowing an estimation of the discharged electrolyte composition. Using the new electrolyte composition, another estimate of the electrical current is calculated according to the procedure described above. The procedure is repeated until the electrolyte composition converges to stable values. If the EW cells are part of a SX–EW circuit, the procedure for simulation has to be repeated until the complete circuit, i.e., the extraction, stripping and EW stages, converges to final values. Strategies to accelerate the convergence of all the calculations are currently under study. Model calibration requires estimation of the rate constants The calibrated simulator was used to simulate the SX/EW circuit of Gaspé mines for operating conditions prevailing during sampling campaigns that were not used for the model calibration. The input variables are listed in The simulation gives acceptable results despite the assumptions made for the mass transfer and rate of the chemical reaction. The simulation predicts that iron will only be marginally extracted by the organic phase and this result is confirmed by pilot plant and laboratory experiments. The validated simulator was used to analyse the influence of different parameters such as the concentration of copper in the leached solution, the cell voltage and the ratio of phases (flow rate of aqueous phase/flow rate of organic phase) on the behaviour of the process. Models for the copper SX and EW processes were developed and calibrated to simulate an integrated circuit of SX and EW. The unknown parameters of the models have been estimated using an optimisation routine operating on the SX–EW simulator. The simulated results agree well with the observed data. Work is in progress to incorporate a model for ore leaching (LIX) to the SX–EW simulator as the raffinate that is re-circulated to the leached piles may become saturated with iron leading to a different behaviour of the process. Once a complete LIX–SX–EW model has been developed and calibrated, it will be used for process simulation, optimisation, design and ultimately control. In the meantime, the SX–EW simulator is used to improve our understanding of the process and to study the influence of process variables on the current efficiency and recovery of copper and iron from the leached solutions. The authors are grateful to Noranda, Mines Gaspé for their collaboration and permission to present the paper. The financial support of the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada is also acknowledged.