The diffusion induced grain boundary migration (DIGM) has been studied in the Cu-Cd system by exposing polycrystalline copper to Cd vapor. The temperature and time dependence of the rate of migration was measured in the range 340–480 °C. A parabolic migration behavior of the grain boundaries has been observed. The diffusivity, Dbδ, was calculated from the growth rates and v/Dbδ values obtained through concentration–distance profile at each temperature. It has been observed that the diffusion coefficient obtained experimentally during DIGM in the Cu-Cd system are 8 to 10 orders of magnitude higher than the corresponding volume diffusion coefficient. The activation energy for solute transport corresponds to that required for boundary diffusion in the Cu-Cd system.The migration of grain boundary under the influence of preferential solute diffusion along it is termed as diffusion induced grain boundary migration (DIGM). The DIGM was first reported by den Broeder The mechanism of grain boundary migration when solute atoms preferentially diffuse along it and the driving force for the reaction are not yet resolved. In the mean time a number of theories for the occurrence of DIGM have been proposed. Of the various theories which have been proposed the coherency strain energy theory has been advocated by Hillert This investigation has been carried out to study the rate of migration and the diffusional transport mechanism in the Cu-Cd system during DIGM. The diffusion induced grain boundary migration was studied in the Cu-Cd system with sheets of copper (99.999% purity) exposed to Cd vapor. The metal Cd was also of 99.999% purity. Copper sheets approximately 6 mm wide, 40 mm long and 0.3 mm thick were encapsulated in silica tubes under vacuum and annealed for 12 h at 1000 °C. This was done to obtain a polycrystalline structure and a large grain size such that the grain boundaries are perpendicular to the free surface. The annealed sheets were electropolished in an orthophosphoric acid solution to obtain a final thickness of approximately 250 μm. Specimens approximately 6×8 mm were cut from the sheet in a diamond wafering machine fitted with a small holder. The 6 mm wide sheet was held from one end and cuts made by adjusting the position of the blade with the help of a micrometer fitted in the diamond wafering machine. This was done to avoid the strain on the sample surface. Then the samples were individually encapsulated in silica tubes along with pieces of pure Cd under vacuum. The amount of Cd was four times the weight of the copper sheet. This ensured ample supply of Cd vapors such that the migrating grain boundaries did not recede during the long exposure time of diffusion anneal. Experiments were also carried out with the Cu-20 at. pct. Cd alloy as a source of Cd vapor. It was observed that very insignificant migration of the grain boundaries occurred even after 5 days as the alloy composition lies in the two phase field ( The sealed samples were diffusion annealed in a tubular furnace in the temperature range 340–480 °C. In order to study the rate of grain boundary migration a number of specimens were annealed at each temperature and subsequently quenched in an ice+water mixture. A small part of the specimen was cut from each sample. In order to study the composition–distance profile, the sample was mounted in plastic resin such that the cross-section (thickness part of the sheet) was exposed. The remaining sample, approximately 6×8 mm, was also mounted to study the distance of grain boundary migration and ultimately the growth rate. Each sample was annealed only once, the growth distance was measured and it was subsequently retired. The specimens were prepared for metallographic examination by using standard metallographic techniques. The distance of grain boundary migration was studied with the help of an optical microscope fitted with a reticule. The composition profile of the sectioned sample was obtained in a JEOL electron probe microanalyser, model 8600 MX fitted with a superprobe and standards of pure metals Cd and Cu. Experiments were carried out to study the migration rate during DIGM when polycrystalline copper was exposed to Cd vapor. The concentration–distance profile of Cd diffusion was recorded on a plane perpendicular to the foil surface to facilitate the analysis. The microstructures of the polycrystalline specimen were recorded at different stages of transformation in pure copper diffusion annealed under Cd vapor. The grain boundary migration appears to have occurred near the grain boundary–twin boundary intersection and the entire segment has moved in one direction, The grain boundaries were observed to preferentially migrate near a grain edge as shown in the photomicrograph of In many instances the DIGM was preferentially observed near grain boundary/twin boundary intersection ( In some areas of the specimen, the twin boundary was observed to nucleate and grow in the wake of DIGM, The average migration rates of the grain boundaries during DIGM at different temperatures were determined from measurements of average migration distance of the boundaries as a function of time of diffusion anneal. The general scatter in the data is shown at 480 °C. The migration rates were determined in the temperature range 340–480 °C at 20 °C interval. The migration distance was measured in each specimen as the maximum distance from the initial position to the leading position of the boundaries. About 30 measurements were made in each specimen and boundaries which have migrated reasonably were considered for measurement. The average migration distance has been plotted against the time to annealing, The average migration distance was plotted against the time of anneal on a log–log scale to determine the time exponent, The growth rate was calculated by differentiating We can make a comparison of the growth rates observed in this investigation to those reported by Li and Hillert The concentration–distance profile was obtained by measuring Cd concentration as a function of distance from the surface to the center across the specimen sectioned perpendicular to the foil surface. The composition analysis has been carried out using electron probe micro analyzer (EPMA) and standards of high purity of Cu and Cd. The data are presented in The concentration–distance profiles were analyzed using Cahn’s solution At 340 °C, v=13.88×10  Assuming grain boundary thickness to be 1 nm, the observed diffusivity, The ratio of volume diffusion coefficient to migration rate at 340 °C was calculated and it has been observed to have a range of 0.038 to 0.28 nm in the diffusion annealing time of 2 to 100 h. The lattice spacing of Cu is 0.361 nm, which is more than the calculated The ratio of In order to calculate the activation energy during DIGM, the A comparison of observed activation energy with those for volume diffusion of Cd in Cu (191.16 kJmol An attempt has been made to calculate the driving force for the DIGM at all diffusion annealing temperatures. The quantity Δ In order to determine the force–velocity relationship, the growth rate during early stage of DIGM has been plotted against the chemical free energy change, The DIGM has been observed to occur in the Cu-Cd system when polycrystalline Cu was exposed to Cd vapor. The migration distance of the grain boundary increased with the time of anneal and followed a parabolic growth behavior with the time exponent in the range 0.487–0.509. The rate of migration of the grain boundaries was observed to decrease with increasing time of anneal. This may be due to the reduced driving force available as the time of transformation increases. The diffusivity