Steelmaking slag fines are leftover materials generated in routine slag processing and their particle sizes are usually smaller than 12.5 mm. The steelmaking slag fines can include desulfurization (DeS) slag fines, basic oxygen furnace (BOF) slag fines, electric arc furnace (EAF) slag fines and ladle metallurgy furnace (LMF) slag fines. Low iron grades, high impurity concentrations and inappropriate particle sizes are major barriers for recycling of the steelmaking slag fines back into ironmaking and steelmaking processes. Current slag processors have failed to solve this problem in an economic way. As a result, steelmaking slag fines are either being disposed of at landfills or being stored on the ground in large quantities, not only adding a considerably heavy financial burden to steelmaking plants, but also causing enormous value losses and potential environmental liabilities. A recycling technology of weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening has been developed at ArcelorMittal Global R&D – East Chicago Laboratories, targeted at solving the problem in a cost-effective way. Samples of steelmaking slag fines from three ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants were collected, characterized and tested with weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening. Test results show that existing slag processors' magnetic separators are ineffective in separating iron from steelmaking slag fines. Using the technology of weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening, steelmaking slag fines can be effectively separated to produce cleaner iron-rich products with sufficiently high iron contents and low levels of impurities to be reused.In an integrated steel production process, steelmaking generally includes three integrated unit operations: hot metal desulfurization (DeS), basic oxygen furnace (BOF) refining and ladle metallurgy furnace (LMF) refining. In a mini-mill steel production process, electric arc furnace (EAF) melting is followed by LMF refining. In these steelmaking unit operations, not only steel products are produced, but also various slags are generated. A steelmaking slag is often given a name corresponding to a specific unit operation, such as DeS slag, BOF slag, LMF slag or EAF slag. Recycling of these slags in economic ways has been a very challenging task and has attracted broad attention for decades ( Due to different working conditions in steelmaking unit operations, steelmaking slags from different unit operations are all different in chemical compositions and physical properties. For instance, since BOF and EAF smelting temperatures are around 1600 °C, BOF and EAF slags are in a molten state when they are discharged from BOF vessels and EAF furnaces, while desulfurization slag and LMF slag have experienced much lower temperatures and are often in a half-molten, half-solid state when they are skimmed out of desulfurization containers and LMF furnaces. Slags produced at high temperatures have good fluidity, and hence decantation can effectively separate metallic iron from the slags, while iron in partly solidified slags is difficult to separate by decantation. In general, iron in BOF slag and EAF slag often occurs as iron oxides, but iron in desulfurization slag and LMF slag often occurs as metallic iron ( After being discharged from unit steelmaking operations, steelmaking slags undergo several operations including conditioning in slag pots, dumping on the ground, watering with sprays, cooling, crushing, magnetic separation and sizing. There are various slag processing facilities in the steel industry and many of them involve various steps of intensive and repetitive crushing and grinding for iron recovery as described in the literature ( The slag processing procedures at ArcelorMittal Americas plants differ from those described in the above literature. Generally, the procedures used at ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants do not include intensive and repetitive crushing and grinding. After hot steelmaking slags are poured onto the ground in the slag yard and sprinkled with cooling water, front-end loaders are used to scoop up the slags in order to disintegrate the slags and accelerate cooling. The hot-state scooping up effectively prevents extensive formation of large slag particles over 300 mm in size, and avoids the need for excessive crushing. After the slags are cooled, drop-ball crushing is sometimes used to break both the large slag particles over 300 mm in size and the iron skulls removed from slag pots. Cooled slags are then swept by grizzly magnetic cranes to separate high-purity steel from the slags. This steel scrap is normally recycled back into steelmaking or sold on the open market without issues. The slags remaining are then charged to magnetic separators (drums or belts) followed by a series of screening steps. Magnetic portions of the slags are often screened into three products: above 75 (or 50) mm, between 75 (or 50) mm and 12.5 (or 9.5) mm and below 12.5 (or 9.5) mm. The non-magnetic portions of the slags are screened into various size ranges for different uses. The three magnetic slag products are given names of “A” scrap for the large-size particles, “B” scrap for the medium-size particles and “C” scrap for the fine-size particles. The “C” scrap is also called “C” slag fines. “A” scrap is often recycled back into the steelmaking process. “B” scrap is either recycled in the blast furnace ironmaking process or sold on the open market. Both “A” scrap and “B” scrap, in general, do not have any problem in recycling. However, due to the low iron grades, high impurity concentrations, and small particle sizes, “C” slag fines cannot be economically or environmentally recycled back into ironmaking and steelmaking processes in significant amounts without further treatment. Current slag processors have failed to solve this problem in an economic way. As a result, the “C” slag fines have been either disposed of at landfills or stored on the ground in large quantities, not only adding a heavy financial burden to steelmaking plants, but also causing enormous value losses and potential environmental liabilities. At ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants, large particles of the non-magnetic (NM) portions of the steelmaking slags mostly have been recycled into blast furnaces as flux substitutes. However, small particles of the NM steelmaking slags are difficult to recycle and face the same problem as “C” slag fines. The “C” slag fines and the fine NM steelmaking slags together are called steelmaking slag fines. Methods to upgrade steelmaking slag fines in order to recycle the slag fines back into ironmaking and steelmaking processes have not been widely reported. Alanyali et al. reported a study using a 1650 G magnetic drum separator to treat <10 mm steelmaking slag fines, but did not report how effective their treatment was in terms of quality of magnetic concentrates ( In mineral processing, in terms of surface magnetic “strength”, magnetic separators are divided into three categories: high-intensity magnetic field, medium-intensity magnetic field and low-intensity magnetic field depending upon the types of magnets used and the method of attaining the field intensity. It should be mentioned that intensity of magnetic field strength is measured in oersteds or A/m and magnetic flux density or induction is measured in gauss (or Tesla where 1 T = 10 Magnetic fields can be generated electrically or with “permanent magnets”. Surface magnetic field strengths for high-intensity magnetic separators are generally between 10,000 and 20,000 G, for low-intensity magnetic separators are between 1000 and 3000 G, and for medium-intensity magnetic separators are in between ( In this research work, representative samples of DeS slag fines, BOF slag fines, EAF slag fines and LMF slag fines were collected from three ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants. These samples were first characterized for physical and chemical properties. The characterization of these steelmaking slag fines has led to the development of a technology of weak magnetic separation (between 200 G and 800 G of surface magnetic field strength) coupled with selective particle size screening to upgrade the steelmaking slag fines for producing clean products with high iron grades, low impurity concentrations, and appropriate particle size distributions without relying on intensive grinding. Samples of steelmaking slag fines were taken from three ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants, abbreviated as X, Y and Z steelmaking plants. X and Z steelmaking plants are BOF plants and Y steelmaking plant is an EAF plant. The following samples were obtained: fresh DeS “C” slag fines, fresh BOF “C” slag fines and fresh BOF NM slag fines from X steelmaking plant; fresh EAF “C” slag fines, fresh LMF “C” slag fines, fresh EAF NM slag fines and mixed “C” slag fines from a legacy pile which was a long-term mixture of EAF “C” slag fines and LMF “C” slag fines from Y steelmaking plant; legacy DeS “C” slag fines and legacy DeS NM slag fines from Z steelmaking plant. The samples were taken from piles which varied from several thousand tons to a few million tons. Incremental sampling was applied in order to take representative samples. A front-end loader was used to scoop samples from various locations of a pile. The scooped samples were then mixed and divided until a representative sample with an appropriate quantity was formed. The representative samples were sealed and labeled immediately after they were collected. Upon arrival at ArcelorMittal Global R&D – East Chicago laboratories, the samples were homogenized and sealed for later use. Representative samples were taken from each individual raw sample for sieve analysis and chemical analysis. ASTM standards were followed for analyzing particle size distributions. Sized samples were saved and analyzed for chemistry. Carbon and sulfur were analyzed by burning a sample with pure oxygen in a resistance furnace and analyzing by infrared detection of the CO Hand-held magnets with several different surface magnetic field strengths were used to determine the iron grades and yields of the products made when upgrading steelmaking slag fines. The hand-held magnets are illustrated in A pilot-scale test was conducted on an Eriez magnetic drum separator with a drum diameter of 381 mm and drum width of 305 mm. Surface magnetic field strength of the drum is 1000 G. The drum speed is adjustable between 15 and 87 rpm. The surface magnetic field strength of the drum was adjusted by covering the drum with shielding materials. This method is simple, cheap, and effective. The surface magnetic field intensity can be greatly reduced by changing the thicknesses and types of the shielding materials. This method can be easily transferred to industrial applications. The pilot-scale magnetic drum separator is illustrated in In the pilot-scale test, the feed rate was maintained at about 3572 kg/hr/m of drum width and the splitter position was fixed in a vertical position. Effects of both surface magnetic field strengths and drum speeds on product quality and yield were examined. Products from the pilot-scale test were analyzed for chemical compositions. Various tests combining magnetic separation with selective particle size screening were conducted to optimize the recycling routes. The tests included screening – magnetic separation and magnetic separation – screening. Chemical compositions of major components in the steelmaking slag fines are presented in Considering that virgin iron ores contain more than 60% Fe and mill scale contains about 70% Fe, the steelmaking slag fines presented in The differences in iron grades between “C” slag fines and NM slag fines are 2.59% for X plant BOF slag fines, 5.43% for Z plant DeS slag fines and 2.66% for Y plant EAF slag fines, respectively. Clearly, these insignificant differences in iron grades and similarity of other components between “C” slag fines and NM slag fines do not suggest that any significant separation of iron from steelmaking slags has occurred with existing slag processors' magnetic separators. The ineffectiveness of existing magnetic separators in treating steelmaking slag fines might have two reasons: (1) iron might not be very well liberated from steelmaking slag fines; or (2) industry might have failed to set up effective working conditions for treating steelmaking slag fines with magnetic separation. Research in the literature has exclusively focused on the first reason. Though intensive and repetitive grinding of steelmaking slags prevails in academic research and industrial practice, the problem has not been resolved in any economic ways as reviewed before in Section Results of sieve analysis (dry based) of the steelmaking slag fines are presented in From In blast furnace ironmaking, 6.3 mm is often believed to be the bottom size limit of raw materials which could be charged into modern large blast furnaces without decreasing burden permeability. Therefore, >6.3 mm steelmaking slag fines can be screened out and recycled into blast furnaces. This has been applied at some ArcelorMittal USA ironmaking and steelmaking plants. The >6.3 mm steelmaking slag fines contain iron and calcined fluxes, have uniform particle size, and hence can be good blast furnace ironmaking raw materials. In addition, after removal of >6.3 mm large particles, the rest of the steelmaking slag fines are more uniform in size and can be more effectively upgraded. Sized samples were analyzed for chemical compositions. Since magnetic and non-magnetic portions of the steelmaking slag fines did not show significant differences as demonstrated above, only “C” slag fines were tested to analyze composition – size relationships. Effects of particle size on iron grade and sulfur content in steelmaking “C” slag fines are shown in From As discussed in Section Therefore, in processing steelmaking slags, avoiding over-crushing and retaining sufficiently large particle sizes are important in enabling recycling of the steelmaking slag fines back into ironmaking and steelmaking processes and retaining high value-in-use of the steelmaking slag fines. Excessive crushing and grinding of steelmaking slags not only reduces recyclability of the slags, but also increases recycling costs due to crushing and later agglomeration that might be required. It should be pointed out that CaO and MgO are also recyclable components and can be used in blast furnace ironmaking as fluxes. When recycling steelmaking slags into blast furnaces, particle sizes, iron grades, flux quantities and impurity concentrations of the slags all need to be evaluated. Handheld magnets with different surface magnetic field strengths were used to separate steelmaking slag fines. Magnetic portions and non-magnetic portions were analyzed for chemistry. Test results shown in Weak magnetic separation is quite effective in treating DeS slag fines and LMF slag fines. For instance, treatment of X plant DeS “C” slag fines with a 200 G magnet resulted in a product with over 70% Fe, less than 0.3% S and more than 40% yield. From In Section From the test results in Section Test results from magnetic separation of steelmaking slag fines with hand-held magnets showed that significant separation occurred when surface magnetic field strengths of the magnets were below 1000 G, and especially when the strengths were below 500 G. Therefore, in pilot tests of separation of steelmaking slag fines with the pilot-scale magnetic drum separator, work was concentrated in the range of surface magnetic field strengths between 200 and 800 G. Test results from upgrading Y plant LMF “C” slag fines and mixed “C” slag fines, and Z plant DeS slag fines at various drum speeds and surface magnetic field strengths are shown in With the pilot drum magnetic separation, it can be seen that variations in iron grades and yields of concentrate products with surface magnetic field strengths follow similar patterns as found in the test results with hand-held magnets, i.e. lower surface magnetic field strengths correspond to higher iron contents and lower product yields in magnetic concentrates. The effect of surface magnetic field strength is more substantial near 500 G or lower. However, due to the impact of momentum, separation of the steelmaking slag fines is also affected by drum speed. The drum with high speed produces magnetic concentrates with high iron grade, but low yield. The drum-speed effect is more significant to product yield than to product quality. As a result, it is important to optimize drum operating parameters to achieve the highest productivity and required product quality. Splitter position can also affect results, but was held constant in these tests. In the pilot-scale test, X plant DeS “C” slag fines were screened first with a 2.36 mm screen. About 45% of X plant DeS “C” slag fines entered the >2.36 mm coarse fraction and contained 60% Fe. The <2.36 mm fine fraction of X plant DeS slag fines containing 41% Fe was upgraded through weak magnetic separation with the pilot-scale magnetic drum separator under different surface magnetic field strengths and drum speeds. The test results are shown in Both Y plant LMF “C” slag fines and Y plant mixed “C” slag fines were tested with weak magnetic separation followed by selective particle size screening. The “C” slag fines were first separated with the pilot-scale magnetic drum separator with 830 G surface magnetic field strength and 78 rpm drum speed. The concentrates were screened with 9.5 mm and 6.3 mm screens. The test results are summarized in From the test results, one can see that it is possible to make high quality products with over 80% Fe through weak magnetic separation followed by selective particle size screening. The >9.5 mm product contains over 80% Fe with particle sizes greater than 9.5 mm and can be used in EAF steelmaking to replace scrap. The 9.5–6.3 mm product has Fe content over 60% and can be recycled into blast furnaces. The <6.3 mm product contains around 60% Fe and can be used in sinter production. The reject material can be further processed for other purposes. Due to different Fe contents and particle sizes, these products have different values-in-use. Products with high Fe and a large particle size are more valuable. Weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening can make different products from steelmaking slag fines for different uses. As a result, high recycling rates of steelmaking slag fines can be expected. Steelmaking slag fines have a large variety of characteristics due to differences in unit operations in steelmaking. Representative samples of DeS slag fines, BOF slag fines, EAF slag fines and LMF slag fines from three ArcelorMittal Americas steelmaking plants have been characterized and tested with weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening. There are insignificant differences in physical and chemical properties between raw magnetic and raw non-magnetic steelmaking slag fines from the plants. This suggests that existing slag processing is ineffective in separating iron from steelmaking slag fines. Product quality of steelmaking slags is not only evaluated by iron content, but also by particle size distribution and impurity concentration. Sufficiently large particle sizes of steelmaking slags must be retained in slag processing for subsequent recycling of the slag products back into ironmaking and steelmaking and for retaining high values-in-use of the steelmaking slag fines. Magnetic separation is ineffective for separating iron from steelmaking slag fines above 1000 G magnetic field strength. Effective separation of iron from steelmaking slag fines occurs below 1000 G, and especially between 200 and 800 G. Though lower magnetic field strength is beneficial to obtaining higher iron content in concentrate products, a higher magnetic field strength of magnetic drum separators need to be maintained in order to have reasonable product yields. Weak magnetic separation coupled with selective particle size screening is an effective way to produce various products from steelmaking slag fines. The coupling could be selective particle size screening of raw steelmaking slag fines followed by weak magnetic separation of under-size slag fines or weak magnetic separation of raw steelmaking slag fines followed by selective particle size screening of concentrate products. Products from these combined processing procedures have different qualities and hence could be recycled with different values-in-use in different unit operations of ironmaking and steelmaking. As a result, high recycling rates of steelmaking slag fines are expected with implementation of this method. Surface magnetic field strengths of existing magnetic separators can be greatly reduced by covering existing magnetic separators with shielding materials, and hence the technology reported in this paper can be readily implemented without requiring large capital investments. The authors wish to thank the ArcelorMittal management team for permission to publish this paper. M. Atkinson, D. White and M. Andrade helped initiate this development. S. Rihtar, K. Segel, R.F.T. Moreira and G.V. Da Siva helped collect samples of steelmaking slag fines. H. Kokal, W. Sammon and M. Andrade reviewed the draft manuscript and provided valuable suggestions for improving this paper. Their contributions are highly acknowledged. The anonymous reviewers are also thanked for their review comments which have helped improving this paper.