The combined influence of κ-carrageenan (κ-CGN, 0.5%) and egg albumin (EA, 2%) on quality characteristics of beef gels processed without or with 0.5% microbial transglutaminase (MTG) was investigated. Beef gel properties were determined by measuring textural, hydration and colour characteristics. κ-Carrageenan favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss, purge and expressible moisture. It also increased hardness and fracturability of beef gels, but was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness. Egg albumin either alone or in combination with MTG generally has been found to be inferior to κ-carrageenan for functionality in comminuted meat systems. Addition of EA produced an increase in lightness and yellowness, and a decrease in redness of beef gels, while the presence of κ-carrageenan resulted in lower L
                     ∗ and b
                     ∗, and higher a
                     ∗ values. No significant influence of MTG on gel colour parameters was observed.Formulation of a meat gel with desirable binding and texture characteristics is dependent on many factors including protein concentration, water holding capacity of the meat, non-meat ingredients, ionic strength, pH, heating temperature and rate, post-mortem history of the muscle and its type ( Carrageenans, alone or combined with other ingredients, have been widely used in a variety of comminuted meat products ( Non-meat proteins, including egg proteins have also been used as functional ingredients in a number of ground and emulsified meat products, to support and ensure binding properties of meat ( Whether egg albumin would have a synergistic effect with carrageenan to improve bind and textural properties in cooked beef homogenates is not known. Furthermore, the influence of transglutaminase on such systems is also unknown. A better understanding of the gelation properties of proteins (meat and non-meat) and κ-carrageenan and their interactions in meat systems in the presence or absence of transglutaminase, would contribute to improved utilization and processing qualities of these ingredients in meat products. Thus the objective of this study was to examine the combined effect κ-carrageenan and egg albumin on colour, binding and textural properties of beef gels processed without or with 0.5% microbial transglutaminase (MTG). For each replication, beef The ingredients used in the homogenate formulations included κ-carrageenan (κ-CGN), (Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis, USA), salt (sodium chloride—BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada), sodium tripolyphosphate (Fisher Scientific Company, New Jersey, USA), sodium nitrite and sodium ascorbate (BDH Inc., Toronto, Canada). Microbial transglutaminase (MTG), (Ajinomoto, Barentz, Poland) was a mixture containing 99% maltodextrin and 1% microbial transglutaminase (activity of approx. 100 units/g). The enzyme concentration is reported in the present study as the commercial concentration. Egg albumin isolate was donated by “OVOPOL”, Nowa Sol, Poland. Protein isolate was hydrated with distilled water (1:4 ratio) for 30 min. prior to adding to meat ingredients. Before processing, the meat was tempered at 4 °C for 24 h. Meat homogenates (300 g treatments, triplicate batches) were prepared by mixing the ground beef with the other ingredients for 60 s on speed 8 using a Galaxie VIII homogenizer (Osterizer, Canada) to produce homogenates containing 6% (w/w) meat proteins. Levels of components tested are shown in Following overnight storage, each chilled gel was removed from the plastic tube, blotted dry with a paper towel and weighed for a cook yield. Overall cook loss was calculated as a percentage based on the raw stuffed weight. Gels (25×15 mm) of known weight were placed in tubes and centrifuged (Sorvall® RC 5B Plus, Du Pont) at 365× Five 25×15 mm gel cores were vacuum-packed (−0.6 bar, Roschermatic VM-20, Osnabruck, Germany) in high-barrier, mylar/polyethylene bags (oxygen permeability rate of 7.7 cm The colour of the meat gels was measured using a Hunter Lab Labscan II spectrocolorimeter (Hunter Associates Laboratory Inc., Reston, VA) and expressed as Hunter The textural characteristics of gels were analysed according to texture profile analysis (TPA; The centre core of gels samples were cut (25 mm in diameter, 15 mm height) and compressed twice to 30% of their original height at a constant cross-head speed of 60 mm/min. The TPA parameters, namely hardness [peak force on first compression (N)], fracturability [first bite, the force required to produce the first fracture (N)], cohesiveness [ratio of the active work done under the second force-displacement curve to that done under the first compression curve (dimensionless)], springiness [distance the sample recovered after the first compression (mm)], and chewiness [hardness×cohesiveness×springiness (N∗mm)] were computed. The experimental design used was a completely randomized design with three replicates. Each replicate represented one block, and one block (all treatments) was prepared and processed in one day. The treatments were arranged as a 2×2×2 complete factorial design with two MTG levels (0 and 0.5%), two carrageenan levels (0 and 0.5%) and two egg albumin levels (0 and 2%) as main effects. The data were analysed by analysis of variance. Any interactions of main effects with replication were used as the valid error term for testing significant differences. When the analysis of variance showed significant (  Water-binding properties were markedly improved by addition of κ-carrageenan. Regardless of the presence EA or MTG, treatments with κ-carrageenan had lower cooking and storage losses than the samples containing 6% muscle proteins without the hydrocolloid. Addition of κ-carrageenan also significantly decreased the percentage of water loss from gel samples after centrifugation, indicating that the hydrocolloid improved water retention of meat gels. Results indicated that the matrix formed in those gels had a greater ability to entrap water than that of other gels. The effect of carrageenan on binding properties shown in our study was consistent with other published reports in which the hydrocolloid has been described as an ingredient that improves the water binding characteristics of meat batters ( Statistical analysis revealed that 0.5% addition of the MTG had a significant ( Previous reports on the effects of egg proteins on hydration properties of meat gels have been contradictory. Although egg proteins have been reported to “dilute” the beneficial effects of the myofibrillar proteins some studies indicated that egg proteins help to stabilize batter and may be advantageous in increasing binding properties. The colour of comminuted and cooked meat products is influenced by the pigmentation in the meat with they are made and by the variations of pigment conversion rates occurring on cooking. However, because the amount of lean meat contributing the myoglobin pigment was constant in all the treatments, the differences in appearance cannot be explained simply by pigment content. When the myoglobin content is kept constant the colour of comminuted products is mostly influenced by processing parameters, fat content, non-meat ingredients and added or lost water. Our results show that non-meat ingredients influence the colour parameters in the present experiment. The effects of κ-carrageenan, MTG and egg albumin on colour parameters are shown in MTG addition had no significant influence on the  Analysis of variance demonstrated that both κ-CGN and MTG preparate had significant effects on all of the measured textural characteristics of the gels. Addition of carrageenan to the experimental batters substantially increased hardness, force required to fracture and chewiness of gels. However, the presence of κ-CGN in gels resulted in a decrease in their springiness and cohesiveness and led to formation harder but more brittle gels. A number of authors have found comminuted products with κ-carrageenan to be tougher than control ones. It has been reported that addition of carrageenan increased gel strength of salt soluble meat protein (SSMP) gels in model systems ( Gel samples containing MTG exhibited greater hardness, cohesiveness, springiness, fracturability and chewiness than those produced without MTG addition. However, the presence of significant interactive effects between MTG and κ-CGN indicates that the addition of MTG preparation resulted in increases in hardness and cohesiveness only in gels produced without κ-CGN addition. Additionally, the addition of MTG resulted in increases in cohesiveness only in treatments containing EA. This could be interpreted as indicating that egg protein/hydrocolloid and EA/MTG synergistic interactions occurred. Our results support the findings of The effect of transglutaminase on the texture is well documented for raw (not cooked), restructured meats ( Addition of egg albumin to meat batters increased gel strength compared to that of pure MP gels. In addition for all of those parameters, except for springiness and cohesiveness, significant interactions between EA and κ-CGN treatments occurred. The presence of interactive effects indicates that the influence exerted on those parameters by egg albumin addition was affected by κ-CGN. In fact, only addition of EA together with carrageenan caused significant changes in hardness as compared to MP gels. Combination of κ-carrageenan with egg isolate resulted also in an increase in the force needed to fracture the mixed gels. It was observed that the force required to fracture the gels containing EA and κ-carrageenan was higher than that for gels with κ-CGN alone. However, overall results indicate that egg albumin alone resulted in poor gelling properties or interfered with the properties of myofibrillar proteins, and could improve beef gel texture only when supported by MTG and carrageenan. Many studies on the way egg albumin influences the properties of muscle proteins under thermal gelation have been contradictory. Egg proteins have been found to disrupt the meat gel more than stabilize it due to the fact that egg proteins become reactive at temperature above that of meat protein gelation, which results in mixed gels which are weaker than gels formed by MP alone ( As noted with respect to batter stability, the effect of EA on texture of homogenized meat systems may be related to the functional quality of myofibrillar proteins. According to κ-Carrageenan added as a component of the batters favourably affected hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and purge and higher WHC for meat gels. It also increased hardness and fracturability of beef gels, but was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness. Egg albumin either alone or in combination with MTG generally has been found to be inferior to κ-carrageenan for functionality in comminuted meat systems. Interactions between κ-carrageenan, egg albumin and MTG were observed. For example, an increase in cohesiveness by addition of egg albumin was observed for treatments containing MTG and the combination of egg protein isolate and κ-carrageenan addition resulted in the highest hardness, force to fracture and chewiness of the gels.