Fe3O4 nanoparticles (NPs) coated with WSG-peptide were prepared via a facile biomineralization technique at room temperature. The concentration of the peptides and the mixing time could substantially influence the morphology of as-prepared particles. The saturation magnetization of WSG-coated Fe3O4 particles were 35.92emu/g, slightly higher than that of Fe3O4 without WSG peptides. Cell viability assay revealed that WSG-coated Fe3O4 particles had a good cellular compatibility. In addition, compared with Fe3O4 NPs, the mineralized Fe3O4 NPs coated with WSG peptides could more easily assemble into the cancer cell, indicating that the WSG-Fe3O4 NPs possess cancer targeting property. Thus, the WSG-coated Fe3O4 NPs could be used in cancer diagnosis and treatment fields.Fe For decades, the main strategy to bind peptide to Fe In our previous study, a tumor targeting peptide sequenced WSGPGVWGASVK (WSG) has been isolated from nude mice bearing human ovarian carcinoma xenografts with In this work, we describe the synthesis of Fe Ferric chloride (FeCl The various cell lines, including ovarian carcinoma cell lines (SK-OV-3, purchased from West China Second University Hospital, China), a mouse fibroblast cell line (L929), and human umbilical vein cell lines (HUVEC) were used in this study. L929 and HUVEC cells were obtained from the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Sichuan University (Chengdu, China). The cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, USA) medium with 15% fetal calf serum (FCS, Hyclone, USA) under a CO The biomineralized Fe The morphology and structures of the prepared samples were observed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEM-2100, operated at 200 Fe In order to analyze the interaction between the particles and the cells, HUVEC and SK-OV-3 cell ultrathin sections were observed. Cells exposed to 0.1 Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 13.0 software. Results were expressed as means  XRD patterns in In order to further analyze the chemical composition of the particles, FT-IR absorption spectra was performed. In TEM images in EDS attached to STEM was performed to analyze the element composition of the samples. The results in  TG analysis was carried out to further confirm the WSG peptide and Wpc in the particles. Based on the above results, it can be explained that the rod like particles (FeOOH) were formed due to the WSG-peptide. WSG peptides, including hydrophobic composition of Ala, Trp, Pro, Val, and hydrophilic compositions of Gly, Ser, Lys, possess the positive charges. Before the precipitation, the WSG peptides and FeCl The hysteresis curves of Fe In order to quantify the effect of NPs upon L929, MTT assay was performed to detect the surviving fraction in the presence of NPs suspensions of different concentrations (Fe  In order to verify the targeting properties of the mineralized NPs with WSG peptides, we have cultured the SK-OV-3 cells with WSG-Fe Fe This work has been supported by the