The majority of flotation models incorporate a parameter that describes the propensity of particles or classes of particles to be recovered through true flotation. This is typically captured in the flotation rate constant or “floatability”, and results from complex interactions between particles, solid/liquid/air interfaces and operational variables.
                  Historically, there have been two distinct approaches in determining flotation rate parameters for industrial circuits. Fundamental approaches have focused on mechanisms for quantifying particle–bubble interactions and how these relate to kinetics. The more applied approach, which uses floatability components (grouping of particles that have the same flotation behaviour in terms of rate of recovery), relies on the availability of plant and batch test data, as well as specialised equipment measurements, to back-calculate floatability components or rate parameters, and their distribution in the feed. Since the parameters are derived from experimental data they are only applicable under the specific operating and feed conditions from which they are derived.
                  A third method is emerging which applies mineralogical data to determine the flotation response of individual particles. This is done typically through a Cassie-type approach if the rates of the liberated components are known, or by developing a database of information which relates the flotation response of classes of particles to key mineralogical features.
                  In this paper, a new small-scale test is presented, to compliment current laboratory batch test methods for separability characterisation. Data are presented to demonstrate the comparability of the overall separation achieved in the small-scale test to batch flotation and full scale plant measurements. The small-scale test is shown to be sufficiently sensitive to particle surface attributes, and based on the results presented in this paper, is a good candidate for further development to potentially determining flotation rate parameters. Work in this area is ongoing and will be reported in a subsequent article.When particles are separated in a flotation cell, they may be present in one of four states ( When bubbles rise to the surface, they also carry a flux of water with them into the froth phase. Hydrophilic particles which do not attach to the bubbles may then be carried into the froth phase, suspended in the upwards flux of water. These particles will then exist in the froth due to entrainment. The total recovery for a specific mineral, the quantity being measured during a survey, is then a combination of its recovery by entrainment and true recovery through bubble attachment. To successfully model this process it is important to understand the various actions controlling flotation, and to have ways of measuring or calculating key model input parameters. As early as 1962 it was recognised that the froth zone should be considered separately to the pulp zone ( In the floatability component (FC) approach, the feed to the circuit is empirically divided into various components, with each component consisting of a group of particles having the same flotation response ( During simulations, the overall recovery of a specific mineral species ( In which  In which The above expression applies to the overall recovery for attached particles and already takes into account the effect of the froth phase, expressed as ( In which The above rate constant expression however only takes into account the recovery of minerals as a result of their attachment to rising bubbles. Using the method by From Eqs. To back-calculate rate constant parameters for a group of cells in a circuit, using the floatability component approach, Fundamental approaches to determine the pulp phase rate constant from first principals has progressed significantly and in the literature a number of these have been demonstrated with both laboratory cells ( Methods have also been reported in which information obtain through automated mineralogy (such as MLA or QEMSCAN) may be used to determine the distribution of flotation rate constants for a particular feed. In the case of Platinum Group Minerals (PGM’s), recovery to the concentrate is influenced by their mode of occurrence, exposure or liberation and particle size (  The method was successful on the samples containing predominantly liberated chalcopyrite. When the same approach was applied to samples containing significantly higher proportions of pyrite, difficulty was encountered to predict the flotation response. Galvanic interactions between sulfide minerals further influence the observed flotation rates of the pure minerals and as such a modification to the surface composition model is required.  Mf-factors are assigned to each mineral on a relative basis meaning that those which are considered to be fast floating will have an Mf-factor of close to unity; whereas non-floating minerals are assigned Mf-factors close to zero. Because the flotation response of pentlandite is affected by the presence of pyrrhotite ( Various approaches thus exist to determine the pulp phase rate constant for particles or groups of particles. In this paper a small-scale test is introduced, and its value in determining separation efficiency is demonstrated for a number of cases. The outcomes of the small-scale test are also compared to those of batch flotation tests and plant data. Based on the results presented here, it is proposed to further evaluate this test to characterise flotation separability of ores, to compliment the floatability component modelling approach. This is aimed at providing information with regards to floatability components, and how it may be influenced by upstream processes. The Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Separability Indicator, JKMSI, was developed based on an earlier concept by The device used by Four sets of test results are discussed to demonstrate the application of the JKMSI as a small-scale test for the characterisation of in particular copper mineral flotation separability. The first set of data (Section  Ore “B” contains predominantly chalcopyrite with some chalcocite, bornite and covellite present for ores “C” and “D”. Ores “A” and “E” on the other hand contain predominantly covellite and chalcocite. The summary table ( Under these chemical conditions it is observed that covellite and chalcocite may adversely affect overall copper recoveries if they are present in significant quantities. Stronger xanthate collectors may be required in such a case to improve the recovery of all copper sulfide minerals. Samples discussed in this section are from ores containing predominantly a single valuable sulfide mineral. MLA particle images of feed from three ores are shown in The dark (black) grains represent the valuable mineral with the light grey and mid grey grains the non-floating and floating gangue components respectively. The images above show different valuable mineral grade and liberation characteristics. The valuable sulfide mineral grades (presented as a value relative to the sample in 3a) for the three samples (3a–3c) are approximately 1.0, 1.3 and 2.6 respectively. Image (3a) indicates that the valuable mineral is predominantly in composite with non-floating gangue. For image (3c) the valuable particles are almost all completely liberated with approximately 90% by mass of the valuable mineral contained in particles having an area proportion of 80% and greater of the valuable mineral. The valuable mineral in image (3b) is somewhere in-between with a high proportion (approximately 25% by mass) also contained in ternary particles that contain floating gangue. The recovery and modal mineralogy of the valuable mineral from each of the above feed samples is summarised in The low recovery reported for the feed sample in image (3a) may be attributed to the low overall liberation as well as the fact that the remainder of the valuable mineral is present in binary with non-floating gangue. The most significant different in the association of the valuable mineral between (3a) and (3b) is the fact that a large proportion of the mineral in (3b) is associated with floating gangue. Although a selective collector was employed during these tests it was most likely not very effective. This is supported by the concentrate grades. For (3b) a much lower valuable mineral grade was achieved. For the other two samples this was less of a problem as the grade of floating gangue in the feed was much lower. The presence of a floating gangue in this case can contribute to the recovery of the valuable mineral but at a lower concentrate grade. The recovery value presented for (3c) appears to be low when considering the fact that more than 90% of the mineral is highly liberated. This is also low when comparing the number to the recovery of particles from image (3b) in which little mineral is completely liberated but mostly present as composites with the gangue phases. In the case of (3c) the limiting factor is more experimental in nature than mineralogical. The high grade of valuable mineral present in the feed (2.6× that of (3a) and 2× that of 3(b)) means that bubble loading can very well be a limiting factor for the recovery of the valuable minerals in (3c). Subsequent work done by the current authors, to be reported in publications to follow, has identified the mass recovery to be sensitive to the ratio of the pulp volume and air volume in the test tube. Bubble overloading is being suspected as a potential factor and further research into this is needed to fully understand the factors contributing to the recovery number achieved in the JKMSI. Nevertheless, the results so far demonstrate that the small-scale test is sensitive to key particle attributes known to influence flotation separation, namely mineral composition and liberation characteristics. The JKMSI test is sensitive enough to identify possible poor recoveries due to mineralogical problems, but for the test to provide meaningful results it is a further criterion that the results are comparable to plant measurements or data produced by standard batch flotation tests.   The data above further demonstrate that the JKMSI test is capable of reproducing the important recovery by size information needed to determine optimum feed size distributions for flotation ( Various methods are reported in the literature to determine floatability components or flotation rate constants. To date, laboratory batch flotation tests are still the preferred method of extracting this information for cases where plant scale data are not available. Progress has been made in understanding the behaviour of individual particles and how this may be simulated on a laboratory scale basis, but implementation of this on full scale to model the variability in the expected process performance of an orebody is still being pursued. In the four sets of data presented above, the new small-scale separability test has been demonstrated to have the capability to provide adequate information that can be related to the overall performance of batch flotation tests and full scale circuits. The test is shown to be sufficiently sensitive to particle surface attributes, making it a good candidate for characterising flotation separability. More work is however needed to further develop this methodology to determine flotation rate parameters. Work in this area is ongoing and will be reported in a subsequent article. The authors acknowledge JKMRC management for the approval to present and publish this paper. Wilfred Leong is also acknowledged for carrying out the JKMSI experiments reported. The various sponsors of the work are also acknowledged for their financial support and approval to published selected outcomes. The contributions of the two reviewers for Minerals Engineering are also acknowledges, for taking the time to read the manuscript and to provide very constructive feedback.