Defective mineralization of the skeleton results in rickets (affecting growth plates) and osteomalacia (affecting established bone). Effective mineralization requires adequate supply of minerals (calcium and phosphate), the hormone calcitriol which controls intestinal mineral absorption (calcitriol synthesized from vitamin D), and enzymes that aid mineralization (alkaline phosphatase). A lack in any of the above can lead to rickets and osteomalacia. The underlying pathology in all forms of rickets is low phosphorus availability to hypertrophic growth plate chondrocytes and osteoblasts irrespective of the cause (calcipaenia, phosphopaenia and hypophosphatasia).
               The most frequent and preventable calcipaenic cause of rickets/osteomalcia worldwide is “nutritional” resulting from deficient dietary calcium and/or deficient sunshine exposure leading to vitamin D deficiency. Calcipaenia affects a substantial proportion of mankind and serious pediatric manifestations only represent the tip of an iceberg, revealing widespread deficiency. Genetic conditions affecting calcitriol synthesis and action are rare and serve as fascinating examples to understand mineralization and bone physiology. The differential diagnosis of phosphopaenia and hypophosphatasaemia has advanced rapidly over the last 15 years. This has led to novel drug developments for X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets (XLH) and life-threatening hypophosphatasia (HPP). The rare bone diseases discussed here require management by bone specialists in tertiary centers.Dietary deficiency Malabsorptive conditions: liver failure (hepatic osteodystrophy), coeliac disease, short gut syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease Decreased cutaneous synthesis: dark skin, covered clothing, sunscreen use, sunlight deprivation (latitude, cloud cover, pollution) Dietary deficiency Malabsorptive conditions (see above) Increased degradation ( Genetic/vitamin D‐dependent rickets (VDDR) 25-Hydroxylase deficiency/VDDR 1B ( 1-Hydroxylase deficiency/VDDR 1A ( Vitamin D receptor defect/VDDR 2A ( Vitamin D response element binding protein defect/VDDR 2B Enhanced vitamin D catabolism/VDDR 3 ( Renal failure (renal osteodystrophy) Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria ( Lowe׳s syndrome ( Dent׳s disease ( Fanconi syndrome Drug induced (i.e. valproate, aminoglycosides, cisplatin, ifosfamide) X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets ( Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets ( Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets ( Tumor induced osteomalacia Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia Antacids contacting aluminum, magnesium, or calcium Phosphate binders (i.e. Sevelamer) Osteopenia of prematurity Prenatal benign Perinatal Infantile Childhood Adult Odonto  Calcium deprivation in the body due to vitamin D and/or dietary calcium deficiency. Premature fusion of skull sutures in an infant. The long bone shaft formed from a primary center of ossification. End of a long bone formed from secondary center of ossification which is initially separate from the body of the long bone and later unites with it through ossification. Low serum calcium concentration. Low serum phosphate concentration. Low serum alkaline phosphatase activity. Growing part of the long bone which lies between the growth plate and the diaphysis. Integration of hydroxyapatite crystals into pre-formed osteoid, creates the bone matrix. Transformation of a cartilage frame into bone tissue during bone development. Unmineralized, organic bone matrix component synthesized by osteoblasts. Phosphate deprivation in the body. Rickets and osteomalacia occur as a consequence of defective mineralization of the skeleton. Such reduced mineralization results in soft bones, which deform and break more easily, and stunting of growth. The non-nutritional forms of rickets can be associated with raised intracranial pressure from craniosynostosis, and severe hypophosphatasia is associated with respiratory insufficiency from pulmonary hypoplasia secondary to insufficient chest growth. Dental manifestations are a frequent association due to impaired mineralization of enamel. Defective mineralization occurs due to (1) lack of mineral supply to mineralization sites (calcium or phosphate), (2) lack of the mineral supplier calcitriol (hormone synthesized from vitamin D) which controls their intestinal absorption, and (3) less commonly due to lack of the tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase enzyme which facilitates mineralization. The leading cause of rickets worldwide is dietary calcium deficiency and/or vitamin D deficiency ( A basic understanding of the physiology of bone growth, structure and mineralization is essential to differentiate and manage various forms of rickets and osteomalacia, and their fundamental difference to osteoporosis. Recent advances in the understanding of the pathophysiology of certain forms of rickets has led to the emergence of new therapeutic agents such as monoclonal antibody against fibroblast growth factor 23 in X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) and enzyme replacement with asfotase alfa in hypophosphatasia (HPP). The bone tissue or matrix is composed of 50%–70% mineral (predominantly calcium and phosphate), 20%–40% organic material (predominantly type 1 collagen), 5%–10% water, and < The term “bone formation” describes the process of synthesis of extracellular organic osteoid followed by its mineralization, with later integration of osteoblasts which transform into osteocytes. The term “mineralization” relates to the integration of hydroxyapatite [Ca Endochondral ossification and mineralization merit more detailed discussion to be able to appreciate the pathogenesis and clinical features of rickets in children. Longitudinal growth occurs through endochondral ossification in long bones. Condensation of mesenchymal cells to form cartilage precedes their differentiation into chondrocytes ( The chondrocytes in the growth plate are arranged in morphologically distinct zones. At the epiphyseal end of the growth plate is the reserve zone or resting zone. Cells in the resting zone then enter the proliferative zone where they undergo division and produce large amounts of extracellular matrix protein ( The proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes is regulated by a number of systemic factors (such as growth hormone, thyroid hormone, estrogen and cortisol) and a large number of still poorly understood locally secreted factors (such as Indian hedgehog, parathyroid hormone-related peptide, fibroblast growth factors) which act on receptors to effect intracellular signaling and activation of chondrocyte-selective transcription factors ( Bone is mineralized connective tissue. The most abundant minerals in bone matrix are calcium and phosphorus, present in the form of hydroxyapatite crystals [Ca The mechanism of initiation and regulation of cell mediated mineralization is not entirely clear, however several theories have been proposed ( The first step in mineralization is the formation of hydroxyapatite in MVs of mature chondrocytes and osteoblasts ( The mineralization status of the bone matrix can be assessed by quantitative backscattered electron imaging and normative data on mineralization density distribution in iliac bone biopsies are available ( Bone metabolism in children differs from adults in that the bone undergoes longitudinal growth, metaphyseal inwaisting, modeling and remodeling during childhood and adolescence whereas in adults remodeling is the only active bone process ( Modeling allows for bone growth in width by deposition of new bone on the periosteal surface by osteoblasts and resorption of old bone on the endosteal surface by osteoclasts ( Remodeling is the process by which old bone is replaced by new bone, essential for maintaining bone strength and removal of microcracks ( Bone tissue is a two-phase porous composite material composed primarily of collagen and minerals, with mechanical properties determined primarily by the amount, arrangement, and molecular structure of these primary constituents (    Based on the primary pathology, rickets and osteomalacia can be classified broadly into defective mineral supply (calcipaenia, phosphopaenia) and defective mineralization (hypophosphatasia). Calcipaenia (deprivation of body calcium, most common cause is dietary calcium and/or vitamin D deficiency) Phosphopaenia (deprivation of body phosphorus, most common cause is renal phosphate wasting) Hypophosphatasia (lack of TNSALP, causing hypophosphatasaemia Irrespective of the primary pathology, the underlying mechanism of all forms of rickets is low phosphate availability to the hypertrophic chondrocytes in the growth plate ( Interestingly, some rare bone conditions have only been associated with osteomalacia and not rickets: Recessively inherited FAM20C mutations cause osteomalacia but not rickets in humans ( Osteogenesis imperfecta type VI (OI6) caused by homozygous mutation (autosomal recessive inheritance) in the Understanding the causes of rickets and osteomalacia based on the primary pathology ( The leading causes of calcipaenic rickets worldwide are dietary calcium and/or vitamin D deficiency. Although calcipaenia (calcium deprivation) can very rarely occur due to defects in calcitriol synthesis or action, the commonest cause is reduced vitamin D synthesis in the skin from lack of UVB exposure. Vitamin D deficiency can very rarely occur due to dietary insufficiency, malabsorption or enhanced degradation induced by drugs such as rifampicin, a Vitamin D is biologically inert and merely serves as the substrate to calcitriol synthesis, in analogy to cholesterol being a precursor for cortisol synthesis. Calcitriol synthesis and metabolism is illustrated in Some of the rare, genetic forms of rickets caused by interrupted calcitriol metabolism or action are detailed in Nutritional rickets/osteomalacia (NR) is a major public health concern in low and middle income countries and has resurfaced in high income countries ( The at-risk population includes: individuals with dark skin and those with reduced sunlight exposure (due to geographic location, predominant indoor living or covered clothing for cultural reasons), individuals with calcium restricted diets (malnutrition, medical or cultural reasons), babies not given vitamin D supplements, especially those of vitamin D deficient mothers and those breastfed for prolonged periods ( Hypocalcemic complications and NR are only the tip of the iceberg and the true burden of hidden disease remains unidentified. The incidence of NR is on the rise even in developed countries, due to immigration of dark-skinned, high risk groups ( The clinical manifestations of calcipaenia occur as a consequence of Hypocalcemia in the short term and hypophosphataemia in the medium to long term. The clinical spectrum across the lifespan is wide and includes hypocalcemic seizures, life threatening cardiac failure, rickets with osteomalacia, muscle weakness, musculoskeletal pain and fractures ( The diagnosis of NR/osteomalacia is based on clinical (leg bowing deformities, enlarged wrists and rachitic rosary; seizures and heart failure), biochemical and radiological signs. The diagnosis requires radiographic confirmation, showing the typical radiological signs: cupping, splaying and fraying of metaphyses and widened growth plates. However, these signs only occur in late stages of the disease ( Treatment should address both vitamin D and calcium deficiency and combined treatment improves outcome ( Daily oral vitamin D for a minimum of 3 months is recommended in a minimum dose of 2000 Minimum of 500 Instead of daily doses, a single high dose of vitamin D in children aged > Both cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) and ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) are equally effective for daily treatment, whereas cholecalciferol with a longer half-life is preferred for single high dose treatment. For prevention of rickets, the minimum daily dietary intake for calcium is > Since the predominant source of vitamin D is from sunshine exposure and supply is rarely met through diet; supplementation or food fortification programs are essential to protect at risk populations. Most developed nations have vitamin D supplementation programs in place during pregnancy and infancy. However, poor policy implementation has led to the resurgence of rickets in certain European countries ( Phosphopaenic, more commonly called hypophosphtemic, rickets commonly results from renal tubular phosphate wasting disorders (genetic or drug induced), less commonly from reduced gastrointestinal absorption and very rarely from insufficient dietary intake. Phosphate homeostasis is closely regulated by the hormone fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) which is produced by osteocytes and osteoblasts. FGF23 excess impairs renal phosphate reabsorption ( Down regulation of sodium–phosphate co-transporters (NaPi-2a and 2c) ( Reduced synthesis of calcitriol through reduced 1-hydroxylase activity hypophosphatemic rickets is classed as FGF23 mediated or non-FGF23 mediated ( Non-FGF23 mediated hyperphosphaturia can result: From primary hereditary disorders of the renal tubule due to mutations in From Fanconi syndrome, either through respective genetic defects or drug effects (e.g., sodium valproate, cisplatin). FGF23 mediated hyperphosphaturia is seen in: X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) due to Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR) secondary to Less common autosomal recessive forms caused by inactivating mutations of dentin matrix protein 1 ( Tumor-induced osteomalacia and fibrous dysplasia XLH is the most common form of phosphopaenic rickets with an approximate prevalence of 1 in 20,000. Its X-linked inheritance means that boys always inherit the condition from their mothers and girls can inherit it from either parent. XLH results from inactivating mutations in the Clinical features vary in affected individuals with majority presenting as toddlers with bowing deformities of long bones and short stature, or referred due to a positive family history. Other manifestations include craniosynostosis ( Establishing the diagnosis of XLH and excluding other causes of hypophosphataemia is important. Given the various forms of hypophosphatemic rickets ( Measurement of phosphate and creatinine concentrations in serum and urine in the fasting state is required to calculate the percent tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP) and the tubular threshold maximum for phosphate (TmP) to glomerular filtration rate (GFR) ratio ( The mainstay of medical treatment currently is multiple daily dosing of phosphate supplements combined with active vitamin D metabolites (alfacalcidol and calcitriol) ( Treatment is monitored and tailored to maintain normal serum concentrations of ALP and PTH, which requires considerable experience. Under-treatment inevitably results in short stature and leg deformities necessitating corrective surgery. Over-treatment with phosphate results in unpleasant gastrointestinal symptoms and secondary hyperparathyroidism; over-treatment with active vitamin D metabolites results in hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. A multi-disciplinary team approach involving pediatric metabolic bone specialists, dentists and orthopedic surgeons is crucial. Also essential is appropriate transition of young patients to adult bone specialists for on-going treatment of hypophosphatemic osteomalacia and management of typical adult complications of XLH. Hypophosphatasia is an inborn error of bone mineralization caused by loss of function mutations in the The TNSALP enzyme on the surface of osteoblasts and brain cells hydrolyses extracellular substrates such as inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi) and pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP, a vitamin B6 vitamer) and phosphoethanolamine (PEA). Reduced TNSALP activity therefore results in accumulation of these substrates. Accumulation of PPi inhibits mineralization (skeletal and dental), resulting in HPP-rickets, osteomalacia and early tooth loss. PLP is the activated form of vitamin B6 which is required as a co-factor in the production of inhibitory neurotransmitters, a process facilitated by TNSALP׳s extracellular dephosphorylation of PLP to pyridoxal (PL) which then crosses the cell membrane. Severely affected infants with HPP therefore can have seizures which are pyridoxine responsive ( The clinical presentation varies depending on the age at presentation, ranging widely from stillbirth, severe rickets, atypical fractures in late adulthood to isolated premature tooth loss. The severity of the clinical phenotype of HPP reflects the magnitude of TNSALP deficiency in bone ( Evidence on this rare form is limited ( This most severe form of HPP is diagnosed before or at birth. Short long bones are usually noted in utero, as well as reduced chest circumference and polyhydramnios ( Affected infants may not have any clinical features at birth but develop symptoms in the first 6 months of life. They can have rachitic chest deformities and respiratory compromise due to rib fractures, muscular hypotonia and seizures. Development of functional craniosynostosis can lead to manifestations of increased intracranial pressure, even in the presence of an open fontanelle. Hypercalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia occur, manifesting with irritability, poor feeding, vomiting, failure to thrive, polyuria and polydipsia ( Although less severe than the infantile forms, the clinical presentation of childhood HPP is widely variable. Children usually present around 2–3 years of age with delayed walking, early tooth loss, bony deformities, musculoskeletal pain, fractures and radiological features of rickets ( Adults with HPP present with musculoskeletal pain and incidental or atypical fractures ( The classic finding of HPP is premature loss of teeth. However, this feature also exists as an isolated condition, representing premature loss of deciduous teeth without skeletal involvement ( The biochemical hallmark of HPP is a persistently low ALP activity. A low ALP for age in itself is not diagnostic and other causes should be excluded prior to further evaluation ( Radiological features include generalized hypomineralization and rickets-like features (HPP-rickets). The most important diagnostic radiographs to be taken in infants and children are the knee (rickets) and skull (craniosynostosis). Childhood-HPP is associated with typical tongue like radiolucent areas in the metaphyses ( HPP can be diagnosed based on clinical, biochemical and radiological features ( Asfotase alfa, a bone-targeted recombinant human TNSALP, is approved for treatment of pediatric HPP (perinatal, infantile and juvenile onset) by the US Food and Drug Agency (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA). Asfotase alfa improves skeletal disease manifestations and pulmonary and physical function in infants and young children with life-threatening HPP ( Neonates with severe form of the disease are usually managed in intensive care units in tertiary centers with support from specialized teams ( Long-term post-marketing studies are required, including global collaboration in a HPP registry to better understand the condition, treatment monitoring and development of complications. Treatment monitoring guidance is preliminary at present (