Silicon nitride as a gate dielectric can improve the performance of ULSI CMOS devices by decreasing the gate leakage currents. In this paper we report a a-SiN:H gate dielectric fabricated using Cat-CVD at a relatively low substrate temperature of ∼250°C, using silane and ammonia as the source gases. The films were deposited at various gas pressures, (NH3/SiH4) flow rate ratios and at different filament temperatures (T
                     F). The deposition parameters, i.e. total gas pressure and gas composition (silane+ammonia) were optimized to deposit insulating and transparent films with high breakdown strength. The structural properties of these films were studied by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy. Films with bandgap as high as 5.5 eV were obtained. The optimized conditions were used to deposit ultrathin films of the order of 8 nm thickness for deep-submicron CMOS technology. Electrical properties such as C–V and I–V measurements were studied on metal–nitride–semiconductor (MNS) capacitor structures. These characterization results on MNS capacitors show breakdown fields of the order of 10 MV cm−1 and good interface properties.In recent years, ultrathin silicon nitride (SiN) films have attracted considerable attention as metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) gate dielectrics for ULSI applications The a-SiN:H films were deposited by HW-CVD using Matheson grade SiH These alloy films were characterized for their optical, structural and electronic properties as a function of the total gas pressure, the ratio defined by (NH The film thickness was measured using a Dektak II surface profilometer from a step height in a masked area on the substrate. For very thin films (or less than 100 Å), the a-SiN:H film thickness was evaluated from The variations in the film growth rate, the optical bandgap, the etch rate, the hydrogen bonded to nitrogen, the hydrogen bonded to silicon, the integrated Si–N intensity, and the breakdown strength were studied as a function of the total gas pressure in the chamber, the ammonia to silane gas flow rate ratio and the filament temperature. For this set, the total gas pressure was varied from 30 to 250 mtorr, while the other parameters were kept constant. The filament temperature ( For this set, the gas flow rate ratio (NH It has been observed that number of N-H bonds increase with increase in pressure in earlier set. This makes the film porous and hence breakdown strength values are lower for these films since these films were deposited at higher pressure (250 mtorr). For this set, the filament temperature (  Along with silane and ammonia, nitrogen also was used for the deposition of the films in this set. Parameters for this set were: SiH From all the characterization of all the films from different sets, the following set of process parameters seems to yield films with optimal properties. These parameters were used for the deposition of very thin films for electrical characterization. A metal-nitride-semiconductor (MNS) capacitor structure was fabricated, which uses an a-SiN:H thin film as a dielectric. Capacitance-voltage ( a-SiN:H films were fabricated using a HW-CVD technique, with and without N The work was supported by financial assistance from DST and MHRD, Government of India.