Production scheduling is a critical activity for the long-term production planning of open pit mining operations. It deals with the effective management of resources and maximizes cash flows to generate higher profits over the life of a mine. Production scheduling problems determine that blocks be mined and processed over a number of periods subjected to mining and processing constraints, which makes the problem more complex. The complexity is further increased due to the uncertainty in the input parameters. In this study, the maximum flow algorithm with a genetic algorithm is used to generate the long-term production schedule. The graph structure for maximum flow is created for multiple periods under uncertainty, and the flow in the arcs is controlled by a genetic algorithm to develop a production schedule. Numerical results for realistic instances are provided to indicate the efficiency of the solutions.An open pit mine refers to the extraction of raw materials from the surface. For a mining industry, mineral deposits are the main asset, and the size, shape, depth, and geology of the economic ore reserves are estimated based on the findings of exploration drill-holes. Traditionally orebody model is represented as a three-dimensional array of blocks, and these blocks are referred to as the mining units. The estimates of the mining attributes are stored in those blocks. The three-dimensional array of the orebody model is the input for production scheduling. For an industry to run a successful business, the mining of blocks should be scheduled to complete a mining project in a timely, efficient and profitable manner. Production scheduling for an open pit mine aims to generate the most profitable extraction sequence of the mineralized material from the surface while satisfying physical and operational constraints. To make the decision on the extraction sequence of the blocks, an approach based on the application of mathematical models and modern computing technology is used. To extract the minerals from the surface, the blocks have to be mined and then processed in a plant to recover the metal, known as mining and processing respectively. The blocks are divided into two subsets;  Reserve constraints: a block can be mined at most once during the life of the mine. Slope constraints: to extract a specific block, all the blocks overlying it, known as predecessors, have to be removed beforehand. Mining constraints: the total weight of the blocks ( Processing constraints: the total weight of Metal production constraints: the amount of metal recovered from processed ore should not exceed the amount that can be sold during a period and should not be less than a minimum amount We refer to reserve and slope constraints as physical constraints, in this paper. Mining constraints, processing constraints and metal production constraints are referred to as operational constraints. Production schedules are crucial for the mining industry as they serve as a key factor in determining the financial return on investments, which can be in the order of hundreds of millions to billions of dollars. Finding the most profitable production schedule is a complex task. Traditionally, a production schedule is developed using a deterministic model, where all the parameter values are precisely determined, but the presence of uncertainty leads to a misleading assessment of the deposit Exact methods To solve large instances of the production scheduling problem in a reasonable amount of time, heuristic and metaheuristic methods are used, though their use does not guarantee the optimality of the solution. To improve the efficiency and robustness of these methods, they are integrated with other techniques. Various hybrid methods have been developed over the years. Denby and Schofield A parametric application of maximum flow is well documented and widely used in the mining industry In this paper, a new hybrid method is presented to generate a production schedule for the deposit under uncertainty without any initial solution. The input for the method is the three-dimensional array of blocks, economic parameters and technical parameters. The technical parameters refer to the lower and upper bounds for the operational constraints. The parametric maximum-flow algorithm along with genetic algorithms are used to generate the production schedule. As distinct from the existing parametric maximum flow application, in this novel hybrid method, economic parameters and multipliers for the entire block array are used to create the graph structure for maximum flow. It should be noted that, in this novel hybrid method, the multipliers are associated with all the blocks in the model irrespective of the economic value of the block. A genetic algorithm is used to optimize the problem, which is solved in stages due to the presence of a large number of decision variables. This approach is based on reducing the size of the search space for individual design variables in each successive stage of the optimization process. El-Beltagy and Keane This section discusses a generalized open pit mining production scheduling problem under uncertainty. Firstly, the graph structure in a stochastic framework is discussed, followed by the stochastic integer programming formulation for the open pit mine production scheduling problem. Then, our solution approach using genetic algorithms is discussed. The problem is formulated as a maximum flow problem in which each block is represented as a node The maximum flow of a directed graph, defines the vertical and horizontal extents of the economically mineable material over the life of the mine, referred as the ultimate pit. For the stochastic framework, uncertainty attributes should be considered. These attributes refer to the information of interest in the optimization model, such as ore quantities, metal quantities, and costs. The uncertainties in the attributes can be quantified using a set of joint scenarios The economic value for a mining block However, the economic value of the block Block The problem formulation (Eq.    The production schedule is developed to determine the extraction sequence over a particular time horizon. To construct a simplified graph of the form shown in The problem is formulated as an integer program with the objective of maximizing profit while satisfying different sets of physical and operational constraints In Eq. In our novel hybrid method, a weight   GAs are a class of evolutionary algorithm based on the principles of natural evolution. GA is a population-based search algorithm and uses a structured but randomized approach to utilize population information in finding a search direction. GA is well documented in the literature Mine production scheduling problems are big and contain thousands to millions of mining blocks   In general, it is not good practice to solve the entire problem together as it is challenging to perform the suitable implementation of GA for a complex problem. For a complex problem, a large number of offspring will be infeasible after any genetic operation  A real-coded GA is used in which the variables are expressed as real numbers. The population is usually randomly generated allowing us to create a wide range of possible solutions. In our hybrid method, the problem is solved in stages, with the initialization of a stage based on the solutions of previous stages. The initialization is randomly generated in the first stage of design. The optimal weights of this stage are transferred to the next stage that provides direction to the search. In this transition, random weights are added as an extension to the optimal chromosome from the previous stage to generate the initial population of the next stage. For instance, in Stage 1, the initial population is generated randomly by assigning a random value between  GA uses a selection technique to select individuals from the population into the mating pool. The individuals from the mating pool are used to generate two new offspring using a crossover operation. These offspring form the basis for the next generation. Roulette wheel selection A real-coded crossover operation is performed to generate offspring from two parents For example, assume the weights used in  A uniform mutation operation for the real-valued population is used for diversification For example, assume the weights used in  In addition to genetic operators, parametric diversification is introduced to increase the efficiency of GA and decrease computational run time. In this step, the chromosome is changed based on its deviation from the operational constraints. The deviation is calculated as: In period For example, assume the weights used in  To ensure the values of weights in a chromosome are within the range of 0 to 1 after the crossover, mutation and parametric diversification operations, the following truncation procedure is applied to the chromosome variable Constraint handling in optimization problems is a challenge. To obtain a feasible solution to the production scheduling problem, Eqs. The genetic algorithm moves from one stage to another when the fitness function value does not change for ñ iterations. The production scheduling problem is stopped when all stages are solved, or if there is no change in the fitness function value between the consecutive stages. In the following, the steps of our hybrid method for production scheduling are presented. Step 1: Set Step 2: Create a graph structure for stage Step 3: Initialize weights for the population (Section Step 4: Calculate the fitness function value of the population using Eq. Step 5: Perform Genetic Operations on randomly selected chromosomes  Perform Crossover operation (Section Perform Mutation operation (Section Perform Parametric Diversification (Section Use Truncation to keep the weights between Use the weights after genetic operations and apply maximum flow to the graph structure in step 2 to get the solution Calculate the fitness function value of the population using Eq. Add the genetically modified chromosome to the initial population (Step 3) and select the best fit chromosomes such that the selected chromosomes are equal to the population size. Continue the steps 5.1 to 5.7 until the stopping criteria is met (Section Step 6: The method described in this paper and all the numerical experiments are performed using MATLAB. The method is tested with the instances generated from actual mineral deposits and the benchmark instances from the literature. The actual mineral deposits used for the study are associated with geological uncertainty and the average gap from the upper bound Linear Relaxed solution is calculated. The benchmark instances lack uncertainty, and the instances are used to compare the average gap from the upper bound Linear Relaxed solution presented in the literature. In this section, firstly, the instances and constraints used for the study are introduced before reporting the results. This is followed by sensitivity analysis of various parameters used in the study, and a discussion on the importance of having weight in both source and sink nodes and of solving the problem in stages. Two different sets of problems, P1 and P2, are used to complete the numerical experimentation. Each set includes three different problems based on real-life data. Problems in P1 are from a copper deposit where blocks are of size 20 ×20 ×10 meters and weigh 10,800 tons each. Problems in P2 are from a gold deposit where blocks are of size 15 ×15 ×10 meters and weigh 5625 tons each. The problem sets are associated with geological uncertainty and 20 equiprobable scenarios representing the mineral deposit are used for developing a production schedule. For both the copper and gold deposit, 20 equiprobable scenarios for the mineral deposit were generated using the drilling information and the geostatistical techniques of conditional simulation The initial population for all instances is selected such that increasing the population does not have any impact on the solution. The initial population for all problems is set as 100. The parameter settings used in GA for the study in all instances are set as crossover probability    The linear relaxed optimal solution for the problem is calculated using Version 12.6 of the commercial solver CPLEX. Since the proposed method includes random choices, each instance is solved five times. The average gap for the solution is the relative gap between the average values of the five solutions generated  To show the effect of various constraints on the production schedule under uncertainty, for all the scenarios in the problem C3, the metal production, ore production and total mining production are presented in  In problem C3, deviations resulting in over and under-production of metal is highly penalized compared to processing capacity deviations, hence there is over-production of ore between period 3 and period 5, whereas metal production remains on the higher side. However, when the penalty for over and under-production of ore is highly penalized compared to the metal deviations, the solution changes and the model will prioritize keeping the ore production deviation within the bounds.  The dataset on which the proposed method is tested consists of instances from The initial population for all instances is selected such that increasing the population does not have any impact on the solution. Thus the initial population for all the instances is set as 100, except for larger instances (W23, Sm2 and Mclaughlin limit) where the initial population is set as 200. It was observed for the larger instances that when the population size is increased from 100 to 200, a noticeable improvement in solution quality was achieved; however, no further improvement was observed when the population size was increased beyond 200. The parameter settings used in GA for the study in all instances are as follows: crossover probability  As deviations from the target are not allowed, The optimal values for the linear relaxed problem and the Since the proposed method includes random choices, the problem is solved five times, and the average gap is calculated using Eq.  From the results, it can be noticed that the proposed hybrid method and The following section describes the sensitivity of the solution to variations in its parameters. The objective of the study is to view the effect of different parameters on the production schedule. Population size is one of the major parameters of the genetic algorithm. Different population sizes are considered to view the effect of population on the production schedule. The initial population is considered at 25, 50, 75 and 100. Since for larger instances the initial population is set as 200, hence they are not used to perform the sensitivity analysis. The parameter settings used in GA for the study in all instances are set as crossover probability  In this section, the effect of variation of crossover, mutation and parametric diversification rates on the objective function is studied. The instances P4HD and Marvin from the To study the effect of crossover probability  To study the effect of mutation probability  To study the effect of probability for parametric diversification  In the past, researchers have used a singular parametric function for blocks with positive block economic value, i.e., the arcs connected to the source. This parameter allows generating a series of nested pits within the ultimate pit In this hybrid method, weights for both the source and sink arc are considered to generate the production schedule. The weights in the source and sink nodes allow the quantity of material extracted in each period to be controlled. Two datasets are solved to compare the effect of the method when the weights for the source and sink nodes are considered and when just the weight of the source node is considered. As mentioned in the previous section, the instances P4HD and Marvin from the  In the proposed hybrid method, the problem is solved in stages. The problems for all time periods can be solved together, but solving all the periods adds more complexity. For the production scheduling problem, the operational constraint has to be satisfied for each period. If the weights change the schedule in the initial periods, the entire solution is affected by the change, and a small change can render the solution infeasible  The production schedule for an open pit mining operation is essential for determining the return on investment. Production scheduling problems are difficult to solve as they have a large number of blocks (in the order of millions) and are subjected to various types of constraints, especially slope constraints, bounds of mining constraints and bounds of processing constraints. In this paper, a hybrid method using maximum flow and a genetic algorithm based on linear programming to solve the real-world open pit mine production scheduling under uncertain scenarios is presented. The method does not depend on an initial solution and generates the production schedule without any initial assumptions. In this hybrid method, a genetic algorithm is used to control the flow in the arcs to the maximum flow algorithm to generate an optimal production schedule. The performance of the method is assessed by comparing it to the recent solution methods proposed in the literature (for deterministic problems) and using the upper bound solution provided by CPLEX (for stochastic problems). The results indicate that the solution obtained is robust and the average gap generated from the upper bound solution is less than 6% in all the cases except for one. The evaluation of the proposed method on a few deterministic instances (for an example, instances Sm2) shows that the proposed method is not performing as well as some existing methods, which might be due to the following reasons. Since the proposed method is based on the maximum flow algorithm, thus it focuses on extracting more quantities of ore and less quantities of waste at the initial periods, which leads to extraction of less waste in the initial periods and more waste in the later periods, affecting the entire solution. Performance of the method is affected, as there is no lower bound constraints for the deterministic problems, to pushes the method to extract more waste material during each period. The interesting feature of the proposed solution method is its flexibility. The method can be easily adapted to solve for a deterministic model or any uncertainty modeling approaches and additional scheduling constraints. Future research will be devoted to solving a more complex version of the problem with other sources of uncertainty, additional operational constraints, multiple destinations, introducing stockpiles and cut-off grade optimization. We are also interested in improving the performance of the model by using different computer-programming languages. No author associated with this paper has disclosed any potential or pertinent conflicts which may be perceived to have impending conflict with this work. For full disclosure statements refer to