Results from a comparative study on the detection of organic collectors by TOF-SIMS, vacuum ultraviolet surface analysis by laser ionization with TOF-SIMS detection (VUV SALI TOF-SIMS) and VUV SALI with laser desorption (VUV TOF-LIMS) are reported. The study was carried out on a PHI 7200 TOF-SIMS instrument upgraded with two lasers: one for laser desorption and another one for VUV laser postionization. A systematic analysis of the laser desorption process lead to a set of optimized desorption parameters and desorption of molecules with a controlled level of fragmentation. The recorded spectra of organic collectors by VUV SALI with laser desorption are characterized by strong parent peaks and simpler fragmentation patterns, which allow for easy molecular identification. Advantages and limitations of the three techniques for analysis of organic collectors on mineral grains are discussed.The ability to analyze organic surface modifiers on mineral surfaces at low concentration levels used in commercial full scale plants facilitates the understanding of the interaction of different reagents with minerals and is important in optimizing mineral beneficiation A PHI 7200 TOF-SIMS instrument was upgraded with two additional laser sources for laser desorption and postionization allowing three different techniques to be utilized for organic surface analysis on mineral particles: TOF-SIMS, VUV SALI TOF-SIMS, and VUV SALI with laser desorption (VUV TOF-LIMS) ( VUV SALI TOF-SIMS is an analytical technique that utilizes a laser sources for the ionization of neutrals sputtered from the sample surface. The analytical procedure can be described as a three step process: (i) small amounts of the sample are sputtered by a focused pulsed ion beam; (ii) the sputtered neutral species are non-selectively ionized by VUV laser radiation and finally; (iii) the resulting photoions are mass analyzed in a time-of-flight mass spectrometer. In the VUV TOF-LIMS approach the first step in this procedure is replaced by a soft laser desorption of neutral molecules with minimum fragmentation. Pulsed Cs The laser desorption source for VUV TOF-LIMS is provided by the second harmonic ( Decoupling the ionization and desorption steps allows more flexibility, control and quantification of the analysis and enables clearer investigation of the sputtering/desorption and ionization processes themselves. A further advantage is that matrix effects are greatly reduced relative to TOF-SIMS analyses. High neutral sputtering/desorption rates combined with the high ion yield of photoionization and high ion transmission of the TOF mass spectrometer are expected to deliver very high sensitivity for the two-step approach. The TOF-SIMS spectra of organic collectors Once it was determined that ion beam sputtering is impractical for VUV SALI TOF-SIMS analysis of organic collectors, two major questions became apparent, namely: is there an alternative route for more efficient delivery of unfragmented molecules into the gas phase, and secondly, can the VUV postionization approach meet our expectation for predominantly parent molecular detection? In order to differentiate the channels for fragmentation (sputtering versus postionization step) the experiments were repeated at different VUV output powers. No difference in fragmentation patterns were observed at different VUV outputs. The ability of the VUV SALI approach to detect intact organic molecules in the gas phase was confirmed by VUV SALI detection of sublimed organic collectors. For that purpose a fresh sample of commercial organic collector in water solution deposited on a Si plate was introduced into the test chamber. VUV SALI TOF spectra were recorded without ion beam sputtering. The corresponding spectra of ammonium–dicresyl–dithiophosphate are shown in Laser desorption is an alternative to ion sputtering used for delivery of neutral molecules into the gas phase The results of this study demonstrate that for analysis of organic collectors on mineral surfaces the two-step process of laser desorption and subsequent VUV laser postionization can provide better detection of unfragmented molecular ions. A systematic study of the laser desorption process was carried out that lead to a set of optimized desorption parameters and the desorption of neutrals with a controlled level of fragmentation. The recorded VUV TOF-LIMS spectra of organic collectors when compared to the TOF-SIMS spectra are characterized by strong parent peaks and simple fragmentation pattern, which allows for easy molecular identification. Unfortunately the VUV TOF-LIMS technique has its own limitations: it is of limited use with anionic collectors. Experiments with anionic collectors exhibiting strong bonds with mineral surfaces showed that such collectors can be more efficiently detected as negative ions by TOF-SIMS. Since no single technique can provide universal applicability and superiority, the ability of fast switching among these three techniques provides great flexibility in addressing a variety of applications.