Introduction
                  Only few case series of capitellar and trochlear fractures have been reported. Some of them assume that the presence of a posterior comminution (type B according to Dubberley classification) can represent a negative risk factor for treatment and prognosis respect to the type A cases (without posterior comminution). Nevertheless, how this parameter impacts the treatment and the prognosis has never been quantified before.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  All the capitellar and trochlear fractures treated from 2007 to 2015 have been retrospectively reviewed. The presence of posterior comminution on a pre-operative CT-scan was correlated to the surgical technique, to the timing of initiation of rehabilitation and to clinical outcomes.
               
                  Results
                  45 Consecutive patients have been selected, 17 not presenting a posterior comminution (type A), and 28 with posterior comminution (type B). In all the type A fractures a lateral approach (Kocher o Kocher extensile) was used and the fragment fixation was always performed using only screws. Elbow replacement or olecranon osteotomy were performed only to treat type B fractures. Augmented fixations, using plates and k-wires, or prosthetic replacement have been used only in type B fractures. The post-operative immobilization was significantly inferior for type A fracture. Better results have been obtained in type A fractures: mean MEPI score was 86 in type A and 73 in type B, the range of motion was significatively higher in type A both in flexion-extension and in pronation-supination. In type B fractures a significant higher number of complications have been observed (64% vs 29%) along with more reoperations.
               
                  Discussion
                  The study has confirmed that, even without considering the extension of the fracture on the coronal plane, the presence of posterior comminution represents an evident negative risk factor, influencing the surgical approach and treatment, the fixation technique, the post-operative rehabilitation, the clinical outcomes, the complications and re-operation rates.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The analysis of the present case series shows how the treatment and the outcomes can be significantly anticipated based on the presence or absence of posterior comminution. Patients with type A fracture are more likely treated with a Kocher approach, screw fixation, an early rehabilitation is performed. In type A fractures better outcomes and low complications rate are expected.Coronal shear fractures of the distal humerus consist in injuries of capitellum, trochlea, or a combination of both. They are relatively uncommon, representing 6% of distal humerus fractures and 1% of all elbow fractures [ According to literature, isolated fractures of the capitellum are not frequent, involving a part of the trochlea in almost 80% of the cases [ Aim of the present study was to retrospectively evaluate the outcome of a consecutive series of patients treated for acute capitellar and trochlear fracture of the elbow, and clearly identify how the posterior comminution influences the surgical techniques and outcomes. This study was conducted after the approval of the Ethical Committee of the Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (Prot. gen n. 0021391 of Sept 11, 2016). The present study complies with the principles laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients with acute capitellar and trochlear fractures between the ages of 14 and 99 years, treated in our department between January 2007 and December 2015, were retrospectively reviewed. 51 patients were identified and considered for the analysis. The study excluded patients treated over 20 days after the trauma, patients with open injuries, associated ipsilateral upper limb fractures, or those with non compliance to the post-operative rehabilitation program. After exclusion, 48 patients were included for evaluation, of which 3 patients were lost to follow-up. The final evaluation was done on 45 patients. The complete remote and recent patient's history was collected and registered from the patients' clinical records, along with the pre and post operative X-rays and pre-operative CT-scan. Basing on the pre-op CT scan, the lesions were classified according to Dubberley [ Based on the fracture pattern, the surgical approach was selected. A standard Kocher approach, preserving the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL), was the preferred approach in every possible case. A Kocher extensile approach was performed in case of necessity to expose and fix a medial trochlear fragment [ When a lateral approach was preferred, the patient was in supine position with the arm on a hand table. In every case, a tourniquet was positioned at the limb's root, inflated up to 250 mmHg. Independently of the approach used, in every possible case the fragments were fixed using screws as a first-choice treatment ( After surgery, the elbow was immobilized in a lightweight, removable plaster cast, with the elbow at 90° of flexion [ Radiographs were recommended after 2–3 weeks to ensure that the fracture has remained reduced. All continuous data were expressed in terms of the mean and the standard deviation of the mean, the categorical data were expressed as frequency and percentages. The Kolmogorov Smirnov test was performed to test normality of continuous variables. The ANOVA test was performed to assess the between groups differences of continuous, normally distributed and homoscedastic data, the Mann Whitney test was used otherwise. The ANOVA test followed by the Scheffè post hoc pairwise comparison was used also to assess the among groups differences of continuous, normally distributed and homoscedastic data, the Kruskal Wallis test followed by the Mann Whitney test with the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparison was used otherwise. Fisher Chi square test was performed to investigate the relationships between dichotomous variables. Pearson Chi square test evaluated by Monte Carlo Methods was performed to investigate the relationships between grouping variables. For all tests p < 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS v.19.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) The group included 32 women and 13 men, evaluated at a mean follow up of 3.3 ± 2.3 years (range 2–10). The mean age was 52 years (15–88). No patient experienced previous surgeries at the affected elbow. The right side was injured in 28 cases, and in 31 cases the affected side was the dominant. The lesions were classified as Dubberley type 1 fractures (10 total cases: 6 type 1 A and 4 type 1B), type 2 (23 total: 9 type 2 A and 14 type 2B) and type 3 (12 total: 2 type 3 A and 10 type 3B). Twenty-three patients reported associated lesions: 14 LCL, 3 olecranon fractures and 7 radial head fractures (4 Mason grade 1 and 3 grade 2). All the LCL and olecranon injuries have been treated, whereas only the 3 Mason grade 2 radial head fractures have been treated. Within the total of 45 patients, the performed procedure was ORIF in 39 cases, simple fragment removal in 2 cases, 1 TEA and DHH in 3 cases. The lesions were approached by standard anterolateral Kocher approach with LCL preservation in 20 cases, Kocher extensile in 17 cases and olecranon osteotomy in 8 cases. In patients type A group (17 cases), 16 underwent a fixation exclusively with screws, and in one case the fragment was removed. For patients type B the fixation was possible in only 23 cases: 6 with screws, 2 with K wires, 3 with screws and K wires and 12 with plate with free screws, with or without additional K wires. The average MEPI score was 78 ± 11 points (range, 60–100), with 12 excellent results, 15 good and 18 fair results. The MEPI score was statistically related with the lesion type according to Dubberley, showing higher values in lesion type 1 and lower in type 3 (p = 0.015, The presence of posterior comminution was strongly related to MEPI score at follow up, with a mean score of 86 for type A lesions and a score of 73 for type B (p < 0.005, The surgical approach showed to be influenced by the posterior comminution: Lesions type A were approached via standard Kocher in 13 cases and via Kocher extensile in 4 cases, while type B lesions underwent a standard Kocher in 7 cases, a Kocher extensile in 13 cases, and an Olecranon osteotomy in 8 cases (p < 0.001) ( The postoperative rehabilitation was based on the intraoperative assessment of the quality of the bone fixation and of the collateral ligament condition. Patients with type A lesions were allowed to perform an auto assisted arch of motion within the first week in 15 cases, and in the second week in 2 cases, whereas patients with type B lesions underwent a mobilization in the first week in 13 cases and in the second week in 15 cases (p = 0.005). All fractures were declared united at the X ray control within 4 months. Complications observed were reported in Seven total cases underwent reoperation: 2 cases in group A (1 stiffness release and 1hardware removal), and 5 cases in group B (1 isolated stiffness release, and 4 stiffness releases associated to hardware removal due to intolerance or avascular necrosis). Several methods have been described for the treatment of capitellum and trochlea fracture, including conservative treatment, simple excision, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation (ARIF) and elbow arthroplasty (Total elbow or Distal Humerus Hemiarthroplasty) [ The first-choice option is the fixation with screws, and thanks to the great improvement achieved in fixation techniques, nowadays it is possible to perform ORIF in the majority of the cases [ In the present case series, on a total of 17 fractures type A, 16 cases underwent fragment fixation, while only in one case (Kocher-Lorenz fracture: articular cartilage with minimal subchondral bone attached) the fragment was too small and inconsistent and it was removed. On a total of 28 cases of B type pattern, only in 23 cases it was possible to perform a fragment fixation, in 1 case the fragments were removed and four cases required elbow replacement (1TEA, 3 DHH). The epidemiological data of the present case series showed to be consistent with other papers in literature: females are almost three times more affected than men and lesions type 2 and 3 according to Dubberley represent the largest group of patients (35 on a total of 45 patients) [ In the present case series lesions type B are the most represented: a reason might be that our Institution is a second level trauma center, collecting cases from other hospitals. As reported in similar case series in literature [ The results show that rehabilitation protocol was significantly associated with posterior comminution: patients treated for Type A lesions started an early rehabilitation protocol, performing self-assisted mobilization in 90% of the cases in the first week. The majority of type B patients, on the other side, started rehabilitation movements in the second post operative week. Clinical results experienced by patients were in line with literature [ The complication rate is similar to other reported studies ( The main limitation of this study is that is a retrospective case series. The rarity of these fractures makes it extremely difficult to perform studies in a prospective or randomized manner and until now, all the few studies reported in the literature are retrospective case series (Level IV evidence [ The reason might be that these rare fractures represent a wide spectrum of different conditions and, even if classified in the same group, important differences of patient's demographic, type of treatment, surgical approach, and used hardware can influence the outcome. Another limitation is that the assessment was performed without using subjective functional tests. The analysis of the present case series shows how the treatment and the outcomes can be significantly anticipated based on the presence or absence of posterior comminution. Indipendentely from Dubberley grade, type I, II and III, the presented data show that the evaluation of pre-operative imaging allows to define two distinct populations, requiring different surgical approaches, treatments, fixation techniques and post-operative rehabilitation protocols, and reporting different clinical outcomes, complications and re-operation rates. Type A patients are more likely treated with a Kocher approach, screw fixation, early rehabilitation, and better outcomes and low complication rate are expected. In type B patients the surgical approach is usually a Kocher extensile or olecranon osteotomy, the fixation require multiple hardware types and prosthetic replacement can be considered in more complex cases. These patients undergo less aggressive rehabilitation protocols, the expected results are inferior, the post-operative complication and re-operation rates are higher. There are no conflicts of interest associated with this article. This is an unfunded study.