The behavior of coal during carbonization and the quality of coke are mainly governed by the grades of coal charged (type and rank) and the operating parameters, bulk density and heating rate. There are several possibilities to increase the bulk density. Among them, compacting of the whole blend before charging into the oven delivers the highest density and the best possible flexibility in the raw material selection. Significantly higher amounts of poor coking coals and other carbon-containing materials can then be used in coking blends. In this chapter, the methods of the industrial coal compacting are shortly presented, and the most relevant parameters influencing the compacting process and compact mechanical stability are discussed. Best practice applications are shown based on extensive experimental works by using specially designed and manufactured experimental setups. The economic performance of coal compacting is shown in the example of the stamp charging process. Coal compacting is a time and energy consuming process. Coal has to be crushed to a certain particle size distribution before compacting. The new developed compact grinding process, combining crushing and preliminary bulk density increase in only one process step, is presented as an approach to reduce the compacting time and consequently the compacting energy, which contributes to improving operational efficiency.Introduction Meaning of coal compacting in cokemaking Methods of coal compacting in cokemaking Analysis of the coal compacting process Compacting by stamping Experimental setup Energy-density relation Effects of coal properties on stampability Mathematical model of the stampability of coals Compacting by pressing Experimental setup Evaluation of the test results Analysis of the coal cake stability Experimental setup and strength tests Assessment of the coal cake stability Economic appraisal of stamp charging technology Compact grinding Process background High-pressure roller mill Experimental work and results Current and future trends References The aim of the coal compacting in cokemaking is to increase the bulk density of coal to be charged in coke ovens up to a relative material density of about 80%, i.e., a compact density around 1100 A methodology to evaluate the coal compacting behavior by stamping and by pressing and to investigate the compact characteristics regarding strength and stability has been developed. Based on systematic investigations, the effects of different coal and process parameters are analyzed. The influences of type, surface moisture, granulometric and mechanical properties of coals on the densification process are shown. Describing cake density in terms of coal properties for a given coal depending on compacting energy input then leads to a compacting equation with the so-called stampability as the integral model parameter for the stamping process. The compressibility factor is used as the integral model parameter for the pressing process. The cake density can be calculated with the measured compacting pressure and the compressibility factor. To investigate the stamping process, a specially developed microstamping test device is used, consisting of a stamping mould of 100 In the compact grinding process, coal is simultaneously crushed and compacted to so-called flakes with a high density corresponding up to 85% of coal true density. In the mill discharge, a variable portion of these flakes remain stable. Subsequently, the mixture of these flakes and dispersed fine coal provides, compared with conventional crushed coal, a higher bulk density and can be used effectively in the cokemaking process by gravity charging. Feeding this predensified material into the subsequent compacting process, compacting energy need and compacting time can be reduced. Coal for cokemaking is generally characterized by chemical properties (proximate and ultimate analysis); rheological properties (Gieseler plastometry, Sapozhnikov plastometry, etc.); dilatometric properties (Audibert–Arnu dilatometry, Ruhr The “classical” or “premium” coking coals have a balanced composition of “reactive” and “inert” macerals as occurring in those coals which have a medium rank of carbonification. The percentage of volatile matter (VM), as a numerical criterion for the coal rank, is ranging between 18% and 30% on a dry basis. As to their chemical–analytical composition (primary structure), the content in water-ash-free condition of the material is 84%–91% carbon (mostly 89%), 4%–8% oxygen, 1.1%–1.5% nitrogen, and 0.6%–0.9% sulfur. They dispose of a high percentage of alicyclic and unsubstituted aromatic structure units (secondary structure), which are combined by relatively weak bridges. In aspects of the polymeric character of solid materials, the X-ray interferences for these coals show a liquid-type structure with an advanced order structure (tertiary structure). Physical properties of importance for the coking technology are the temperature limits between softening and resolidification, the degasification temperature, and the degasification speed (swelling pressure). The plastic zone should be as wide as possible and the viscosity during the liquid phase relatively high. The maximum degasification speed should coincide with a certain range of viscosity to get a porous coke with a high compressive strength. If the viscosity is too low at high degasification speeds, large bubbles will be formed in the material, thus decreasing the strength of the coke. Even if high-volatile coals have good coking properties, coke produced from such coals alone will not meet the requirements in terms of coke size and strength. Because of their high content of VMs, they will be subjected during coking to relatively high material loss as escaping fission products resulting to a very high stress in the semicoke. This stress has a very fine-patterned cracking effect and leads to an undesirable fine-grained coke structure. A more or less extensive utilization of coal with poor coking abilities and/or high-volatile coals is possible under the following conditions: by blending suitable components, if need be; by adding low-volatile carbon materials such as petroleum coke and coke breeze; by applying adequate grinding methods; by adding coal tar, pitch, and other plasticizing additives and increasing the bulk density of coke oven charge. Stamp-charged coke oven plants mostly use as blendable materials low-volatile coals, low-temperature coke (semicoke), petroleum coke, and coke breeze. The percentage of these blendable materials is to be selected in a way to keep the level of VM in the blend at approximately 26%–32% (on a dry basis). The swelling index in the blend may drop to the range of 3 without adversely affecting the mechanical coke properties. The same refers to dilatations around zero. Thus the application of the stamp charging technology allows economically the use of low-cost poor coking coals as well as noncoking coals and other inexpensive blendable materials in the coking blend. A comprehensive description of the coal blend preparation for cokemaking was given by The potential of using semisoft coals in a stamp charging blend was presented by State-of-the-art methods for increasing the bulk density are the optimization of the size distribution, coal predrying, partial briquetting and briquette blending, and ultimately, stamp charging, i.e., compacting the whole blend before oven charging. Along this scale, the bulk density can be increased from 5% to 35%. Besides the coke quality improvement, the coke oven productivity increases by up to 15%, as shown in Because of higher density, the stamp charging technology can operate the same production capacity with lower number of ovens, thus a lower number of oven pushes per day. The specific coal throughput (kg/m A slight increase in bulk density can also be achieved through enlargement of the oven chamber width. It has been demonstrated by Relationship between oven chamber width (CW) and coking time (t) can be described by the empirical rate n derived from This relationship shows that increasing the oven width aiming to influence the coal bulk density was proven as a nonproductive route of cokemaking. Coal is compacted by stamping, if the so-called stamp charging process in conventional vertical chamber ovens with or without recovery of by-products is applied. Stamping means to compact the coal blend layer by layer to a so-called “coal cake” by drop hammers in a stamping box as illustrated in The coal cake with slightly smaller dimensions than that of the oven is subsequently charged vertically standing into the oven on a coal cake charging plate from the battery This method has been principally known for more than 100 A stamp-charged coke oven plant differs from a so-called top or gravity charged coke oven plant in the coal blend used, in the preparation of charge coal blend, and in the way of the oven charging. In all other aspects, a stamp-charged coke Compacting of the coal by pressing can be applied for cokemaking in so-called heat-recovery ovens. In this case, the oven charge is compacted to a coal cake in a horizontal box in three to four layers by pressing through hydraulic-driven plates. The compacting energy can be additionally, or alternatively, also inserted by vibration. Application of the vibrocompacting in industrial cokemaking is reported by The idea of stamping is the densification of the coal to be charged in the coke oven by periodically falling stamp weights to obtain a compact-formed coal cake. The material is filled in layers into a formwork, whereupon each layer is repeatedly compacted by the mechanical stress that results from the kinetic energy released by stampers. Owing to the fact that the compact is formed in tiers, the air is allowed to continuously escape from the densified volume leading to a more homogenous pore structure of the compact and to a better heat transfer inside of the charged coal during carbonization in the coke oven. The dynamic forces, i.e., the momentum resulting from the impact, induce a wavelike densification, thereby increasing the compact strength. Compared with other agglomeration processes, the densification of particulate materials by stamping allows the formulation of large size cohesive compacts. At the beginning of the densification process the particulate material yields under the stress applied by the stamper, thereby filling the interstitial voids of the particle system with smaller particles. The rearrangement of the particles is supported by the surface moisture which reduces the internal friction. With further strain an elastic-plastic deformation of the particles takes place partly resulting in particle breakage and filling of small pores with the fragments. While the pore volume decreases, the pore saturation with water rises causing a damping effect. Besides the influence of the capillary water on the densification process itself, the mechanical properties of the compact are also determined by the surface water as it serves as a binding agent in the formation of adhesive forces; i.e., within the systematics of process engineering, the stamp coal cake can be classed as an agglomerate which is characterized by the adhesive forces resulting from liquid bridges within the capillary pore system ( Besides a higher flexibility in the coal selection and raw material input, respectively, the efficiency of the stamp-charge cokemaking plant is mainly determined by the operating parameters stamping time and stamping energy for the compaction of the stamp cake. From the technoeconomic point of view, as many oven cycles as possible are required in a given time. Therefore, the stamping process has to be optimized with respect to a minimum process time for stamping a single coal cake. Critical to the final density and the stamping time are frequency, weight, height of the fall, and number of the drop hammers. To sum up, the following three objectives are relevant to the technical stamping process: Realization of a certain cake density, homogeneous within the cake volume, in combination with a maximum mass throughput taking account of the carbonization properties of the coal blend, Guarantee of a sufficient cake strength in terms of operating safety while charging the coal cake into the oven, and Achievement of short stamping time to increase the productivity. These three objectives are visualized together in the so-called criteria space in First of all, the search space is restricted by the constraints for the dependent variables, cake density and strength. Subsequently, the minimization of the stamping time yields the set of optimal solutions, e.g., given by the depicted envelope to the solution space. This set of optimal solutions, within operations research, referred to as the Pareto set, is characterized by the fact that an improvement in one criterion can only be obtained by the degradation of another. For example, a decrease of cake density impacts the cake mechanical stability. Thus, for example, in case of adding more good coking coals in the blend, the cake density has to be newly adjusted to avoid the oven damages caused by high swelling pressure and hard coke pushing. The stamping process for producing a cake of tall oven height with a sufficient mechanical strength and a constant high density can essentially be divided into two subprocesses: Densification of the raw material to obtain a high bulk density, i.e., reduction of the pore volume of the particle system by applying mechanical energy. Implementation of sufficient adhesive forces within the particle system using appropriate bonding mechanisms. At the Department of Mechanical Process Engineering and Solids Processing of the Technical University of Berlin, these subprocesses and their interaction are comprehensively investigated in the last decade ( For the investigation of the stamping process a special microstamping test device was designed, constructed, and used. It contains a stamping mold of 100 Stamping energy per stamping step can be varied by using different fall heights of the stamper. After adjusting the particle size distribution and the moisture, a constant amount of coal is filled into the chamber and is then successively compacted in up to five stamping steps. According to the continuous process in practice, the same gross energy is applied in each individual step, i.e., the height of fall is always adjusted referring to the actual vertical position of the cake's upper side. For quantifying the densification process, the stamper is instrumented with an inductive displacement transducer and a load cell. The simultaneous measurement of the stamper's path and normal force acting on the stamper allows the recording of the variation in time. During the stamping process, the cake density and other derived quantities change, e.g., the cake porosity or the pore saturation index; the cake density (wf For the experimental investigations, several ranked coals C1 to C10 with VM contents from 19.7% to 38.9% (daf) were used. From the movement of the stamper, the effective energy input by stamping can be determined. This is done by performing a mathematical integral calculus of the load-path curve. In this way, the energy effectively inserted into the coal is precisely determined instead of using the theoretical value of the potential energy connected with the vertical Between the cake density and the cumulative mass-specific stamping energy accumulated during the stamping steps, a functional relationship is apparent. The correlation between the coal cake density and inserted stamping energy can be mathematically described by means of the following compacting equation ( Starting from the densification state at the beginning of the stamping process (index ‘0’), which corresponds to the adjusted initial density ρ The stampability K is a dimensionless model parameter describing the slope of the compacting curve, which can be interpreted as the coal bulk's resistance toward compacting. It is calculated from the measured data and the modeling approach by means of the least squares method. The stampability K depends on a variety of material and granulometric properties of coals and the determining parameter for coal cake density and mechanical stability, as illustrated in K varies with: (1) coal rank and blend composition as the stamping process should also depend on the mechanical properties of the coals used; (2) coal surface moisture as moisture has an influence on the densification process by reducing internal friction and by affecting the dampening characteristics—this effect can be further improved by using suitable additives; (3) ash or mineral content; (4) particle size distribution as fine particles add to the densification by filling small pores. To investigate the influence of the coal type on the stampability factor K, stamping tests with eight different coals (C1–C8 in HGI is influenced by the petrographic composition of coal. HGI was developed to find a relationship between petrographic properties and strength of coal particles thus For the execution of each test, further coal property parameters, particle size distribution and moisture content, as well as the height of fall of the stamp and the number of stamping steps were kept constant, so that the only parameter varied was the coal rank characterized by HGI. The obtained data of each test was analyzed as described above to calculate the stampability factor K. A higher value for the HGI is equivalent to a lower resistance to stamping, i.e., a better stampability. The determined values of the stampability factor K are plotted against HGI in During stamping of the coal the rearrangement of the particles is supported by the surface moisture which reduces the internal friction. Water is mainly used as a binder between the coal particles and gives the coal cake its cohesive condition and thus the necessary mechanical strength, i.e., the wet coal cake strength is determined by liquid bridges and capillary forces. While the coal moisture degrades the thermal balance during the carbonization process, the determination of the optimum water content with respect to achieving the envisaged cake density and the sufficient cake stability In several tests led by the author, surface moisture of the coal has been varied in a wide range of 6%–14% moisture content. The tests at otherwise constant test conditions showed a maximum increase in cake density at approximately 10% (   Based on the results shown in The ash content of coal is a crucial parameter for the coking process. Compacting of high-ash coals improves the coke quality. It has to be considered that their compacting can require higher stamping energy insert. Because of the higher density of mineral matter in the coal, stamping coals with higher ash content should result in a higher cake density. These deceptive appearances effect a lower energy demand for stamping to achieve the cake density around 1100 Literature data obtained by early stamping tests ( The achieved results based on tests at three different stamping energy levels are plotted in From the observed proportionalities between the stampability K and the parameters moisture content, particle size distribution (described by the two RRSB parameters fineness d′ and broadness n), and the coal type (described by VM or HGI), an empirical model for the stampability K was formulated for the first time ( The determination of the numerical values of the model parameters allows the calculation of the stampability factor by specifying coal fineness, surface moisture, coal type, and ash content. The stamping energy demand for an aimed cake density or the obtainable cake density by a stamping energy can be calculated. The quantities derived from the tests as described in To gain better insight into the densification process and the inner structure of the coal cake, a computational model based on the discrete element method (DEM) has been set up by It was possible to reproduce the force and displacement pattern of the stamper in response to the viscoelastic properties of the cake using standard DEM bonding and contact models. Furthermore, the rearrangement of particles in response to the compaction by the stamper was tracked by calculating their displacement at the point the stamper hit the coal surface. The latter can also be used as indicators of particle deformation or breakage. By defining control points at different heights, the particle displacement, stress and strain rates, and porosity could be studied. The setup of the DEM model for the coal compaction includes several steps to model the stamping process domain and the material properties of the coal as follows: Representation of the stationary walls of the mould Representation of the stamper as a movable wall in the vertical direction and description of its motion in the gravity field Generation of the coal particle collective (polydisperse bulk with a defined particle size distribution) Selection and calibration of the DEM model (adjustment of microlevel parameters within the mechanistic model to macroscopic measured values) Description of the filling process (generation of a random arrangement of particles followed by deposition in the stamping mould) Description of the compaction process Within this procedure, the calibration of the DEM model is the most crucial step. To model the interaction between particles and between particle and wall, the mechanistic model parameters that describe particle contacts and bonds have to be adjusted. The block chart in The results of simulations were quantitatively compared with data from empirical investigations of the stamping using a laboratory-scale microstamping device. In addition to directly comparable information such as stamper movement, velocity, and force on the stamper, discrete element simulation allows for observation of those properties that are difficult or impossible to obtain by experimental methods. These can relate to particle displacements, contact force networks in the cake structure during compaction, local coordination numbers (average number of contacts per particle), sliding fractions (average number of sliding contacts), and porosities. Porosity can be tracked both as a function of time or cake position (e.g., vertical height). Based on the local porosities obtained from simulations for different heights, the vertical porosity profile was calculated as a function of time during stamping. Furthermore, the bulk porosity was calculated as an average of the local porosities. As is shown in A critical issue with simulating particle compaction by DEM is that the time step must be very small if the velocity of compaction is high compared with the size of particles. This severely increases the wall-clock simulation time, which can only be Ideally, parameters obtained at one level are utilized as input values for simulations using another method and another level of detail. There are some points that can be specifically stressed regarding future work in the simulation-based investigation of coal stamping: comparison between 2-D and 3-D systems with regard to porosity, particle displacements, etc. is not straightforward. Work should therefore continue in the direction of 3-D simulations. Issues related to the number of particles, particle size distributions, and increased complexity of interaction models will put greater strain on computational resources. With this in mind, it is at present still not reasonable to completely rule out 2-D simulations. Because of the restriction in the number of particles, the cell filling degree in simulations was not identical with the experimental trials. If possible, simulations should perform the same filling degree as in experiments. An alternative approach could be to perform laboratory tests with filling degrees in better coherence with simulations. As in the technological process, the coal charge is filled into the stamping machine in layers, and it would also be interesting to conduct a simulation of filling and compacting in several layers and investigate the potential effect of layering on the cake stability. For modeling the stamping of coal cakes on full-scale industrial production, i.e., with a mass of up to 50 tons and more, the description of individual particles as in the DEM approach is not feasible. Instead, particle-based continuum methods, e.g., the smoothed particle SP method, could be an interesting option. To describe different facets of the stamping process, a hierarchical approach to modeling and simulation, which incorporates different numerical methods corresponding to the number of particles, is useful. A general task that is not restricted particularly to the stamping process is how to formalize the model calibration step using multiple parameters simultaneously. The solution must couple the iterative procedure as described by For the investigation of the compacting process by pressing, a hydraulic pressing device has been developed ( For a compacting test, a sample of 1 The results obtained with two different ranked coals are shown in As a comparison of the stamping diagram in This formula is in line with the pressure-density correlation described by Because of the small quantity of the coal sample in the used laboratory-scale test device, achieving a cake density around 1000 Pressing results with variation of the moisture content at a moderate pressure of only 700 For the investigation of the mechanical strength properties of the stamped coal cakes as well as of pressed ones, a specific strength tester has been developed, combining the For compressive strength tests, the coal cake is placed between two steel plates and is loaded until the maximum force f   With increasing cake density, the compressive strength continuously rises up to values of approximately 400 The measuring equipment comprises a bidirectional load cell with a maximum load of 5 For measuring the tensile strength, the upper and lower part of the coal cake is mounted under preload between steel plates. The upper and lower parts of the cake are then pulled apart until the two parts are separated ( Since the load cell is under tension, the force shows negative values. When the turning point is reached the coal cake collapses and the force settles on a constant value, which represents the weight of the clamp and the upper part of the coal cake. Data obtained by shear force measurements under variation of normal force deliver the development of the shear stress depending on normal stress. Shear stress determined without normal load is the cohesion. Plotting shear stress versus normal stress results in the yield limits. With an increasing number of stamping steps, i.e., by increasing the stamping energy, the strength also increases, recognizable from the shift of the yield limit to generally higher values. Cohesion increases as well as the tensile strength, which can be read from the intersection of the yield limit with the axis of abscissas (compressive strength by definition takes positive values) with the increase of stamping energy, i.e., stamped cake density. As it can be seen from the similar slopes of the yield limits, the angle of internal friction as a material-specific parameter does not vary much with the number of stamping steps. As the necessary cake density is determined by the requirements of the coking process, the development of mechanical strength in turn depends on the densification process. The knowledge of the yield limit as a function of the achieved cake density is the basis for assessing the risk of mechanical failure. The mechanical strength significantly increases with increasing cake density, as one parameter besides others that affect the strength, as number of particle contacts, moisture, etc. To develop a quantitative criterion for preventing mechanical failure of the In plotting the test results showing the linear correlation between measured shear stress versus normal stress and in applying the Mohr–Coulomb Breakage Hypothesis ( Based on the tests on the densification behavior and cake strength for a given coal, the stability criterion of a coal cake with the required height h The normal stress of the cake given by its own weight should be lower than the maximum compressive strength of the cake. The stability criterion of the cake results in: For correctly stamped coal cake, the friction angel amounts to 50° Where: h The width of the coal cake (cw) is not contained in Since several decades, world market price of high-volatile poor coking coals was by 55 US-$ per ton and more lower than of so-called premium coking coals, which are normally needed for blast furnace coke production in gravity charging ovens. Generally, approximately 75% of coke production costs are spent for raw material. Thus, effort to reduce the raw material costs is an important economic task in coke production. In case of an assumed coke oven plant with the annual coke production amounting to about 1.25 As far as investment cost comparison is concerned, the stamp-charging coke oven plants are high, although the investment costs for machine equipment are more expensive; however, the total investments are not higher than for a conventional top-charging coke oven plant because stamp charging requires lower investment for coke oven battery. Details are given in Additional operating cost saving could be realized through reducing the stamping energy demand and increasing the productivity of the coke oven plant by shortening the stamping time. The innovative approach of compact grinding, simultaneously grinding, and partly compacting of the coal blend in only one process step can deliver the stamping machine with feed of higher bulk density—than the usually operated hammer mills—enabling the abovementioned economic effects. Compact grinding of coals means the simultaneously grinding and compacting of the coal yielding a mixture of fine dispersed coal and compacted coal flakes in the mill discharge on a single pass without any preliminary crushing and subsequent classification or recycling. Compact grinding is based on use of the high-pressure roller mills (HPRMs). Thereby the coal is crushed through interparticle comminution, and the crushed coal is partly compacted to so-called flakes of high density due to high pressure applied between two rolls. A variable portion of these flakes with a high density corresponding up to 85% of coal true density remain stable. Compact grinding provides a high bulk density and can be used effectively in any cokemaking process and also instead of the partial briquetting and briquette blending techniques ( Since the introduction of roller presses into grinding technique according to a patent of Discharged flakes reexpand depending on the more or less elastic-plastic behavior of the material and become the flake density ρ The nip angle corresponding to the aimed flake density α(ρ The height of the pressure zone h Under the constant conditions of the process, the obtained fineness and the flake density depend on the coal characteristics factor k (HGI). To investigate the suitability of the material-bed comminution in the roller gap of an HPRM and to develop the compact grinding process, subsequently, several pistons and die tests with a hydraulic press, laboratory-scale HPRM, and semiindustrial-scale HPRM have been carried out. Six coals (C1 to C6, see In tests with a semiindustrial HPRM, bulk densities up to 860 Increasing grinding pressure leads generally to higher flake density as shown in Analyzing the effect of the coal characteristics described with HGI, Through product particle size analysis after deagglomeration of the flakes, the simultaneous grinding effect can be demonstrated. The stability of the flakes is an important aspect for the success of compact grinding. It depends mainly on their density and on binding forces induced by coal surface moisture due to liquid bridges and capillary forces. The stability criteria of the flakes can be described in a similar manner to methodology for compacted coals as presented in In the range T Coal compacting before carbonization is the key to utilize significantly higher amounts of poor-coking coals and other carbon-containing materials in coking blends. Depending on the applied coke oven design, coal compacting can be carried out by stamping or by pressing. Through the possibility of using low-cost coals and other carbonic materials for coke production, coal compacting contributes to a higher economic performance of the related industries. The aim of the compacting process is to form a coal cake with homogenously high density generating high-quality coke and sufficient mechanical stability for a trouble-free operation. To ensure that in this chapter the most significant parameters and their interrelation are investigated, test methods are presented and empirical mathematical models developed. For a better understanding of the compacting process, application of the modeling and simulation methods such as DEM and FEM as well as the development of the on-line coal cake monitoring systems are essential. Derivation of more alternative carbon blendable materials and reduction of the compacting energy demand through improving coal handling systems by using compact grinding technology are important approaches for future development to increase the economic efficiency of coke production.