In this study the removal of the metallic contaminants like Cu, K, and Fe commonly found on the wafer surface after scrubbing which is widely used as a post-chemical mechanical polishing(CMP) cleaning technique are investigated by remote hydrogen plasma and UV/O3 cleaning techniques. Our results show that metal contaminants including Cu, K, and Fe can be effectively removed by a hydrogen plasma or UV/O3 cleaning technique, if it is performed under optimum process conditions. In the remote plasma H2 cleaning contaminants removal is enhanced with decreasing the plasma exposure time and increasing the rf-power. The optimum process conditions for the removal of Cu, K, and Fe impurities existing on the wafer surface are the plasma exposure time of 1min and the rf-power of 100W. The surface roughness decreased by 30–50% after the remote plasma H2 cleaning. On the other hand, the highest efficiency of Cu, K, and Fe impurities removal was achieved for the UV exposure time of 30s.
                  The removal mechanism of the metallic contaminants like Cu, K, and Fe in the remote plasma H2 and the UV/O3 cleaning processes is as follows: the metal atoms are lifted off when the SiO∗ is removed by evaporation after the chemical or native SiO2 formed underneath the metal atoms react with H+ and e− to form SiO∗.As the device density on a chip increases, the metal interconnection density also increases. Thus, the interconnections occupy a large portion of the chip and they contribute to increasing interconnection related propagation delays. The solution to these problems is the use of a multilevel interconnection scheme where interconnections are made through vias in the different dielectric layers isolating various levels of interconnections. For such a scheme to work it is important that each level be flat so that lithography and patterning can be precise to allow vertical interconnections to be made. The key to this requirement lies in the minimization of the exposure field depth when defining sub-half-micron features To make the CMP process successful, it is important to establish a good post-CMP cleaning process: removing not only slurry and particles but also metallic impurities from the polished wafer surface and in some cases removing the damaged top surface layer if necessary In this paper the experimental results for the removal of the metallic contaminants like Cu, K, and Fe, which exist on the wafer surface after the mechanical cleaning process like scrubbing, using the remote plasma H  In the remote hydrogen plasma cleaning samples were positioned 20 In the UV/O The Si wafers treated with remote hydrogen plasma and UV/O  The most common impurity existing in the vacuum chamber is water vapor. It is adsorbed by the chamber wall when the chamber door is open and then closed or adsorbed by wafer surfaces. The water vapors on the chamber wall or wafers are desorbed by the downstream of hydrogen plasma and ion bombardment. The desorbed water vapors are thermally dissociated into O, OH, and H radicals. The metal molecules removed from Si wafer surfaces react with the O and OH radicals to form metal oxides. Thus, the Si wafers are recontaminated from the removed metallic contaminants. Surface roughness is generally measures of both plasma damage and removal of particulate and film type contaminants but these two factors are contrary to each other in view of the influence on surface roughness. If the rf-power in plasma cleaning is too high, Si atoms at the surface of the silicon substrate will be etched away and thus the surface will be roughened (surface roughness will increase) because the etching is not uniform. Nevertheless, if particulate and film type contaminants including metallic oxides are removed by plasma cleaning, surface roughness will decrease. The impurity concentrations represent the concentrations of all types of impurities including atomic, molecular and ionic types of metallic impurities as well as particulate and film type impurities, whereas surface roughness is not related with atomic, molecular and film type impurities but with particulate and film type impurities. Therefore, there is no direct relationship between surface roughness and impurity concentrations. The AFM analysis results in the  According to the AFM analysis results in In the dry cleaning process, the removal mechanisms of metallic impurities may be classified into four types: (i) converting into the volatile compounds by a chemically reactive species; (ii) lifting-off during the removal of underlying material; (iii) sputtering-off by the accelerated species and (iv) evaporating under elevated temperatures. The mechanisms (iii) and (iv) are excluded because there are no accelerated species by the sputtering system and no elevated temperature processes. The removal mechanism of Cu, K, and Fe impurity atoms is considered to be mechanism (ii) of these four types. The details of the mechanism are proposed as follows: the states or compositions of the hydrogen plasma itself should be briefly explained before discussing the removal mechanism of metallic impurities. It is known that hydrogen plasma is in a gaseous and electrically neutral state containing the electrons, the charged ions (positive and negative) and the neutrals (atoms and molecules), and is initiated by the electric fields which are produced by either direct current (dc) or alternating current (ac) power supplies. In this study, a typical ac frequency of excitation is 13.56 Chemical SiO   In this study the removal of the metallic contaminants like Cu, K, and Fe which are commonly found on the wafer surface after CMP processes is investigated by remote hydrogen plasma and UV/O The removal mechanism of the metallic contaminants like Cu, K, and Fe in the remote plasma H