We report a case of fractured occipital condyle caused by minor trauma accompanied by light pain on palpation at the lateral cervical trigonum. A 15-year-old boy complained of nuchal pain, particularly pain on palpation at the left lateral cervical trigonum in the absence of neurologic deficits after head deceleration trauma. Computed tomography demonstrated a unilateral nonluxated fracture of the occipital condyle. Owing to consequent immobilization by means of cervical orthosis, pain disappeared after the first 48 hours. Follow-up examination 4 weeks later showed no neurologic deficits. The boy had no severe impairment of movements at the cervical spine.The presence of an occipital condyle fracture after head injury is seldom seen, especially when diagnosed in the absence of neurologic deficits, or even worse, if it is presented in childhood with nonspecific complaints. A 15-year-old boy was playing on a carousel with his classmates in the schoolyard. While driving around, he lost hold and hit sandy ground with the left side of his head. Trauma was reported as an axial torsion movement. At the scene of the accident, the boy had his cervical spine immobilized by a stiff-neck collar (Laerdal Medical GmbH & Puchheim, Germany). No initial loss of consciousness or signs of neurologic deficits were observed. At the emergency department, the boy reported a progressive pain in the neck as well as at the left cervical trigonum after palpation. He kept his head in a fixed position. Subsequent neurologic examination showed no abnormalities. Computed cranial tomography (CT) excluded intracranial signs of trauma. An axial spiral CT scan (1.25-mm slice thickness) with high-resolution algorithm gave hints of irregularity of the craniocervical junction. Two-dimensional reformation of the craniocervical junction and the remaining cervical spine showed a fracture of the left occipital condyle without dislocation of the fragment ( The young patient was discharged after 5 days without any neurologic signs and was prescribed the cervical Miami J Collar for 4 more weeks. At follow-up examination 4 weeks later, the boy was still in good condition without any deficits. Pain in the neck occurred intermittently after mindless movements and disappeared fast. A CT scan showed a reorganization of fracture fragments. We decided to remove the orthosis. Fracture of the occipital condyle is often reported to be an unusual lesion compared with other described injuries of the human spine. An incidence of 4.2% was found in autopsies of fatal traffic accident victims The clinical presentations vary from absence of neurologic deficits to lower cranial nerve palsies. These palsies could be with delayed presentation In most cases, patients were older than 21 years. Hence, we lack information concerning the presence of occipital condyle fracture in children or in adolescent patients. There are some cases reported in younger patients who were also involved in severe accidents like older persons In our case, the young boy had no neurologic deficits. Based on the classification of Anderson and Montesano, this fracture is categorized as type I ( In case of unexplained posttraumatic neck pain, especially in the absence of neurologic deficits and nonspecific complaints, the craniocervical junction should be assessed by CT scan even in young patients with minor trauma.