The less predictive nature of alkaline cyanide leaching, owing to its complex functional relationships, render most processing plants unproductive and subsequent shutdown. In this work, the mechanism and kinetics of alkaline cyanide leaching of the two refractory flotation gold concentrates and their bio-oxidised products, taken as surrogates, have been investigated under isothermal, batch conditions, together with a review of the cognate literature. Specifically, the influence of ore mineralogy, pH modifier (caustic soda and quicklime), agitation rate (600–1000 rpm) and time on the leaching behaviour has been studied at 30 °C and pH 10.5 ± 0.2 over 8 h period. The results showed that cyanide leaching of the refractory flotation concentrates did not significantly alter the ore mineralogy, regardless of the pH modifier deployed. In case of jarosite-free bio-oxidised product, gypsum and bassanite phases present were leached out completely whilst only bassanite was leached out from jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised product upon deploying caustic soda as pH modifier. Unlike the caustic soda, bassanite was not leached from the jarosite-free and jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised products when quicklime was used to modify the pulp pH. In addition, increasing the agitation rate did not show any impact on the rate and yield of leaching the flotation concentrates. On the other hand, the rate and yield of leaching the bio-oxidised products increased with increasing agitation rate in an ore-type dependent manner. The gold leaching rates were greater within the initial 60 min than the later 420 min. The use of quicklime generally reduced the gold leaching rates compared with the caustic soda, however, certain variations, dependent on the ore mineralogy were observed within the initial 30 min. The leaching kinetics and mechanism of the flotation concentrates followed a chemical reaction controlled, shrinking core model whilst their corresponding bio-oxidised products followed a porous layer diffusion controlled, shrinking core model, both in a two-stage manner. The observed gold leaching rates were ~ 3–4 orders of magnitude lower than those reported for some sulphidic and oxidised gold ores, reflecting the refractoriness of the ores under investigation. The findings highlight the pivotal role complex, refractory ore mineralogy and its variation, pretreatment, process chemistry and applied mechanical action play in judicious manipulation and control of gold leach behaviour and extraction efficacy.Alkaline cyanide leaching is a conventional hydrometallurgical technique that involves selective leaching of gold (Au) from host ores using cyanide, a universal gold ligand, in a stepwise oxidative and complexation manner (Eq. Previous studies have shown that, the alkaline cyanide leaching efficacy of gold ores is mostly defined by: (1) gold leach-site availability; (2) gold-gangue mineralogy/chemistry; (3) degree of lixiviant (cyanide, oxygen and alkali) reactivity; and (4) process variables (e.g., agitation rate, feed particle size, ore mineralogy, temperature and time) ( In an attempt to satisfy the current, sustainable environmental and economic imperatives, benign gold ore bio-cyanidation and bio-treatment of mine effluents (ASTER™ process) have been developed ( Pre-treatment techniques (e.g., bio-oxidation (BIOX®) and pressure oxidation) are integrated into process routes to enhance gold extraction from refractory ores. These methods are designed to eliminate specific refractory causing components of the ores and render the gold-sites readily available for leaching ( Despite the numerous benefits of bio-oxidation, it may also result in intractable challenges such as unresolved preg-robbing problems of ores, high cyanide (CN-) consumption and formation of refractory secondary sulphate minerals ( Conventionally, the desired alkalinity of the gold cyanide leaching system is achieved using lime (CaO) as the pH modifier. It is not very clear how the associated high calcium concentration due to the lime and sulphate minerals act synergistically or antagonistically at high pH (~ 10.5) to influence the gold extraction rate and yield ( In this work, the mechanism and kinetics of alkaline cyanide leaching of two refractory flotation concentrates and their bio-oxidised products have been investigated at 30 ± 2 °C as surrogates for the increasing complexity of the currently available ores. Specifically, the influence of ore-mineralogy, pulp Eh, pH modifier (quicklime, CaO against caustic soda, NaOH), agitation rate (600–1000 rpm), particle size distribution and time on the leaching behaviour have been studied, in tandem with the review of the relevant literature. The following key research questions are addressed. What relationship exists between ore mineralogy/chemistry and cyanide leaching behaviour of gold from the selected flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products? How does gold extraction performance by cyanide leaching vary with leaching time, pulp mineralogy/chemistry, agitation rate and pH modifier? How do refractory secondary sulphate minerals specifically influence the gold extraction efficacy? Which mineral phases and/or chemical species largely account for reagent consumption during alkaline cyanide leaching of gold from the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products? What leaching mechanisms and kinetics may be established for cyanide leaching of gold from the selected flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products? How does pH modifier impact on the gold leaching mechanisms and rates? What learnings may be generalised for alkaline cyanide leaching of refractory gold ores and concentrates? Two flotation concentrates and their biologically oxidised products, obtained from the Ghanaian gold province, were employed in this investigation (due to confidentiality agreement, the name of the operating mine from which the samples were outsourced cannot be disclosed). Previous characterisation studies on these samples showed that ( The gold head grade of samples FL, FH, AL and AH are ≈17, ≈28, ≈23 and ≈38 g/t. Both microscopic and sub-microscopic gold particles were observed in all samples. In addition, similar gold liberation statistics were also observed for the flotation concentrates. All the investigated samples are polydispersed with BET specific surface area of 2.9, 2.1, 1.8 and 3.0 m 480 min leach tests were carried out on 80 g of the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products in 149 cm Furthermore, the pulp pH was maintained constant by a Metrohm auto-titrator using quicklime (CaO) and caustic soda (NaOH) as the modifier. Slurry samples were periodically taken (0, 30, 60, 120, 240, and 480 min). The leached solid residues for samples FL, FH, AL and AH were referred to as FLC, FHC, ALC and AHC, respectively, when quicklime is used as the pH modifier. Similarly, when caustic soda is used to modify pH, they are referred to as FLN, FHN, ALN and AHN, respectively. The solution and solid samples were analyzed using inductive coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS), and fire assay with ICP-MS finishing. Cyanide speciation in solution was also accomplished by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with ICP-MS. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed to establish the crystallographic characteristics of the solids before and after alkaline cyanide leaching. Scintag ARL X'tra diffractometer equipped with XPowder search/match software for mineral identification was employed. The XRD patterns were collected on powdered samples in θ/2θ scanning mode using Cu Kα (λ = 1.54056 Aͦ) generated at 40 kV and 30 mA. The scanning speed was 1° per min between 2° and 90° 2θ. Bulk chemical characterisation of the samples were achieved using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF)/laser ablation mass spectroscopy. Samples for XRF were oven dried (105 °C) before analysis. Glass bead for laser ablation was cast from 12:22 sample to flux, 4% lithium nitrate ratio. Gold head grade was determined by fire assay with ICP-MS finishing. The particle size distribution (PSD) of the mineral samples, before and after alkaline cyanide leaching, was determined by laser diffraction (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). The measurements were carried out in de-ionised water at room temperature (25 ± 0.5), with 5 min ultrasonication to ensure good dispersion of the particles. The specific surface area of the samples was determined by a 5-point N To establish and elucidate the mechanism for the alkaline cyanide leaching of the flotation concentrations and bio-oxidised products, the reaction kinetics data were fitted to the shrinking core models where the following steps are assumed to apply ( Transport (volume diffusion) of reactants (i.e., O Chemical reaction at the reaction site; and Transport of species/reaction products away from the reaction site through the porous layer and boundary layer to the bulk solution. The different mathematical expressions employed, representing the stepwise rates are summarized in Eqs. Eqs. Changes in the mineralogy and chemistry of the leach solid feeds and products after alkaline cyanide leaching is very important in understanding, in the first hand, some of the chemical interactions occurring in the leach system. The mineralogy and chemistry of the leach feeds and solid residues are reported in All the investigated leach feed ores are indicated to be mineralogically complex. The predominant minerals in the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products include quartz, muscovite, ephesite, chamosite, illite, albite and rutile. Larnite was also observed in the flotation concentrates yet absent in the bio-oxidised products. The major difference between the two flotation concentrates is the predominance of dolomite and apatite in samples FH and FL, respectively. For the bio-oxidised products, the presence of jarosite in sample AL marked their differences. In addition, gypsum and bassanite were observed in the two bio-oxidised products as secondary minerals. Subsequent to alkaline cyanide leaching, all the mineral phases observed in the leach feeds of the two flotation concentrates (FH, FL) were also noticeable in their respective leached solid residues (FHN, FLC, FLN). No significant changes in mineralogy were observed when the pH modifier was changed from quicklime to caustic soda ( Unlike the flotation concentrates, some mineral phases in the leach feeds of the bio-oxidised products were absent after alkaline cyanide leaching ( It is evident from the results that although similar minerals were found in both bio-oxidised products, different mineralogical response to alkaline cyanide leaching were observed. The different reactions of the mineral phases also varied with the alkaline cyanide leaching parameters (e.g., pH modifier deployed). For instance, it was expected that the interactions of gypsum and bassanite in both bio-oxidised products should be the same for a given parameter used for the leaching process. On the contrary, gypsum and bassanite were sometimes leached in some ores and other times not leached. This is indicative of some of the trends occurring during commercial treatment processes where little attention is given to the small changes in the ore properties, leading to significant reduction in gold extraction. Gypsum and bassanite minerals have been previously reported as generally soluble in aqueous solution ( The chemical composition of the leach feeds and solid residues, using caustic as pH modifier, showed decrease in some chemical species (Ca, S, As, Mn, Zn, Ni, Au) whilst others were unnoticeable ( The evolution of pulp particle size distribution (PSD) and BET surface area with time at agitation rate of 600 rpm during alkaline cyanide leaching of gold was investigated. The results are summarized in The BET specific surface area, on the other hand, showed significant increase in the surface area of the bio-oxidised flotation concentrate after alkaline cyanide leaching using NaOH as pH modifier ( To understand the relationship between the different ore mineralogy, pH modifier types, leaching time and gold extraction efficacy, the concomitant solution gold concentrations were analyzed over the 480 min batch leaching time. The unnormalised and BET surface area normalized gold recovery curves are presented in Generally, reaction time, ore mineralogy and pH modifier type had pronounced impact on the gold leaching rate and yield. Rapid gold leaching behaviour was observed for both the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products within the initial 30–60 min ( From It was evident that all the investigated samples displayed 10–20 wt% lower gold yield after 480 min of cyanide leaching using quicklime instead of caustic soda as pH modifier ( An interesting leaching behaviour observation was also made between the caustic soda and quicklime pH modified pulps. Within the first 60 min, the caustic soda and quicklime modified pulps showed statistically similar leaching rates for the jarosite-free bio-oxidised product. On the other hand, greater leaching rate was observed for the quicklime modified jarosite-bearing product compared with the caustic soda modified pulps. Furthermore, the apatite-bearing flotation concentrate showed greater leaching rate for the caustic soda than the quicklime modified pulp. The cause of these pH modifier-dependent variations in leaching behaviour was not clear, however, it is evident that the leach feed mineralogy played key role. The observations made for the jarosite-free bio-oxidised product and apatite-bearing flotation concentrate are consistent with the formation of Ca-O species on gold particle surfaces, passivating and attenuating the rate of gold leaching and yield. A different interaction may be occurring in the jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised product, limiting the negative impact of the Ca-O species which deposit on the available gold sites. Furthermore, the BET surface area ( The agitation rate was varied to investigate the influence of mass transfer/volume diffusion on the underpinning the gold leaching mechanism and kinetics of the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products. The results are shown in The leaching rates of gold within the first 60 min of alkaline cyanide leaching at variable agitation rates are shown in Overall, the gold leaching rates of the bio-oxidised products were approximately two times greater than those of the flotation concentrates. Leaching rates of similar order of magnitude were observed for the jarosite-free bio-oxidised products, independent of the pH modifier deployed, within the first 60 min (8.10–8.13 × 10 In comparison with previous studies reported by The pulp electrochemical (redox potential) behaviour during cyanide leaching was investigated for the apatite-bearing (FL) and dolomite-bearing (FH) flotation concentrates, and their corresponding jarosite-bearing (AL) and jarosite-free (AH) bio-oxidised products. The reported redox potential comprise measured saturated calomel potentials that has been converted (+242 mV) into standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) potentials, plotted against leaching time (  The initial reductive potential created in the jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised product leach system (ALN) could also be ascribed to the various electrochemical processes occurring in that system. For instance, the oxidative condition created for gold leaching (DO: 7.5 ± 1.0) could also encourage oxidation of ferrocyanide to ferricyanide. This creates a negative potential of approximately −580 mV (pH 10.5; Eq. The results further explained the variable gold leaching rates observed between quicklime and caustic soda for the first 60 min of leaching. At pH 10.5 and 25 °C temperature, aurocyanide complex have been established to occur thermodynamically between ~−400 to +600 mV redox potential ( To establish the influence of specific mineralogy on reagent consumption, the sodium cyanide, caustic soda and quicklime consumption were determined. The results are shown in For the NaCN, attention was mainly given to the NaOH pH modified pulps where approximately linear consumption curves were observed from the beginning of the experiment until the end ( Speciation of cyanide after 480 min of leaching is presented in The negative impact of copper was more pronounced in samples FL, FH and AH whereas iron most significantly impacted sample AL. This is consistent with the redox potential data. For samples FH, FL, AH and AL, the metal ion cyanicides are in the order Cu > Zn > Fe > Ni, Cu > Ni > Fe > Zn, Cu > Ni = Zn > Fe, and Fe > Cu > Ni = Zn, respectively. Subtle leaching of jarosite in sample AL may be responsible for the observed higher iron associated cyanide species. This observation is consistent with studies by The caustic soda consumption during cyanide leaching was in the order AL > AH > FL > FH for the BET unnormalised curves. Very rapid NaOH consumption was observed for all investigated samples within the first 30 min followed by steady gradual increase till the end of the experiment. The higher NaOH consumption in the bio-oxidised flotation concentrates could be ascribed to neutralization reactions underscored by the secondary sulphate minerals such as gypsum (Eq. Despite the possible formation of portlandite (Eq. To determine the mechanism for alkaline cyanide leaching of the flotation concentrates and bio-oxidised products, the experimental data obtained from the batch leaching tests were fitted to the shrinking core (SC) models (Eqs. Based on mineralogical and gold deportment data ( Compared with the caustic soda modified pulps, correlation with noticeable scatter was observed for the CaO pH modified pulps getting to the end of the experiment. This could be ascribed to the significant influence of the Ca(II) species on the gold leaching behaviour, leading to complexity. To confirm the selected model adequacy, the predicted Au wt% recoveries were plotted against the experimental data (  Schematic representation of the mechanism for leaching the bio-oxidised products is shown in The mechanism and kinetics of alkaline cyanide leaching of gold from two refractory flotation concentrates and their bio-oxidised products, obtained from the Ghanaian gold province have been investigated. Specifically, the influence of ore mineralogy, pH modifier, agitation rate and time on electrochemical and kinetic behaviour of the pulps during isothermal batch cyanidation has been studied. Overall, ore mineralogy, pulp pH modifier type, agitation rate and time significantly influenced the gold leaching behaviour, reagent consumption and gold extraction mechanism and kinetics. Unlike the flotation concentrates, the jarosite-free bio-oxidised product showed mineralogical changes where gypsum and bassanite mineral phases were completely leached when caustic soda was used as pH modifier. Only gypsum was leached out when quicklime was used for the jarosite-free product. Contrasting the jarosite-free bio-oxidised product, gypsum was also not leached out from the jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised product regardless of the pH modifier deployed. Jarosite-bearing bio-oxidised product displayed higher sodium cyanide and caustic soda consumption compared with the jarosite-free bio-oxidised product. The quicklime and caustic soda consumptions were similar for all investigated samples. The leaching rate of the initial 60 min was markedly greater than that of the later 360–420 min of the batch time. Furthermore, the quicklime modified pulps generally showed lower leaching rates in comparison with the caustic soda modified pulps. The lower gold leaching rates and yield of the quicklime modified pulp are ascribed to surface nucleation of hydrolysed Ca(II) species. The leaching mechanism and kinetics of the flotation concentrates using caustic soda and quicklime as pH modifiers generally followed chemical-reaction controlled, shrinking core model. However, the kinetics and mechanism of the bio-oxidised products followed the porous layer diffusion rate controlled shrinking core model, both in a two-stage manner. The gold leach rates and final recoveries were about two times greater for the bio-oxidised ores in comparison with the corresponding flotation concentrates, reflecting the relative refractoriness and differences in mineralogy of these four ores. The observed gold leaching rates are noted to be approximately 3–4 orders of magnitude lower than those reported for some sulphidic and oxidised gold ores, underscoring the highly refractory nature of the ores under current investigation. Despite the conventional use of biological oxidation to pretreat refractory gold sulphide ores, key attention must be given to the feed specific mineralogies and their variations in tandem with the prevailing bio-oxidation process conditions and parameters. Whilst the bio-oxidation process aims at enhanced liberation of gold species, certain deleterious secondary mineral by-products such as jarosite may form if favourable reaction conditions prevail. The formation of such products leads to significant passivation of the liberated gold or partially oxidised auriferous sulphides, hence poor leaching rates, recovery and yield. The process of cyanide leaching of gold from real refractory ores is shown to be very complex, comprising several intermolecular reactions leading to gold release and other by-products formation. The findings show that very good knowledge of ore mineralogy, pulp chemistry and associated variations is essential for devising ore-specific customized approaches and process flow sheets for optimum extraction performance and enhanced gold recovery. Financial support from the