Demonstrated is a new method for stamping nanoscale polymeric patches (footprints) onto surfaces. Cationic core-shell nanoparticles with hard polystyrene (PS) cores and soft poly(n-butyl methacrylate) (PB) shells spontaneously adsorbed on glass beads suspended in water. With mixing, the bead-bead collisions removed the adsorbed polymer particles, leaving PB footprints. The footprint density on the bead surfaces mirrored the initial density of adsorbed nanoparticles. The footprint thicknesses, measured by AFM, were 10–20nm. Our motivation for this research was developing nanoparticles that promoted glass bead flotation (i.e. nanoparticle flotation collectors). Whereas the adsorbed nanoparticles did promote flotation, glass beads coated only with footprints gave poor flotation recoveries in spite of the hydrophobic nature of PB. We propose that footprint-coated spherical bead surfaces are too smooth for efficient bead attachment to air bubbles. Janus particles with one hard PS lobe and a soft PB lobe were more strongly adhering and more effective at promoting bead flotation, presumably because of high bead/nanoparticle adhesion. Beyond the flotation application, footprint formation could be a simple approach to modifying dispersed particle surfaces in a wide range of applications.Herein we describe a new method for decorating macroscopic surfaces with nanoscale polymer patches we call footprints. This finding evolved from a fundamental flotation study. Froth flotation isolates high value mineral-rich particles in the froth phase from unwanted gangue materials, making flotation one of the most important unit operations in mineral processing As a completely alternative approach, we have been exploring the potential application of polymeric nanoparticles (latex) as collectors for froth flotation. For mechanistic insights, we have focused on a very simple physical model − the flotation of aqueous glass bead suspensions. Glass is hydrophilic and smooth, pristine glass beads are not efficiently carried to the froth phase in laboratory flotation experiments Typically, we added nanoparticles to a stirred bead suspension for a short “conditioning time” to facilitate the deposition of the cationic polymeric nanoparticles onto the negatively charged glass bead surfaces. Subsequently, a frother (nonionic surfactant) was added and nitrogen was bubbled through the glass bead suspension to give a froth phase. Recently, while exploring the potential advantages of long conditioning times with hard polystyrene nanoparticles, we observed that with extended conditioning times, adsorbed polystyrene particles were removed from the glass bead surfaces With a view to improving flotation performance by increasing nanoparticle/glass adhesion, we prepared two types of more complex nanoparticles: a) core-shell particles (PS-BA), where the core was hard polystyrene (PS) and the shell was soft poly( Sodium chloride (>95%) and ethanol (>95%) were purchased from Fisher Scientific and used as received. Glass beads with an average diameter of 43 Cationic polystyrene-core-poly ( Flotation experiments were performed in a 125 Glass bead surfaces were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JEOL 7000F SEM, JEOL Ltd., Japan). Dried glass beads were placed on a conductive carbon tape and sputter coated with 5 The Janus particles were also imaged by transmission electron microscopy, TEM (JEOL 1200-EX TEM, JEOL Ltd., Japan). A diluted latex sample was placed on a formvar film supported on a TEM grid and was allowed to dry at room temperature. Images were acquired using an AMT XR-41 Side-Mount Cooled 4 megapixel format CCD camera. Glass bead topography was further analyzed by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a BioScope Catalyst BioAFM (Bruker). Images were collected in ScanAsyst mode using SCANASYST-AIR cantilevers (Bruker) with a nominal resonance frequency of 70 The elemental composition of the footprints was measured by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford Instruments) equipped with JEOL 7000F SEM running an Oxford Synergy INCA EDS X-ray microanalysis software. SEM micrographs of the footprint areas of interest for EDS analysis, corresponding spectrum and elemental analysis results are included in the Supplementary Material File (Fig. S1, Fig. S2, and Table S2). The reported elemental weight percentage values are the average of three analyzed footprints. Previously we reported water contact angles on nanoparticle surfaces using three methods: 1) sessile drop measurements on glass slides with a saturated adsorbed monolayer of nanoparticles; captive bubble measurements on never-dried nanoparticle coated glass slides; and, sessile drop measurements on smooth polymer films prepared by solvent annealing the adsorbed nanoparticles In these experiments a bed of glass beads was pushed against a pendant air bubble. the number of beads attached to the air bubble was measured when the bed was retracted In an effort to simulate the attachment of beads to bubbles in flotation, we photographed glass beads impinging on immobilized bubbles One core-shell and two Janus nanoparticle types were prepared with hard polystyrene (PS) and soft poly( Particle hydrophobicity was probed by sessile drop water contact angle measured on glass slides coated with a saturated adsorbed monolayer of nanoparticles. The contact angles, shown in We will show that adding cationic core-shell PS-PB latex to 43 A series of small scale flotation experiments was conducted with each of the three nanoparticle flotation collectors ( For all three nanoparticle types, recovery is high over the first five minutes, whereas it decreases dramatically after long conditioning times. We will show below that although the footprints consist of hydrophobic PB, footprints alone do not promote the adhesion of glass beads to air bubbles. Therefore, the recovery versus conditioning time curves in Abraded nanoparticles accumulated in the aqueous phase as aggregates.  Referring back to The images in the middle row in The smaller Janus particle (PS/PB-92) images (  The elemental composition of the footprints was analyzed by EDS, the spectra are included in the Supplementary Material (Figure S 1, Figure S 2 and Table S 2). The analysis showed that the composition of the footprints was 72  In this section, we compare the air bubble attachment characteristics of two sets of beads isolated from the flotation froth. One sample is nanoparticle PS-PB-356 (Γ With a water contact angle of 91degrees The static bubble pickup experiments ( The overall goal of our research program is the development of nanoparticle flotation collectors for mineral froth flotation separations. For mineral separations, more complex surface chemistries are required to obtain specific nanoparticle deposition onto the desired mineral surfaces. For example, we have shown that imidazole surface groups promote nanoparticle deposition onto pentlandite, a nickel mineral Janus particles should be ideal flotation collectors. One could imagine particles in which the soft lobe is hydrophilic but with surface chemistry designed to selectively adsorb onto and strongly adhere to mineral surfaces, and not to the unwanted gangue particles. The corresponding hard lobe could impart the hydrophobic characteristics required for bubble adhesion. Our results suggest that Janus particles are more effective than core-shell particles of similar size. The Janus particles contained more of the soft, tacky PB adhesive (66% vs 33%, In our initial work with hard (PS) nanoparticle flotation collectors, we proposed that bead-bead collisions during turbulent mixing abrade adsorbed nanoparticles Chapter 5 of van de Ven’s textbook The lower sequence of images in The footprint density on bead surfaces can be high. Based on image analysis of Finally, we propose that the nano-stamping process, driven by bead-bead collisions removing adsorbed soft particles, is a new, simple approach for decorating surfaces with small patches of polymer. Our work involved a hydrophobic polymer, however, it should be possible to produce hydrophilic patches with a suitable soft, tacky, polymer with low cohesive strength. The work described herein is significant as it suggests a new approach for patterning surfaces and because it highlights the importance of nanoparticle abrasion in the overall performance of nanoparticle flotation collectors. The key conclusions are: Footprint formation by abrasion of adsorbed soft-shelled particles is a new, simple way to pattern surfaces. Vigorous, extended (240 Footprint formation is direct evidence for our earlier proposal Hydrophobic footprints, based on hydrophobic poly( Janus particles are superior flotation collectors compared to similarly sized core-shell particles. We propose that the Janus particles are more strongly adhering because more of the soft, sticky polymer is located in the nanoparticle/bead adhesive joint. We thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: