The technique of emulsion ionic liquid membrane (EILM) was used as chemical process for Pb(II) recovery, from nitrate medium, using Aliquat336 as ionic liquid carrier. The Tween20 as a dispersive non-ionic surfactant was used for the emulsion formation. The optimization of the extraction and pre-concentration of Pb(II) was determined by optimizing one parameter at the time. So, several experimental parameters as: carrier concentration, surfactant concentration, time and stirring speed of feed phase, initial concentration and pH of feed phase, were studied. The results showed that the lead ions were extracted at 82.61% by Aliquat336 and recovered at 82.16%, in aqueous solution of the nitric acid, from a feed phase of lead(II) nitrate of 207.2ppm at pH equal to 5.5, in presence of 1% w/w Aliquat336 and 0.5% w/w of Tween20 under 30min of stirring at 210rpm. The tests of separation experiments of Pb(II) and Cu(II) were carried on the basis of the optimal conditions of lead (II) recovery. Thus, the separation factor of lead over copper was equal to 1.30, obtained from their equimolar synthetic mixture. Indeed, the recovery of Cu(II) can be advantageous towards of Pb(II) if the molar composition of Cu/Pb in mixture was of 0.65. Response surface methodology (RSM) using Box–Benheken Design (BBD) was used for the statistical study. So, the reduced cubic of the quadratic model showed that the predicted values were in good agreement with those found experimentally and the parameter of ionic liquid concentration has an important individual effect on the response. Therefore, the recovery of Pb(II) can be predicted at 82.14% with the best desirability of the chosen model under our experimental conditions.Lead is a heavy metal widely used in the metallurgical activities since ancient times and rediscovered at the time of the industrial revolution. It is mainly found in the ores as galena and lead sulfide (PbS). Currently a good part of lead production is based on the recovery of vehicle batteries ( In recent years, the ionic liquids (ILs); called “green solvents”, presented an alternatives to hydrometallurgical processes of metal ions separation where they begin to replace many organic solvents that are expensive, toxic or non-ecological. This was due to theirs characteristics as: zero volatility, good miscibility and solubility of organic and inorganic compounds and low toxicity. It exists as liquid over a wide range of temperatures ( The present work was devoted to the optimization of Pb(II) recovery process by the experimental and statistical study. The experiments of extraction and pre-concentration of lead(II) and copper(II) were realized by Aliquat336 using the technique of emulsion ionic liquid membrane (EILM). The optimization method of one experimental parameter at the time was adopted for determination of the best conditions of lead(II) recovery, from their nitrate aqueous medium. The results were extrapolated on its recovery tests from their synthetic mixture with copper(II). In the second time, the modelling of process was achieved by response surface methodology (RSM) using Box–Behnken Design (BBD). For this, three parameters such as: initial concentration of Pb(II), concentration of ionic liquid and concentration of stripping solution, were considered as factors of quadratic model to predict the optimal recovery of Pb(II). Tricaprylylmethylammonium chloride (Aliquat336) was used without further purification. The non-ionic surfactants used were: TritonX-100 ( The experiments of metal ion recovery were conducted by a mechanical stirring during the equilibrium time of the extraction reaction using a platform agitator; type A Haier (Beijing, China). The study of the pH effect on extraction and pre-concentration of metal ions, was carried out with a pH-meter; type Consort C831 (Turnhout, Belgium). An analytical balance; type Kern ABS (Balingen, Germany), was used in the weighing operation. The experiments of the emulsion formation were carried out by using a homogenizer; type Vortex (Germany) at 2500 An organic solution of 7.5 The emulsion phase (W/O emulsion) was added to a volume of 62.5 The study of recovery process of metal ion was evaluated by the yield of extraction (Eq. The concentration of Aliquat336 was varied in the range of 0.025–3.0% w/w while the quantity of Tween20 surfactant was fixed to 1% w/w. The effect of carrier concentration on the transport of Pb(II) is given in The nature of surfactant is an important parameter because it acts as an emulsifier in phase of the liquid membrane, and it is responsible on the reduction of emulsion swelling and the membrane breakage ( The mass transfer through the liquid membrane was governed by the stirring speed of feed phase which insured the stability of membrane phase ( The solute concentration affects the driving force of metal ion transport and the mass transfer rate through the emulsion liquid membrane ( The initial pH of the feed phase plays an important role in metal ion recovery namely in carrier-mediated transport ( The experiments of separation of metal ions were made from their synthetic mixture. The study was realized on the basis of the optimal conditions of extraction and pre-concentration of Pb(II), obtained previously. The results are given in From Different studies involving lead(II) and copper(II) recovery were carried out by different extraction techniques using different types of carrier and extractant. When comparing our results with those found in previous work, we concluded that our results were promising, where the lead(II) was recovered with Aliquat336 as ionic liquid, using emulsion liquid membrane process. This has been achieved under moderate experimental conditions which are interesting for industrial and ecological scale. In the classical experimental study, the experiments are carried by changing one factor at a time and keeping the other parameters constant. The study is advanced by examining the corresponding results, which involve both wasting material and time-consuming. Response surface methodology (RSM), a relevant tool, is now commonly applied as a solution to explore mathematically the interaction between variables and their effect on one or more response. This philosophy decreased the number of required experiments considerably without overlooking the interactions of variables. Currently, RSM is widely used for the optimization of several studies as: optimization of media, process conditions, catalyzed reaction conditions, oxidation, production, fermentation, biosorption of metals, etc. ( From the experimental study, three factors such as: initial concentration of feed phase, concentration of ionic liquid and the concentration of stripping solution, were chosen as the independent variables and designated as X The statistical study was accomplished by Design-Expert 7 software (trial version, Stat-Ease, Minneapolis, MN, USA). It was used for regression and graphical analysis of experimental data of Pb(II) pre-concentration. The number of experiments required to investigate this study was optimized by BBD. It was 15. Therefore, the experimental sequence was randomized to minimize the effects of the uncontrolled factors. In fact, the center point in the design was repeated three times for estimation of errors and curvature. The experimental points for BBD, shown in From initial overview of BBD matrix, we observed that the maximum, mean and minimum responses were 81.67%, 74.095% and 61.74%, respectively. Indeed, their max/min ratio was of 1.323. So, no mathematical transformation is required. The experimental and predicted values for the quadratic model are given in From the ANOVA for reduced cubic model ( From these results, reduced cubic model was found interesting for statistical study of Pb(II) pre-concentration. Thus, the estimate coefficients of the regression equation are given in From The contour plot for the effect of initial concentration of feed phase and concentration of stripping phase ( The optimum conditions for the lead(II) pre-concentration after their extraction by Aliquat336 using ELM process, were given by numerical optimization tool of design software. The calculation resulted in 10 different solutions taking into account the minimal quantity of carrier, to respect the ecological and commercial interests, and having a maximal pre-concentration of Pb(II). The results of numerical optimization were given in  The actual value of the ith independent variable The actual value at the center point Response at the model center Coefficient of individual variables Coefficient of quadratic effects Coefficient of interaction effects Input variables Quadratic effects of input variables Interaction effects of input variables The initial concentration of Pb(II) ions in feed phase The concentration of Pb(II) ions remaining in feed phase, after extraction The concentration of Pb(II) ions retaining in stripping phase Predicted response of pre-concentration  The step change value A random error The experimental study of recovery process of Pb(II), from nitrate aqueous solution, by the ionic liquid carrier (Aliquat336) using emulsion liquid membrane technique, showed that the lead ions were extracted at 82.61% in ionic liquid membrane, and pre-concentrated at 82.16% in nitric acid solution. This was obtained by optimizing one parameter at the time. The optimal experimental conditions were: [Aliquat336] The authors thank the laboratory of