A comprehensive study on the separation of cesium and rubidium from potassium with 4-tert-butyl-2-(α-methylbenzyl)-phenol (t-BAMBP) from a synthetic brine solution containing 20mg/L Cs, 200mg/L Rb and 5g/L K was conducted. The effects of alkalinity, t-BAMBP concentration, temperature, A/O ratio on extraction were investigated. It was found that the best conditions to extract cesium and rubidium were using 30% t-BAMBP concentration with 0.1M NaOH feed solution alkalinity under room temperature, for example 22°C, at an A/O ratio of 1. Under these conditions, the separation factor of cesium and rubidium over potassium were found to be 139 and 11, respectively. The kinetics of both extraction and stripping were fast with equilibrium reached within 2min. All extracted cesium and rubidium and 93% potassium were stripped with 0.1M HCl at an A/O ratio of 1:1 in a single contact. A batch continuous test with 5 extraction stages was conducted under these conditions. It was found that over 99% cesium and rubidium were extracted with 19.4% potassium co-extracted. The concentration ratios of potassium over cesium decreased from 216 in the feed solution to 42 in the loaded organic solution and that of potassium over rubidium from 22 to 4.3, resulting in a decrease in concentration ratios of potassium over cesium and rubidium by about 5 times. Further work should target to test feed solution containing sodium and to improve extraction efficiency and selectivity of the extraction system.Cesium and rubidium are important rare metals that have a wide range of applications such as for making highly accurate atomic clocks and using as an additive to formate brines for petroleum exploration and as highly efficient catalysts ( Solvent extraction, ion exchange and precipitation have been investigated for the recovery of cesium and rubidium from brine solutions, among which solvent extraction is the most promising method ( BAMBP extracts alkali metals in the order of Cs Study on the recovery of cesium and rubidium using To evaluate the performance of Reagent The synthetic feed solution was prepared by dissolving AR grade chlorides of cesium, rubidium and potassium in deionised water at their nominal concentrations of 20 To determine metal extraction and stripping isotherms, tests were carried out in 100 For the study of extraction kinetics, 50 The tests to determine metal extraction distribution isotherms were carried out with various phase ratios at room temperature with the organic phase containing 30% The organic samples were stripped using 1 Metal extraction alkalinity isotherms with 10% The separation factors obtained at different alkalinities are presented in The effect of Since the separation factor of rubidium over potassium is small and the rubidium extraction is high only at high organic concentrations, it is difficult to completely recover rubidium and separate it from potassium in one SX circuit. The rubidium concentration is only 1/25 of that of potassium and the cesium concentration is only 1/250 of that of potassium, suggesting the difficulty in complete rejection of potassium. Furthermore, as total concentration of cesium and rubidium is low, crowding out the co-extracted potassium in extraction and scrubbing stages is limited. It is suggested that another SX circuit using the same reagent should be added to completely recover cesium and rubidium and completely separate them from potassium. Details are discussed in The effect of temperature on the metal extraction with 10% No comprehensive studies were found in the literature on the stripping of metals from loaded The metal extraction kinetics was determined with the organic solution containing 10% It is essential to completely recover cesium and rubidium at the lowest alkalinity from the economic aspect. It is also noted that it is difficult to completely separate cesium and rubidium from potassium in one SX circuit due to their low concentrations compared to that of potassium and poor selectivity of rubidium over potassium. To choose the right organic concentration to almost completely extract both cesium and rubidium, metal extraction alkalinity isotherms with It was found that complete extraction of cesium can be readily achieved with all three The effect of A/O ratio with the organic solution consisting of 30% The metal extractions and separation factors at different A/O ratios are shown in The rubidium extraction distribution isotherm with 30% Since cesium is more readily extracted than rubidium and its concentration is much lower than rubidium, almost all cesium should be extracted together with rubidium in five stages. To demonstrate almost complete recovery of cesium and rubidium and achieve their maximum separations from potassium at the same time, a five-stage batch continuous extraction test was conducted with the organic solution consisting of 30% The concentrations of the three metals in the organic and aqueous solutions in each stage are presented in If the loaded organic solution were stripped with HCl solution at an O/A ratio of 5:1 with residual acidity of 0.1 The solvent extraction of cesium and rubidium and their separation from potassium in synthetic brine solutions using Further work should target to (1) test feed solution containing sodium although its co-extraction should be very low, (2) improve extraction efficiency and selectivity of the extraction system by modifying the structure of Mr. Nicholas Kelly and Mr. Karl Bunney at CSIRO are thanked for the assistance with GC analysis and AA analysis, respectively. Drs. Keith Barnard and Wensheng Zhang at CSIRO are thanked for reviewing the paper and providing valuable comments. The support and the permission to publish the paper by CSIRO Mineral Resources, Australia, is gratefully acknowledged.