The extraction of copper from aqueous sulfate media into ELMs using the extractant LIX 984N-C was studied. Appropriately characterized emulsions on the basis of viscosity and internal drop sizes were used to study the effect of different parameters on extraction. The effects of stirring speed, surfactant concentration, pH of the external continuous phase, carrier concentration, internal phase stripping acid concentration and initial copper concentration are reported. These results show that LIX 984N-C efficiently extracts copper at low pH values typical of leach solutions. It was found that LIX 984N-C could extract up to 80% copper from aqueous solutions at pH value of 1. Performance of LIX 984N-C was also compared with LIX 84 and LIX 84-I at different pH values. Results indicate that LIX 984N-C could open up new avenues for extraction of copper into ELMs, not only from dilute solutions, but also from sulfuric acid leach solutions.There is general concern to minimize the discharge of hazardous metals in liquid effluent streams. Aqueous streams contaminated with heavy metal ions are frequently encountered from various industrial processes such as mining and smelting, metal plating, and metal finishing also during attempts to remediate soil loaded with heavy metals. Precipitation technique is most commonly used for the removal of metal species from effluent streams. This practice is becoming unpopular because the products obtained are not always of required quality and the process produces a sludge that has to be disposed in a landfill. Solvent extraction is another widely used technique, but it requires large inventory of organic solvent and the metal extractant and becomes inefficient when the metal ion concentration in the effluent stream is low. Emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) first invented by ELMs for metal extraction are made by forming a water in oil (W/O) emulsion, stabilized by a surfactant, the W/O emulsion contains the metal extractant (carrier) in the oil phase and the stripping acid in the internal aqueous receiving phase. This emulsion is then dispersed by mild agitation into a feed phase containing the metal to be extracted. After extraction, the loaded emulsion is separated from the feed stream, demulsification yields an oil phase that can be recycled. Electroplating or crystallization could subsequently recover the heavy metal concentrated in the receiving phase. Removal of copper as Cu Earlier used copper extractants LIX 63, LIX 65, etc. are no longer commercially available. In the present work, the extraction of copper from aqueous sulfate media into ELMs using extractant LIX 984N-C as carrier is reported. The results present an overall idea of the optimal operating conditions for copper extraction into ELMs. Further, the results are compared with those obtained for copper extraction into ELMs using the extractants LIX 84 and LIX 84-I at various pH conditions. The copper extractant LIX 984N-C, supplied by Cognis Ireland, is an equi-volume mixture of LIX 860N-IC (5-nonyl salicylaldoxime) and LIX 84I-C (2-hydroxy-5-nonyl-acetophenone-oxime) in a high flash point hydrocarbon diluent. Kerosene, supplied by Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., having boiling range of 152 °C to 271 °C containing Experimental studies were carried out in the following three stages. Water in oil emulsions were prepared by initially blending the extractant LIX 984N-C and surfactant Span 80 with kerosene to get the membrane phase. The internal aqueous stripping phase (1.5 M H Emulsions were characterized by viscosity and internal drop size distribution. The viscosity of the emulsions were measured using Brookfield cone and plate Rheometer, model LVDV III+CP, at different shear rates. Internal drop size of emulsions were measured microscopically using Olympus microscope model BH-2 attached with an Olympus photo micrographic system model PM-10AD. Copper extraction into ELM was performed in a batch extractor at 30 °C. The extractor was a four-baffled vessel 0.105 m in diameter equipped with a six bladed turbine agitator. The copper feed solutions were synthetically prepared by dissolving CuSO The performance of the extraction depends on the nature of emulsion and the influence of various operational parameters as detailed below. Appropriate characterization of ELMs is necessary to ensure reproducibility of results. The W/O emulsions having internal phase volume fraction When the W/O emulsion is dispersed in the feed phase, the emulsion breaks up into numerous tiny globules to generate a huge surface for reaction and mass transfer. The reaction that takes place at the interface of the emulsion globule and the continuous feed phase can be described by: The metal complex ‘CuR The liberated carrier is free to shuttle back to the external interface to scavenge more Cu In all experimental runs, the internal phase volume fraction of the extracting emulsion was retained at Stirring speed, Preliminary studies showed that a stirring speed of 150 rpm was necessary to keep the emulsion in a dispersed state but even then a film of emulsion remained on the surface of the feed phase. Increasing The dispersion was photographed at definite time intervals and the globule sizes were measured using imaging software. The globule size distribution after 10 min of dispersion that corresponds to almost 80% extraction is shown in Surfactant concentration has an important bearing on the stability of the emulsion. Too little surfactant renders the membrane weak, while an increase in surfactant concentration leads to larger diffusional resistance. Experiments were performed with surfactant concentrations ranging from 1% to 4.7% by weight based on the oil phase. It was observed that, when the surfactant concentration was 1%, there was severe membrane rupture, but increasing the surfactant concentration to 3% resulted in a stable membrane throughout the duration of the experiment with negligible leakage at stirring speed of 160 rpm. Further increasing the surfactant concentration to 4.7% gave similar extraction rates but there was significant swelling of emulsion. Hence, surfactant concentration of 3% was chosen for all further studies. The pH of the continuous phase has a profound influence on the extraction behaviour. The ketoximes, LIX 84, are only moderately strong copper extractants and are most useful above pH 1.6 to 1.8 ( To test the efficiency of extraction using LIX 984N-C and to compare the ELM performance with LIX 84, extractions were performed at pH values of 1, 2 and 5.The results obtained are presented in Comparing the behaviour of LIX 984N-C with LIX 84, it was observed that at pH 5 the rates of extraction were almost identical. At pH 2, the total amount of copper extracted was almost the same, although the initial rates using LIX 984N-C were more rapid than those obtained using LIX 84. This behaviour could be attributed to the presence of salicylaldoximes in LIX 984N-C. Furthermore, it was observed that with LIX 84 the rates of extraction at pH 2 were considerably slower than that observed at pH 5. At pH 1, only 28 % copper could be extracted with LIX 84. Extraction of copper into ELMs with LIX 84-I at pH 5 gives a behaviour that is comparable with LIX 84 and LIX 984N-C, although the extraction rates were marginally lower. However, at pH 2, ELMs containing LIX 84-I could extract only 60% copper in 60 min of contact time in comparison with quantitative extraction of copper by ELMs containing LIX 84. Carrier concentration, Two concentrations of stripping acid 1.5 M and 2 M were studied. It was observed that for extraction of copper at pH 2 the initial extraction rates with a stripping acid concentration of 1.5 M were marginally greater than that obtained with 2 M acid concentration, although the overall extent of extraction in both cases were the same. The effect of copper concentration in the feed phase was investigated at feed concentrations of 497 mg/L and 1900 mg/L using two ELM systems—one containing LIX 984N-C as carrier and the other with LIX 84 as carrier. The extractions were performed at pH 2 with stripping acid concentration 2 M. The results are presented in The results of this study demonstrate the effectiveness of LIX 984N-C as an extractant for copper extraction into ELMs. Membranes with LIX 984N-C can be used even at pH values as low as pH 1 to achieve more than 80% recovery of copper. ELMs containing LIX 984N-C could be used over wide range of solute concentrations with almost the same extent of copper recoveries in each case. Such expectations cannot be fulfilled by predominantly ketoxime extractants such as LIX 84 or LIX 84-I at low pH ranges or at high solute concentrations. However, for dilute concentration ranges and pH The ELM technique was originally developed for the removal of copper and other heavy metals from waste waters where the concentration of metals are quite low. But due to the inherent instability of the emulsion, their commercialization has been delayed. The results of this investigation also show that adequately formulated emulsions are sufficiently stable in carefully chosen operating conditions for industrial utilization. The new genre of strongly copper extracting reagents like LIX 984N-C opens up avenues for the use of ELMs for extraction of copper not only from dilute solutions but also from sulfuric acid leach solutions and at par with the conventional solvent extraction technique. We would like to thank AICTE, R&D Scheme F.No.8021/RID/NPROJ/R and D-2/2002-03 for support to carry out this work, Indian Oil Corporation Limited for supply of kerosene and Cognis Inc. (Ireland) for supply of samples of LIX reagents.