Metal-matrix composite coatings of lead–cobalt (Pb–Co) and lead–cobalt oxide (Pb–Co3O4) were electrodeposited onto the surface of a conventional PbCaSn anode in an effort to develop an improved anode for use in base metal electrowinning. The developed coated anodes were examined in terms of their electrochemical and physical stability over several days of polarisation for the evolution of oxygen under typical copper electrowinning conditions. Results from scanning electron microscopy have shown that fresh Pb–Co and Pb–Co3O4 composite coated anodes have rougher surface than conventional (uncoated) PbCaSn anodes but the apparent differences in surface area become insignificant after several days of polarisation under typical copper electrowinning conditions. The Tafel slope on the Pb–Co anode was 92mVdec−1 and on the Pb–Co3O4 it was 90mVdec−1, which is significantly less than the 122mVdec−1 measured on the conventional PbCaSn anodes. The composite anodes exhibited consistently lower oxygen evolution potentials than the conventional type and the potential remained relatively stable throughout the polarisation period. The reduction in the operating anode potential can be attributed to the presence of cobalt in the surface layer while the decrease in the Tafel slope shows that this reduction can be related to a change in the mechanism of the oxygen evolution reaction. Corrosion rates estimated from 16h tests showed that the composite coated anodes are more stable than the conventional type during short periods of operation. It was also observed that for the Pb–Co coated anode, both the rate of corrosion and the overpotential for the oxygen evolution reaction can be further reduced by the addition of organic additives such as thiourea.Lead based anodes have been used in the electrowinning of base metals for more than a century due to their low cost and availability. However, the conventional types of lead based anodes, such as PbCaSn, operate at relatively high oxygen overpotential, which results in significant energy consumption, and suffer from corrosion which takes place at a slow rate during the electrowinning process. It is reported that 20–25% of the overall cell energy consumption in tankhouses using conventional lead based anodes is attributed to oxygen evolution overpotential ( The development of anodes that can evolve oxygen from acidic sulphate solutions at lower overpotential than on the conventional lead based anode has a long history in the hydrometallurgical research field. This was revisited in the present study, with particular attention given to the low cost options, such as the addition of cobalt. Some of the earliest references relating to the effect of cobalt go back to 1938 when Ray and his co-workers reported on testwork evaluating the effect that cobalt in the electrolyte had on the performance of lead anodes used for copper electrowinning. They reported that cobalt, even at relatively low concentrations of 20–70 Research on developing methods to produce catalytically active composite coated anodes which can operate as anodes to generate oxygen at a low overpotential and maintain good resistance to corrosion continues ( This paper presents the results of a study which aims to extend the previous work and utilise some of the benefits of cobalt by introducing it directly into the surface layer of the anode, thus avoiding the need to continuously add cobalt ions to the electrolyte. Several attempts to produce composite anodes containing lead with cobalt have been considered in the past. Composite anodes have been prepared by mechanical alloying, metal-ceramics, electrical arc, cementation and pulse plating techniques ( The composite coatings were electrodeposited onto a resin-sheathed PbCaSn electrode with a diameter of 5.00 The PbCaSn substrate was pre-treated by degreasing and etching. The pre-treatment steps involved i) cleaning the surface with SiC sand paper, 600 and 1200 Two different types of composite coatings were produced and tested, one type involving lead and cobalt ions reduced on a cathode to form Pb–Co composite coating, and another type involving lead ions reduced on a cathode with Co The The Analytical Reagents (AR) grade chemicals and deionised water were used to prepare the electrolytes. The pre-treatment and deposition were carried out in a double-walled glass cell, connected to a water bath to maintain a constant temperature. A plastic lid was used to support the anode, cathode and reference electrode. The data was monitored and recorded on a computer running LabVIEW® 7.1 software. The power supply in all experiments was an EG&G Princeton Applied Research Potentiostat (model 173). The working electrode was positioned in a vertical plane in order to minimise the attachment of gas bubbles onto the surface. In each case, immediately after the electrodeposition, the coated electrode (anode) was removed from the cell, rinsed with deionised water and dried in air. The coated anode surface was then observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), Philips XL20, which was equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector, Oxford Link ISIS 5175. Each composite coated electrode was tested for i) stability when used as anode under typical copper electrowinning conditions, ii) oxygen evolution potential, and iii) corrosion rate. Tafel plot and cyclic voltammetric measurements were also performed to examine the electrochemical characteristics of the coated anodes. The anode potential, exhibited under typical copper electrowinning conditions, was one of the key performance indicators for the new composite coated anodes. Two sets of operating performance tests were conducted. Short-term tests for a period of 16 Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine the overpotential for the oxygen evolution reaction on the composite coated anodes. Once the polarisation period in the coating bath was completed, the fresh coated anodes were immediately removed from the bath, rinsed with deionised (DI) water, dried with a stream of air and immersed into the 180 SEM images of the composite coated anodes before and after 168  This suggests that roughness is probably a factor that would contribute to the reduction of the anode potential on the composite coated anodes at the start of the anodisation, but this is not expected to play a significant role in the later stages of the polarisation tests. Therefore, in accordance with the description by Tafel plot measurements were conducted next to evaluate the likelihood of a catalytic effect playing a role in the evolution of the oxygen at lower overpotential. A lower Tafel slope can confirm whether the depolarisation of the composite coated anode is due to enhancement of the catalytic activity or geometric extension of the surface. The results of these measurements are illustrated in Tafel slopes related to Pb–Co and Pb–Co The cyclic voltammograms in It is apparent from these results that with the increase in potential from the open circuit potential (OCP), the PbCaSn surface converts initially to lead sulphate (peak A) followed by oxidation to lead dioxide. Following the formation of the conductive lead dioxide, oxygen gas was observed to evolve simultaneously which is indicated by the rapid increase in the current density (peak B). Upon reversing the potential, the reduction of PbO In the case of the composite coated anodes, peak A was absent. This might be related to passivation of the surface by lead sulphate formed in a chemical process coupling lead oxidation and cobalt catalysed hydrogen reduction, hence, the electrochemical formation of lead sulphate is no longer apparent ( It is evident that oxygen is evolved at less positive potential on both of the composite coated anodes. These results are in agreement with previous observations reported by The height of peak C observed with the PbCaSn anode is almost twice as high as for the Pb–Co  This could in part be attributed to the large “real” surface area due to the rough surface. The geometric surface area of the produced Pb–Co (3%) composite coated anode was 19.63 The concentration of cobalt in the electrolyte was observed to increase rapidly at first and continued to do so gradually during the first 100 Nevertheless, the presence of cobalt changes the lead oxide surface giving it a rougher structure, which obviously results in larger real surface area and therefore lower actual current density. In an effort to investigate this aspect further, a Pb–Co (1%) composite coated anode was prepared using a lower current density of 100 On the other hand, when the composite coating was prepared by introducing lead along with cobalt oxide, the composite coating contained up to 28% cobalt. As shown in Organic additives are often used in copper and zinc electrowinning for different reasons, including to lessen the extent of cathode re-dissolution and to form smooth deposits.  In addition, the effect of TU on the stability of the composite coating was also apparent from the lead dioxide reduction peaks recorded as part of the cyclic voltammograms. Tests were conducted using a fresh Pb–Co The release of cobalt from the Pb–Co  Evidently, a decrease in the extent of the formation of PbO The size of the peak related to the conversion of PbO This data confirms the earlier indications that the addition of TU slows the rate of corrosion of the Pb–Co This study focused on the development of catalytic active composite coated anodes containing lead and cobalt. A review of developments in anode technology identified several promising options for further investigation. Methods were developed to produce, and evaluate the performance of, new type of anodes. The anodes were produced by cathodic electrodeposition of composite lead–cobalt coatings on the surface of conventional PbCaSn anodes followed by conversion to the oxide form. The composite coated anodes were characterised by increased surface roughness, which contributed to decrease in the anode potential. Galvanostatic oxidation experiments at 300 The possible benefits of incorporation of Co in lead alloys are well described, however, the challenge is to produce long lasting coatings. Result of the present study regarding Pb–Co and Pb–Co The authors would like to thank