The adsorption behavior of polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers functionalized silica (SG-G0∼SG-G4.0) for Cd(II) from aqueous solution was investigated by combining experimental and theoretical method. The influences of dendrimer generation, terminal functional group, solution pH, contact time, temperature, as well as the initial concentration of Cd(II) on the adsorption behavior were explored. Static adsorption indicates that the adsorption capacity increases first and then decreases with the increase of dendrimer generation, SG-G2.0 and SG-G2.5 possess the highest adsorption capacity for amino- and ester-terminated PAMAM functionalized silica, respectively. The optimal adsorption pH value is 6 for all the adsorbents. Kinetic adsorption implicates that the adsorption can approach equilibrium at about 200 min. The kinetic adsorption follows pseudo-second-order kinetic model and is dominated by film diffusion. The isotherm adsorption demonstrates that the adsorption favors high concentration and the adsorption capacity first increases and then decreases with the increase of temperature. Adsorption isotherm process can be well described by Langmuir model. FTIR technique and DFT calculation reveal that the involvement primary and secondary nitrogen atoms, as well as carbonyl oxygen atoms dominate the adsorption. As SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 displays excellent adsorption performance for Cd(II), they could be potentially used as effective adsorbents for the decontamination of aqueous Cd(II).With the rapid development of industry, water pollution provoked by heavy metal ions has attracted considerable attention There are multifarious technologies to repair aqueous heavy metal pollution, such as electrolytic reduction, reverse osmosis, chemical precipitation, electrochemical treatment, ion exchange, and adsorption A number of functional groups have been utilized to modify silica to enhance its adsorption capacity and selectivity The objective of the present investigation is to further explore the possibility to remove aqueous Cd(II) by SG-G0∼SG-G4.0. The impacts of dendrimer generation, terminal functional group, solution pH, contact time, temperature, and initial Cd(II) concentration on the adsorption were systematically determined. The adsorption kinetics and isotherm data were analyzed by appropriate models, and the adsorption mechanism was verified by combining the results of FTIR analysis and density functional theory (DFT) calculation. SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 were prepared via divergent method according to the procedures described in our previous reports ( The saturated adsorption capacity of SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 for Cd(II) were determined by adding 20 mg adsorbent and 20 mL Cd(II) solution with the concentration of 0.005 mol/L to a series of flasks. The mixture was shaken at 25 The effect of pH on the adsorption was conducted by mixing 20 mg adsorbent with a series of 20 mL 0.005 mol/L Cd(II) solution with the pH of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, respectively. The following procedures are similar to A series of 100 mL flasks were filled with 20 mg adsorbent and 20 mL 0.005 mol/L Cd(II) solution. The mixture was shaken and the concentration of Cd(II) was determined at different time intervals. After that, the adsorption amount was calculated. A series of 20 mg adsorbents and 20 mL Cd(II) solution with different concentration were suspended in the flasks. The mixture was shaken for 12 h at 15, 25, and 35 The effect of coexisting cations on the adsorption was carried out by selecting SG-G2.0 and SG-G2.5 as representative. About 20 mg adsorbent and 20 mL binary metal ion solution containing Cd(II) and coexisting cations such as Ca(II), Mg(II), and Pb(II) were charged into the flask and shaken for 12 h at 25 The application of the adsorbents for the removal of Cd(II) from real aqueous solution was investigated by selecting lab water, lake water, and sea water as samples. SG-G2.0 and SG-G2.5 was selected as model adsorbents. The lab and lake water was collected in our campus, and the sea water was obtained from coastal water of Yellow Sea in Zhifu District of Yantai. The adsorption experiment was conducted accordance with that of the pure water and the adsorption amount was calculated. The adsorption mechanism was calculated by selecting G1.0 as computational model due to the high geometry symmetry of PAMAM dendrimer. The geometry optimization of the complexes of G1.0 with Cd(II) was simulated by DFT method with B3LYP functional Saturated adsorption capacity is one of the most crucial parameters to evaluate the adsorption behavior of the adsorbent. The comparison of adsorption capacity with other alternative adsorbents is displayed in The influence of pH on the adsorption is described in The adsorption kinetic of SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 for Cd(II) are presented in The pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models are widely applied to interpret the adsorption kinetic mechanism. The linear form of the two models can be depicted by The fitting parameters of pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models for Cd(II) are presented in Boyd film diffusion model is further employed to clarify whether the rate-controlling step of the adsorption kinetic process is film diffusion or intraparticle diffusion. This model can be described by The The adsorption isotherm curves of SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 for Cd(II) are presented in However, when the temperature is higher than 25 Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models are extensively employed to reveal the adsorption isotherm behavior The Freundlich model assumes the uptake of metal ion on heterogeneous surface based on multilayer adsorption, and the binding sites are different in the energy The fitting results of Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models are summarized in D-R isotherm model is employed to further determine whether the adsorption nature is physical or chemical The mean free energy ( The value of The effect of coexisting cations on the adsorption of Cd(II) was investigated by selecting SG-G2.0 and SG-2.5 as representative with Ca(II), Mg(II), and Pb(II) as coexisting cations, and the result is described in The adsorption capacity for Cd(II) from real aqueous solution was conducted by selecting lab water, lake water, and sea water as models using SG-G2.0 and SG-G2.5 as adsorbents. It can be seen from FTIR technique and DFT calculation were applied to validate the adsorption mechanism for Cd(II). The FTIR spectra of SG-G2.0 and SG-G3.5 before and after adsorption were selected as representative to indicate the changes as shown in The optimized geometries of the complexes of G1.0 with Cd(II) that may be formed during the adsorption are illustrated in NBO analysis is employed to further evaluate the interaction mechanism between the functional group and Cd(II) The present study depicts the systemic investigation on the adsorption behavior of SG-G0∼SG-G4.0 for Cd(II) from aqueous solution. Results show that the adsorption depends on the dendrimer generation, solution pH, contact time, temperature, and initial concentration of Cd(II). Static adsorption indicates SG-G2.0 and SG-G2.5 possess the highest adsorption capacity for amino- and ester-terminated PAMAM functionalized silica, and the ester- terminated adsorbents exhibit relative higher adsorption capacity than the corresponding amino-terminated adsorbents. The influence of pH suggests the optimal adsorption value is 6. The adsorption kinetic follows pseudo-second-order kinetic model and is dominated by film diffusion. Adsorption isotherm demonstrates that the adsorption favors high concentration and the adsorption capacity first increases and then decreases with the increase of temperature. Adsorption isotherm process can be well described by Langmuir model. Adsorption mechanism reveals that the involvement primary and secondary nitrogen atoms, as well as carbonyl oxygen atoms dominate the adsorption. The authors are grateful for the financial support by the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 