We present a unique evaluation of three advanced high throughput pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis systems (HTPH-systems) for screening of lignocellulosic biomass for enzymatic saccharification. Straw from 20 cultivars of winter wheat from two sites in Denmark was hydrothermally pretreated and enzymatically processed in each of the separately engineered HTPH-systems at 1) University of California, Riverside, 2) National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Colorado, and 3) University of Copenhagen (CPH). All three systems were able to detect significant differences between the cultivars in the release of fermentable sugars, with average cellulose conversions of 57%, 64%, and 71% from Riverside, NREL and CPH, respectively. The best correlation of glucose yields was found between the Riverside and NREL systems (R
                     2 = 0.2139), and the best correlation for xylose yields was found between Riverside and CPH (R
                     2 = 0.4269). All three systems identified Flair as the highest yielding cultivar and Dinosor, Glasgow, and Robigus as low yielding cultivars. Despite different conditions in the three HTPH-systems, the approach of microscale screening for phenotypically less recalcitrant feedstock seems sufficiently robust to be used as a generic analytical platform.The development of crops specifically bred for ethanol production would help overcome a major obstacle in biofuel production, namely feedstock recalcitrance. Utilizing less recalcitrant plants opens up the possibility of combined economic benefits of higher yields at milder pretreatment conditions and lower enzyme dosages. However, implementing genetic selection programs for reduced recalcitrance and understanding the associated genetic modifications requires methods to evaluate large populations for their digestibility. In response to the need for screening methods to breed less recalcitrant feedstock for cellulosic ethanol production, several research institutions recently engineered high-throughput pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis systems (HTPH-systems). In this case, high throughput systems are considered systems that have been miniaturized and automate from a larger-scale assay using custom-designed laboratory hardware and/or a rapid assay for sugar determination at the end of hydrolysis, as to handle large sample sets with minimum labour. To the best of our knowledge, few automated HTPH-systems exist around the world; examples are described by Studer et al. To detect differences between phenotypes, the HTPH-platforms must be so accurate that the analytical variation is small in comparison with natural variation between phenotypes. The HTPH-platform from Riverside was initially capable of detecting difference in enzymatic saccharification greater than 10%, with a standard deviation of the laboratory method (i.e., standard deviation when the same sample is repeated) of 4.1% total sugar yield for poplar material Several authors have described an array of factors influencing the HTPH axiom “you get what you screen for” pointing to the importance of sample heterogeneity, size reduction, distribution, pretreatment chemistry and severity as well as enzyme activity The aim of this study was to evaluate three HTPH systems on their ability to measure sugar (i.e., glucose and xylose) release from different cultivars of winter wheat straw and determine the correlation between the systems. This will indicate how much the conclusions of such microscale screening methods can support selection and comparison of cultivars. Winter wheat straw was sampled at two sites in Denmark, where field experiments comparing cultivars were conducted in two completely randomized blocks at each site. At full maturity, wheat straw was harvested and approximately 80 g dm (dry matter) of straw was sampled as representative of each block. Straw collection was done the same day at the two sites. Growing conditions were kept similar at the two sites, thus straws represented the natural variation (in climate, soil type etc.) in the biomass feedstock in Denmark. Cultivars were Northern European breeds: Abika, Ambition, Audi, Dinosor, Flair, Florett, Glasgow, Hattrick, Inspiration, Jenga, Oakley, Opus, Penso, Potenzial, Robigus, Samyl, Skalmeje, Smuggler, Tommi, and Tuscan. One sample was lost during harvest; thus total sample set was 79 samples. The straw was collected as air dried (approx. 7% moisture) in the field, milled to <1 mm pieces on a cyclone mill (President, Holbæk, Denmark), and stored at ambient temperature until any further analysis. The conditions of processing were for all three HTPH-systems based on previous knowledge for near-optimal hydrothermal pretreatment of wheat straw, and high enzyme loading was applied to be sure that inhibition of enzymes by compounds released in pretreatment and hydrolysis did not interfere with enzyme action The analysis was performed as described in Lindedam et al. The analysis was slightly modified from the method described by Selig et al. Though the system has been preliminarily described Compositional analysis of the 79 samples was performed by the two-step acid hydrolysis of carbohydrates according to the procedure published by NREL Results from HPLC measurements of glucose (+cellobiose) and xylose (+arabinose) released from combined pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis are presented in gram per gram dry matter of unpretreated wheat straw (g g Conversion of cellulose or xylan was calculated as the amount of glucose and xylose released from pretreatment and hydrolysis as a percentage of the maximum theoretical release possible; based on the concentration of hydrated substrate determined by compositional analysis and corrected for solid loading in hydrolysis. The standard deviation of the laboratory method (SDL) was based on the laboratory triplicates in each HTPH-system and used to compare the systems accuracy and reproducibility (Eq. Comparison of straw from wheat cultivars used Tukey simultaneous tests to fit general linear models (proc GLM) at a 95% confidence level   When using the HTPH-systems to search for feedstocks of higher digestibility, it is critical to know if the process conditions reduce the sensitivity of digestion assays by pushing all sample digestion yields closer to the theoretical maximum, or if the yields are still a function of structural variations Though the log severity of pretreatment in all three systems was approx. 3.6 Correlations between the three HTPH-systems for all sugars are listed in The standard deviation of laboratory results (SDL) for total sugar yields was lowest in Riverside, highest in CPH, and intermediate at NREL ( We concluded that stronger correlations between the HTPH-systems are not possible unless better SDL and CVs can be achieved. However, such an optimization of the systems does not seem necessary, when judging the individual systems reproducibility. If optimization was chosen, possible reproducibility bottlenecks could be the plate-to-plate variation in the pretreatment step for CPH and the assay reliability of the colorimetric sugar determination assay for NREL. The statistical analysis revealed that all three HTPH-systems detected cultivars to have a significant effect on the release of both glucose and xylose, and thus their total (  As an example of whether or not microscale measurements can be extrapolated to large scale, we point out that 3 of the cultivars have been pretreated in a pilot-scale ethanol plant in bales of 500 kg and the observed ranking placed Ambition and Smuggler as less recalcitrant then Skalmeje It deserves to be noted that the relative placing of a few cultivars varied considerably between the systems, most clearly seen for Inspiration ranking second best at Riverside, in the middle at NREL, and in bottom half at CPH ( All three systems were able to detect significant differences between the cultivars in the release of fermentable sugars, with average cellulose conversions of 57%, 64%, and 71% from Riverside, NREL and CPH, respectively. The best correlation of glucose yields was found between the Riverside and NREL systems ( The collection of straw was funded through the OPUS project funded by the