In this paper, interlaminar crack initiation and propagation under mode-I loading of a composite material made of an epoxy matrix reinforced with unidirectional carbon fibres are experimentally assessed for different asymmetry ratios. In the experimental program, DCB specimens were tested and the number of cycles to failure necessary for the onset of crack growth was registered for the asymmetry ratios R
                     =0.2 and R
                     =0.5. The G–N curves under fatigue loading were determined, N being the number of cycles at which delamination commences for a given energy release rate. The ΔG–da/dN curves associated with the previously generated crack growth were also determined for different G
                     cr rates (90%, 80%, 70%, etc.) and two different asymmetry ratios.
                  For the asymmetry ratios, the fatigue limits show values in the order of 50% and 70%, respectively, of the critical fracture energy resulting from the static tests employing the modified beam theory. The fatigue limit is discretionally taken as the fatigue strength corresponding to 2.5 million cycles, i.e., the limit number of cycles considered for testing. The micrographs show that the morphology of the fracture toughness under mode-I loading are quantitatively but not qualitatively influenced by the stress ratios.Composites made of laminates exhibit a worrying susceptibility to the appearance and growth of cracks between the layers. This phenomenon, known as delamination, represents one of the most life-limiting failure modes of laminated composites. Delamination can be caused either by defects induced during the manufacturing process or generated in the structural elements during the service life of the material due to interlaminar stresses that can lead to the commencement of delamination. Additionally, delamination growth generally results in a loss of resistance and stiffness in the structural members leading to failure of the structure. Although several decades have elapsed since the recognition of the importance of interlaminar failure The composite material employed in this research program was manufactured from Hexcel AS4/8552 RC34 AW196 epoxy resin prepregs, reinforced with unidirectional carbon fibre AS4 sequentially piled and cured in an autoclave, resulting in a volume fraction of 60%. The laminate configuration consists of 16 plies with 0° orientation/insert/16 plies with 0° orientation, employing an RF-260-R Tygavac 20 Young moduli   Ultimate stress:   Shear modulus:  Shear ultimate stress:  All the tests performed to characterize the material both under static and cyclic loading were carried out in a servo-hydraulic MTS testing machine provided with a 5 The aim of the fatigue tests was to provide information on the material to be used in the fatigue life prediction of laminates. This objective was twofold: To find out the number of cycles needed to initiate delamination for a given energy release rate, i.e., to determine the fatigue curves Δ To characterize the propagation phase by means of the crack growth curve d In order to reasonably extend the test duration without implying a pronounced increase in costs, tests were conducted up to 2.5 million instead of the 2 million cycles usually considered as a standard number of fatigue limit cycles. (a) Δ (b) Although it is difficult and cumbersome to perform the test, it seems to be an effective way of obtaining valid information. The same asymmetry coefficients were used here as in the study of crack initiation, i.e., 0.2 and 0.5. Since the aim of the tests is to gain knowledge about the onset of delamination and to determine the crack growth rate, they were all carried out under displacement control, contrary to usual fatigue tests, which are generally conducted under load control. This is due to the fact that, under load control, increasing stress arises at the crack front during its progression, thus causing crack instability of the specimen when the crack reaches a certain value, unless constant stress may be ensured at the crack tip via steady load variation. This means applying appropriate load control of the real crack length in the machine under consideration. The procedure employed consisted in controlling the displacement, i.e., the crack opening displacement, via the critical displacement obtained from the static characterization of the material. By adjusting this displacement as the crack grows, it is possible to keep the stress state constant at the crack front throughout the test. The crack length values were read by means of a 100× portable microscope, located at one side of the specimen. The test was stopped after every 10 In the following, the experimental results obtained from the tests are presented.  The values of the critical energy obtained from the tests are represented as a percentage. A reference fatigue limit, discretionally taken as the fatigue strength for 2.5 million cycles, i.e., the limit number of cycles, corresponds to approximately 50% of the critical fracture energy calculated from the static tests according to the modified beam method for an asymmetry coefficient of 0.2, and to around 70% for an asymmetry coefficient of 0.5. The pronounced scatter observed by the results of the number of cycles elapsed until crack initiation could presumably be assigned to the strip of resin accumulated at the crack front as a result of the manufacturing process and to the 20  As can be observed, the growth rate slows down with increasing crack length. For better understanding of the process, The crack growth rate increases for an asymmetry coefficient of 0.2, varying around 1.5  In this same figure, a certain pattern of behaviour is observed, which is practically coincident for both cases, showing the same trend in crack growth, the highest crack growth rates corresponding to the increases in critical energy. In In this case, lower crack growth rates are obtained with decreasing load levels, presenting mean rates of 4.71   As regards the morphology of the fracture surface of the laminate under mode-I cyclic load, a certain difference between the generated fracture surfaces is observed when the stress ratio is changed. This becomes apparent when observing the higher degree of damage of the matrix-fibre interface occurring in the specimen tested at a higher stress level In the case of the higher stress level, the trajectories of the cracks generated were found to be mainly oriented along the interface fibre-matrix. Another important difference between the two fracture surfaces is found in the striation appearing in the resin. This effect is more noticeable in the case of the material subjected to a lower stress level, which could be explained by the presence of a lower propagation velocity at an overall level, since the fracture surface developed is broader. In this paper, certain parameters controlling the delamination process of a composite under mode-I fatigue loading were experimentally investigated. The results may be summarized as follows: As regards interlaminar crack initiation: The determination of the fatigue curves was strongly influenced by the process of manufacturing the laminate, the accumulation of resin at the crack front and possibly by the film thickness, which led to pronounced variability in the data. As a consequence, the study and interpretation of the influence of these parameters requires the testing of a large number of specimens. Fatigue fracture under mode-I loading may be characterized by carrying out the tests under displacement control, i.e., by regulating the opening of the crack lips as a function of the critical displacement obtained from the static characterization. The fatigue versus asymmetry coefficient curves show the expected behaviour, i.e., a higher fatigue limit with decreasing stress range. As regards crack growth: Crack growth slows down with increasing crack lengths and can even stop progressing if the critical fracture energy supplied does not exceed the equivalent values calculated from the static characterization of the material. This could be due to the increasing compliance of the crack legs under cyclic loading caused by viscoelastic effects or to fibre bridging at the crack as evidenced by the With increasing stress range, a decreasing crack growth rate was observed during the tests, which could once more be assigned to the increasing compliance of the specimen legs. The authors are indebted to the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology (Project MAT2003-09768-C03-03) for partial funding of this work.