The Trzebionka ore field is located in the SE part of the Silesian–Cracow ore district. The mine extracts zinc and lead ore from a Mississippi Valley-type deposit, hosted in Triassic dolomites. These are stratabound tabular orebodies with very complex internal structure. Main ore minerals are sphalerite (ZnS) and galena (PbS). Ore grade may be defined as low: 4.2% Zn and 1.7% Pb (on average). The accuracy of the mean metal estimation within typical reserve calculation blocks of 100×100 m horizontal dimensions is low with the relative kriging standard errors: 20–25%. The study aimed at examination to what extent the sampling and analytical errors affect the accuracy of the mean metal estimation in mine sub-blocks (area about 1 ha) and in broken ore.
                  The results of routine and experimental sampling of orebodies in mine workings, and automatic sampling of the broken ore transported on a conveyor belt, were used in this research. Variability of metal contents in the deposit “on site” and in the broken ore was characterized geostatistically by means of relative semivariograms. Variances of sampling errors were estimated using P.Gy formula while variances of analytical errors using the experimental data. It was found that total variability of metal contents in the deposit “on site” is only marginally affected by sampling and analytical errors. In contrast, the contribution of these errors to the total variability of metal contents in the broken ore is significantly high. However, the latter has no practical impact on the accuracy of metal content estimation due to low variation of metal tenors caused by ore homogenization and large volume of samples taken from conveyor belt.The Trzebionka ore field is located in the SE part of the Silesian–Cracow (Upper Silesian) ore district (for details of ore geology see Trzebionka is located near old abandoned mine workings: The oldest records about extracting lead and silver ore date back to the 14th century. The current mine went on-line in 1962 and its present output is around 7800 tons/day of broken ore. Mining is done using the room-and-pillar method with hydraulic backfill. Broken ore hoisted to the surface goes through two stages of beneficiation, at first is concentrated gravitationally in heavy media and on shaking tables, and then by flotation. As a result, four types of zinc and lead concentrates as well as dolomitic construction gravels are produced. Waste are disposed of to the tailing pond. At the stage of deposit exploration with mine workings, the ore quality is characterized as the mean contents of metals, estimated in underground blocks with the areas of about 1 ha that will be mined in the nearest future according to development plans. However, the accuracy of this on-site estimation is low, as it is proved by high standard kriging errors of mean metal content assessments about: 20% for Zn and 25% for Pb. The geostatistical investigations were aimed at separation from the total, observable variability of metal contents its part associated with sampling errors (preparation and comminution errors of assay samples) and assaying errors as well as determination of the role of these errors in the accuracy of estimation of mean metal contents. For comparison purposes, identical procedures were applied for the run-of-mine ore (broken ore), transported on the conveyor belt to the concentrator. Initial data treatment was done with the classical statistics method. The structure of metal content variability was described using relative semivariograms, while the precision of mean metal content estimations with kriging procedure. Variances of the sampling and comminution errors were estimated using P.Gy formula, and variances of the assaying errors were based on experiments. Two numerical data sets were used in the geostatistical modelling of variability and metal content assessment. The first set comprised the results of routine sampling of orebodies (further called “mine sampling” or “on-site sampling”), carried out underground by mining geologists. The standard mine sample consists of several (about 10) pieces of rocks (each about 0.2 kg) collected from a vertical profile, from roof to bottom of a drift. The total of 1393 such ore samples, about 2 kg each, were taken alternately from both walls of drifts at 5-m intervals. To make the behaviour of metal content semivariograms precise at the distances shorter than or comparable to the standard sampling interval, special sampling in the local scale (further called “experimental sampling”) had to be made. A total of 104 such samples, about 2 kg each, were taken identically like mine samples in mine workings from the three selected sites of typical ore aggregates, at intervals varying from 0.1 to 0.5 m The second data set originated from automatic sampling of broken ore transported on the conveyor belt to the beneficiation plant. A total of 609 samples, about 3.6 Mg each, were taken from ore stream on the belt during every mine shift, i.e., at a constant time interval of 8 h. Each sample represented a lot of about 2600 Mg of broken ore. Statistical parameters of the metal contents in both data sets are presented in The variability of the metal contents for the samples of broken ore is one order of magnitude lower than for the samples taken on-site and can be explained as a result of different masses of the samples and high homogenization of the run-of-mine ore. The preparation of the assay portion involves four stages of size reduction for the samples of broken ore taken from the conveyor belt [CB] with simultaneous reduction of the mass from 3.6 Mg to 1 g, and two stages for samples taken on-site from the deposit [MW], i.e., in mine workings, with reduction of the mass from 2 kg to 1 g. The flow-chart of the sample reduction, including weighing, drying, crushing, grinding and screening, is presented in Assuming that all operations are conducted properly and very carefully, the relative variances of the fundamental error (FE) that appears during sample mass reduction were evaluated separately for both kinds of the samples with a simplified formula The values of the parameters The relative variances of total sampling errors (TSE), comprising selection and preparation errors, were obtained as doubled variances of fundamental errors Evaluation of the errors introduced by assaying of zinc and lead contents was based upon the results of experimental research The relative errors fall in the range from 2.9% to 4.6% for zinc (with true Zn contents between 7.8% and 2.6%) and from 5.3% to 7.1% for lead (with true Pb contents between 3.4% and 1.7%).The values of analytical errors for the basic data set studied were calculated by the current authors using interpolation. For samples taken on-site (MW), they are: These analytical errors seem to be acceptable in mining practice but their variances, similarly as variances of sampling errors, contribute in different degree to the variances, depending on the type of samples and on the place where they were collected [compact (MW) or broken (CB) ores]. However, according to Horizontal (2D) variability of metal contents in samples taken on-site from the deposit (MW) was quantified geostatistically by means of the general relative semivariograms Relative differences in sample values for samples taken on-site over very small distances (from several cm to 4–5 m), lesser than the routine sampling interval, were characterized by local relative semivariograms calculated for the results of experimental sampling. The local semivariograms were next included into the semivariograms for mine sampling Variability of metal contents in broken ore was characterized with 1D relative semivariograms as a function of differences in the time sampling. In contrast to the on-site sampling, the semivariograms for broken ore, approximated also with spherical models, show a very high nugget effect: 76% for Zn and 90% for Pb Variances of the sampling and analytical errors are shown on the semivariograms The role of these errors in total variability of metal contents is different in compact and broken ore. In the first case, their contribution to nugget variances (assessed for local semivariograms) is marginal and constitutes 3% at the highest (the analytical errors constitute 2.2% for [Zn] and 1.3% for [Pb]). In the second case, the role of sampling and analytical errors is very significant (contribution of the analytical errors to nugget variances constitute 66.7% for [Zn] and 21.3% for [Pb]). It should be stressed that the global sampling error The remaining parts of nugget variances are difficult to explain. It can be presumed that they are mainly caused by microvariability of metal contents in the scale of single centimeters and underestimation of the real analytical and sampling errors. The relative, standard errors of mean metal content estimation within a typical underground block and in the stream of broken ore transported on a conveyor belt were calculated using the kriging procedure It was assumed that the average block in ore reserve estimation has its horizontal dimensions of 100×100 m and vertical dimension 4 m (the latter equal to the mean thickness of the studied part of deposit). Such a block contains about 110,000 Mg of ore. Estimation of the metal contents was based upon 40 samples taken in mine workings at the current sampling interval of 10 m. The same quantity of broken ore carried on the conveyor belt provided 42 samples collected every 8 h during 14 days. The results of calculation are presented in In the case of deposit blocks, two kinds of semivariogram models were considered: spherical models for routine sampling, and compound models for experimental and routine sampling. Computations were repeated also for compound models without nugget variances. In the case of broken ore, spherical models adopted to sample semivariograms were applied. Because of high contribution of nugget effect and practically random variability of parameters under study, also classical, statistical formula was used for estimation of errors. The error assessments based exclusively on the mine sampling seem to be slightly underestimated (about 25%) in relation to those evaluated from mine and experimental sampling. The assessments calculated for the compound models of semivariograms without nugget variances are only slightly lower than the ones for models with nugget variances. It suggests that the role of sampling and of analytical errors is marginal in the case of metal content estimation for on-site samples because their relatively high variability in the short-range scale (microvariability). In contrast, the estimation of mean metal contents in broken ore depends in practice mostly on errors of sampling and of chemical analyses The role of sampling and analytical errors, which create additional variability in relation to the total observable variability of metal contents, recorded using semivariograms is diversified depending upon the type of samples and the place of sampling. In the case of small, routine samples (2 kg) taken in mine workings, apparent variability caused by these errors is completely marginal and practically negligible because of large natural variability of metal contents in samples taken on-site. The contribution of error variances to nugget variances does not exceed 3%, and the influence of these errors on precision of metal content estimation within a standard underground block is insignificant. Practically, it means that more careful preparation and reduction of samples as well as more precise assaying will not bring about observable, better estimations of the mean metal contents on-site (i.e., in samples taken underground). In the case of large samples (3.6 Mg) taken from broken ore, the sampling and analytical errors are significant and form the main source of variability of the metal contents. The variances of these errors related to nugget variances constitute almost 100% for the Zn and 60% for the Pb. Paradoxically, these significant sampling and analytical errors have no practical impact on mean metal content assessments in broken ore. It can be explained by very low variability of metal contents in the broken ore samples, caused by their homogenization and large mass of the ore taken. The precision of the mean metal content estimation in broken ore transported on the conveyor belt during the two-week trial is very high with relative standard errors lesser than 3%. The research project was financed by the University of Mining and Metallurgy, grant No. 11.11.140.050.