This paper assesses the use of a potential-based fluid finite element formulation to investigate earthquake excited dam–reservoir systems. The mathematical background of the analytical and numerical techniques is presented in a unified format. Frequency and time-domain analyses are conducted to validate the potential-based finite element formulation. A case study of a typical dam–reservoir system subjected to earthquake loading is presented. The dynamic response of the system is discussed to illustrate the effects of fluid–structure interaction and reservoir bottom absorption. The validated potential-based fluid elements and boundary conditions are shown to perform adequately for practical seismic analysis of dam–reservoir systems.Dam failures may result in catastrophic consequences, causing considerable loss of life and property. Research dealing with dam safety has been extensively active during the last 50 years to improve understanding of the complex behavior of dam–reservoir systems and implement more reliable approaches into the codes of practice. Rigorous techniques to investigate dynamic dam–reservoir interactions are relatively new compared to more established static dam analysis tools. The milestone of such rigorous treatment dates back to the pioneering work of Westergaard The importance of considering fluid–structure interaction effects on the seismic response of concrete dams has been extensively documented in the literature and is now widely accepted. Different approaches were proposed including the work of Chopra and collaborators who developed analytical and finite element procedures to account for dam deformability, water compressibility and reservoir bottom absorption for earthquake excited dam–reservoir systems Extensive work has been dedicated to the development of solid and fluid finite element formulations, but only a brief review of two common fluid finite element approaches is presented here, i.e. the Lagrangian-based and Eulerian-based formulations. The former approach is an extension of the classical displacement-based finite element formulation for solid domains. Therefore, the degrees of freedom are the nodal displacements in both the solid and fluid domain meshes. Fluid finite elements are formulated using the same shape functions as structural elements but are characterized by a volumetric elastic modulus equal to the fluid bulk modulus and a negligible shear resistance to simulate free relative inter-laminar motion of inviscid flow. In this case, compatibility at the fluid–structure interface is automatically satisfied through constrained normal displacements of the nodes common to the fluid and structural domains, thus no special interface elements are required. Displacement-based fluid elements can then be implemented easily into a conventional structural finite element code. Although the Lagrangian approach has proven successful in many applications The Eulerian approach in hydrodynamics The main objective this work is to systematically assess the use of The geometry of a dam–reservoir system is shown in We consider harmonic ground motions The hydrodynamic pressure frequency response functions  This boundary condition is based on compatibility between hydrodynamic pressures and normal displacements at dam–reservoir interface  Neglecting the effects of gravity waves at reservoir free surface  This boundary condition was introduced by Hall and Chopra  This boundary condition is placed at a distance a rigid boundary condition implying a null horizontal acceleration at the upstream reservoir boundary a radiation boundary condition implying a null hydrodynamic pressure at an infinite distance from the dam upstream face, i.e. when a Sommerfeld radiation boundary condition By comparing Eqs. Once the boundary conditions described above are implemented, the complex-frequency response functions of hydrodynamic pressures Strictly speaking, the procedure described in this section is not fully analytical since it depends on dam mode shapes that can only be approximated using a numerical method. It will though be referred to as the analytical formulation or solution in the rest of the paper to alleviate terminology. The technique includes the combined effects of water compressibility, dam flexibility and wave absorption at reservoir bottom. It is however restrained by the simplified rectangular geometry of the impounded reservoir. To investigate dam–reservoir–foundation systems with irregular geometries, recourse to finite element or boundary element methods is then required as discussed in the next section. The main equations of the Using standard techniques, the weak variational form of Eq.  Using the technique proposed by Lysmer and Kuhlemeyer In a similar way, the Sommerfeld boundary condition can be applied by attaching a series of grounded viscous dampers to the nodes of beam elements placed at the far upstream end of the reservoir. It is important to note that the grounded nodes of the dampers should be restrained, contrary to earthquake excited boundaries underlying the dam–reservoir system (  In the next section, the potential-based formulation and boundary conditions described previously are confronted against analytical solutions when available or boundary element solutions otherwise. The analytical and the numerical techniques presented above are applied to analyse 2D gravity dam monoliths impounding reservoirs with different shapes. We first consider a rectangular reservoir with a finite length to validate potential-based finite element (PBFE) meshes and compare the analytical and numerical approaches described above. A simplified triangular dam cross-section with dimensions inspired from the tallest non-overflow monolith of Pine Flat dam is used The analytical and numerical solutions are determined considering unit horizontal and vertical harmonic ground accelerations The analytical formulation presented in Section It is common practice to limit the size of the largest finite element in a wave propagation analysis to one-twelfth of the smallest wave length considered A rigid dam assumption is adopted first to isolate the effects of dam–reservoir interaction and focus on the validation of reservoir mesh density. Frequency-domain analyses are conducted using the potential-based formulation implemented in ADINA Dam flexibility effects are included next and the dam monolith is modeled using isoparametric plane stress finite elements including incompatible modes. As for the analytical formulation, a sufficient number The effect of structural damping is important in the dynamic response of dam–reservoir systems. When damping is included, frequency-domain analyses cannot be conducted directly using the potential-based formulation implemented in ADINA To investigate the effects of reservoir shape on the accuracy of the results including reservoir bottom absorption, 4-node and 9-node finite element meshes R  Modeling of energy dissipation at the far upstream end of a semi-infinite rectangular reservoir is investigated next. Infinite fluid elements We next consider a flexible dam impounding an infinite rectangular reservoir. Infinite fluid elements are applied at a truncated reservoir length The results and discussions presented above have demonstrated the efficiency and accuracy of potential-based finite elements and the adopted boundary conditions in evaluating the dynamic response of dam–reservoir systems over a wide frequency range of interest. For purpose of illustration, these modeling techniques are used next to determine the seismic response of a typical gravity dam impounding a reservoir with irregular geometry. The geometry and finite element model of the dam–reservoir system are shown in The dam–reservoir system is subjected to the N-S component of the 1940 Imperial Valley earthquake recorded on rock site at El Centro The effect of wave absorption at reservoir bottom on the seismic response is then examined. In this paper, analytical and fluid–structure potential-based formulations were applied to assess the dynamic and seismic response of dam–reservoir systems. The mathematical background of the analytical and numerical techniques was presented in a unified format. Frequency and time-domain analyses were conducted to validate the PBFE formulation programmed in ADINA The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Quebec Fund for Research on Nature and Technology (FQRNT). This Appendix illustrates the construction of viscous dampers to simulate absorptive and Sommerfeld boundary conditions at reservoir bottom and far upstream end, respectively It can be shown that the absorptive boundary conditions in Eqs. The horizontal displacement Damper influence areas in Eqs.