This paper presents the transformation of thiosulfate using Cu(II) salts, such as copper sulfate, at pH between 4 and 5. The nature and kinetics of this process were determined. In the experimental conditions employed, the reaction between thiosulfates and Cu(II) ions produces a precipitate of CuS and the remaining sulfur is oxidized to sulfate, according to the following stoichiometry: 1 mol thiosulfate reacts with 1 mol Cu2+ and 3 mol H2O, generating 1 mol copper(II), 1 mol sulfate and 2 mol H3O+. In the kinetic study, the apparent reaction order was ≈0 with respect to H3O+ concentration, in the interval 1.0·10−4–1.0·10−5M H3O+; of order 0.4 with respect to Cu2+ in the interval 0.21–0.85 g L−1 Cu2+; and of order 0 with respect to S2O3
                     2− in the interval 0.88–2 g L−1 S2O3
                     2−. The apparent activation energy was 98 kJ mol−1 in the interval 15–40 °C. On the basis of this behavior an empirical mathematical model was established, that fits well with the experimental results. The thiosulfate transformation process using copper(II) sulfate was applied to an industrial fixing bath that proceeded from the photographic industry; after this, the resulting effluent contained less than 10 mg L−1 of thiosulfates.In the extraction of gold and silver, numerous authors have studied about the substitution of cyanides by thiosulfates or other less polluting systems; some of them are indicated here ( For gold (and also for silver) coatings, the sulfite–thiosulfate system has been proposed as an alternative to cyanide baths ( The main industrial use of thiosulfates is in the photographic industry (fixing baths) to dissolve the silver halide not reduced to metallic silver during photographic or radiographic processes. At low thiosulfate concentrations, the main species of silver is Ag(S Industry generates considerable volumes of fixing bath effluents which are dangerous according to environmental norms. Numerous processes have been proposed and in most cases applied at the industrial scale to recover the silver contained in these effluents ( Previous work ( Thiosulfate-based effluents are already generated at the industrial level, for example in the photographic and radiographic industry, as has been previously mentioned. In the immediate future the amounts of these effluents may increase considerably if cyanides are substituted by thiosulfates in the extraction of gold and silver from their ores or in metallic coating processes. Different processes for the oxidation of thiosulfates have been proposed. This paper is a study of the thiosulfate transformation by reaction with copper(II) sulfate at a pH between 4 and 5. The nature of the reaction and the effects of temperature and concentrations of H All the reagents used in this study (sodium thiosulfate, copper sulfate 6-hydrate, calcium oxide, magnesium oxide, sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid) were of laboratory grade. Preliminary experiments for transforming thiosulfates at high temperature and pressure were carried out in microwave equipment (MEC, Mars X model) capable of working at temperatures between 0 and 240 °C and pressures between 0 and 800 psi. The equipment can hold up to 12 Teflon vessels. Thiosulfate solution at concentrations ranging from 1 to 4 g L The progress of the thiosulfate transformation was followed by sampling the solution in each Teflon vessel and testing for S All the experiments were carried out in a conventional 0.5 L reactor, using magnetic stirring and a temperature controller. The pH was kept constant by adding the necessary amounts of NaOH solution; a Crison micropH 2000 was used. The general experimental conditions used were: temperature, 40 °C; pH, 5.0; stirring rate, 500 min The reaction was monitored by sampling the solution throughout the experiment and testing for thiosulfates by iodometry (iodine 0.1 M was used for these purposes, and a starch solution was added to determine the end point). Several samples were also tested for thiosulfates by chromatography. Solids obtained at different conversion values were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a Siemens D-500 equipment, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and X-ray energy dispersive analysis (EDS), using a JEOL JSM-840 equipment for both techniques. Two preliminary (blank) experiments were performed to transform thiosulfates at 20 °C and 60 °C with air bubbled through the thiosulfate solution. In both cases experimental conditions were: pH 7; 12 g L A very low conversion was obtained in both blank experiments with maximum conversion, In all cases thiosulfates disappeared from the system in 45 min. These results confirm that transformation is a two-step process; the first involves the thiosulfate transformation to sulfites and sulfates, and pH abruptly decreases to acid values. Due to the generated acidity, a second step occurred, in which the remaining thiosulfates decompose because it is unstable at a pH of less than 4 (see The transformation of thiosulfates at 180 °C using excess MgO or CaO to produce a stable alkaline pH had a low reaction rate ( The oxidation of thiosulfates using air at temperatures of 60 °C or lower proceeds very slowly. At high temperature and pressure good conversion values are obtained, but undesirable species such as SO A thiosulfate transformation experiment by reaction with Cu(II) was carried out under the following conditions: temperature, 40 °C; pH, 5.0; stirring rate, 500 min Almost all of the thiosulfates transformed in 120 min; the amount of thiosulfates remaining in solution was less than 10 mg L  Summarizing: Thiosulfates have been transformed to sulfates; A CuS black solid was obtained; The pH was kept constant by the addition of NaOH solution (hydronium neutralization). Thus, the stoichiometry of the process, under the experimental conditions employed, can be described by the following bulk reaction: Some authors ( Experiments carried out at pH 6 and pH 10 (40 °C) indicate the formation of a precipitate that contains almost all the thiosulfates and Cu Thiosulfates are easily decomposed at pH The effects of temperature (30–60 °C) and concentrations of H  For concentrations of H For initial concentrations of Cu The effect of initial concentration of thiosulfates on its transformation rate was determined for the interval 0.50–2 g L At low initial thiosulfate concentrations the ratio [Cu According to the obtained results the following empirical mathematical model can be established: This model is valid within the following conditions: Temperature: 30–60 °C; apparent activation energy of 98 kJ mol H Initial Cu Initial S  The transformation of thiosulfates by their interaction with Cu Formation of CuS and sulfates under experimental conditions: temperature, 40 °C; pH, 5; stirring rate, 500 min A pH Separation of CuS from the reaction system; the residual effluent contains less than 10 mg L Reoxidize CuS to sulfate using conventional reagents before the next thiosulfate transformation cycle. An experiment was carried out on an industrial fixing bath containing 2 g L  At atmospheric pressure, with air or oxygen and temperatures between 20 °C and 60 °C, a very low reaction rate is obtained with maximum conversion of Thiosulfates are transformed at 180 °C in 45 min in all cases. When excess MgO or CaO is used to produce a stable alkaline pH, a low reaction rate is obtained. Our results indicate that the fast reaction in experiments carried out without initial alkaline additions were due to the acid decomposition of thiosulfates resulting in undesirable species such as bisulfite, SO The stoichiometry of thiosulfate transformation in the presence of Cu Experiments carried out at pH The reaction rate for thiosulfate transformation is multiplied by a factor of 3 for each 10 °C of temperature increase. There is an apparent activation energy of 98 kJ mol In thiosulfate transformation the apparent reaction order with respect to H Based on the behavior described, we have established an empirical mathematical model for thiosulfate transformation by reaction with copper sulfate which fits our experimental results well. The corresponding expression is: By means of the process proposed, with potential applications in treating industrial effluents and based on the interaction between thiosulfates and copper(II) ions, thiosulfates can be transformed to copper sulfide and sulfate ions, leaving less than 10 mg L The authors wish to thank to CONACYT of the Mexican Government, and CICYT (PPQ2001-3524), of the Spanish Government, for their financial support. Thanks are also due to the Serveis Científicotècnics of the University of Barcelona for their assistance with this work.