Our sensory perception of the texture of foods depends on the material properties of the food and its breakdown in the complex mastication process prior to swallowing. This process can be studied and visualized like any other mechanical comminution process and related to the fracture and failure of the food structure, which is determined by its microstructure. However, the mouth is more sophisticated than most engines and can adjust the stresses, strains, and lubrication necessary to form the swallowable bolus.
               The breakdown process of food types is presented, which is beginning to explain food preferences, and hence the basis for design of novel foods.The human mouth has evolved to cope with food materials that are most readily gathered in the wild. Many of these (fruit, nuts, and some leaves) are still part of our daily diet, but most of what we now consume are structures which are not naturally occurring and involve conversion of raw materials into something edible. All of this early food development was largely by trial and error, and the many and varied types of food we consume must have some pleasant perceived attributes. Furthermore, we each know our preferences and tend to assess any new product against the properties of foods we have previously experienced. Only recently have we tried to codify the stimuli which give rise to perceived properties, allowing the development of systematic design principles for food, in the language of materials engineering ( If we do not eat, we cannot be active and healthy. Our mouths are processing engines, selected by evolutionary pressures to suit the foods available to our distant ancestors. It is only in the last few thousand years that humans have processed agricultural raw material (by cutting, cooking, baking, etc.) to suit the processing engine of our jaws, teeth, tongue, and lips ( The human mouth shows the characteristics of our forebears. We have soft flexible closures (lips) that contain the food inside the machine. We have a selection of teeth, incisors at the front are designed primarily for cutting; our canine teeth are small since we no longer need them to seize prey; and our molars are designed for crushing and grinding relatively weak structures. Relative to other primates we have short muzzles, and our mouths are small ( Neither is our musculature particularly powerful. Chewing forces are around 50–150N ( Mastication requires more than simple fracture and compression. This process of restructuring in the mouth has been visualized by X-ray video (see The tongue is a stirring device that can change shape and move in three dimensions. It is used to position food for compression between the molars. Fracture or failure of the food occurs and then the tongue collects broken material into a ball or bolus, which is propelled backward toward the epiglottis and swallowed. If this process cannot be achieved then the material is not swallowable. Bolus formation requires that particles are reassembled and are lubricated to provide a viscoelastic mass. Some foods contain enough liquid (water and oils and fats) and are self-lubricating, described as ‘juicy’ or ‘moist’ by sensory panelists. Drier materials require the active addition of saliva and are described as ‘dry,’ ‘mealy,’ or ‘floury.’ Examples of the processing of meat (juicy) and cracker (dry) are shown in Bolus formation normally occurs after about 15–20 chewing strokes ( This led to the hypothesis that texture perception included all stages of a breakdown and reassembly pathway, shown schematically in Finally, the mouth is not just a mechanical device but is also a chemical reactor. Saliva glands deliver lubricating liquid, which contains active enzymes to hydrolyze starches and oils and glycoproteins capable of emulsifying fats and oils ( The hunter could catch live prey such as fish and land mammals. To produce edible material, it helps to have fire, and a knife. Meat and fish are water-filled fibrous composites. When raw, both the contractile fibers and the connective tissue are highly extensible, so the material requires a large deformation before fracture. As explained above, human teeth are ill-equipped to deal with this type of structure, but all muscle tissues are heat sensitive. Actomyosin fibers heat-set, rendering the contractile fibers stiffer. Connective tissue ‘melts,’ and in the case of fish it largely dissolves, so that wet heating converts a rubber into a composite capable of being delaminated in the mouth. Complete fragmentation is not required, and the bolus is formed by reassembling bundles of fibers. Muscle tissue is high in water content, and in land mammals it can contain stored fat. This provides the juiciness or succulence of this tissue. Surprisingly, lower-quality cooked joints can be described as ‘dry,’ even though they contain over 50% water. This is because the connective tissue shrinks on cooking, squeezing out water. When chewed, no lubricant is left, and the water remaining inside the heat-set fibers is not detected. The solution to this mechanical problem is well known to a good chef, who will cook in water at a low temperature for a long time, thereby dissolving the elastic connective tissue. The alternative technology is to chop up the tough composite. The teeth are now not required to perform the initial fracture, and the mouth simply separates and reassembles appropriately sized particles. The burger is born! There is an abundance of vegetable biomass that humans do not eat, notably trees and grass. Because of their high cellulose and lignin content, they cannot be broken by chewing. They contain highly aligned cross-linked fibers, making the structures very resistant to both tensile and compressive failure. Edible vegetable tissue such as roots, tubers, and some leafy vegetables contains less cellulose, most of which provides mechanical strength for the cell walls. In fresh tissue, the walls are prestressed by turgor pressure. Because the channels between cells are very small, liquid within the cells cannot flow out rapidly during chewing, and so they are effectively incompressible. Crushing by the molars produces a high-speed fracture through cell walls ( Cooking does not always have a beneficial effect. The action of heat weakens the adhesion between cell walls. It also destroys the cell membrane, allowing faster water flow. Turgor is lost, and cracks do not propagate as readily. Compression by the molars is sufficient to break the chewed piece, but fracture can occur by cell separation rather than cell wall fracture ( If the tissue contains intracellular starch (such as potato or legumes), the starch can gelatinize during cooking. Now, little liquid is squeezed out in the first compression strokes and plays no useful part in bolus formation. The liquid remaining within cells is not detected, and the food may be described as ‘dry’ or ‘mealy’ even though it contains >50% water ( In design terms, therefore, there is good reason to minimally cook most vegetables. Cereal grains provide a convenient method to store nutritional components; they are dry and easily protected against attack by microorganisms. The seeds are small and hard, difficult to break between the teeth, and even if this is possible, a dry floury texture is experienced as the starchy components absorb saliva. We all know this is not a pleasant experience, but the technology of the bakery and patisserie employs a series of restructuring processes that converts this cheap stable food raw material into a whole range of delightful products. Milling breaks the seeds. The addition of excess water swells starch and protein, and if an equal weight of water is added, a plastic mass or ‘dough’ is formed which allows the incorporation of gas bubbles. Heat performs several structuring actions. First, starch gelatinizes, proteins may heat-set, and the combination forms a continuous matrix, but the expansion of gas blows and lifts the structure. Provided the matrix sets before all gas escapes, a solid foam forms which is porous and does not collapse on cooling. Even unleavened bread has a porous structure, but the incorporation of carbon dioxide increases the phase volume of gas in the final product. Baking technology has now been generalized to the aeration and cooking of any dough, producing pastry, cakes, biscuits, and even meringues and soufflés. The physics of solid foams has been modeled extensively, and the behavior of edible foams seems to behave in a similar fashion ( The material properties of the foam walls are water dependent, so bread has a lower modulus, but a higher breaking strain than extruded dry snacks, and is therefore ‘chewier.’ Snacks also have thinner cell walls, and some are coated with fat from previous frying processes. As a result, they retain their brittle fracture and ‘crispness’ even after exposure to saliva after several chews. On the other hand, some snacks (and meringues) are low in fat and because of their high air content have very thin cell walls. When exposed to water in saliva, these collapse and give the impression of ‘melting in the mouth.’ Milk proteins can be coagulated by renneting and other acidification processes. The proteins form a continuous coagulum which provides the mechanical network. Initially, the gels are weak and crumbly (cottage cheese), but as water is removed and the protein ‘ages’ in salt, a more solid brittle structure is achieved (Cheddar). Some cheese can be so hard that it cannot be broken in the mouth (parmigiana) and needs to be grated into particles before eating. The cheesemaker is controlling fracture mechanics ( Other milk fermentations produce an extracellular polysaccharide which acts as a weak gelling agent (yoghurt), whose viscoelastic rheology seems perfect for swallowing and requires no chewing. The advantage of any gelled structure containing high water content is that the work of fracture is easily achieved within the mouth. This applies to protein gels (egg white and blood), hydrocolloids from seaweeds (alginate, carrageenan, and agar), and gelatin. The control of the mechanical properties of these gelling systems is well understood, and they are frequently used to bind other structural elements together. They can be tailored to be weaker than the embedded particles, providing a complex breakdown path which can simulate other natural textures (meat, fish, and reformed fruit). These structures are some of the newest, being only a few hundred years old. They are ‘luxury’ products of high calorific value. They comprise materials structured by crystals or sugar glasses and include sweets and confectionary, ice cream, and chocolate. Chocolate is a continuous network of fat crystals, in which are embedded the hard particles of sugar crystals and milk solids. The melting profile of cocoa butter means that chocolate is a brittle solid at room temperature which is easily fractured. All crystals melt at mouth temperature, and a creamy emulsion forms with saliva ( Gelled sweets and confectionary are rubbery, the work of fracture is large, and so these structures would be perceived as tough and almost inedible if the gels did not also melt and dissolve at mouth temperatures. The resultant solutions are viscous and easily swallowed. Hard candy confectionary is a sugar glass which, if presented as a large structure such as a boiled sweet, requires such a high fracture stress that it cannot be broken in the mouth. However, sugar glasses dissolve under the action of saliva and the solution has a viscosity appropriate for swallowing. As soon as the sweet is small enough to reduce the brittle fracture force required between the teeth, we can ‘crunch’ the sweet into swallowable particles. An alternative technology to create edible structures from food glasses is to adopt the same design principle as dry snacks (see above). Air is introduced so that a solid foam containing crack propagation sites is formed. Ice cream is a whipped cream in which the continuous water phase is frozen. Static freezing produces dendritic ice, so the product can be hard and ‘crunchy.’ Modern technology controls the ice crystal size and shape by crystallizing ice under shear, to produce spherical ice crystals which do not intermesh. The result is a softer product with no shards of ice to impact on the soft palate ( Extrusion processing of ice cream can dramatically reduce air cell size. This has several effects on perceived texture. At the same phase volume of air, a decrease of cell size and a narrowing of size distribution can, on average, increase cell wall thickness; the product is initially harder. However, as the ice melts, the melted liquid phase still entrains small bubbles and therefore a smoother and creamier texture is perceived, and fat content can be reduced. This is one of the first cases where understanding the requirements of mouth action has allowed the systematic design of a new product structure (unpublished results). This type of food includes sauces, soups, dressings, and drinks. They all flow under gravity, and although they may have structure identifiable by microscopy, the mouth is unaware of it and measures some kind of flow behavior or ‘viscosity.’ However, most liquid foods are far from Newtonian in their flow behavior, so studies have attempted to identify the shear rates and shear stresses which relate to viscosities perceived by the consumer. The classical work, which is still the guiding principle of design of mouth viscosity or ‘thickness,’ is that of Viscosity is not the only perceived oral sensation. Smoothness, stickiness, sliminess, and creaminess, are other sensations frequently reported. It is clear that these sensations involve interactions with saliva and the surface of the buccal cavity and are not a property of the simple product. Indeed, creaminess may well be related to both mechanical properties and associations with aromas released from typical dairy products ( Empiricism has developed a wide range of nutritious foods. By understanding the principles of fracture and failure mechanics in the mouth, the reasons for their success can be explained. However, We know relatively little about reassembly and swallowing. Engineers should talk with physiologists and clinicians studying the swallowing process. The interaction of foods in the mouth is extraordinarily complex. The potential to model or simulate this behavior Foods and mouths are much more complicated than most structures or machines engineers normally encounter. Furthermore, product design usually has a target of maximum strength with minimal material cost. Food must be designed to break and in a pattern peculiar to the food type. Nonetheless, the guidelines now derived from the study of acceptable foods should accelerate the development of new foods from new materials, by eliminating some of the more obvious mistakes. The greatest challenge the world now faces is the security of our food supply; one half of the population being calorie deficient, while the developed world has calorie surplus resulting in obesity and other metabolic syndromes. Reducing calorie intake is not easy. Exhortations to change behavior are not very efficient, because eating is a pleasurable process. A solution would be to create similar structural properties, with components of lower calorific value, but similar appetite satisfaction. Some opportunities are evident, such as lowered glycemic index by the replacement of starch and sugar with fiber and sweeteners. The failures are where the product structure does not deliver the recognized chewing breakdown, because the new components do not maintain the mechanical properties of the traditional product. More attention to design will solve most of these problems.