This paper presents the importance of the thermal losses in the performance evaluation of thermal storage systems. In order to reinforce this statement, an evaluation of a pilot plant whose size is sufficiently representative for the extrapolation of results at larger scales has been carried out. The evaluation of the heat losses of a molten salt pilot plant with 8.1 MWhth built in Spain by Abengoa is presented. While the storage materials development has attracted a lot of attention from the researchers, the performance of a two-tank storage system has not been evaluated in detail. The relevance of the design of conventional systems such as insulation, mechanical assembly or foundation, are found to be the key for the feasibility of a TES system. Different performance scenarios were performed and based on experimental results, decisions for reengineering of the pilot plant could be taken to improve commercial storage plants.The mixture known as “solar salt” is formed by a non-eutectic binary mixture of 60%wt. sodium nitrate and 40%wt. potassium nitrate Molten storage tank heat losses were first evaluated in the CESA-I central receiver plant in Spain in 1984 The aim of the salts pilot plant built in Solúcar (Sevilla, Spain) was the experimentation of the thermal energy storage technology by sensible heat storage with a mixture of molten salts chosen specifically for this project. The storage system has a capacity of 8.1 MWh A very detailed description of the pilot plant can be found in the previous publication The salt used is the so-called “solar salt”, a non-eutectic mixture of 40% wt. KNO The tanks were insulated with Spintex 342-G-145 from Isover. The bottom of the tank was protected with Superwool™ 607™ blanket from Thermal Ceramics, covered with a galvanized shell. The properties of the insulation materials are presented in The tanks walls were insulated with two mineral wool blankets with 250 mm thickness. Special care was taken in the non-homogeneous parts, that is, where instrumentation and sensors were located. The insulation material was protected with an aluminium corrugated sheet. The domes of the two tanks were insulated with two 250 mm thickness mineral wool blankets and were protected with aluminium corrugated sheet. The piping was insulated with 100 mm of mineral fibre insulation Spintex 342-G-145 from Isover for temperatures lower than 649 °C, and calcium silicate for higher temperatures. All equipment at temperatures higher than 71.1 °C and at a height lower than 2.134 m over the floor, platforms or corridors, was insulated or protected for persons. All external insulation was protected with aluminium shells. At the design and building of the pilot plant all control elements existing in the piping system were not insulated. The tanks were supported over two different structures, one over the hot mesh (in direct contact with the storage tanks) and the other in direct contact with the foundations. Both mesh were formed by beams, diaphragms and stiffeners of structural steel ASTM The first variable that was identified as affecting the rate of conductive heat transfer is the temperature difference between the two locations. The second variable of importance is the materials involved in the heat conduction. The rate of heat transfer depends on the material through which heat is transferred. The effect of a material upon heat transfer rates is expressed in terms of the thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity. Another variable that affects the rate of conductive heat transfer is the area through which heat is being transferred. As such, the rate of heat transfer is directly proportional to the surface area through which the heat is being conducted. Finally, a variable that affects the rate of conductive heat transfer is the distance that the heat must be conducted. The rate of heat transfer is inversely proportional to the thickness of the insulation layer. The process of filling the storage tanks started on a February 14th, 2009 (winter period in Spain). During the first 48 h of the process, very important heat losses were measured with a thermography camera, mostly located in the wall near the bottom part of the tanks ( Thermographs showed that even though the thermocouples used to measure the wall temperatures of the tank, were also causing thermal bridging ( The thermal bridge occurs when there is a gap between materials and structural surfaces. The main thermal bridges are found at the junctions, instrumentations or other singularities in the layers of insulations. In a plant that is not properly insulated, thermal bridges represent low comparative losses (usually below 20%) as total losses via the walls. However, when the walls are very well insulated, the percentage of loss due to thermal bridges becomes high (more than 30%). It is important to have very high thermal resistances for walls, foundations and connexions to have low heat losses via the junctions. During the pre-commissioning of the plant the preliminary detected heat losses were reduced and after the filling of the tanks with molten salts, circulation between both tanks started. After 24 h of operation, significant heat losses were detected again but now in the piping and in the heat exchanger.  Once more, important thermal bridges were found in the auxiliary equipment, the instrumentation, valves, and supports and shoes in the molten salts piping (horizontal), the supports and shoes in the thermal oil piping (vertical), and the heat exchanger ( To reduce the heat losses in the piping supports, the following measures are recommended: To install insulation between the pipe and the clamps in the support. The insulation to be used here is the same one installed in the trough solar collectors between the solar collector pipe and the clamps in the supporting structures. Nevertheless, more research and testing are needed to ensure that this material can support the thermal cycles of the pipes without breaking down or losing position. To consider the support as part of the pipe and therefore insulate it completely. In this case, in the contact point between the support and the pipe an insulating material with the appropriate thermal and mechanical properties should be included (i.e. Syndanio The oil circuit piping also had important heat losses, mainly in the clamp shoes. A ceramic fibre coating was installed in all the shoes ( Heat losses of molten salt tanks were analysed with the available data, and reengineering solutions were looked for to avoid or minimize the risk of salts solidification during long periods without sun. One further aim was to avoid high temperatures in the concrete base (maximum 100 °C were allowed). The foundation scheme is shown in The heat losses were modelled considering a semi-infinite model To find the best option to decrease heat losses through the mesh, different scenarios are set, changing the type of insulation material in the cold mesh and the thermal conditions of the tank. The temperature dependence of the screen with the mesh and the tank is assumed as: To consider the heat losses from the tank to the air by radiation and convection, the surface temperature of the tank is estimated by: The tank dimensions are 8 m diameter Heat transfer through the concrete base to the floor is calculated with The considered materials for the calculations are mineral wool for the insulation and stainless steel AISI302 for the tank. The thermal conductivity of mineral wool is calculated with: The properties of the concrete base and the floor (sandstone) are presented in The conditions considered in the modelling are: Summer, hot tank at 370 °C during 8 h – simulation of full thermal charge in the storage tank. Winter, tank discharged and with no heater, starting at 300 °C, during 100 h – simulation of discharged tank and with no sun input. The aim of this simulation is to find out when the salts reach their solidification temperature. Winter, tank discharged and with heater on, starting at 300 °C, during 100 h – simulation of discharged tank and with low sun input, enough to maintain the salts at the “cold salts temperature”. The solutions considered to reduce heat losses are also three: Adding a radiation screen in the cold mesh, next to the insulation material. Metal plate added in the base of the cold mesh. Adding thermal insulation material. These conditions and solutions were modelled in different scenarios presented in  A comparison of the simulated scenarios would give the right decision for reengineering of the pilot plant. Scenarios 1 and 2 had the aim to determine the concrete heating risk in summer conditions and with the tank at its higher temperature ( The study for winter season when several days without sun can take salts to solidification, scenario 5 gives the best results and scenario 3 the worst ( The evaluation of the thermal power needed to maintain the salts at the desired temperature (assumed 300 °C) again shows that the best is to add insulation in the cold mesh ( After the scenarios simulation, the approach followed to reduce heat losses in the pilot plant was the addition of a radiation screen in front of the cold mesh of the tanks support and the addition of mineral wool inside it. The conditions considered before were simulated again and the results are discussed below. The conditions of winter (ambient temperature 5 °C, floor temperature 0 °C), with the tank cold (300 °C) and with auxiliary heater when insulation material is added in the cold mesh are presented in During the first 48 h of operation of the MS-TES molten salts storage plant installed in Seville in Abengoa premises, important heat losses were measured, much higher than expected from the plant design. The evaluation of such losses brought important knowledge to be learnt. Thermal bridging occurs in facilities envelopes when materials with high thermal conductivity, such as steel, concrete or even timber, create pathways for heat loss that bypass thermal insulation. Thermal bridging can also take place when gaps or breaks in the insulation envelope create pathways for heat loss that by pass thermal insulation. A thermal bridging analysis should be done in the pre-commissioning of the power plant. All the foundation of the tank had to be designed to ensure lower heat losses. Moreover, all the insulation on the tanks, piping, sensors and actuators had to be designed with this criterion on mind. Working at this high temperature, all sensors and actuators must be carefully insulated and it is critical to avoid the contact between the piping and its support at the shoes; in this plant a ceramic fibre coating (Syndanio) is recommended. To evaluate the heat losses and to find the best approach for future commercial plants, a simulation of the tanks foundation was carried out and different scenarios were evaluated. The first scenarios showed that the actions needed were within the cold mesh of the foundation. Next, it could be corroborated that the addition of a radiation screen would be a good solution, but the best one is to add insulation material within the cold mesh. This last approach would be also the best solution to maintain the temperature of the molten salts reducing the maintenance costs, and giving better storage plant efficiency. Taking into account the relevant information taken from pilot plants and the size factor in the estimation of the heat losses, higher amount of salt per tank will optimize the losses due to higher ratio of surface per unit volume. These findings have done that current designs in commercial plant have less than 1% of heat losses in the thermal storage system. The research leading to these results has received funding from