Changes in basal fluid pressure and normal flow depth in 2-phase granular mass flows, the equivalent coefficient of friction and the equivalent coefficient of friction between gravity centres before and after failure were investigated for pumiceous gravel, and a mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash by means of large-scale model flume tests. The proportion of finer soil particles, the inclination of slope segments, and the width of horizontal segments were selected as the controlled conditions. No excess of basal fluid pressure was observed in the pumiceous gravel. On the other hand, an excess of pressure head was generated in the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash. This was due to the suspension of the fine particles in the pore fluid increasing its effective density and the quasi-undrained shear deformation due to the low permeability of the mixture in the mass of the granular flow during its motion. In tests with a slope of 30°, both the pumiceous gravel and the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash travelled less distance in the narrow flume than in the wide one. This was likely because, in the wide flume, no clogging occurred where the width of the flume changed, and less frictional collisions against side-walls and resulting grains' contact took place. In tests with a narrow flume, the pumiceous gravel clogged and most of material was deposited around the constriction. However, the mixture passed through the constriction smoothly. This could be because less frictional resistance was generated in the mixture due to the lowering of effective stress between soil particles associated with the excess of pore-fluid pressure.
                  Although the test on a slope of 35° had the largest potential energy before the release of the materials and the test on a slope of 25° had the least, the test with the 35-degree slope produced the largest equivalent coefficient of friction and the smallest value was obtained from the test with a 25-degree slope. This finding suggests that the dissipation of kinetic energy, especially in the vertical direction, due to the collisions and the following abrupt deformation around the connection of the flume between the slope and horizontal segments may play an important role in the travel distance.Flow-like landslides can be extremely dangerous within the five recognised types, i.e. falls, topples, slides, spreads, and flows ( Past studies have suggested that devastating flow-like landslides take place mainly because: 1) a rise in the subsurface water table results in the destruction of the geomechanical balance within the channel deposits; 2) the saturated downslope torrent deposits are abruptly overloaded by the mass of upslope failures; and 3) the landslide mass clashes into check dams followed by the collapse of the unsaturated sliding mass (  Although it is important to satisfy scaling in physical phenomenon that is dominated by the expression of forces or stresses, such as granular mass flows ( In the second half of this paper, the discussion is extended by the concept of the equivalent coefficient of friction ( An overview of the employed large-scale model flume is shown in Pressure transducers (strain-gauge type, range Three types of samples were used for the granular mass flows ( In order to investigate the influence of finer particles on basal fluid pressure during the granular mass flow, Sample-1 (pumiceous gravel) and Sample-2 (mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash) were released on the flume at a slope of 30°. The values of normal flow depth started to increase in downslope sequence at 0.69 s (position 2, The basal fluid pressure was strongly influenced by the normal flow depth such that the values of basal fluid pressure generally increased when the values of normal flow depth increased, and vice versa. The values of basal fluid pressure started to increase from 0.28 s (position 1, Although the equivalent pressure head sometimes exceeded the normal flow depth at position 3, in general the normal flow depth was larger than the equivalent pressure head in the granular mass flow of Sample-1. This implies that the granular mass flows produced by Sample-1 was not fully saturated, likely because its very high initial void ratio and bulk permeability allowed some water to be lost before the gate was fully open. The changes in basal fluid pressure, the equivalent pressure head, and the normal flow depth of Test 2-1 (the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash) along the slope segment are shown in The changes in basal fluid pressure (the equivalent pressure head) also seemed to be controlled by the normal flow depth. Although the increasing and decreasing rates of these values were rather different, the values of basal fluid pressure increased/decreased when the values of normal flow depth increased/decreased. It should be mentioned that a rather large value of basal fluid pressure was observed at position 1 around 0.19 s. This was probably because position 1 was too close to the casement gate, resulting in dynamic overpressures as the material fell from the opening gate with a strong component of vertical motion. As for positions 2 and 3, the mass of granular materials reached there without falling directly from the gate. The values of basal fluid pressure increased from − The values of basal fluid pressure remained almost zero from about 6 s at position 1 and position 2, whereas it did not return to zero at position 3 because of the slow movement of the mass of granular material. The equivalent pressure head exceeded the normal flow depth at all three positions generally during the period between the arrival of the front surge and its peak normal flow depth. As for Sample-3 (Tests 3-1 and 3-2), the changes in normal flow depth were quite similar to the results of Sample-1 shown in The changes in basal fluid pressure, the equivalent pressure head, and the normal flow depth of Tests 1-1, 1-2, 2-1, and 2-2 at around the constriction (position 4) are shown in As for Test 1-2 ( As Test 1-2 was conducted for the wider horizontal segment of 1.2 m, no jam like that in Test 1-1 was generated so the assembly of granular materials moved slowly forward with the inertial force. The changes in basal fluid pressure showed almost the same trend as the normal flow depth. The difference was such that the values of basal fluid pressure changed dynamically between 1.43 s and 4.39 s, when the front surge passed through position 4. This was likely because the flowing materials could have been jumping, bouncing, and falling somewhat due to the effect of the change in the flume gradient. Regarding Test 2-1 ( The results of Test 2-2 ( In the results discussed in the previous sub-section, an excess of the equivalent pressure head over the normal flow depth of the granular mass flow was observed in Sample-2 (the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash). As generally noted, the generation of excess of fluid pressure is likely one of the most important factors in the fluidisation, rapid motion and long travel distance of the granular mass flows. Because higher fluid pressure reduces the effective normal stress mobilised between the soil particles, shear resistance was lost. High pore-fluid pressure is likely to be a product of both: (a) increased pore-fluid density due to suspended particles; and (b) the quasi-undrained shear deformation of the granular mass. Since the time required for the suspended particles to settle is high ( Although the water table and the normal flow depth of the granular mass flows would be different, the difference between the estimated pressure head,  When the granular mass travelled along the flume, the flow depth was at most 0.3 m. However, the estimated pressure head in the front surge of the granular mass flows allowed the estimated pressure head to exceed the normal flow depth, indicating that quasi-undrained conditions, which are usually simulated in geotechnical soil tests, such as triaxial compression and ring-type tests, could be maintained for a short period in the frontal surge. The downslope velocity of the granular mass was calculated between position 2 and position 3 when the tip of the front surge reached there ( In contrast, Test 3-2, conducted on a slope of 35°, generated a higher velocity at peak normal flow depth than the velocity at the tip of the front surge. When the slope was as steep as 35°, the surface velocity of the granular mass was larger than the tip of the front surge, indicating that the materials in deeper positions were outrun by the materials near the flow surface in the forepart of the front surge. However, when the slopes were gentler than 30°, the materials in the deeper position would move downslope faster than the ones near the surface. Accordingly, the directions of shear within the frontal surge should be opposite those of Test 3-2. It is generally considered that the velocity at the surface of a granular mass flow is higher than at the base ( The values of As for the differences between The side views of the deposited granular materials are shown in In contrast, Sample-2 (Test 2-1) was deposited homogeneously along the horizontal segment and it almost reached the end of the flume, where clogging presumably did not occur ( Since the studies of Relatively small equivalent coefficients of friction were obtained from Test 3-1, Test 2-1 and Test 2-2. This was likely due to the excess of basal fluid pressure causing a decrease in shear resistance in the case of Sample-2 (Test 2-1 and Test 2-2). Since Test 3-1 did not generate the excess of basal fluid pressure, the different factor should cause the small equivalent coefficient of friction in Test 3-1. Test 3-1 was conducted on a gentle slope of 25°, so that the potential energy before the test must have been the lowest. However, the relatively smooth transition between the sloping and the horizontal segments of the flume will consume less kinetic energy when a granular mass passes through. The largest equivalent coefficient of friction was observed in Test 3-2 on a steep slope of 35°, despite this test having the largest potential energy and shear velocity (see The order in the equivalent coefficient of friction between gravity centres was different from the one in the equivalent coefficient of friction in the series of tests. For example, the equivalent coefficient of friction of Test 2-2 was second smallest, but the equivalent coefficient of friction between gravity centres was third largest. Test 2-2 produced a small equivalent coefficient of friction in which the tip of the granular materials travelled a long distance. On the other hand, the large equivalent coefficient of friction between gravity centres meant that a relatively small amount of the granular materials were travelling long distances. These results implied that the following two aspects of landslides must be considered in the evaluation of mobility: the maximum travel distance, and the spatial mass distribution of the deposit. Since the maximum travel distance designates the areal extent of a disaster area, it is the more important aspect and it has been evaluated by the equivalent coefficient of friction. Regarding the spatial mass distribution of the deposit, the degree of the collisional, or destruction, forces acting upon a structure should be taken into consideration. For example, if the disaster prevention facilities (eg sabo dams) or residential houses had been located at around 4.0 m lengthwise from the left end of the horizontal segment, the forces acting on the structures should have been different in Test 2-1 and Test 2-2, which showed almost the same equivalent coefficient of friction. Accordingly, the authors propose the new “run-out characteristics index”, which expresses the ratio of the coefficient of the equivalent angle of friction to the coefficient of the equivalent angle of friction between gravity centres as follows: A large run-out characteristics index close to unity is generated when there is little difference between the equivalent friction angle and the equivalent friction angle between gravity centres. In this case, the granular materials will likely remain agglomerated and dense during flow motions and will have higher destructive potential. On the other hand, when the run-out characteristics index is smaller, the granular flows should attenuate the distance, producing less destructive potential in the far field.  On the basis of the tests reported in this paper regarding the flow characteristics mobilised in the downslope 2-phase granular mass, the following was found: No excess of basal fluid pressure was observed in the poorly sorted pumiceous gravel. In contrast, an excess of pressure head was generated in the well-sorted mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash. The generation of the excess of pressure head in the mixture specimens was due to the suspension of fine particles flowed in the pore fluid increasing its effective density and quasi-undrained shear deformation due to the low permeability of the mixture in the mass of the granular flow during its motion. In tests with a slope of 30°, both the pumiceous gravel and the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash travelled less distance in the narrow flume than in the wide one. This was likely because, in the wide flume, no clogging occurred where the width of the flume changed, and less frictional collisions against side-walls and resulting grains' contacts took place. In tests with a narrow flume, the pumiceous gravel clogged and most of the material was deposited around the constriction. However, the mixture of pumiceous gravel and volcanic ash could go through the constriction smoothly. This could be because less frictional resistance occurred in the well-sorted specimen due to the low effective stress between grains associated with the excess pore-fluid pressure. The importance of the two aspects of the maximum travel distance and the spatial mass distribution of deposits was pointed out to introduce the “run-out characteristics index” as a parameter expressing the ratio of the equivalent coefficient of friction to the equivalent coefficient of friction between gravity centres before and after failure for the evaluation of granular mass flows. The authors would like to dedicate this paper to the late Dr. Yoichi Okura (former Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute), who played an important role in designing the model flume and setting-up the sensors. Most sincere thanks are also due to Mr. Akimitsu Sato of Kyowa Giken, Inc., for his help with managing the testing environment. The authors also wish to thank Dr. Toshiaki Sammori for his valuable suggestions and advice on the analysis of fluid pressure in the granular mass flows.