Pneumatic separation was used to separate the valuable current collectors and harmful separators in spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) to avoid the plastic pollution caused by the separators in this study. Theoretical calculations for suspension velocities of the current collectors and separators indicate that they could be separated under special conditions. Furthermore, a special Z-shaped pneumatic separator was used to separate the current collectors and separators for the first time. Experiments for manually cut samples indicate that the efficiency of pneumatic separation is approximately 100% with the sizes and airflow velocities in the range of 3–4 cm and 6.96–7.8 m/s, respectively. Furthermore, industrial experiments of pneumatic separation indicate that the recoveries of the current collectors and separators are approximately 99.23% and 98.64%, respectively. Computer simulations of the separation process indicate that the turbulence and the changes in high-speed zones in the pneumatic separator benefit the separation of current collectors and separators. In conclusion, pneumatic separation is a promising technology to separate crushed current collectors and separators.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used in portable electronic and energy storage equipment (such as mobile phones, electric vehicles, electric tools, electric motorcycles and so on) ( In general, LIBs consist of current collectors, separators, and electrolytes ( Pneumatic separation is an economic, simple, clean, and efficient process that uses airflow to lift light materials out of heavy materials based on the density difference of the materials. It is widely used in the impurity removal processes of grain ( In this study, the separation of valuable current collectors and harmful separators was calculated in theory to obtain the optimal airflow velocities and particle sizes during separation. And the current collectors and separators with different particle sizes were used to evaluate and confirm the results of theoretical calculation. In addition, 10 kg of spent LIBs was used to evaluate and confirm whether pneumatic separation can be used in industrial production. Finally, computer simulations were carried out to analyze the separation processes of the Z-shaped pneumatic separator. The spent LIBs were provided by a spent LIB disposal factory in Hunan Province, China, and the spent LIBs consisted of LiFePO Calculations on pneumatic separation were conducted to determine the initial conditions for the pneumatic separation of crushed LIBs. The crushed current collectors and separators were suspended when the rising velocities of airflow were equal to the free sedimentary velocities of the current collectors or separators. Under those conditions, the gravity force (G) of the current collectors or separators can be described as follows: The air resistance ( When the gravity is equal to the air resistance, the co-acting forces of current collectors or separators in vertical direction can be described as Then, the suspension velocities of current collectors or separators can be computed by Eq. In general, the resistance coefficient ( 1) Reynold numbers in viscous resistance zone The Reynold numbers in viscous resistance zone are in the range of Eq. However, Eq. Eq. 2) Reynold numbers in the transition zone The Reynold numbers in the transition zone are in the range of Combined with Eqs. Eq. 3) Reynold numbers in the inertial resistance zone The Reynold numbers in the transition zone are in the range of Eq. In this study, the densities of airflow, separators, and current collectors are 1.225, 910, and 2.36 × 10 The pneumatic separation of current collectors and separators was calculated in detail to study the optimal parameters during pneumatic separation. On the basis of the calculations, a Z-shaped pneumatic separator ( Based on Eq. Based on Eq. Based on Eq. After being crushed, to ensure that the current collectors and separators are completely separated, the particle sizes of spent LIBs are usually 3–7 cm The movements of the current collectors or separators during pneumatic separation are related to the surface shapes of the current collectors or separators. A correction factor ( The suspension velocities of the current collectors and separators are marked as In general, if the air velocities are larger than the suspension velocities, the crushed current collectors or separators will be blown away by the airflow. Therefore, the velocities of the airflow need to be controlled in the range of If the airflow velocities are between the suspension velocities of the current collectors and separators, the crushed spent LIBs can be separated. Therefore, the airflow velocities of 5.94, 6.24, 6.96, 7.8, 8.34, and 8.9 m/s of the airflow velocities were chosen to separate the manual cutting separators and current collectors ( The current collectors are more valuable than separators because they contain many noble metals such as Ni, Co, Mn, Cu, and Li. Therefore, it is important to increase the recovery of current collectors. In addition, if the separators are mixed in the current collectors, then the recovery of current collectors becomes difficult, so the recovery of separators should be increased as well. In a word, it is important to find the optimal velocities under which both the recoveries of separators and current collectors are as high as possible. The relationship between the recovery and airflow velocities under different sizes of mixed current collectors and separators was further studied in detail, and the results are shown in On the basis of pneumatic separation experiments of manually cut current collectors and separators and theoretical calculations on pneumatic separation, the current collectors and separators can be separated efficiently under the optimal conditions (size and airflow velocities are in the range of 3–4 cm and 6.98–7.8 m/s, respectively). Under such optimal conditions, 10 kg of spent LIBs were crushed by a shear crusher and separated by the pneumatic separator ( In conclusion, pneumatic separation experiments for mechanically cut separators and current collectors indicate that pneumatic separation is an effective technology to separate the current collectors and separators produced during the recovery of spent LIBs. The flow field characteristics of the airflow in Z-shaped pneumatic separators were investigated in detail by using ANASYS FLUENT 15.0, and the results are shown in In conclusion, the high turbulent kinetic energies and high velocity vector distributions around the corners led to a high efficiency for the separation of current collectors and separators. The stable velocity distributions and low turbulent kinetic energies in the middle of the cavity benefit the flow of the separated current collectors and separators. The behaviors of current collectors and separators were also examined to study the working mechanism of the pneumatic separator. Therefore, the particle movement behaviors under optimal size (4 cm) were studied in detail to further understand the mechanism of pneumatic separation. The visualized results of the movement of the current collectors and separators under different velocities are shown in For the separators, the particle movement behaviors are almost the same as the current collectors, except the recovery of separators became high with the increase in airflow velocities. On the basis of the computer simulation of particle behaviors, the theoretical recoveries of current collectors and separators under different airflow velocities are shown in Pneumatic separation was proposed to separate valuable current collectors and harmful separators which may lead to plastic pollution in spent LIBs in this study. Theoretical calculations of pneumatic separation indicate that the separators and current collectors can be separated by pneumatic separators with proper size and airflow velocity. Moreover, pneumatic separation experiments of manually cut separators and current collectors indicate that the separation efficiency is almost 100% under optimal sizes and airflow velocities in the ranges of 3 – 4 cm and 6.96 – 7.8 m/s, respectively. In addition, industrial pneumatic separation experiments indicate that the recovery rates of current collectors and separators are 99.23% and 98.64%, respectively, with the airflow velocity and size of 6.96 m/s and 4 cm, respectively. Computer simulations indicate that the special structures in the Z-shaped pneumatic separators result in a high efficiency of the separation of current collectors and separators, thereby fitting well with the experiments. In summary, pneumatic separation is an efficient, clean, and promising technology to separate current collectors and separators in crushed spent LIBs. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: