Niobium is a highly strategic mineral, of which Brazil holds almost all the world's reserves, followed by Canada. This study investigates the prevailing market power for niobium at the country level by using the residual demand approach suggested by Goldberg and Knetter (1999). The empirical evidence on the US and European Union (EU) destination markets, indicates a significant and similar market power for Brazil and yet a non-negligible intra-block trade that might play some role in the EU destination market. Moreover, some complementarity patterns are detected in connection to ferrovanadium alloys.CBMM Anglo American Niobec high strength low alloy steel (HSLA) stainless steel heat resistant steels automotive industry heavy engineering and infrastructure petrochemical sector CBMM superalloys aircraft engines power generation petrochemical sector CBMM superconductors particle accelerators magnetic resonance imaging various small tonnage uses CBMM Functional ceramics catalysts optical electronics The intensity of exports competition among national markets is a recurring topic in the literature. Traditionally, the assessment of market power in selected industries builds on developments in the industrial organization literature, which devised methodologies for identifying the intensity of competition with unobserved marginal costs [see  This study assesses the market power in the US and EU destination markets of Brazilian exports of ferroniobium, based on quarterly data from 2003Q1 to 2016Q1. Those two destination markets respectively represent 14.8% and 31.2% of the total exports of ferroniobium from Brazil. The article contributes to the literature in at least two aspects: Niobium plays an important role in steel alloys for the aerospace industry and has future potential for the industry's superconductors. Although there are other descriptive studies reporting the main supply and demand characteristics of the niobium sector [see A second interest of our study is that the bulk of the residual demand literature do not perform (or mostly do not perform) the tests (unit root, cointegration) about non-stationarities. Exceptions, in terms of a dynamic specification, include The paper is organized as follows. The second section reviews the literature. The third section provides a basic background on the niobium sector. The fourth section discusses the conceptual aspects of residual demand estimation at the country level. The fifth section discusses the construction of the database. The sixth section presents and discusses the econometric results. The seventh section provides some final comments. It is possible to observe, over the last decades, a growing body of the literature that benefits from insights from industrial organization that are incorporated in both theoretical and empirical studies in international economics. Analogous applications to The literature on market power is somewhat small for metals in general and mostly focus on domestic markets with examples including The ferroniobium alloys have a large potential of applications in the industry that ranges from infrastructure and automotive industry to nuclear reactor cores, rocket parts and jet engine components. The major part of the Brazilian niobium production is directed to foreign markets. Among the destination markets for Brazilian niobium in 2016, one can highlight Netherlands (28.7%), China (25.9%), Singapore (14.9%), United States (11.9%), and Japan (9.6%). In the same year, less than 10% of the total production of standard ferroniobium alloy (66% of niobium content and 30% of iron) was directed to the domestic market. It is reasonable to say that the potential for applications of niobium has not yet been fulfilled and, despite the large supply potential and strong market dominance by a few firms in a few countries, the relevance of substitute products cannot be underestimated. In fact, vanadium, molybdenum, manganese, titanium, and tantalum can be used as imperfect substitutes in some alloys, although the substitutions imply efficiency losses and increased costs. It is important to mention the distinctive features of the two major producers and of the two destination markets considered in this study (the United States and the European Union). In Brazil, the cost conditions for niobium extraction are more favorable, as it has open pit mines, in contrast to Canada, where underground mines prevail. This, in principle, would favor the dominance of Brazil. However, other important aspects that could generate costs' discrepancies between Brazil and Canada relate to the refining and conversion steps, since different techniques could be used but the associated data is not available to allow the assessment of the importance of such discrepancies. Some additional aspects of the niobium production process are summarized in It may be also relevant to consider the prevailing tariff structure in the destination markets. During the sample period of our analysis no changes have occurred but some contrasts are worth mentioning. In the US destination market, import tariffs for ferroniobium are 5% and 0% for Brazilian and Canadian exports, respectively, with corresponding market shares of 65% and 35% in 2017. In the EU destination market, in contrast, no import duties are charged for ferroniobium exports from Brazil and Canada and the corresponding market shares were 85% and 15% in 2017 A distinctive feature of the EU destination market pertains to the intense trade of ferroniobium within the EU area. Thus, although the Netherlands typically appears as the entry for niobium to the European Union, non-negligible intra-trade occurs within that economic block. In the next sub-section, we outline the data sources and definitions of the variables used in the estimated system for country-level residual demands for ferroniobium.   The approach advanced by To obtain the residual demand for the reference country, it is necessary to consider the optimizing behavior of the remaining competitors. Thus, from the first-order conditions follows the equality between the perceived marginal revenue and marginal cost. However, as firm-level data are not available, as in marginal cost in the source country is given by Q Similarly, the following expression represents the supply relations of the competitors: Expression (4) condenses the set of n-1 supply relationships of the reference country's exporting rivals. The simultaneous solution of the demand equations given by (2) and the supply relationships given by (4) expresses the competitors' prices as a function of costs (W As emphasized by the authors, expression (5) considers a set of n-1 partially reduced forms for the reference country's competitors. Thus, the final step involves the substitution of eςςquation 5 into equation This expression comprises three classes of observables: the quantity produced by the exporter The estimation of such a class of models will clearly requires the consideration of instrumental variables methods given the endogeneity of the variable The estimation of the residual demands and the related elasticities constitute the approach considered in the present study for assessing market power. This fact is important in our case given the data unavailability at the firm-level and led to the use of data at the country-level. Nevertheless, despite such data limitation, the strong dominance of a particular Brazilian firm in that industry makes the aggregate behavior similar to the one by that referred firm. The interpretation of the (inverse) residual demand elasticity as properly portraying the intensity of competition relies on its association with the theoretical mark-up as given by the Lerner index L = As contended by In the present study, we consider the estimation of a system of residual demands for niobium from Brazil as directed toward the US and EU destination markets. We consider a log-log functional form that, in generic terms, would lead to the following expression for a particular residual demand, where ε stands for a stochastic disturbance: It is worth emphasizing that the conceptual experiment considered by residual demand estimation aims to isolate in the data, situations where firm-specific (or country-specific) cost shocks can be transmitted to prices. This requires some form of instrumental variable estimation, where firm-specific cost shocks must be instrumented for. The coefficient pertaining to the (inverse) residual demand elasticity (η In contrast with As we shall see later in the application, the evidence suggests the prevalence of cointegration among the variables. In Section The data set was constructed using different sources. The different indexes used were put in terms of a common base period, and the basic categories, as in any NEIO study, include prices, quantities, demand shifters, and cost shifters. The construction of the database aimed to match disaggregated information in connection to the niobium as closely as possible, although in some cases, some series are more aggregated. In the present application, exports from Brazil and Canada were considered in terms of two destination markets, namely, the United States and the European Union in terms of its main entrance market represented by the Netherlands. We consider quarterly data over the period from 2003Q1 to 2016Q1. The choice of this frequency reflects the data availability. In fact, electricity prices for Brazil are only available after 2003, whereas GDP data are only available on a quarterly basis. Furthermore, niobium exports of Brazil to the two selected destination markets (the United States and European Union) involved some missing monthly data. The construction of quarterly data involved using the averages of the existing values within each quarter. The two markets received around of 50% of the global ferroniobium exports along the whole studied period, whereas the two aforementioned producing countries are responsible for 90% of the global production. As regards the exchange rates, sample averages were calculated from daily data. Finally, all the series, unless already seasonally adjusted, were subject to the usual method using the X-13 ARIMA-SEATS module available in the R platform. Furthermore, two dummy variables were created. First, it was important to acknowledge the sudden niobium price increase related to the abrupt demand increase from China. Thus, a dummy variable, DSB, was considered, which assumes the value 1 during the 2007–2009 period and the value 0 otherwise. Second, non-negligible intra-trade within the EU block was considered, using the dummy variable DSHARE, which assumes the value 1 during the period from 2013Q1 to 2013Q4 and the value 0 otherwise. In fact, the Netherlands typically acts as the entry port for the EU destination market, but over the years its role has shifted between that of an importer and an exporter: between 2000 and 2012, it acted more as an importer of Brazilian niobium than as an exporter to the remaining EU countries (except in 2007). However, a reversal in that pattern was observed in 2013, with Netherland supplying 77% of the niobium imported by the European Union, whereas Brazil provided only 6%. Thus, the aforementioned dummy variable aims to control for the effect of the Dutch market in the EU destination market. Some industry demand shifters associated with the aerospace, automotive, and infrastructure industries were considered at first. However, as we will implement the Johnsen's cointegration test, all variables have to be integrated of order 1 [I(1)], but not all were diagnosed as I(1) series, and even in favorable cases, no satisfactory results were obtained in terms of the instruments’ validity. Thus, we have opted to consider GDP as a demand shifter. The results are presented in Since the involved series are I(1), we can proceed with the cointegration test by The logic of residual demand estimation involves identifying situations where there are incentives for cost pass-through following specific shocks, and the ability to identify such situations indicates the prevalence of market power and is summarized by the residual demand elasticity. The oligopolistic feature of the interaction between competitors would suggest an endogeneity issue that must be addressed using a method of instrumental variables. In the specific applications of the present study, we consider a three-stage least squares (3SLS) estimator. This system estimator allows obtaining more efficient estimates by accounting for possible correlation between the errors of the equations of the two destination markets, which could reflect common shocks. All the estimations were implemented in the Stata 12.0 software. The results for the US and EU destination markets are presented in In the present application, we have 3 excluded instruments for 1 endogenous variable to be instrumented, and, therefore, one can also interpret the test as an over-identification test. In the US destination market, the individual significance of the estimated coefficients is generally satisfactory, and their signs were as expected. Furthermore, the overall results displayed robustness across different lag structures. Examining the specific results, it is first worth highlighting the significant coefficients pertaining to the dummy variable for structural break (DSB). The interpretations of the estimated coefficients in a residual demand model are not always straightforward, with the exception of the main parameter of interest, given by the residual demand elasticity [see The negative sign of the exchange rate is intuitive, as the appreciation of the local currency would raise the cost of the competitor in the destination market and thus allow Brazilian exporters to raise their prices. However, in the case of the price of vanadium, the negative and significant coefficient plays a complementary role as regards ferroniobium in high performance alloys. Finally, the main coefficient of interest is the elasticity of the residual demand, which under reasonable assumptions can be interpreted as the Lerner index. The 3SLS results imply a statistically significant residual demand elasticity of −0.725 (whose p-value is 0.000), which indicates significant market power for Brazil in the US destination market, considering the restrictions imposed by the main competitor (Canada), as it was already expected due the characteristic of this market mentioned before. As regards the EU destination market, the statistical fit is also satisfactory in terms of the significance of the individual coefficients, although with two exceptions. The effect of the abrupt demand change in China, as captured by Again, the main coefficient of interest is the elasticity of the residual demand, which also reveals important market power for Brazil in EU destination market. The 3SLS results imply a statistically significant residual demand elasticity of −0.814 (whose p-value is 0.002). It is worth noting that, although there is a slight numeric difference between the coefficients of elasticity of the residual demand from USA and EU destination markets, this difference does not hold under a statistical point of view, as seen by testing of the following linear restriction: The niobium is a strategic mineral with important applications in space, aircrafts and military industries and with great possibilities of use in civil construction and gas and oil industries. The Brazilian near monopoly situation causes a big concern in developed countries as can be seen in the criticality list elaborated by specialized agencies from the US and EU, This study assessed the intensity of competition in the international market for niobium in the US and EU destination markets. The adopted approach built on country-level residual demand estimation as advanced by Statistically, the results for the residual demand of Brazil in both destination markets were generally satisfactory. As regards the main parameter of interest, the residual demand elasticity, the evidence suggested a significant market power as would be expected due to the very strong dominance of Brazil vis à vis Canada in supply of ferroniobium. Theses results confirm supply risks assessments found in criticality studies mentioned in introduction section and could make this method to be a relevant sub indicator complementary to the other sub-indicators about criticality. Indeed, as it simultaneously takes into account the supply and demand aspects (cost and demand shifters) and can be estimated not only on the upstream market (raw material market, here niobium), but also on the downstream market (where the material is used by importers in their production and international trade of product, here steel, superalloys, etc.), this can be seen as an expanded criticality. Although it was not possible to detect a statistically significant difference between the market power of Brazilian exports in the US and the EU destination markets, a non-negligible intra-block trade was detected and might play some role in the EU destination market. Additionally, it was possible to detect a complementary role of ferrovanadium alloys in relation to ferroniobium. In fact, the price of vanadium exerts a negative effect on ferroniobium quantities in both destinations markets and therefore the referred intermediate goods can be seen as complementary. As mentioned before, there in exist fact production processes that make simultaneous use of both ferroniobium and vanadium alloys. A tentative note may raise the case for export promotion in that particular case, as the potential for the use of niobium in high-performance alloys does not seem to have been fully explored. Perhaps, incentives in terms of funding for R&D projects associated with niobium could be desirable in Brazil to some extent. In fact, the dominant focus on exporting mostly primary metals, as for example occurs with iron ore, seems less desirable than aiming at exports of goods with greater value added. Future research may progress in different directions, as for example: Further exploring the role of alternative minerals used in high-performance alloys, such as tantalum and molybdenum, should the data be available. Other products derived from niobium could be investigated, in particular, niobium oxide. Given the growing importance of the Chinese destination market, it should be considered in future studies should the necessary data be available. The analysis could be also enhanced by considering possible dynamic specifications for residual demand. Such an extension has not yet been considered in the context of residual demand estimation.  No funding was received for this paper and there are no conflicts of interest. We have implemented 3 different tests of stationarity to be able to evaluate the order of integration of all variables in the model. Augmented Dickey and Fuller (ADF) test, which is the most widely used test, Phillips-Perron (PP) and Kwiatkowski–Phillips–Schmidt–Shin (KPSS). The tests were implemented in the R plataform with the urca package. The results, for PP, ADF and KPSS tests, have indicated the all variables are integrated of order 1 but Consider a levels VAR(p) model:      The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at