The work focuses on the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide over solid catalysts undergoing mechanical activation by ball milling. The rate of carbon monoxide conversion at individual ball impacts was estimated by measuring the impact frequency, the mass of powders involved in individual impacts and their duration. The rate of the mechanochemical hydrogenation process was compared with the one of the corresponding thermal process. An enhancement of the catalyst activity under mechanical activation conditions is observed.The mechanical activation (MA) of materials is based on the application of non-hydrostatic stresses to solid phases and their consequent deformation Also due to its ease of utilization and apparent simplicity, MA has been variously exploited in areas of application as different as powder metallurgy The experimental evidences hitherto obtained concern solid–solid For clarity, the characteristics of catalysts and the catalytic runs will be dealt with in separate subsections. A brief description of the procedures concerning MA is first given. Catalyst powders were mechanically treated inside the stainless steel reactor of a commercial Mixer/Mill mod. 8000 (Spex CertiPrep Inc., Metuchen, NJ, USA). The reactor has a cylindrical inner chamber about 2 and 6 At the aforementioned With Actually, deformation events due to the intense stresses generated by attrition of surface asperities can give rise to transient local temperatures as high as 1000 The catalysts consist of Co Catalyst powders were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Rigaku D/Max diffractometer equipped with a Cu radiation tube and a graphite monochromator in the diffracted beam. Analyses were carried out under Ar atmosphere with a special sample holder. The XRD patterns are shown in Experiments carried out with a Malvern Zetasizer nano s90 indicate that (Co The specific surface area The inhomogeneous character of catalyst powders, i.e. the presence of interfaces between metallic phase and support, was investigated by low-angle XRD. Full details will be reported elsewhere. It suffices here to report that supported Co A few final words of comment about the catalysts. First, the mechanical treatment allows the transition of anatase to brookite and rutile roughly at room temperature, whereas about 1000 CO hydrogenation was carried out under both MA and isothermal conditions on 8 Experiments under isothermal conditions were also carried out in batch. The catalyst powders were placed inside the reactor and exposed to a 1:3 CO:H CO hydrogenation was monitored by gas-chromatography (GC). A Fisons 8000 apparatus equipped with a HWD detector was employed to monitor CO and H The relative amounts of products change with the time of mechanical treatment. However, the initial stages of CO hydrogenation are characterized by a proportional decrease of CO and H For simplicity, attention was focused on the catalytic behavior of powders during the first stages of CO hydrogenation. In this way, CO conversion and methane formation can be considered almost synonymous terms. The catalytic runs points out that only H The number The number All the The experimental findings described above represent the starting point for a deeper analysis of the kinetic features of the CO hydrogenation processes carried out under MA conditions and a better comprehension of the MA ability of enhancing the rates of chemical transformations. It is first necessary worth noting that a direct comparison between the CO hydrogenation rates estimated for processes performed under MA and isothermal conditions is in principle wrong. In fact, the rates of CO hydrogenation under MA are referred to absolute time. However, this is not the best quantity to which refer the transformation. The reason is that most of time the ball simply travels between the opposite bases of the reactor, with no effect on the powders. Only at impact, non-hydrostatic stresses can indeed operate on them. It follows that the number Along this line, two other points are worth noticing. First, the CO conversion at any given individual impact between the ball and the reactor walls must be ascribed to the chemical action of the mass With such premises, it is relatively easy to work out a specific rate It is here worth remembering that all the aforementioned quantities were measured during experiments. In particular, These All the different The enhancement of the catalytic activity observed under MA conditions cannot be simply related to temperature and surface effects. In fact, although it is not reasonable to expect temperature rises larger than 150 A final observation concerning the different performances of the (Co The experimental findings discussed in the present work point out that the MA has a marked effect on the performances of catalyst powders. A significant enhancement of the chemical reactivity of catalysts working under MA conditions is observed, which can be reasonably related to the deformation processes involving the powder amount trapped at individual impacts between the ball and the reactor walls. A satisfactory explanation of the experimental evidences obtained should rely on the intimate nature of such deformation processes, which is however quite obscure. For this reason, no definite rationale for the observed behavior is available. In spite of this, the rough order-of-magnitude estimates of the CO hydrogenation rates under MA conditions clearly define an interesting scenario which deserves deeper investigations. Financial support has been provided by the University of Cagliari and the University of Sassari.