Purpose
                  ESWL® is a minimally invasive, efficacious therapy for most renal stones. However, an optimal voltage treatment protocol ensuring effective stone comminution while minimizing tissue injury is not well established. We performed a prospective, randomized trial of the stone-free rate and renoprotective effect of an escalating vs a fixed voltage treatment strategy during ESWL.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  Between February 2006 and June 2008 we enrolled 45 patients undergoing ESWL for a renal stone in this institutional review board approved trial. A Dornier® DoLi 50 lithotriptor was used. Patients were randomized to receive the escalating strategy of 500 shocks at 14k V, 1,000 at 16 kV and 1,000 at 18 kV or the fixed strategy of 2,500 shocks at 18 kV. Abdominal x-ray was done to determine the stone-free rate at 1 month. Voided urine was analyzed for β2-microglobulin and microalbumin before, immediately after and 1 week after ESWL to evaluate renal damage.
               
                  Results
                  Median patient age was 48 years. Median stone size was 8 mm. Of patients in the escalating group 81% were stone-free vs 48% in the fixed group (p <0.03). There was a significant difference between microalbumin and β2-microglobulin 1 week after the procedure (p = 0.046 vs 0.045). There was trend toward a difference in microalbumin and β2-microglobulin immediately after the procedure (p = 0.17 and 0.25, respectively).
               
                  Conclusions
                  This prospective, randomized study shows that an escalating voltage treatment strategy produces better stone comminution than a fixed strategy. The study suggests that there may be a protective effect against damage caused by ESWL with an escalating treatment strategy.I Approximately 2,000 to 2,500 shocks are required for successful renal stone comminution using the Dornier DoLi 50 lithotriptor. Numerous investigations have been done to determine the level of urinary enzymes excreted during ESWL to monitor cellular and renal injury. To our knowledge we are the first to examine the efficacy and safety of an escalating compared to a fixed voltage of shock waves applied during ESWL in patients with renal stones. We tested the clinical validity of the observation that an escalating voltage strategy is advantageous in animal models. From February 2006 to December 2008 we enrolled in this study 45 consecutive patients who met strict inclusion criteria while undergoing ESWL for a radiographically documented renal stone. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this registered clinical study. All patients signed consent forms before study inclusion. A Dornier DoLi 50 lithotriptor was used for shock wave lithotripsy. Patients were randomized into 2 groups. Patients received 500 shocks at 14 kV, 1,000 at 16 kV and 1,000 at 18 kV in the escalating group. Patients received 2,500 shocks at 18 kV in the standard group. Biplanar fluoroscopy was done for stone localization approximately every 250 shocks to ensure proper targeting. The lithotriptor was synchronized with the patient echocardiogram with a resulting shock wave rate of between 60 and 80 shocks per minute. Before randomization complete pretreatment evaluation, and noncontrast spiral CT of the abdomen and pelvis, and/or plain x-ray of the kidneys, ureters and bladder was done. Stone length was measured as the maximal stone diameter. Study inclusion criteria targeted patients with a single, previously untreated, radiopaque stone between 5 and 15 mm in diameter who were candidates for ESWL. Patients were eligible for study if a stent was placed preoperatively. Patients were excluded from analysis if prior treatment for the targeted stone was done, or there was evidence of multiple stones or stones in a caliceal diverticulum, obstruction distal to the stone, concomitant urinary tract infection, bleeding disorder, radiolucent or known cystine stones, or renal anomalies such as horseshoe kidney, ureteropelvic junction obstruction or infundibular stenosis. Voided urine was obtained and analyzed for β2-microglobulin and microalbumin before, immediately after and 1 week after ESWL. Patients underwent plain x-ray of the kidneys, ureters and bladder 1 and 3 months postoperatively. A blinded urologist (MG) ascertained treatment outcome at these visits. Treatment success was defined as stone-free status with no residual fragment or renal fragments less than 2 mm vs renal fragments greater than 2 mm after a single ESWL treatment. All analysis was done using the intent to treat principal. Stone-free rates and the impact of pretreatment variables were analyzed by randomization group. Failure included cases requiring repeat ESWL, ureteroscopy or PCNL for residual fragments greater than 5 mm, symptomatic fragments of any size or obstructing fragments. Statistical analysis was performed using the 2-sided Fisher exact t test to detect differences in outcomes of up to 1.25 SD with 80% power at 0.05 significance. Power calculations were done by statisticians at our institution to determine the number of patients needed to detect statistical significance. Urinary enzyme levels were compared with the Student t test with statistical significance considered at 2-sided p <0.05. A total of 45 patients with a single renal stone were randomized to escalating or fixed treatment strategy for ESWL ( To assess renal damage levels of the urinary enzymes microalbumin and β2-microglobulin were evaluated. No complications were seen in the escalating group but 2 complications and 1 treatment failure occurred in the standard group. In 1 patient a large hematoma required hospital admission for pain and decreasing hematocrit. The patient responded to conservative therapy. The other patient in the standard group required ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy for a 5 mm stone fragment obstructing the proximal ureter. Postoperatively abdominal x-ray in 1 patient revealed stone fragments greater than 3 mm in the same area as the lithotripsy. CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed a caliceal diverticulum. The patient required PCNL and fulguration of the diverticular lining. The patient was included in analysis, complying with the intent to treat principle. ESWL is minimally invasive, efficacious therapy for most renal stones. However, an optimal treatment protocol ensuring effective stone comminution while minimizing tissue injury is not well established. Stone comminution is based on the number and rate of shocks delivered, and the amount of energy or voltage applied to the stone. Adequate stone fragmentation is the consequence of stress wave induced tensile forces and spallation, Approximately 2,000 to 2,500 shocks are required for successful renal stone comminution using the Dornier DoLi 50 lithotriptor. The group from Duke University performed a similar in vivo experiment. In our study stone comminution was more efficacious with escalating voltage, as shown by followup abdominal x-ray 1 month after ESWL. Treatment success was based on the evaluation of abdominal x-ray after a single ESWL session. Notably abdominal x-ray and not CT was used to determine the primary end point outcome and the stone-free rate may have been overestimated. The stone-free rate was determined by clinically detectable, less than 2 mm fragments on abdominal x-ray. No patient experienced obstruction from fragments with the escalating treatment strategy. One patient in the fixed treatment strategy group required ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy for a retained 5 mm fragment. Another patient in the fixed group underwent PCNL for stone fragments retained in a caliceal diverticulum that were not found preoperatively. During PCNL 1 fragment was 4 mm and another was 2 mm, indicating that the strategy broke up the stone into clinically undetectable fragments. Urinary β2-microglobulin and microalbumin measure proximal renal tubular and glomerular damage, respectively. There was a significant increase in β2-microglobulin and microalbumin 1 week after ESWL in the fixed strategy group, suggesting greater renal insult. One patient in the fixed group had a renal hematoma requiring hospital admission for pain control and decreasing hematocrit. This may suggest renal parenchymal damage. A number of patients did not return for the 1-week followup analysis of urinary enzymes and, thus, they were excluded from analysis. Due to the strict inclusion criteria and need for close followup the sample size was small. This sample size limited our ability to accurately measure renal parenchymal damage and evaluate the influence of factors that differed in patient subgroups, such as stone size and site. Thus, definitive conclusions cannot be made on the true risk of complications in the 2 groups. Our study differs from that of Demirci et al, who also compared escalating and fixed treatment strategies. Although the clinical significance of renal injury secondary to ESWL remains questionable in healthy patients with 2 normal kidneys, those with a solitary kidney or chronic renal insufficiency may experience a broad spectrum of effects ranging from at least a minimal serum creatinine increase to acute renal failure. An ESWL treatment strategy that produces less renal damage with increased efficacy would obviously be in the best interest of these patients. This randomized, prospective study shows that an escalating voltage treatment strategy produced better stone comminution than a fixed voltage treatment strategy. The study suggests that there may be a protective effect of an escalating treatment strategy. There was significantly increased renal damage in the fixed group, as shown by increased urine microalbumin and β2-microglobulin. The significance of this is questionable in patients with 2 healthy kidneys but it may be important in those with a solitary kidney or renal insufficiency.