This paper reports the successful synthesis of nanostructure bredigite powder by mechanical activation with subsequent annealing. Talc, calcium carbonate, and amorphous silica were used as initial reactants. The initial materials were milled for various times and then annealed in order to obtain single-phase nanostructure bredigite powder. The results showed that during the formation of bredigite powder some intermediate compounds such as wollastonite and larnite were formed. Single-phase nanostructure bredigite powder was synthesized by 10–60h of mechanical activation with subsequent annealing at 1200°C for 1h. The bredigite powder obtained after 60h milling and subsequent annealing at 1200°C for 1h had a mean crystallite size of about 50nm and mean particle size of about 779nm.Bredigite, named after the physical chemist, Max Albrecht Bredig, is a calcium magnesium silicate compound with an orthorhombic structure and the chemical formula of Ca Naturally occurring bredigite is often not pure and associated with other minerals. Therefore, bredigite was produced with several synthetic techniques including the conventional solid-state reaction Talc (98% purity, Merck), calcium carbonate (99% purity, Aldrich), and amorphous silica (99% purity, Aldrich) powders were used as starting materials. Appropriate amounts of CaCO The morphology of powder particles was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in a Philips XL30 at an acceleration voltage of 20 The obtained thermogravimetric (TG) curve of ball milled powder for 10  Reaction Some peaks of silica could be distinguished at the XRD patterns due to the fact that the reaction Formation of larnite from wollastonite was reported by Mazzucato and Gualtieri previously As can be seen, at this stage, the amount of bredigite phase was low due to the diffusion mechanism of the bredigite formation process. In order to obtain single-phase bredigite powder, mechanical activation should be accomplished for longer time to combine and homogenize the powder mass and consequently enhances the bredigite formation after subsequent annealing. With increasing the milling time to 1 After 5 With increasing the milling time to 10   Single-phase nanostructure bredigite powder was synthesized by utilizing mechanical activation and subsequent annealing of talc, calcium carbonate, and amorphous silica. A mechanism has been proposed for the formation of bredigite. It was found that during the synthesis of bredigite powder some intermediate compounds such as wollastonite and larnite were formed. Furthermore, it is possible that other transition compounds such as Ca