Groundwater buoyancy force, calculated by using the Archimedes' Principle, provides a fundamental basis for the anti-flotation design of buoyant structures. Owning to the limitations of large-scale field measurements and small-scale laboratory model tests, previous practitioners indicated that the measured buoyancy force was slightly different from the calculated Archimedes' buoyancy force. However, this argument is still questionable in the academia. This study hence introduced an experimental investigation of groundwater buoyancy force on shallow foundations embedded in saturated clay ground based on the “half interval” search method. By setting the weight of model buckets in an “arithmetic sequence”, the groundwater buoyancy force was obtained based on the average weight of the “heaviest” model bucket that floated and the “lightest” model bucket that did not float under the same hydrostatic uplift loading. The proposed “half-interval search” method has many advantages, i.e., didn't rely on any instrumentations, avoided limitations of devices/sensors, and maintained high quality of test accuracy. In addition, the complete test processes were recorded, during which the buoyancy force change could be observed lively. Test results demonstrated that the measured buoyancy force on foundations in clay ground was smaller than the theoretical buoyancy force, which is consistent with the large-scale field measurements, indicating that the proposed half interval search method is reliable and robust.hydraulic head density of water/soil gravity, 9.8 unit weight of water soil-side wall interface friction force lateral earth coefficient at rest soil-side wall interface friction coefficient unit weight of soil water content weight of i void ratio permeability constant, unit is reduction coefficient cross-sectional area buoyancy force gravity force supporting force cohesion force perimeter of the model box Groundwater buoyancy force, which in conjunction with environmental loads, often cause significant uplift of shallow foundations/buoyant infrastructures ( Small Scale models are usually developed in soil laboratory to investigate the behavior of full-scale field prototype models, which might have size and up-scaling effects, however, always offer a simple and less expense way for preliminary studies of the fundamental behaviors of the prototype model. In this research, round plastic buckets were adopted to simulate shallow foundations embedded in clayey soils and subjected to constant hydrostatic uplift loading. Although the plastic buckets do not scale up to field dimensions of real foundations, the test data would be helpful for numerical analysis and provide in-depth understanding of the behavior of full-size models. The flotation test setup includes: (1) A giant water tank (which was built by constructing a concrete test pit in the laboratory, Water pluviation method was adopted to construct the clay layer in the water tank. The soil constructing process was achieved by natural sedimentation and self-consolidation, where each soil layer (0.1 Once the test setup has achieved, model bucket flotation tests then started. The weight of the four buckets was adjusted to Clayey soil was used as the foundation soil in this research. Its grain size distribution cure is shown in Theoretically, shallow foundations/buoyant infrastructures will (1) Completely float on water; (2) partially float, where part of the foundation is still embedded in the clay; or (3) no flotation, when subjected to constant hydrostatic loading. In this study, flotation tests were carried out and each test took 10 days long. Based on the test observations ( According to the classical Archimedes' principle, when the model bucket is submerged in water, it is subjected to buoyancy force the theoretical buoyancy force on the model bucket could be calculated by Based on the test results ( When the model bucket is placed in the clay under the condition of flotation (at the equilibrium of floatation, when the model bucket is about to float, The adhesion force Assume the reduction of the buoyancy force is linear in clay, a buoyancy force reduction coefficient, Substitute the There are three unknowns in Eq. The groundwater buoyancy force on shallow foundations embedded in normally consolidated clayey soil was investigated by conducting laboratory flotation test. The groundwater buoyancy force was obtained by carrying out the “half-interval search” of the model buckets whose weights were set in “arithmetic sequence”. Compared with the previous method of measuring groundwater buoyancy force, the proposed “half-interval search” method has many advantages, i.e., didn't rely on any instrumentations, avoided limitations of devices/sensors, and maintained high quality of test accuracy. In addition, the complete test processes were recorded, during which flotation of the model bucket could directly be observed. Test results demonstrated that the measured buoyancy force on foundations in clay was smaller than the theoretical buoyancy force, which is consistent with the large-scale field measurements, indicating that the proposed half interval search method is reliable and robust.