SUMMARY
               The era of shoulder replacement began at the end of the 19th century with Péan who followed Glück's ideas. During the fifties, acrylic humeral prosthesis was used in France mainly to face complex upper humerus fractures. However, history of shoulder replacement really started with Charles S. Neer. He designed his first humeral prosthesis in 1951 and modified it in 1973 to match it with a glenoid component. Neer's contribution to shoulder replacement is tremendous. He created a new concept of minimally constrained implant, aiming at reproducing the anatomy. He also detailed the operative technique of prostheses for complex fractures or arthropathies, the post-operative rehabilitation and evaluated his results. Most of his principles are still true today. His studies and those of the many users of his prosthesis allowed to determine the limits of his concept: rotator cuff insufficiency and weakness of glenoid fixation. Other prosthetic systems were then designed. Modularity was applied to the humeral component to match the various build of patients. These so-called second generation prostheses were not really a great improvement. Boileau and Walch, after anatomical studies that demonstrated great variations of upper humerus anatomy, introduced a new concept: prosthetic adaptability. A more complex modularity allows, from a bone cut through the anatomical neck, to reconstruct a humeral epiphysis very close to patient's anatomy. The third generation of anatomical humeral prosthesis was born. Many authors attempted to find solutions to the difficult problem of glenoid fixation. Operative technique significantly improved. Many modifications of articular and non articular surfaces and of anchorage appeared but there is no ideal glenoid implant today. Improvements of uncemented fixation were applied to shoulder replacement but cementless fixation was not very successful on the humeral side in France and was abandoned on the glenoid side. Besides these conventional prostheses, other arthroplasties are now available. Fracture prosthesis are used today. Bipolar humeral prosthesis did not convince. Cup resurfacing requires an almost intact epiphysis and could be interesting in young patients because it is bone sparing. However, the greatest recent step forward in shoulder arthroplasty is the reverse arthroplasty designed by Grammont. The concept of fixed fulcrum prosthesis is not new. Many attempts occurred during the seventies but they failed. The success of the Grammont prosthesis is based on its more medial and more distal center of rotation. It allows restoration of the active anterior elevation despite cuff insufficiency. Lack of active external rotation can be compensated using tendon transfer. Survivorship is very superior to what was expected. This arthroplasty should be used in rather elderly patients only, because revision surgery is difficult and uncertain. However, its indications widely spread.