This paper mainly investigates the flotation kinetics of coal in the flotation column. The flotation tests were carried out in the Inflatable Cyclonic Flotation Column (ICFC) which consists of two parts, i.e., the inflatable flotation unit and the cyclone flotation zone. The flotation rates of −0.5 + 0.25 mm, −0.25 + 0.074 mm, and −0.5 + 0 mm size fractions of coal were obtained respectively with different aeration rates. Based on the first-order kinetics model, the fitting parameters of four kinds of traditional dynamic models for the experimental data were obtained by the MATLAB software. In addition, a new flotation kinetics model was developed to match the column flotation result. It was found that the flotation rate obviously increased with the increasing aeration rate independent of the size fraction. The second-order kinetics model was suitable for the −0.25 + 0.074 mm and −0.5 + 0 mm size fraction of coal. For the −0.5 + 0.25 mm size fraction, the correlation coefficient (R
                     
                        2
                     ) of the new model was close to 1 and the Sum of Squares for Error (SSE) was close to 0, indicating that the new model fitted the flotation result very well.Froth flotation is a physic-chemical separation process based on the attachment of hydrophobic particles to air bubbles, which is widely used in the separation of fine minerals [ The study of flotation kinetics can be traced back to 1930s when the first flotation model was proposed by Zuniga [ This study examined the influence of aeration rate on the flotation behavior of coal of different particle size distributions using the Inflatable Cyclonic Flotation Column (ICFC). The traditional kinetic model was used to describe the characteristics of the flotation process. In addition, a new kinetics model was developed to describe the flotation process of coal of each size fraction. The results of this paper are expected to improve the column flotation efficiency and enrich the flotation kinetics models. A coal sample used in this study was obtained from Tangkou mine located in Shandong province, China. The coal sample was screened to pass 0.5 mm. The size distribution and ash analysis of the coal sample are shown in The schematic of the laboratory Inflatable Cyclonic Flotation Column (ICFC) separation system is shown in The system can be divided into three parts, i.e., the gas supply system, the feed device and the ICFC. The gas supply system consisted of an air compressor, a pressure regulating valve and a gas flow meter. The feed device was an agitation tank. The ICFC consisted of two parts, i.e., the inflatable flotation unit and the cyclone flotation zone. The inflatable flotation unit was a cubic structured column with the length of 100 cm and the section area of 15 ∗ 15 cm Compared with the flotation cell, flotation kinetics tests in flotation column are more difficult because the pulp level needs to be maintained at a certain height during the whole flotation process. Through the preliminary exploration tests, the pulp level was fixed to be 20 cm lower than the overflow launder, which means that the thickness of the foam layer was 20 cm. The solid concentration of the flotation feed was 80 g/L. Kerosene was used as the collector and octanol was used as the frother. The actual volume of flotation column was around 35 L. Coal particles with three particle size fractions, namely the −0.5 + 0.25 mm, −0.25 + 0.074 mm, and −0.5 + 0 mm size fraction, were used as the feed in the flotation tests. The collector dosage of 1727 g/t, 1343 g/t, and 1600 g/t and the frother dosage of 638 g/t, 510 g/t, and 510 g/t were used in the flotation tests, respectively. In the flotation tests, the pulp was firstly agitated in the tank for 3 min. Secondly, the predetermined dosage of kerosene was added and the slurry was conditioned for 2 min. Thirdly, the predetermined dosage of octanol was added and the slurry was conditioned for another 1 min. At last, the coal slurry was fed into the flotation column. At the same time, the circulation pump was switched on and the air compressor was opened, the gas flow meter was adjusted to obtain the required aeration rate. Five groups of the froth products, referred to J1, J2, J3, J4, and J5, were collected separately during the flotation periods of 0–0.5, 0.5–1, 1–2, 2–3 and 3–5 min. The tailings in the flotation column were also collected. Tap water was added during the whole flotation process to maintain a constant pulp level. The aeration rate was varied from 0.25 m  When the flotation process proceeded to 3 min, the cumulative combustible recovery of −0.5 + 0.25 mm size fraction exceeded that of the finer size fractions. Moreover, the higher the aeration rate, the smaller the difference between the cumulative combustible recovery of coarse and fine size fractions was observed. At the end of flotation, the cumulative combustible recovery of −0.5 + 0.25 mm size fraction was about 1% higher than that of the −0.25 + 0.074 mm size fraction under the aeration rate of 0.25 m  The main task of flotation dynamics is to study the regularity of flotation rate and reflect the speed of flotation process. Dynamic model has important guiding significance for the industrial practice. The research on the flotation kinetics mainly focused on change of flotation rate constant Considering the mineral concentration change and recovery changes are in good agreement, the n-order dynamic model is also written as, Model 1: when Model 2: the first-order rectangular distributing model is expressed as, Model 3: when Model 4: the second-order rectangular distributing model is expressed as, The results show that for the single-mineral flotation of narrow-grained grain, the flotation process follows the classical first-order kinetics equation. For the coal samples used in the paper, supposing that the flotation process accords with the first-order dynamic model and assuming that the maximum combustible recovery According to Eq.  In order to further explore the flotation kinetics characteristics of various size fractions in the Inflatable Cyclonic Flotation Column under different aeration rates, the MATLAB software was used to fit the experimental data for the above four models, and the In After the comparison of fitting models and experimental values, we can see that the Defining the maximum theoretical flotation recovery as After the first froth product was floated, the maximum combustible recovery value of the remaining floatable material was ( Similarly,  The total recovery of all froth products is given by, Combining Eqs. Assuming that each flotation time The above equation is equivalent to, If the time interval Eq. Therefore, the instantaneous flotation rate function can be given by, In conjunction with Eq. The original function of Eq. In order to verify the adaptability of the model to different size fraction of coal particles under different inflatable conditions, the results of the flotation speed tests were processed using the MATLAB software. The results of the related model parameters are shown in In order to determine the accuracy of the new model further, the experimental value of the combustible recovery was compared with the calculated value of the new model, and the results are shown in From The influence of aeration rate on the flotation behavior of different particle size fractions was studied. According to the first-order kinetic model, the MATLAB software was used to obtain the fitting parameters of four kinds of traditional dynamic models for the experimental data. Based on the investigation, a new kinetic model was proposed. The correlation coefficient value A new kinetic model suitable for describing the flotation process of various size fraction of coal particles under different aeration rates was established, i.e., The prediction values were consistent with the experimental data. The flotation rate of coarse and fine coal slime can be obviously improved with the increasing of the aeration rate of Inflatable Cyclonic Flotation Column, especially for the coarse coal slime separation. The This paper was supported by the