The use of microwave ovens in the acid roasting of spodumene as part of the process for lithium extraction was investigated and compared with conventional furnace heating. The effects of various key process factors were evaluated. Conventional acid roasting of 5 g of β-spodumene at 250 °C for 60 min was highly effective in extracting lithium in the presence of 80% excess concentrated sulphuric acid. The microwave process achieved nearly complete recovery of lithium with 20 s of irradiation. The potential to reduce the amount of excess acid required by grinding the sample to achieve a slight reduction in particle size was studied, and almost complete recovery was observed with only 15% excess acid. Microwave irradiation of the sample for longer than 20 s resulted in a reduction in lithium extraction, with the lowest value being 42% after 240 s of microwave irradiation. The mechanism of heating and the reverse reaction of Li+ and H+ were explored as possible explanations of this effect. The energy consumption of the conventional muffle furnace heating method in this study was calculated to be 10.4 MJ which was significantly greater than the microwave energy of 15.4 kJ required to achieve the same percentage of Li extraction from β-spodumene.Spodumene (LiAlSi Since 1950 the most common method of extraction of lithium from spodumene has been conversion of the refractory α-spodumene to β-spodumene at temperatures higher than 1000 °C, mixing the product with concentrated sulphuric acid in excess of the stoichiometry of the reaction in Eq. The reaction between the spodumene and sulphuric acid follows these equations: In this equation, the Li The formed LiHSO  Investigations to optimise the lithium extraction and reduce the cost of the process have mostly been carried out by mining companies and there is very little information about the results in the public literature. However, lithium extraction from spodumene is still largely carried out using a conventional method of acid baking in ovens. While acid roasting of spodumene is still the most popular method of extraction, it could potentially be improved by applying different heating technologies. Microwave energy is an alternative source of heat that has been used extensively in other applications in coal processing, extraction of vanadium from slag and even in the ceramics industry ( Conventional heating starts from outside of the material and the core of material warms up by means of convection, conduction and radiation. Microwave heating on the other hand is based on the penetration depth of microwave energy and the extent of microwave energy absorption by the material. Since the heat is generated inside the material, the material heats volumetrically and this a great advantage for speed of heating compared to the application of an external source of heat. Depending on the dielectric properties of materials they are categorised into three groups: absorbers, transparent materials and conductors. In microwave processing of absorbers, the time of the treatment can be reduced to 1% of the conventional heating method ( As lithium extraction from spodumene requires heating to high temperatures in both calcination and acid baking, microwave heating is a potential substitute for conventional furnace heating. In our previous study, calcination of spodumene under microwave irradiation was investigated ( The feed sample for this study was spodumene concentrate from Greenbushes Western Australia. The concentrate was received in the form of α-spodumene containing 2% quartz as the main impurity. β-spodumene which was used in the heating experiments was synthesized by calcination of α-spodumene at 1100 °C for 2 h ( Acid roasting of β-spodumene was conducted in a muffle furnace made by Modutemp with power of 2.9 kW. 5 g of β-spodumene was weighed in a ceramic crucible and the target amount of concentrated sulfuric acid for the experiment was introduced to the crucible. The β-spodumene and acid were mixed for two minutes until the entire sample was in contact with the acid. The amount of acid needed to be in excess of the stoichiometry of the reaction to ensure that all particles could access enough acid for the extraction reaction to occur. Once the furnace reached the target temperature, the crucible was inserted into the furnace. Temperatures between 200 °C and 300 °C were used in the experiments. After heating for the targeted duration, the samples were placed in a fume hood to cool. The microwave roasting experiments were performed in a benchtop microwave with power of 1100 W and 2.45 GHz magnetron. The power was set at 770 W (70%). The furnace was equipped with a rotating plate. To avoid damaging the plate if high temperatures were reached during an experiment, an insulating block of alumina was added onto the rotating plate ( After roasting in the muffle or microwave furnace, the products were leached in deionised water at 50 °C for 1 h, at 30% pulp density with constant agitation by magnetic stirring. At the end of each leach test, the residue and solution were separated by vacuum filtration. The residues were washed with deionised water and dried at 60 °C. Accountability of the lithium was confirmed in each test. For the experiments performed to clarify the effect of particle size the samples were ground in mortar and pestle for one minute. ICP- MS was used to evaluate the amount of Li in the leach and wash solutions. The residues were studied with X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a GBC Enhanced Multi-Material Analyser (EMMA). The instrument was operated at a voltage of 35 kV and a current of 28 mA with Ni Filter Cu-Kα. To optimise the temperature for lithium extraction, samples of the β-spodumene feed were roasted at 200 °C, 225 °C, 250 °C, 275 °C and 300 °C for 1 h in the presence of 80% excess acid. The amount of lithium extracted after the water leach is summarised in A likely explanation for the observed reduction in extraction at 300 °C is that as the temperature gets closer to the boiling point of the acid, which is 337 °C, there is greater acid loss from the system and therefore less acid available to extract the lithium. In order to study the effect of roasting duration in a muffle furnace the temperature of 250 °C was chosen and heating times were 30, 45, 60 and 120 min. The results are illustrated in Heating for 30 min was not sufficient for all the lithium to react and convert to Li The addition of excess acid was necessary to ensure the entire sample was exposed to sufficient acid. Different amounts of excess acid in the range 15–140% stoichiometric excess were tested. The roasting was conducted at the ideal temperature and time that gave the highest lithium extraction in the previous experiments, 250 °C for 1 h. The extractions are presented in The percentage extractions of 87% and 88% for 15% and 30% excess acid respectively indicate that these amounts of acid were not sufficient to wet the entire solid sample. This would have limited the amount of exchange of H During acid muffle baking the Li The XRD spectra of the leach residues from the muffle furnace experiment that produced almost complete lithium extraction is shown in This is consistent with the spectrum of HAlSi The results for conventional heating were compared with microwave heating for different times and different amounts of excess acid. The effect of grinding of the feed sample on the extraction was also investigated. The β-spodumene samples were mixed with 80% stoichiometric excess acid, which was the optimum value from the conventional muffle heating experiments, and mixed in the same ceramic crucible as in the conventional heating experiments. They were then exposed to microwave energy for 10, 20, 30, 60 and 240 s. The temperature of the sample was measured after each experiment and the results are shown in Unlike muffle furnaces which can maintain a constant temperature for desired period of time, the temperature in microwave ovens for a specific power varies depending on the material being exposed to the irradiation. During these experiments, the material being heated was changing as different reactions occurred. From Lithium extraction after water leaching for the different heating times are plotted in This decrease in recovery with increasing temperature is consistent with the findings of A heating time of 20 s was chosen to investigate the optimum amount of excess acid for lithium extraction. Excess acid of 15% was found to result in extraction of 93%, which is a considerably higher extraction of Li compared to conventional muffle roasting with 15% stoichiometric excess acid. As grinding can improve contact between β-spodumene and acid, further experiments were conducted to determine whether grinding of the β-spodumene would improve lithium extraction for 15% and even lower excess acid amounts.  The lithium extraction for microwave roasting of the ground sample with 15% excess acid was almost 100%. Excess acid of 10% and 5% resulted in lithium extractions of 91% and 80% respectively, which implies that amounts less than 15% excess acid do not result in complete extraction even for the finer particles. To investigate the reasons for the reduction in lithium extraction observed at higher temperatures, the leach residues for different heating times were studied. XRD spectra of the products of the microwave process after 10, 20, 30, 60 and 240 s are shown in The 10 s leach residue is a mixture of β-spodumene and HAlSi To investigate the effect of temperature on sample composition, samples were first heated in the microwave oven for 20 s with 80% excess acid. Some of the samples were then leached. An unleached sample and the residues from the leached samples (which should not contain lithium) were then heated in a conventional oven at 500, 800 and 1100 °C. The XRD spectra of the leach residues after heating at different temperatures are shown in After heating at 500 °C, peaks of Li At a high enough temperature, it is possible that lithium ions in the unleached samples replace hydrogen ions in the product of the acid baking and re-form β-spodumene (or some kind of solid solution of spodumene). This process may be assisted by a phase change of the Li This is supported by the results of These results could explain the reduction in lithium extraction observed after microwave heating at 240 s. In this case, the measured final temperature is close to 700 °C, which is well above the temperature of 500 °C at which formation of β-spodumene by conventional heating of unleached samples was observed. Heat flow in a muffle furnace is from the outside towards the inner layers of the sample. Hence the heating time needs to be sufficient to heat the entire sample to a temperature at which the reaction of sulphuric acid and the spodumene particles occurs. As β-spodumene is not highly heat conductive ( However, during this lengthy heating process, the temperature of the acid also needs to be kept below the boiling point of the acid ( In the microwave process however, the microwaves rapidly penetrate the whole material. Sulphuric acid is a great absorber of microwaves, with a loss tangent of 6.5 for a solution with 3% acid at 70 °C, which is more than 100 times that of water. This increases with increased acidity and temperature ( The spodumene heats much more slowly than the acid. However, the acid can heat in seconds to a temperature high enough to heat spodumene surfaces if it is in contact with to the threshold temperature for the exchange reaction Another possible reaction is between the acid vapour and spodumene, but this gas-solid reaction has not been mentioned in any previous studies and requires further investigation. The usage of energy during acid baking under conditions that resulted in almost complete lithium extraction was calculated for conventional muffle heating and microwave heating ( In addition, microwave heating requires less excess acid than conventional muffle heating. The reduction in the amount of acid required reduces the cost of the acid and also of post-process neutralisation of the acid that is not consumed in the process. Grinding of the β-spodumene can lead to complete recovery of lithium with a lower consumption of acid than conventional muffle heating. In acid baking using conventional muffle heating, lithium extraction can be improved by using energy to agitate the sample to accelerate the heat transfer throughout the whole sample. However, microwaves deliver energy to all parts of the sample where agitation is not required. The conditions to optimise lithium extraction in the currently-used process of acid roasting of β-spodumene by conventional heating in a muffle oven were investigated. The highest extraction was achieved by roasting at 250 °C for 60 min with 80% excess acid (excess to stoichiometry of the reaction Eq. Microwave acid roasting of β-spodumene for 20s with 80% excess acid resulted in almost complete recovery of lithium. With grinding of the spodumene sample, the excess acid needed for almost complete recovery of Li was reduced to 15%. Microwave heating of β-spodumene and acid mixtures to a final temperature greater than 400 °C resulted in a reduction in lithium extraction, which can be explained by re-formation of β-spodumene at higher temperatures via replacement of H The energy consumption of the microwave heating process for optimum lithium extraction (15.4 kJ) was 3 orders of magnitude lower than that using the muffle oven. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the value of further investigations aimed at developing an industrial-scale microwave acid roasting process as part of the process of lithium extraction from spodumene, due to its potential to achieve comparable extraction to conventional methods in less time, and with lower reagent and energy consumption.