For many years, the oil and gas industry were looking for an alternative method that could significantly reduce the primary drawbacks of using explosives. Perforating oil and gas wells using lasers as a new method is currently under research. In laser perforating, many parameters influence the essential factor of specific energy (i.e. the required energy to remove the unit weight of rock). One of these parameters is the confining pressure. Here, a core sample is placed in the Hoek cell and a new frame is designed to fix them. A small circular part of top side of the cylindrical sample is open in order to interact with the laser beam while the mechanical pressure exerted with the Hoek cell confines the other sides. The results show that the main disparity in specific energy and rate of penetration (ROP) occurs in the range 8–16MPa of confining pressure. It is found that the amount of specific energy is constant at pressures higher than 16MPa and consequently, micro cracks that appeared on sample surface at low pressure are absent at higher pressures.The oil and gas industry has attempted for many years to find adequate non-explosive alternatives to create downhole reservoir connectivity with the wellbore. The existing methods used in well perforating are not ideal because of the damage intensity and thus researchers, for decades, were trying to come up with a new method that would cause less well damage. The oil and gas industry has also been looking for an economic and technical solution. The last fundamental change, in this regard, was introduced at the beginning of the 21th century As mentioned earlier, generating uniform holes at the selected pitch and the increasing permeability due to growing micro-fractures are the main advantages of the use of laser beams in the gas and oil well perforations Delivery with fiber optics over long distances. Enhanced rock ablation with thermal stress on rocks. Ability to focus to small spot sizes. Its high peak and low average powers provide high intensity (W/cm However, laser systems can be expensive to purchase and maintain. The recent commercial introduction of high-power fiber lasers represented a significant step forward in realizing field-based applications of photonic energy for well construction and completion Research indicated that, in rock perforating with laser, two parameters, i.e. specific energy (SE) and rate of penetration (ROP) are the most important factors. Specific energy is the energy required to remove a unit weight of rock The rate of penetration (ROP) makes the laser perforating more efficient Since the oil and gas industry is concerned with deep drilling (more than 2500 In this study, a pulsed Nd:YAG laser, Model IQL-10, with a maximum mean laser power of 400 The study used pure nitrogen with a coaxial nozzle as the purging gas ( Two types of limestone were selected from an oil and gas field of Iran. In addition, a granite sample was chosen for experiments, because this type of rock has a high strength, which is the most difficult material to process using laser perforation. In the testing of each sample, after fixing it on the Hoek cell, the frame was installed on the cell and the confining pressure varied from 0 to 37 To acquire the minimum laser power density (threshold) affecting each kind of the rock, a series of preliminary tests was performed, starting from low power and then gradually increasing the laser power. To determine the effect of confining pressure on SE and ROP, the samples were perforated with the threshold SE. In addition to applying different confining pressure, these tests were also done in three varying conditions, i.e. dry, water saturated and heavy oil saturated. The interaction time for all of these experiments was 20 As The figures show an obvious discrepancy between the used SE and ROP of the water and heavy oil saturated samples as compared to the dry ones. The reasons for this discrepancy are the degree of saturation of samples and the type of saturation With regard to the above experimental results, the question arises as what is the reason for the enhancement of the specific energy while the confining pressure is also enhanced?  As shown in Once the samples are under the confining pressure, two mechanisms are activated, first is the enhancing of samples' strength with increasing confining pressure and the second is increasing thermal conductivity. The first mechanism is shown in  Another reason for the increase in the SE and decrease in ROP is associated with thermal stress, which is the more significant parameter in ablating the samples in the laser perforating method. This also means that, over a short time period, the temperature difference between adjacent elements is huge. For this reason, the induced stress (thermal stress) broke the samples and made the removal of material easier. With an increase in the confining pressure, the distance between sample particles (grains of rock) decreases and leads to an enhancement of the thermal conductivity. An increasing thermal conductivity decreases the thermal stress, which is another reason for the increase in SE and decrease in ROP that is observed with increasing enhancing confining pressure. A study of the effects of confining pressure on rock perforating with laser in granite and two types of limestone samples has been presented. The threshold value of laser power density on this type of granite is 30.3 The authors sincerely thank S. Dadras, M.J. Hamedi and A. Chehrghani from the Iranian National Centre for Laser Science and Technology for their assistance during the experiments.