For nearly 100 years, the flotation plant metallurgist has often wondered what is happening ‘beneath the froth’. To assist in unravelling this mystery, new technology has been developed as part of the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association (AMIRA) P9 project, to measure gas dispersion characteristics (such as gas hold-up, superficial gas velocity and bubble size) in industrial flotation cells. These measurements have been conducted in a large number of cells of different types and sizes by researchers from the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) and JKTech. A large database has been developed and the contents of this database are described in this paper.
                  Typical cell characterization measurements show a wide spread in values, even in the same cell types and sizes performing similar duties. In conventional flotation cells, the typical gas hold-up values range from 3% to 20%, bubble sizes range between 1 and 2mm, and superficial gas velocity ranges from 1 to 2.5cm/s.
                  The ranges of cell characterization measurements given in this paper will enable plant personnel to compare their operation to other similar types of operations from around Australia and the rest of the world, giving opportunities for further improvement to flotation plant operations.It is widely acknowledged that separating valuable mineral particles from gangue particles by flotation is dependent on a wide range of complex factors. One of the most important of these factors is the hydrodynamic conditions (or gas dispersion characteristics) within flotation cells, which is known to directly influence the flotation efficiency ( It is also widely acknowledged that the main measurements that define the hydrodynamic performance include bubble size, gas hold-up and superficial gas velocity. These parameters have been measured in a large number of cells of different types using techniques developed as part of the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association (AMIRA) P9 project. A database of these parameters, incorporating previously reported results from Flotation requires a certain degree of turbulence for a variety of reasons ( to maintain suspension of solids in the pulp phase; to introduce air to the pulp and disperse into bubbles; to mix the aerated pulp for reagent distribution and conditioning, as well as enabling opportunities for bubble–particle collision. Gas dispersion measurements, such as bubble size, gas hold-up and gas velocity, can be used to characterize the hydrodynamic conditions in the pulp phase of a particular flotation cell. In simple terms, gas dispersion is defined as how well the air entering a flotation cell is dispersed throughout the volume of the cell, and is heavily dependent on the air flow rate and impeller speed. In general terms, smaller bubbles result in improved flotation kinetics ( Briefly, the analyzer consists of a sampling system and an optical/electronic detector system. The sampler enables incoming bubbles to be cleaned of any attached particles before they enter the capillary, where they are deformed from spheres to cylinders. The length of the bubbles is detected by a pair of optical sensors. The electronic detector system interprets the signals form the sensors and calculates the results of the bubble size distribution, giving the Sauter mean bubble diameter according to (  Gas hold-up is the volume fraction of air within a flotation cell. Increasing gas hold-up values, to a certain point, results in improved flotation kinetics due to a greater number of bubbles per unit volume ( Gas hold-up is measured by taking a sample of aerated slurry within the pulp phase of a flotation cell ( Superficial gas velocity is a measure of the aeration ability of a cell and has a direct influence on flotation kinetics ( Superficial gas velocity is measured using a The bubble surface area flux is a measure of the rate of bubble surface area rising through the cell per unit cross-sectional area ( An estimate of the bubble surface area flux can be obtained using measurements of the superficial gas velocity ( The database currently contains hydrodynamic measurements from over 800 cells. These tables show that there is a large amount of data spread across cells operating in a broad range of conditions. While it is known that mechanical and self-aerating cells function differently, the same methodology was applied to both cell types to give gas dispersion measurements. Comparisons can be made between these cell types for similar cell duties, volumes, etc. An example of measurements taken in a mechanical cell is given further in this paper, and similar measurements can be reported for self-aerating cells.  Using the data contained in this database, relationships can be observed between gas velocity, bubble size and air hold-up for varying operating conditions, and this is often performed on a site-by-site basis. Note that variations in chemical conditions were not included as a variable in the database, however these have been noted during the individual campaigns. Air hold-up measurements varied from 1.6% to 63.1%, with an average of 13.7% across all cells measured. The majority of air hold-up measurements were between 3% and 20%. There were only a few measurements above 40%, and the reasons behind these high values are likely due to ore viscosity properties. The superficial gas velocity varied greatly between 0.1 and 4.1 There was a wide range of bubble sizes measured in the pulp phases across the cells investigated, ranging from 0.7 to 4.0 The wide range in bubble sizes resulted in a very large range of bubble surface area flux, from 5.8 to 178.2 The database has been used for many applications, but the main use is in benchmarking a flotation cell operation. Many plant metallurgists question if their cells are operating in the ‘typical’ range for that particular cell type and duty, and this database has been invaluable in providing that information. For example, an investigation can be performed on an Outukumpu 100 The majority of air hold-up values for the OK100 cells were between 12% and 18%, with a significant number greater than 60%. As discussed previously, gas hold-up values greater than 30% are likely to indicate that the pulp viscosity is high due to very fine particles (or the shape factor of the particles). These high values also raised questions of the depth of measurement, and this is currently being investigated. The distribution of superficial gas velocity ( The majority of bubbles measured in the OK100 cells were between 1 and 1.2 The bubble surface area flux values for these OK100 cells ranged from 20 to 100 The database has also been used to investigate typical ranges for a particular cell duty, e.g. roughers, and/or a particular mineral, e.g. copper. Other applications of the database include providing plant metallurgists with information on air flow rates, impeller speeds etc. for newly installed cells. A database has been generated using data collected from many types and sizes of industrial flotation cells over the past 10 years. The database currently contains gas dispersion measurements, such as bubble size, air hold-up and superficial gas velocity, for over 800 cells and is continually growing with ongoing pulp phase investigations. There has been a wide range of measurements collected, with general trends across all cells investigated indicating typical values of air hold-up range from 3% to 20%, superficial gas velocity from 1 to 2.5 This database has been used in a number of areas including benchmarking current flotation cell operations and comparing to similar cell operations, as well as giving estimates of starting operating conditions for newly installed flotation cells. Continuing these measurements in more flotation cells will enable more information to be obtained regarding the gas dispersion characteristics to better understand the science of flotation. The authors would like to acknowledge Professor JP Franzidis, Doctor Emmy Manlapig, the staff and students of the AMIRA P9 project and its sponsors for the work and the funding, which developed the methodology and contributed greatly to the database. In addition, the authors wish to thank various site personnel who have also contributed to the database, especially Anglo American Research Laboratories, Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton. Finally, acknowledgement is given to the many JKTech personnel who have performed these measurements at the various sites around the world.