Total axial strain controlled fatigue tests have been conducted in air at 823 and 923 K to ascertain the influence of cold work on LCF behaviour of a 15Cr–15Ni, Ti modified austenitic stainless steel, designated as Alloy D9. The LCF behaviour of the 20% cold worked alloy was compared with that of solution annealed alloy. A symmetrical triangular waveform at a constant strain rate of 3×10−3 s−1 was employed for all the tests performed over the strain amplitude in the range of ±0.25 to ±1.00%. The cyclic stress response varied as a complex function of microstructure, temperature and strain amplitude. The cyclic stress response of solution-annealed alloy was generally characterized by initial hardening to the maximum stress followed by a regime of nearly stable peak stresses. The degree of initial hardening was higher at 823 K due to dynamic strain ageing effects. The cold worked alloy displayed a gradual softening prior to the attainment of saturation stress response stage. The plastic strain fatigue resistance of the cold worked alloy was inferior compared to that in solution-annealed condition at both 823 and 923 K. At low strain amplitudes, the cold worked alloy exhibited better total strain fatigue resistance at 923 K. The observed variations in fatigue life and cyclic stress response behaviour have been explained on the basis of crack initiation, development of substructure, precipitation behaviour and evolving changes in plastic strain during cycling.Fully austenitic 15Cr–15Ni titanium modified stainless steel (Alloy D9) is being used as a fuel clad and wrapper material in fast breeder reactors (FBRs). The choice for using this material is primarily based upon a good combination of high temperature tensile strength properties, creep strength and its excellent resistance to radiation induced void swelling. Void swelling and mechanical property changes during irradiation depend sensitively on the prior microstructure of the alloy. Increased dislocation density due to cold work and a uniform dispersion of fine titanium carbides have been found to exert a beneficial effect in improving the resistance to void swelling and helium embrittlement in austenitic alloys The chemical composition of the alloy is given in Solution Annealed (SA) condition — Bars 110 mm long and 26 mm in diameter were given a solutionizing treatment at 1373 K for 1/2 h and water quenched. This treatment yielded an average linear intercept grain size of 55 μm. Prior cold worked (CW) condition — Bars of one-meter length and 26 mm diameter were swaged to give a percentage reduction in the area of twenty percent. Total axial strain controlled low cycle fatigue tests were conducted in an Instron 1343 servo hydraulic test system on cylindrical ridge specimens ( The fracture surfaces of fatigued samples were examined by a PSEM 501 scanning electron microscope to determine the crack initiation and propagation modes. The sub structural changes were studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Samples for TEM examination were obtained from thin slices cut at a distance of 1 mm away from the fracture surface by mechanically thinning down to 250 μm, and then electro polishing in a solution containing 10% perchloric acid and 90% methanol at 243 K with a bias voltage of 10 V. Thin foils were examined in a Philips CM 12 transmission electron microscope operating at an acceleration voltage of 100 keV. The influence of temperature and strain amplitude on cyclic stress response of solution annealed Alloy D9 is illustrated in In contrast to the solution-annealed material, the prior cold worked stainless steel cyclically softened. The cyclic stress response of the cold worked material at 923 K is described in At all the test conditions, the crack initiation and propagation in solution annealed as well as the cold worked alloy occurred in transgranular mode. Fatigue crack initiation took place along the slip bands on the surface. Initial propagation of the slip band cracks occurred along the slip planes oriented nearly at 45° to the applied stress axis, designated as stage I. Stage I cracking continued to only one or two grain diameters before the transition to stage II cracking occurred. Stage II cracking was characterized by the occurrence of ductile striations on the fracture surface. Stage I and stage II crack initiation and propagation stages are depicted in The deformation substructure of the cold worked material at 823 K was composed of crude cells ( In solution-annealed alloy at 823 K, irrespective of the strain amplitude employed, a majority of the grains developed well defined planar slip bands with high density of dislocations and dislocation tangles between the slip bands. At 923 K the substructure was composed of both cells and sub-grains. Solution annealed alloy exhibited intergranular precipitation of carbides. The LCF properties of the solution annealed and cold worked materials at 823 K and 923 K are shown in Solution annealed material exhibited cyclic hardening at elevated temperatures as can be seen from A comparison of the LCF life of the solution annealed material at 823 and 923 K reveals that the life at 923 K is much lower than that at 823 K. This reduction in life is attributed to the increased amount of inelastic deformation per cycle and the deleterious effects of oxidation on crack initiation ( The cold worked material exhibited cyclic softening as can be seen from Deformation induced substructure in austenitic stainless steels has been generally related to stacking fault energy and slip character. Slip character has been described as a measure of the degree to which dislocations tend to disperse during plastic deformation On the basis of plastic strain amplitude, the solution annealed material showed better plastic strain resistance than the cold worked material at all strain amplitudes ( In this context it is interesting to observe the development of plastic strain with number of cycles during high temperature total strain controlled fatigue tests.  Alloy D9 in the solution annealed state exhibited initial hardening followed by saturation stress stage at 823 and 923 K. Prior cold worked alloy showed initial softening followed by a regime of stable stress response. In general solution annealed Alloy D9 exhibited superior plastic strain LCF resistance when compared with the cold worked material at both 823 and 923 K. The total strain LCF resistance of the cold worked material was superior at lower strain amplitudes at 923 K. This is attributed to the smaller amounts of plastic strain developed during a cycle in the PCW material than in the solution annealed material. The deformation substructure in solution-annealed material was characterized by predominantly planar slip bands at 823 K and cell structures at 923 K. In the cold worked state the alloy displayed crude cells and deformation bands at 823 K while at 923 K well developed cells and sub grains occurred. In the cold worked state the alloy also exhibited very fine carbide precipitation in the matrix. The authors wish to thank Mrs.Kanchanamala, Dept. of Metallurgy, IIT Madras, and Chennai for valuable assistance in electron microscopy work.