A common experience when exploring a field of research is to find that the community in question is split down the middle: the most common split is between scientists and engineers. When such a split develops, the two (or more) communities scarcely know of each other's existence, and they certainly don't learn from each other. Such a split is to be found in the domain of grinding, or milling and comminution, and the split is between materials and mechanical engineering on one side, and materials science on the other. Industry often requires coarse blocks of stone, ore, or pigment to be ground into gravel or finer powder, in large tonnages. The comminution of limestone for cement manufacture is a familiar example. Turning ores into powder for subsequent separation of the desired mineral from gangue by flotation pins down enormous quantities of energy. Thus it is not surprising that much research is undertaken, mostly by mechanical engineers, with the aim of enhancing efficiency. One paper describing the fruits of such research, by Shulin Wang, has just appeared in The other side of the split is the use of grinding, usually here called milling, as a tool of scientific research. The object here is to find out the effect of milling on the crystallographic state of the material: instead of tonnes per hour, the researcher needs only to grind a few grams. This kind of research seems to have developed out of an engineering innovation, mechanical alloying, invented by John Benjamin of the International Nickel Company, in 1966: it involves mixing together two or more chemically distinct powders and then milling them to alloy them at the atomic scale without melting, forming solid solutions. The objective here is a chemical function, not comminution. The process is expensive and used only on a modest scale, but is valuable when high strength is more important than cheapness. Various kinds of mill, using combinations of shaking, rotation, and vibration, are outlined by C. Suryanarayana in an overview of mechanical alloying [ From the 1980s on, a range of other phenomena were studied: the synthesis of intermetallic compounds in powder form from the elements; the destruction of the ordered distribution of atoms within the compound (disordering); and the circumstances under which ordered intermetallic powders can be driven beyond the stage of disordering to the creation of an amorphous material (solid-state amorphization). Just recently, a new phenomenon has aroused interest, the formation of a nanocrystalline powder (of NbAl One thing is clear. The people who design better mills for large-scale industrial comminution and the materials scientists who research metstable, mechanically alloyed and nanocrystalline materials, pursue their respective careers separate from each other. The books and journals cited by Wang are totally distinct from those cited by the materials scientists, and the split is no doubt unavoidable.