Automatic methods used in geosciences to interpolate between orientation data have often limited applicability and strength, in particular where large ranges of orientations occur. In this paper, we show that geostatistical methods yield rather strong and powerful results when applied to directional data. The procedure involves the calculation of variograms, followed by a kriging interpolation of the data. In order to free from the circular property of directional data, the treatment of initial angular data sets is performed using scalar values provided by the direction cosines of double-angle values. The strength and application of the method are demonstrated by the analysis of theoretical and natural data sets. Natural examples are focused on the calculation and the analysis of cleavage trajectory maps.The analysis of the spatial distribution of directional data can have various applications in earth sciences, including structural geology (e.g. construction of cleavage trajectory maps) Two main applications of the statistical analysis of orientation data are (1) the calculation of mean principal directions from a data population, and (2) the analysis of variations of data in space (e.g. on maps or cross-sections). Many automatic methods have been developed to extract best principal directions from a population of orientation data (calculation of eigenvectors and eigenvalues, see Data interpolation using geostatistics was first introduced by A set of orientation data distributed throughout a given domain can be regarded as a representative sample of a continuous regionalized variable defined for the whole area. This regionalized variable is a deterministic function relative to the chosen reference frame. However, data may also contain nonnegligible random and insignificant contributions. The kriging method developed by The geostatistical approach is here applied to the analysis and modelling of spatially scattered local directional data. After building a georeferenced database, the procedure used comprises two main steps, as follows (see For spatial interpolation purposes, it is often admitted that two close data points may have a more similar value than two distant ones. Common techniques, such as inverse distance weighting, are based on this hypothesis. The main problems with this approach are (1) to determine the maximum distance for which data values show significant mutual dependence, (2) to estimate how and how fast this dependence decreases with increasing distance, and (3) to take into account the effects of possible anisotropies in the spatial variations of the data. The quantification of such parameters can be provided by the computation of experimental variograms. To compute an experimental angular variogram, one first calculates the differences Δ Assuming that data variations are isotropic, a general variogram can be simply imaged as the plot of the half-squared differences against the separating distance ∣ The experimental variogram defines a curve representing the increasing discrepancy (i.e. the decreasing of mutual dependence) between data, as a function of their degree of proximity ∣ Four important statistical parameters come up from an experimental variogram The variogram can reach a constant value, classically defined as the The maximum correlation distance for which the variogram reaches the sill is defined as the The variogram can show a nonzero ordinate at the origin. From a theoretical point of view, this value comprises the random part of the random functions defined for the studied domain. It thus corresponds to the nonregionalized part of data values (in grey in The experimental trend of the variogram indicates the way the variance increases with increasing distance within the data set. It can be fitted to a theoretical function, classically chosen as spherical For a given data set, the range of data variations can change according to the considered space direction. Such anisotropy in data variance can be detected by calculating variograms along particular space directions. The procedure is the same as for omnidirectional variograms, except that the overall computation space is sliced into orientation classes for which individual variograms are calculated. For each class, the calculation uses the data pairs separated by a vector As for general statistical studies, geostatistics cannot be directly performed on angular values. The kriging interpolation is therefore made using direction cosines As for other weighted moving average techniques, the interpolation is made along a regular grid covering the whole studied area. At each node location, ordinary kriging is performed using all adjacent data points From the interpolated grid, various types of representation of the distribution and variations of directional data can be made. These are in particular trajectory maps or contour maps. To draw trajectories, we used the algorithm proposed by In this example, constant N120° striking directions occur across a given domain, and a disc-shaped perturbation of 6 units wide has been introduced within this continuous field The maximum distance of spatial correlation between directional data has already been considered as an important parameter for interpolation Directional data can present strong anisotropies in their variation trends. To illustrate relationships between anisotropy and variograms, a regular fold-shaped pattern has been drawn, with axial planes striking N30° This example emphasizes that oriented variogram are powerful tools to detect anisotropies in orientation distributions. Furthermore, the wavelength of the periodicity of the oriented variograms provides an estimate of the wavelength of the anisotropy. Indeed, for ideal situations, these two values should be equal (6 units, In this example, regularly spaced directional data have been distributed across a rectangular area In this model example, the computed trajectories are in good agreement with the initial directional data and outline well the overall trend of direction variation at regional scale. It also points out that other representations of the data and additional statistical calculations (e.g. lateral gradients, frequency analysis, profile extractions) can be useful to better describe regional trends. In our example, a domainal distribution of data is outlined, a feature that was not clearly detectable by the simple trajectory map. To test the method further, we consider an example of regularly spaced directional variables (segments in  The two first techniques are characterized by (1) the treatment of the data set as a whole, and (2) the direct use of orientations as algebraic values. Results emphasize that these constraints can lead to irrelevant interpolations, especially if the orientation range exceeds 90°. Indeed, poor correlations are observed between data and trajectories. Thus, bulk interpolation methods do not seem to be adapted to the treatment of directional data. Even for the case of simple direction fields, as the one presented here, the smooth regional trend of the data set is not detected. The two other methods Individual data can vary strongly in space, even for close sampling locations. This can be due to the errors attached to initial measurements. It can also result from mixing of data of different origin (e.g. data from maps of different type, scale or age), and from subsequent computations (digitization, calculations). Strong local variations can also reflect very local effects that are not directly linked to the regional-scale tendencies (e.g. see In order to examine the effect of introducing noise within the data set, we start with the ideal example presented in For comparison, the interpolation method based on the inverse distance-weighting is shown in This example emphasizes that the geostatistical method, via the variogram analysis, allows to separate local effects and (or) errors in data from significant regional-scale tendencies. During field studies, measurements or calculations of directional data can be done from micro-scale to outcrop-scale, and even up to regional scale (e.g. analysis of satellite images). It is admitted that a highest density of measurements and a regular distribution of them throughout the studied area are optimal conditions to constrain the spatial variations of the considered parameters (e.g. In order to test the strength of the geostatistical analysis with respect to sampling heterogeneity, we again use the example introduced in Shear zones are very common structures where the characterization of strain gradients can be useful for the analysis of strain patterns and attached kinematics. Across shear zones, increasing shear strain is marked by the rotation of the principal strain plane (cleavage or foliation), and by a convergence of strain trajectories The geostatistical method has been applied to a famous example of small-scale shear zone described by Strain patterns within and around syntectonic plutons emplaced in the ductile crust generally reflect the interference between strains due to pluton emplacement (e.g. ballooning effect; The example presented here is a small syntectonic Hercynian pluton (Landudal leucogranite) from the western part of Central Brittany (France) Line segments in A variogram analysis and an interpolation have been performed on these direction data The occurrence of triple points can be further tested. During kriging, the direction cosines are used to calculate the interpolated direction. For a given set of orientation data, the length of the mean vector defined by the direction cosines is a direct estimate of the local direction variance. This parameter represents the degree of data concentrations around the mean vector, and has been defined as the parameter Thus, the interpolation method provides consistent results for this complex example where rather few orientation data are available This study has emphasized that statistical analysis of directions cannot be made with circular data. To avoid this problem, the use of direction cosines during automatic data treatment appears a good solution. Geostatistics, in particular the analysis of variograms, permit to describe and quantify the spatial dependences of values from any kind of data set. The method has been here developed for directional data. The variogram analysis allows (1) to quantify the scale of data correlation, (2) to detect and quantify anisotropies in data variations, and (3) to quantify local effects, as well as inherent errors included within original data, and separate them from regional effects. Statistical parameters provided by variograms are critical to constrain the way directional data should be interpolated. Indeed, during interpolation, data weighting depends on the best-fit equation of the variogram curve. The strength of the interpolation method is outlined by the treatment of nonideal theoretical data sets, as follows. The influence of data heterogeneity, like a substantial background noise, appears rather limited. This is because the nugget value obtained from the variogram analysis is taken into account during interpolation. The influence of heterogeneously distributed data appears also limited. The method is convenient to draw direction trajectories. It can also provide further information. We have in particular emphasized the followings. Contour maps, combined with direction histograms, are convenient to detect domainal distributions of directions. The interpolation leads to quantify the degree of local consistency and of correlation between neighbouring data. For example, well-oriented domains can be distinguished from less-oriented ones. Thus, in the example of pluton intrusion presented in this paper, cleavage triple points have been detected. Compared with other methods of analysis of directional data developed in geosciences, the geostatistical method appears particularly efficient, reliable, and can be applied at all scales. We have focused this paper on the analysis of strain trajectories, but the method could be applied to any kind of other directional data, like displacement vectors (e.g. from GPS measurements), fault patterns, stress fields, paleocurrents, topographic data, paleomagnetic data, or directional data extracted from geophysical maps or cross-sections (e.g. seismics, gravity and magnetic data). This study was made in the course of the research project Armor 2 (“Géofrance 3D” Program, BRGM-CNRS). Constructive discussions with C. Walter (INRA, Rennes) strongly contributed to the methodological aspects developed in this paper. C.G. acquired a large part of the bases of the geostatistic analysis in the on-line lessons provided by D. Marcotte (Ecole polytechnique de Montréal, Directional data are particular variables characterized by a circular property. Angles are indeed expressed modulo The construction of a variogram requires the use of angular differences Δ For example, for a pair of directions striking N5° and N175°, the algebraic difference is (175−5°)=170° Problems induced by the circularity of orientation data in their statistical analysis are further critical for the interpolation between data than for the variogram calculation. Indeed, the interpolation procedure involves computations using angles and angular means defined with respect to a given reference frame. Therefore, additional transformations of original data are required. This is illustrated in For this example, the resulting mean direction is intuitively estimated as striking north–south, irrespective of the reference frame (NS, Different techniques have been proposed to treat such nonoriented directions (e.g. The first step consists in a preliminary doubling of the algebraic values of the nonoriented directions