The papers included in Part 1 of “Improving Environmental, Economic and Ethical Performance in the Mining Industry” examined a number of important environmental and sustainable development policy issues in the mining sector. The topics covered were wide-ranging and included environmental management systems (EMSs), community development, industrial ecology, environmental economics and disaster management. The papers presented in this issue of the The issue is divided into three sections. The papers presented in Section 1 focus upon an emerging field of environmental management in the mining sector – Life Cycle Analysis (LCA). The papers provide, inter alia, a broad overview of the application of LCA to mining, examples of Life Cycle Inventorying at sites, sample models for LCA, and recommendations for managing wastes such as tailings. Section 2 focuses upon environmental technology and innovation in the mining sector. Here, broad discussions are presented for ameliorating and preventing sector-specific environmental problems, particularly Acid Mine Drainage (AMD). Specific ways in which to reduce the environmental impacts of refining and mineral processing are also prescribed using case studies of the aluminium supply chain and cyanide management. A final “Book Reviews” section has been inserted at the conclusion of the issue, summarizing some of the more recent texts published on mining environmental management/sustainable development. Once again, I would like to thank Professor Don Huisingh for encouraging the development of both special issues. I would also like to extend my gratitude to the peer reviewers who put a considerable amount of their time into reviewing the manuscripts contained in this issue. The uniqueness of the topics covered made the search for appropriate referees challenging; however, in the end, each of the reviews solicited was extremely comprehensive, providing invaluable guidance to all contributing authors. Both special issues are important information sources for researchers examining specific and/or broader aspects of the mining-sustainable development debate. I am confident that the ideas put forward will facilitate further environmental and social research on mining.