In this investigation flotation behaviours of microlite and zircon were studied. Hallimond tube flotation experiments were carried out with pure specimens of microlite and zircon collected from different ore bodies. pH, collector type and depressants were the parameters tested. The results showed that zircon floated in a much better way compared to microlite. Porocoll SAM that is an amphoteric collector was more promising than Porocoll FS-R being a derivate of a fatty acid. Tests indicated that effective separation could be achieved at pH 4. Depressants were observed to deactivate both minerals to some extent.Cassiterite formations in Southeast Asia associate with a number of valuable heavy minerals such as microlite, tantalite–columbite, xenotime, rutile, ilmenite, monazite, wolframite and zircon. Microlite (Ca, Na) Some researchers have investigated the flotation of zircon. Zircon flotation could be achieved using fatty acids, alkyl sulphates or cationic collectors ( Industrial scale microlite flotation is only applied in Bernic Lake-Canada in the world. The ore is concentrated down to 20 μm particle size using shaking tables below that size flotation is applied to reduce metal losses. Microlite is floated at a pH range 1.5–3.5 using sulphosuccinamate as collector where multivalent cations of Fe and Al are used as activators ( In this investigation flotation behaviours of pure zircon and microlite samples collected from Chao Fah and Porn Patoh mines of Thailand were studied. The effects of pH, collector types and depressants on the flotation of microlite and zircon were investigated using a Hallimond tube flotation cell. Microflotation tests were carried out with pure zircon and microlite minerals taken from Chao Fah and Porn Patoh deposits in Thailand. Pure zircon particles usually contains Fe Purified microlite and zircon samples were ground in a roller mill and than −100 Flotation tests were conducted with an 80 ml Hallimond tube modified by Hoberg ( A Ridick-Zetameter was employed to determine zeta potentials of microlite and zircon samples. In zeta potential measurements mineral particles were ground below 5 μm and pH adjustments were achieved using NaOH and HCl. It is seen from Effects of various collectors mentioned above on the flotation of microlite and zircon were tested with respect to pH, however, in Experiments conducted with Porocoll SAM showed that zircon floats best around pH 4.5 whereas the flotation of microlite was encouraged between pH 1.5 and 3.5. Ultimate floatabilities of zircon and microlite were 75% and 20% respectively. On the other hand 90% of zircon floated using Porocoll FS-R at pH values between 4 and 6. Microlite flotation was best around pH 5 with 20% ultimate recovery. Depressant Na When Porocoll SAM was used as a collector effects of depressants on both minerals seemed to be similar except for Na In the presence of Porocoll FS-R zircon deactivation was more pronounced compared to microlite. However, this behaviour is undesirable for selective separation in favour of zircon.  Hallimond tube flotation test results showed that zircon floats in a much better way compared to microlite using Porocoll SAM and Porocoll FS-R and the best selectivity can be achieved at pH 4. Deactivators did not seem to be effective in selectivity, in contrast, microlite was slightly activated in some cases. Consequently the selective separation of zircon from microlite in an ore body could be achieved by floating zircon without any addition of depressants.