An investigation of several agricultural wastes (almond shell, hazelnut shell, walnut shell and apricot stone) revealed that their suitability for granular activated carbon production is not determined by material specific (elemental composition) but type-specific features. Granular activated carbons were evaluated for their physical (attrition, bulk density), chemical (elemental composition, % weight loss), surface (surface area, surface chemistry) and adsorption properties (iodine number, phenol and methylene blue adsorption). Pyrolysis temperature and activation time with ZnCl2 had influence on the phenol and methylene blue adsorption capacities of especially for the activated carbons produced from hazelnut and walnut shells. Adsorption isotherm data were fitted to both Langmuir and Freundlich models. The following order of suitability of raw materials for activated carbon production was established: hazelnut shell>walnut shell≈apricot stone>almond shell.Phenol and its compounds are present in the effluent of a number of industrial units such as oil refineries, coke oven plants, steel plants etc. These compounds impart taste and odour to water and are toxic to aquatic life. The process of adsorption is a well established and powerful technique for treating domestic and industrial effluents. In addition, the ever increasing demand for water of high quality has caused considerable attention to be focused towards recovery and reuse of wastewaters. Ligninocellulosic materials, such as fruit stones and nutshells, are very good precursors for the production of activated carbons Adsorption characteristics of activated carbon are determined by its pore structure (magnitude and distribution of pore volume) and surface chemistry (kind and quality of surface-bound heteroatomic functional groups) Adsorption isotherms were obtained from batch experiments and data were fitted to the Langmuir or the Freundlich equations to calculate the adsorption properties. The langmuir adsorption isotherm is theoretically derived and assumes one to one binding between the adsorbate and the binding site on the adsorbent. The Freundlich adsorption isotherm is experimentally derived and empirical. The objective of this study to produce activated carbons with good mechanical strength and high adsorption capacities toward various organics from food waste such as walnut, almond, hazelnut shells and apricot stones. Turkey has huge amounts of these wastes in the canning industry. The chemical activation with ZnCl Almond, walnut, hazelnut shells and apricot stones were used as starting materials. These raw materials were broken with a Waring commercial blender and sieved to a particle size of 1–1.25 mm in diameter. Elemental analyses of raw materials were determined using a Carlo Erba 1106 Elemental Analyzer. Granulated raw materials were dried at 110 °C for 24 h. Dried raw materials were mixed with a solution of ZnCl The activated carbons were characterized by N Adsorptive properties were measured by using methylene blue, phenol and iodine as adsorbates. These molecules are important for the characterization of activated carbons. The mesopores of carbon are usually studied by methylene blue adsorption which also serves as a model compound for adsorption of organic contaminants from aqueous solution The amount of iodine absorbed (in milligrams) by 1 g of carbon is called the iodine number. The iodine adsorption was determined using the sodium thiosulfate volumetric method (ASTM D 4607-86, 1990) For determining the ash contents of activated carbons, carbon samples were ground to pass through a 0.5 mm sieve. One gram of prepared sample was weighed in tared porcelain basin. Dishes and their contents were placed in muffle furnace at 800 °C for 2 h then placed in a desiccator to cool to room temperature and then they were reweighed. Bulk densities of carbons were determined according to ASTM D 2854-96 Attrition measurements were based on the procedure given in the literature Acidic and basic characters of activated carbons were determined according to Boehm titration All of these physical and chemical properties of activated carbons were listed in The values of all properties in Phenol adsorption values according to both activation temperature and time are given in The 18 h activation time give the highest methylene blue adsorption values at both 750 and 850 °C ( In general 10 h activation time and 750 °C give the highest phenol adsorption results for both phenol and methylene blue ( The adsorption trend shows constancy at all conditions for both phenol ( Phenol adsorption capacity of activated carbons is less than that of others ( Basically, an adsorption isotherm is important in describing how adsorbates interact with adsorbents and is critical in optimizing the use of adsorbents. Correlation of isotherm data by theoretical or empirical equations is thus desired for practical operation. The Freundlich and the Langmuir adsorption equations were applied to isotherm data for phenol and methylene blue for all activated carbons. The Freundlich and the Langmuir isotherm constants for phenol and methylene blue adsorption are given in Although some properties like surface area and carbon content of all activated carbons are not very much different from each other, phenol adsorption capacities differ. The phenol adsorption of ACH and ACAS considering The activated carbons produced from fruit shells and stones have high surface areas and highly developed micropore structure. Activation time and temperature had an influence on phenol and methylene blue adsorption especially for ACH and ACW. For activated carbons with similar surface areas and carbon content (ACAS, ACW), the adsorption of phenol might be affected by their surface chemistry. Isotherm data fit well to both Langmuir and Freundlich models. However, higher The experimental results indicated that the prepared activated carbons were economically promising twofold. The agricultural wastes would be utilized and the production of activated carbons for the treatment of wastewaters would be achieved at a reasonable cost.