Macroalgae wastes from the Agar–Agar industry were used as a feedstock to obtain hydrochars by means of hydrothermal carbonization. The effect of temperature (200 °C and 230 °C) and time (2 h and 6 h) on the yield, higher heating value (HHV) and chemical-morphological-textural properties of the hydrochars was studied. The carbon content and the higher heating value were observed to increase with the hydrothermal carbonization. The hydrochars yields (up to 60%) were much higher than yields obtained using conventional char (27.5–33.5%). The hydrochar obtained at 230 °C and after 6 h showed a HHV of 23.25 MJ/kg, which is similar to that of lignite HHV. The H/C and O/C atomic ratios decreased as a consequence of the dehydration and decarboxilation reactions. Hydrothermal carbonization barely changed the vegetal structure of the macroalgae waste. The hydrochars were found to be essentially meso-macroporous with average pore sizes of up to 110.5 nm.The increase in population and quality of life since the Industrial Revolution has been accompanied by a growing demand for energy worldwide and by the generation of large amounts of different types of waste. This demand for energy has been met largely by the exploitation of conventional fossil fuels. Organic solid wastes are one of the largest groups of wastes produced worldwide and the rate at which they are being generated is constantly increasing. Traditionally, organic solid wastes have been eliminated by incineration or landfill, but recently implemented stricter environmental regulations require new strategies to ensure a more sustainable and profitable waste management. Indeed, good waste management must be given top priority if this waste is to be transformed into valuable resources, such as fuels ( Thermochemical conversion by pyrolysis or hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) could be used to manage wastes, such as organic municipal solids, agricultural wastes, food wastes, forest wastes, etc., by turning them into high value products. It is well known that in pyrolysis, a thermochemical process that takes place in an inert atmosphere and at atmospheric pressure, the thermally treated material is transformed into three fractions: solid (char), gas and liquid (condensable liquids or oils). In the process of pyrolysis up to high temperatures (more than 600 °C), organic matter is thermochemically transformed with a high energy consumption. Furthermore, biomass wastes have high moisture content, so they must be pre-dried prior to heat treatment at high temperature. Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) at low temperature is an alternative procedure to thermal treatment at high temperature, like pyrolysis, both by conventional and microwaves heating. HTC at low temperature is a more sustainable procedure due to the energy saved as a direct consequence of working at lower temperatures (less than 300 °C). In general, HTC is performed by applying moderate temperatures (180–250 °C) to biomass in the presence of water under autogenous pressure and during several hours to obtain a sustainable carbon material referred to as hydrochar. The composition, structure and potential uses of hydrochars vary significantly depending on the composition of the feedstock and process conditions (temperature, reaction time, pressure and solid/water ratio). Although HTC is a scientifically well-known technology, it has not yet been commercialized ( In this research study, new alternative treatments are investigated with the aim of finding a more efficient and sustainable management of industrial macroalgae “Gelidium Sesquipedale” biomass wastes. The biomass waste is subjected to HTC treatment and the effect of the temperature and duration of the thermal process on the yield, higher heating value (HHV) and chemical-morphological-textural properties of the obtained hydrochars is studied. Furthermore, since this industrial biomass waste has been used by the research group in previous works, including studies on the use of the energy produced by pyrolysis of this waste, by conventional and microwave heating, it will be possible to compare the results obtained previously with those of the present research work. An industrial macroalgae waste, algae meal (AM), from the Agar–Agar industry “ROKO-AGAR” from Spain is used as a precursor for the production of hydrochars. ROKO-AGAR is the largest European producer of Agar-Agar and who provides the macroalgae industrial waste to carry out this work. The macroalgae waste was sampled for a period of one month by the personnel of the industrial plant in order to ensure their representativeness during the sampling period and following standard procedures. The total sample (80 kg) was quartered by division cone until a representative sample of about 2 kg was obtained. Four hydrochars were prepared as follows: 1.0 L of wet AM solution with 30% solids content was introduced into a Teflon recipient inside a Hastelloy autoclave supplied by Demede S.L. The autoclave is equipped with two thermocouples, one of which is inserted into the Teflon recipient and brought into contact with the sample, while the other is in contact with the outer part of the Hastelloy wall. The temperature difference between the two thermocouples is around 20 °C. The samples were heated up to 200 and 230 °C and the final temperature was maintained during 2 or 6 h under autogenous pressures to produce the hydrochars labelled HAM200-2, HAM200-6, HAM230-2 and HAM230-6, respectively. After being cooled down to room temperature, the aqueous solutions were filtered and the hydrochars were dried at 80 °C during 24 h and sieved to below 2 mm. The samples were characterized as follows: The ultimate analysis (of the carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulphur contents) was carried out on LECO CHN-2000 and S-144-DR automatic instruments. The Oxygen content was obtained by difference as: 100%−(%C + %H + %N + %S + %Ash). The atomic ratios (H/C) and (O/C) were also determined. The Higher heating value (HHV) was estimated according to the formula proposed by  The electrical conductivity (EC) and pH of AM and the four hydrochars were determined in a 4 g L Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was applied in order to determine the main functional groups on the surface of the materials. For this purpose, a Nicolet 8700 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer was employed. The FTIR analysis was carried out using diffuse reflectance (DRIFT) and a MCTA detector. Before the analysis, the materials were dried at 120 °C during 18 h to eliminate any water (to avoid interferences between 3200 and 3600 cm The hydrophysical characterization was performed as follows: the field capacity (FieldC) and wilting point (WP) were determined as the sample moisture content at 33 kPa (FieldC) and 1500 kPa (WP) ( Thermogravimetric analyses were carried out in a Thermogravimetric Analyzer TGA Labsys Setaram (Setaram Instruments). 20 mg of sample was heated at 15 °C min The morphological analysis of the hydrochars was performed using a scanning electron microscope Zeiss (Model DMS-942) at a 20.00 kV accelerating voltage and beam. The microscope is equipped with a dispersive energy X-ray analysis system (Link-Isis II). The samples were coated with iridium for examination by SEM-EDX and images were taken at different magnifications. The textural characterization of the materials was carried out as follows. The real density was determined by means of helium picnometry. The specific surface area and pore size distribution (PSD) were ascertained from the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherm at 77 K and the Hg density and the meso-macroporosity were determined by means of mercury injection porosimetry. The true densities or helium densities were measured by means of helium pycnometry on a Micromeritics AccuPyc 1330 pycnometer. Before the analysis, the samples were outgassed for 18 h at 120 °C. The specific surface areas and pore size distributions (PSD) of the materials were measured by nitrogen adsorption/desorption at 77 K on Micromeritics ASAP 2420 volumetric adsorption analyzer. Nitrogen adsorption isotherms were used to calculate the BET surface areas (S The bulk and skeletal densities, the total meso-macropore volume, porosity and the average pore diameter were obtained by Mercury porosimetry on a Micromeritics AutoPore IV 9500 Series apparatus, which provided a maximum operating pressure of 228 MPa. The contact angle and surface tension of the mercury were set at 130° and 485 dym/cm, respectively. Before the analysis, the samples were outgassed for 2 h at 120 °C.    Four hydrochars had a pH lower than the original feedstock but their pH increased with temperature or duration of the HTC. Other authors have obtained similar results ( In the present study, the EC of the AM feedstock increased slightly with the HTC process. In general, the hydrochar EC are lower than that of the feedstock probably because the ashes dissolve ( It is well known that cation exchange capacity (CEC) is related to the ability of samples to adsorb nutrients, and is one of the most important properties for the agronomic use of hydrochars in soil amendment, growth stimulation media and as green roof components. In this study CEC decreased slightly with increasing HTC temperature due to the removal of functional groups and increasing aromatization, as can be seen form the O/C and H/C ratios ( The P  The FTIR spectra of AM and the four derived hydrochars are in the The broad band centred at 3400 cm  Four stages were differentiated during the combustion of the samples. The initial mass loss from room temperature to 150 °C was attributed to the loss of moisture and the volatilization of very light volatile materials (Stage I). However, the main differences between the feedstock and hydrochars were observed between 200 and 650 °C during the combustion of the organic matter (  The DTA combustion profiles of the AM feedstock and the derived hydrochars are included in It can be observed that thermal properties of AM changed significantly after the HTC treatments. The two exothermic peaks of AM that became one broad band during the combustion of the hydrochars shifted to lower temperatures as the temperature or reaction time increased, indicating that during the HTC, not only did decomposition of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin take place but also that new structures with high HHV formed and that then they decomposed at low temperatures.  SEM images were taken in order to observe morphological changes caused by the HTC process in the hydrochars with respect to the macralgae waste. Selected SEM images are shown in The presence of mineral matter in the hydrochars was observed using SEM-EDX. This information is presented in  The N  As illustrated in An examination of the hydrochars by nitrogen adsorption at −196 °C showed that they have negligible microporosity but some mesoporosity in their structure. In view of this, the study of the texture of hydrochars was expanded to include mercury porosimetry, since this technique is suitable for the study and characterization of mesopores and macropores. The cumulative pore volume and the pore volume size distribution results obtained by mercury porosimetry for the hydrochars are presented in HTC technology was used to obtain different hydrochars for the upgrading and sustainable management of macroalgae industrial wastes. HTC at 230 °C during 6 h produced hydrochars with a HHV of 23.25 MJ/kg, similar to low-rank coals. In addition, it was found that a higher degree of carbonization, facilitated the combustion of the hydrochars. The available water and phosphorous content present in the algae meal increased with HTC, making the resulting hydrochars suitable for use as growth media components. The hydrochars retained to a large extent the vegetal structure of the wastes and displayed a meso and macroporous nature. The authors thank the company ROKO-AGAR, Asturias-Spain, for providing of the industrial residue, algae meal. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: