Conventional phosphorus anode materials in lithium/sodium-ion batteries are mainly based on the physical mixing and evaporation/condensation, in which external phosphorus on conductive matrix is unavoidable and hard to be removed due to the formation of crystalline phase. It has been found to break off from conductive matrix easily and deteriorate capacity rapidly. In this communication, we first report a solution processed encapsulation method which facilitates phosphorus anchored inside multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). Any possible external phosphorus adsorbents are hard to transform into crystalline and enable an easy removal by polar solvents. Eventually, the phosphorus rings and chains are successfully encapsulated only inside MWCNTs, exhibiting high cycling stability in lithium-ion battery because of the efficient physical confinement and unique discrete phosphorus segment assemblies inside MWCNTs which ensured enough vacant space for volume expansion.Chemical energy storage is one of the most ideal ways to store electricity in terms of energy density Recently, Salzmann et al. How to avoid the external deposition of phosphorus? The primary protocol in this study is inspired from the facile conversion of red phosphorus (RP) into soluble polyphosphide anions (major in P Red phosphorus (RP, ~99.4%) was obtained from Tianjin Damao Chemical Ltd. Sodium ethoxide (NaOEt, 96%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 99.5%) were obtained from Aladdin. MWCNTs (~20 µm in length and ~5 nm in inner diameters) and graphene oxide (GO) were purchased from Nanjing XFNANO, China. All air- or moisture-sensitive reactions were performed under argon gas protection. 110 mg solid NaOEt was dissolved in 6 mL DMSO, then 50 mg RP and MWCNTs (or GO) were added into the solution, the mixture was heated up to 189 ℃ and refluxed for 8 h. After the mixture was cooled down to room temperature naturally, the as-obtained PP@MWCNTs (or PP/GO) were washed by water and ethanol and centrifuged for three times, and dried in vacuum at 80 ℃ for 12 h. SEM images of samples were measured on a Nova Nanosem 200 system operated at an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. Both transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) were performed on JEOL-2100 instrument. HR-TEM was performed on a Nion U-HERMES200 at 60 kV. In-situ TEM was carried out on JEOL-3010 apparatus. Raman spectroscopy (JY-T643200, France) was performed at ambient temperature with a laser excitation of 514 nm. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a spectrometer from Kratos Axis Ultradld, using Mono Al Kα radiation at a power of 120 W (8 mA, 15 kV). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15406 nm), with which the data was collected in the 2θ range of 20–90° at a step size of 0.02°. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out on a Perkin-Elmer Pris-1 TGA/Clarus SQ 8 T with a heating rate of 5 °C per minute. The synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction were conducted at the Australian Synchrotron using a wavelength of 0.73 Å at 300 K. In-situ TEM was carried out using a Nanofactory in-situ TEM holder capable of biasing. PP@MWCNTs was attached to one Au rod by conductive glue, while the counter electrode, Li metal was scratched from one Li foil and attached to one W rod using the same glue. These two rods were then mounted on the in situ TEM holder. All assemblies were carried out inside a glove box filled with argon gas. The holder was then transferred into a JEOL 3010 TEM operated at 300 kV. During this transfer process, the surface of Li metal was oxidized with a thin layer of Li The electrochemical properties of PP@MWCNTs were studied using a 2025-type coin cell on a Neware Charge/Discharge apparatus. The working electrode was prepared by pasting a mixture of 70 wt% PP@MWCNTs, 20 wt% carbon black, and 10% poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) on an aluminum foil. Li metal round disk was selected as the reference and counter electrode. The mass loading of active material in electrode was ~5 mg/cm Discrete phosphorus segments are assembled inside MWCNTs in Raman spectroscopy ( Electrochemical performances of PP@MWCNTs at a low C-rate of 0.1 A g Over the past decade, in situ TEM studies of lithium/sodium ion batteries have provided important fundamental insights in the reaction kinetics and microstructural evolution during battery operations by real time observation In summary, we have developed a solution-based encapsulation method for converting liquid red phosphorus into polyphosphides, which is favoured anchoring inside MWCNTs. With a relatively high loading of 32% phosphorus inside MWCNTs. A multifaceted investigation has been carried out to prove the active material in PP@MWCNTs, i.e. polyphosphides are mainly composed of NaP This work was supported by the