The present research work has concentrated to synthesize nanocrystalline (NC) Cr0.26Fe0.24Al0.5 (medium entropy alloy, 3E-MEA) and Cr0.15Fe0.14Al0.30Cu0.13Si0.28 (high-entropy alloy, 5E-HEA) non-equiatomic (equal weight fraction) alloys through mechanical alloying (MA); which studied the influence of entropy effect on structural properties, microstructural characterization, and mechanical behaviour. Further, the same non-equiatomic ratio of two coarse grain alloys (CGAs) was manufactured by conventional powder metallurgy (PM) route (blending method, 3E-CGA, 5E-CGA) for comparison. All synthesized powders were hot-pressed (HPed) at 723 k for 30 min subsequently mechanical properties in terms of compressive stress-strain and hardness were examined. The samples of as-milled powders, HPed, and fractured were investigated using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and advanced electron microscopes. The HPed sample of 3E-MEA of Cr0.26Fe0.24Al0.5 produced 94% BCC and 6% FCC crystal structures due to more dissolution of Al atoms in the stronger bonding atoms of Cr-Fe lattice. Whereas 5E-HEA of Cr0.15Fe0.14Al0.30Cu0.13Si0.28 sample has exhibited 72.1% FCC phase and 27.9% BCC phase due to balance between the dissolution of FCC elements (Al, Cu, Si) and BCC elements (Cr, Fe). Further, 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA have exhibited the ultimate compressive strength (UCS) of 1278 ± 6.75 MPa and 2060 ± 2.8 MPa respectively whereas the corresponding conventionally blended alloys produced 268 ± 5 MPa and 615 ± 3 MPa for 3E-CGA and 6E-CGA respectively. Vicker’s hardness strength (VHS) of 5E-HEA of Cr0.15Fe0.14Al0.30Cu0.13Si0.28 has exhibited 68% more when compared to 3E-MEA of Cr0.26Fe0.24Al0.5, 3.26 times higher compared to blended alloys. Further, several strengthening mechanisms on the mechanical behaviour of MEA and HEA were investigated in which dislocation strengthening mechanisms followed by solid solution strengthening mechanisms have influenced more as compared to grain boundary strengthening mechanisms.In the past decades, traditional alloys [Al, Ti, Cu, Ni & Fe based] have been used in which one or two metals can be the principle elements that act as a matrix. Recently, materials engineers and materials scientists have more interests towards HEAs as it possesses special microstructures, enhanced thermal, mechanical and corrosive properties Current research shows that HEAs are a simple solid solution (SS) which forms nanostructures. In HEAs, the formation of intermetallic particles and unwanted precipices can be avoided Wang et al. Chen et al. Elemental powders of Cr (−200 mesh, <75 μm), Fe (−230 mesh, <63 μm), Al (−325 mesh, <44 μm), Cu (−400 mesh, <37 μm), and Si (−400 mesh, <37 μm) with>99% purity were purchased from M/S LobaChemi, India and used as a raw material. As per objectives, elemental powders were weighed with equal weight fraction (non-equiatomic). The weighed elemental powders were mechanically milled using a Fritsch planetary ball mill with a ball-to-powder (BPR) weight ratio of 10:1 at 250 rpm for 20 h. Tungsten vials and tungsten carbide balls (ϕ8) were used as milling medium. Ethanol was used as a process control agent during MA to avoid cold welding and oxidization. Intermittent milling was conducted to avoid heating effect for which 15-minute forward direction, 15-minute pause, and 15-minute reverse direction were set. The schematic of two stations planetary HEBM principle is shown in The synthesized 3E-MEA, 5E-HEA, 3E-CGA, and 5E-CGA powders were heated at 373 k for 1 h to relieve the internal stress built during milling. Stress relieved powders were put inside the HP dies which were made of H13 steel ( FEG-HRSEM (Apreo FEG-HR-SEM, 30 keV, 1.3 nm resolution at 1 keV) was used to capture the powders surface morphologies of as-received elemental powders, MAed HEA powders, and mechanically blended CGA powders. Further, the same FEG-HRSEM was used to check the solid solubility by over-lay and live map features. Besides, the soundness of sintered samples was also examined using the same FEG-HRSEM. XRD test (Rigaku Ultima IV) using Cu-Kα radiation with a scanning rate of 2°/min from 20° to 90°, the working voltage of 40 KV and current of 40 mA was conducted on milled powders and the sintered bulk samples to investigate the phase formation in the samples. JEOL JEM 2100 HRTEM was used to measure the crystallite size of 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA powders. Before the powder samples were dispersed in a solvent (Ethanol), put it into the TEM copper grid, allowed to dry, and then the TEM grid was placed inside the TEM for examination. Samples of 10 mm in diameter and 15 mm in height were prepared from HPed pellets to conduct a uniaxial compression test as per the ASTM E9 standard. Before, the samples were polished as per metallographic procedures and ensured scratch-free with a smooth surface. Servo-controlled universal testing machine (MTS, model no: 370.25, capacity: 250kN, USA) was used to conduct the compression test at a strain rate of 0.07 s  The powder surface morphologies of as-received elemental powders of Cr, Fe, Al, Cu, and Si are shown in From The XRD of hot-pressed CGAs and entropy alloys are shown in  The properties of developed alloys mainly depends on amount of SS from the mixed elements, phase stability, phase formation, physicochemical parameters (atomic radius, electronegativity, valence electron concentration), and thermodynamic parameters (Gibbs free energy ( The SS formation and phase stability for the developed MAed 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA depends on the value of The obtained mechanical properties of developed alloys can be correlated to several strengthening mechanisms which also behind the properties improvement. To quantify the various mechanisms, the Eqs. Using all the Eqs. Two different entropy alloys of Cr Cr Very fine particle size of 1.75 μm and 2.20 μm nanocrystallite entropy alloy powders was obtained for Cr Hot pressed entropy samples and CGAs samples have produced the relative density of 94% and above in which MAed 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA have produced very high UCS and VHS. The properties improvement in 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA were attributed to various physicochemical and thermodynamic parameters which also explained and reported. In addition, several strengthening mechanisms on total strength were calculated in which dislocation strengthening and solid solution strengthening mechanisms were influenced more. Further, the major four core effect behind the properties enhancement in 3E-MEA and 5E-HEA were also described. The authors acknowledge the financial support of The experimental datasets obtained from this research work and then the analysed results during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: