We conducted a prospective, randomized, controlled trial to compare functional outcomes, complications, and reoperation rates in elderly patients with displaced intra-articular, distal humeral fractures treated with open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) or primary semiconstrained total elbow arthroplasty (TEA). Forty-two patients were randomized by sealed envelope. Inclusion criteria were age greater than 65 years; displaced, comminuted, intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus (Orthopaedic Trauma Association type 13C); and closed or Gustilo grade I open fractures treated within 12 hours of injury. Both ORIF and TEA were performed following a standardized protocol. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score were determined at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months, and 2 years. Complication type, duration, management, and treatment requiring reoperation were recorded. An intention-to-treat analysis and an on-treatment analysis were conducted to address patients randomized to ORIF but converted to TEA intraoperatively. Twenty-one patients were randomized to each treatment group. Two died before follow-up and were excluded from the study. Five patients randomized to ORIF were converted to TEA intraoperatively because of extensive comminution and inability to obtain fixation stable enough to allow early range of motion. This resulted in 15 patients (3 men and 12 women) with a mean age of 77 years in the ORIF group and 25 patients (2 men and 23 women) with a mean age of 78 years in the TEA group. Baseline demographics for mechanism, classification, comorbidities, fracture type, activity level, and ipsilateral injuries were similar between the 2 groups. Operative time averaged 32 minutes less in the TEA group (P = .001). Patients who underwent TEA had significantly better MEPSs at 3 months (83 vs 65, P = .01), 6 months (86 vs 68, P = .003), 12 months (88 vs 72, P = .007), and 2 years (86 vs 73, P = .015) compared with the ORIF group. Patients who underwent TEA had significantly better DASH scores at 6 weeks (43 vs 77, P = .02) and 6 months (31 vs 50, P = .01) but not at 12 months (32 vs 47, P = .1) or 2 years (34 vs 38, P = .6). The mean flexion-extension arc was 107° (range, 42°-145°) in the TEA group and 95° (range, 30°-140°) in the ORIF group (P = .19). Reoperation rates for TEA (3/25 [12%]) and ORIF (4/15 [27%]) were not statistically different (P = .2). TEA for the treatment of comminuted intra-articular distal humeral fractures resulted in more predictable and improved 2-year functional outcomes compared with ORIF, based on the MEPS. DASH scores were better in the TEA group in the short term but were not statistically different at 2 years' follow-up. TEA may result in decreased reoperation rates, considering that 25% of fractures randomized to ORIF were not amenable to internal fixation. TEA is a preferred alternative for ORIF in elderly patients with complex distal humeral fractures that are not amenable to stable fixation. Elderly patients have an increased baseline DASH score and appear to accommodate to objective limitations in function with time.Treatment of displaced intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus is one of the most technically challenging procedures in elbow surgery. In young patients, open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) with plate fixation of both columns is the gold standard. However, elbow stiffness, malunion, nonunion, failure of fixation, and ulnar neuropathy are common sequelae, with overall complication rates of over 35% reported. In addition to revision internal fixation with bone grafting, semiconstrained total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) is a well-established treatment option for the complications of internal fixation of distal humeral fractures. In 1997, Cobb and Morrey The purpose of this study was to compare the effectiveness of ORIF with primary TEA for the treatment of displaced, comminuted intra-articular distal humeral fractures in elderly patients (age >65 years). Our primary outcome measure was reoperation rate, and secondary outcome measures were patient function as measured with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) instrument. We performed a prospective, randomized, double-blind clinical trial beginning in January 2001 at 4 university-affiliated Canadian academic medical centers: St Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto (Toronto, Ontario); Royal Columbian and Vancouver General Hospitals, University of British Columbia (New Westminster/Vancouver, British Columbia); and McMaster Medical Center, McMaster University (Hamilton, Ontario). Each patient was randomly assigned by sealed envelope drawn by the site coordinator to be treated with either ORIF or semiconstrained TEA. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the institutional research ethics review board of each participating institution. All patients provided written informed consent. The sample size was estimated by use of an equation appropriate for comparing 2 independent group means The patients included in the study were men or women aged over 65 years with displaced, comminuted, intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus (AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association [OTA] classification type 13C) Exclusion criteria included (1) extra-articular or partial articular fractures of the distal humerus (AO/OTA classification types 13A and 13B), (2) intra-articular fracture of the distal humerus (type 13C) that did not require surgical intervention, (3) Gustilo grade I open fractures that had not had irrigation and debridement within 12 hours of occurrence, (4) Gustilo grade II, IIIa, IIIb, and IIIc open fractures, (5) associated vascular injury, (6) previous ipsilateral distal humeral fracture, (7) pathologic fractures, (8) fractures with diaphyseal extension of 8 cm or greater, (9) definitive surgery more than 21 days after injury, (10) pre-existing severe joint disease (eg, rheumatoid arthritis), and (11) limited life expectancy because of significant medical comorbidity. In addition, patients with dementia, inability to comply with rehabilitation or form completion, and unwillingness to be followed up for 2 years were excluded. All patients underwent a standardized preoperative assessment by a physician and a research assistant. Preoperative radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral views) of the affected elbow were obtained before surgery. Patients were not stratified by surgeon or institution. Randomization was performed after consent was obtained and before the patient entered the operating room. A random number generator was used to create a 1:1 allocation scheme for randomization ( In total, 6 surgeons performed the procedures in this study. Preoperative prophylactic antibiotics were given to all patients, and all procedures were performed with the patient under general anesthesia. All surgeries followed standardized protocols. ORIF was performed via a posterior approach with anatomic reduction of the fracture and provisional Kirschner wire fixation. A midline triceps split or triceps-sparing approach was used for TEA, and a midline triceps split or olecranon osteotomy was used for ORIF. Antibiotics were administered after surgery for a period of 24 hours for closed fractures and a period of 48 hours for open fractures. Both ORIF and TEA treatment groups had the same rehabilitation protocol. A splint was applied with the elbow at 90°. Active-assisted flexion and gravity-assisted extension of the elbow were begun on the second postoperative day in the hospital. A resting elbow splint was provided to help support the extremity. Patients progressed to unrestricted elbow motion at 6 weeks and strengthening at 8 weeks, depending on wound healing. A research assistant, blinded to the treatment group, and the attending physician, who was not blinded, performed a standardized clinical assessment of all patients preoperatively; at 6 weeks postoperatively; and at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months postoperatively. At each evaluation, the patients completed a patient-oriented and limb-specific measurement questionnaire (DASH). The primary outcome measurement was the reoperation rate. The secondary outcome measures were patient outcome (ie, pain, motion, stability, and daily function) based on both objective elbow performance scores (MEPS) and patient-rated upper extremity disability and symptoms (DASH). Complication rates (ie, malunion/nonunion, refracture, loss of mechanical fixation, infection, wound breakdown, and ulnar neuropathy) were also analyzed. The statistical software used was SPSS for Windows, version 13.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). All scale variables were tested for normality with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The main effect of treatment on DASH scores and MEPSs was analyzed by use of a 2-way analysis of variance with treatment (ORIF and TEA) and time (6, 12, 24, 52 and 104 weeks) as independent factors, and the Tukey post hoc method was used for the comparison of means. The Student Two analyses were conducted on the postoperative data. The first was an intention-to-treat analysis in which all patients, regardless of further treatment (ie, intraoperative conversion or postoperative crossover), remained in their original group. The second analysis was an on-treatment analysis in which patients were analyzed by the treatment actually received instead of that randomly allocated (the 5 patients randomized to ORIF who were converted intraoperatively to TEA because of the inability to stabilize the fracture adequately). A conservative efficacy analysis was performed for the single case of postoperative crossover (ORIF failure converted to TEA at 6 months postoperatively) in which the patient's last score before he or she crossed over to the other treatment group was identified and carried forward through the remaining evaluations. Forty-two patients were enrolled in the study. Two died of unrelated causes before complete follow-up and were excluded from the analysis of data. Data were, therefore, collected on 40 patients: 20 randomized to ORIF and 20 randomized to TEA. Baseline variable for the groups after randomization are summarized in All patients had an AO/OTA type 13C fracture of the distal humerus that was confirmed intraoperatively. Five randomized to the ORIF group were converted to TEA intraoperatively because of extensive comminution and inability to obtain fixation stable enough to allow early mobilization in the judgment of the attending surgeon. This intraoperative conversion group consisted of 4 women and 1 man with a mean age of 81 years. The mechanism of injury was a low-energy fall in the women, whereas the man had a fall from a height. This resulted in 15 patients treated with ORIF and 25 patients treated with TEA after the initial surgical procedure. Baseline variables for the groups after initial operative treatment are summarized in One patient in the ORIF group was converted to TEA 6 months postoperatively, and a conservative efficacy analysis was used to accommodate the data. In this patient, a nonunion had developed with an incongruent joint space greater than 2 mm. Six months after ORIF, the range of motion was 115° flexion, 50° extension, 90° supination, and 70° pronation, and the MEPS was 55. Six months after TEA, the range of motion was 150° flexion, 30° extension, 90° supination, and 70° pronation, and the MEPS was 70. The overall results of the intention-to-treat and on-treatment analyses were not significantly different from those of the conservative efficacy analysis (data not shown). Reoperation was required after the initial procedure in 7 patients, 4 (27%) who had ORIF and 3 (12%) who had TEA ( The mean MEPS was significantly improved in patients who had TEA compared with ORIF at 3 months (83 vs 65, Although there was a trend toward improved motion in the TEA group (by 12°), the mean extension, flexion, and arc of motion of flexion-extension were not significantly different between the ORIF group and TEA group at 2 years. In the ORIF group, the mean extension was 28° (range, 5°-60°), mean flexion was 123° (range, 90°-150°), and mean arc of motion of flexion-extension was 95° (range, 30°-140°). In the TEA group, the mean extension was 26° (range, 0°-72°), mean flexion was 133° (range, 90°-155°), and mean arc of motion of flexion-extension was 107° (range, 42°-145°). The mean pronation-supination arc at 2 years was 160° (range, 90°-180°) in the ORIF group and 172° (range, 110°-180°) in the TEA group ( DASH scores showed a significant improvement for TEA compared with ORIF between 6 weeks (43 vs 77, The number of complications was similar for treatment with ORIF and TEA ( Radiographs taken for the fractures treated with ORIF that healed without revision (14 patients) showed that 10 had an anatomic reduction, and 4 had greater than 2 mm of articular incongruity with stable fixation. There was no evidence of arthritic change (at this early point) in these individuals. One patient treated with ORIF had Brooker type III heterotopic ossification with extension of 50°, flexion of 95°, and a 135° supination-pronation arc. Three patients treated with TEA had Brooker type III heterotopic ossification, with one undergoing resection and revision ulnar nerve transposition at 4 months postoperatively. At 2 years, this patient had an excellent outcome (MEPS of 100) with extension of 25°, flexion of 140°, and full supination and pronation. The 2 remaining TEA patients with type III heterotopic ossification had ranges of elbow flexion-extension of 40° to 135° and 20° to 90°, with MEPs of 80 and 85, respectively. Radiographic evaluation in the TEA group indicated that the implant was associated with a progressive radiolucency of the ulnar component in 1 patient. In this patient, an early wound problem with persistent drainage had developed, and subsequently, a deep infection developed at 9 months, requiring a successful 2-stage revision elbow arthroplasty. None of the patients (n = 5) with open Gustilo grade I injuries had any evidence of infection during the course of the study. Displaced, comminuted, intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are difficult to treat because of the complex anatomy of the elbow. Although osteosynthesis with double-plate fixation is the recommended treatment in adults, the presence of osteoporotic bone, metaphyseal comminution, poor-quality soft tissue, and intolerance for joint immobilization increases the challenge in the elderly. This problem can be expected to become more prominent with time, as the incidence of osteoporotic fractures of the distal humerus is increasing dramatically. Palvanen et al Although there is substantial evidence of the benefits of ORIF in younger patients, Our study supports previous literature reporting that advanced age itself is not a contraindication for ORIF, because good or excellent functional results can be achieved in selected patients with AO/OTA type C fractures. ORIF was performed by fellowship-trained orthopaedic trauma and upper extremity surgeons in our study using standard goals (anatomic articular restoration, plates on both the medial and lateral columns, early postoperative motion); however, 47% of patients achieved a poor to fair MEPS. This figure is consistent with the literature and suggests that these current fixation strategies are not optimal in the elderly. The use of newer anatomic locking plates Several studies suggest that primary TEA is a reliable treatment for severe intra-articular distal humeral fractures in the elderly. Cobb and Morrey Despite the abundance of retrospective reviews, to our knowledge, there has not been a study that compares ORIF and TEA in the elderly population in a prospective, randomized fashion. In our study, patients treated with TEA had significantly improved MEPSs at all time points in the follow-up period, up to and including 2 years, despite the inclusion of the 5 worst fractures originally randomized to the ORIF group (this would have the potential to bias results against the TEA group). The improvements in the TEA group were especially marked early in the postoperative period, which coincides with our (and others') subjective impression of faster recovery with TEA in this situation. Again, a large difference in perceived disability was seen early in the patient-based DASH scores, with a 34-point superiority in the TEA group at 6 weeks postoperatively. The DASH scores were significantly improved in the TEA group in terms of self-perceived functional outcome from 6 weeks to 6 months but began to converge after 1 year, despite continued physician-observed differences between treatment groups based on the MEPS ( There are several potential explanations for the ongoing statistical advantage of the TEA group in MEPSs as the DASH scores tend to converge. One is a true and genuine continued improvement in the ORIF group that is only detected by the more sensitive patient-based scores. The second is a numeric one, resulting from the increased variability in the scores of the DASH, which makes statistical significance more elusive as the magnitude of difference diminishes. The third (the option that we believe is most plausible) is that elderly patients in our study adapted over time to their perceived disability despite consistent objective limitations. When one is performing TEA for fracture, it has been argued that resecting the humeral condyles may have a significant detrimental effect on forearm strength and elbow stability. Although the reoperation rate was higher in the ORIF group (4/15 [27%]) than in the TEA group (3/25 [12%]), this was not statistically significant ( Regardless of which operative treatment patients received, postoperative ulnar nerve problems were the single most common complication in our study. The increased incidence is probably related to our careful, independent surveillance for these complications in a prospective, patient-based fashion. Although most cases improved significantly with time, there is clearly room for improvement. We routinely transposed the nerve at the conclusion of the procedure; this may not be the optimal form of management for the ulnar nerve with a fracture in elderly patients. The strengths of our study include the prospective randomized design, the use of standardized modern operative techniques, evaluation with comprehensive patient-oriented and surgeon-based outcomes, and complete follow-up. However, we believe that there are 2 main weaknesses. One is that the sample size was relatively small, and we identified several trends (such as the reoperation rate of 27% in the ORIF group vs 12% in the TEA group [ In conclusion, this is the first randomized prospective trial to evaluate the efficacy of ORIF compared with TEA for comminuted distal humeral fractures in patients aged over 65 years. Primary semiconstrained TEA was superior to ORIF as measured by both surgeon-based (MEPS) and patient-based (DASH) outcome scores, especially in the early postoperative period. Operative time was shorter by a mean of 32 minutes in the TEA group. There were trends toward a reduced reoperation rate and improved range of motion in the TEA group, which were not statistically significant. In addition, 25% of patients randomized to ORIF required intraoperative conversion to TEA, a consistent figure in multiple studies that we believe represents a subset of individuals with this fracture type who are not amenable to ORIF. We believe that our study supports the use of primary TEA in elderly patients with comminuted, intra-articular distal humeral fractures.