Rich silver-bearing low-grade complex sulfide ores can be found in great supply in China's Yunnan Province. The beneficiation experiment showed that it would be very difficult to separate Ag (Zn or Pb) minerals with traditional ore beneficiation methods. In the present work, acid pressure oxidative leaching of such complex sulfide ores in sulfate medium added sodium iodine and at the temperature ranging from 90 to 170 °C was studied to search for silver recovery alternatives. The Lab-scale experiments were conducted in a 2-L autoclave to investigate the influences of temperature, acidity, sodium iodide addition, oxygen pressure, oxygen flow rate on recovery of silver and zinc. The experimental results obtained show that under optimum conditions, recovery yield of silver and zinc reaches 71.5% and 41.29%, respectively.According to geological surveys, China's Yunnan Province has abundant reserves of silver-bearing low-grade complex sulfide ores. The beneficiation experiment showed that it would be very difficult to separate Ag (Zn or Pb) minerals with traditional ore beneficiation methods. As the high-grade base metals resources diminished, the treatment of such low-grade complex sulfide must be considered. Silver recovery plays a major role in the economy of the process ( In the present work, sodium iodine is added into the sulfate medium in acid pressure oxidative leaching of the complex sulfide ores to prevent silver precipitation prior to the formation of silver iodine precipitation. The ultimate goal of the improved leaching process is to achieve maximum recovery yield of silver and zinc. The low-grade silver-bearing lead–zinc–iron sulfide ores were originated from Yunnan Lancang Lead Ore Co., Ltd, Yunnan, China. The chemical and mineralogical composition is described in As seen as in A solid autoclave, 10.9 cm dia. In every leaching run, 100 g dried ores (− The recovery yield of silver ( The percentage of zinc extraction ( The relationship between recovery yield of silver and zinc and temperature was determined in Dobrokhotov and Verban ( However, at higher temperatures (140–170 °C), silver recovery decreased with increasing temperature. From 140 to 170 °C, kinetics of iron precipitation is faster than that of its dissolution, which resulted in the high iron precipitation yield at the end of the oxidation reaction. Consequentially, some silver ion were sequenced into the jarosite phase at the higher temperature range, which indicates the silver deportment into the jarosite phase is enhanced by the increased iron and lead in the feed ore. The combined effect of suspension promoted the precipitation kinetics of jarosite and the loss of silver into the jarosite phase. Although the stability of jarosite increases with increasing temperature, the stability of silver iodide decreases with increasing temperature (  If the silver ion is incorporated into the core of the jarosite crystals, its extraction yield during the cyanide leaching will be low because only the silver ion in the outer crystal planes of the jarosite can react with the free cyanide ion ( The cyanidation processes as Eq. The relationship between recovery yield of silver and zinc and time was described in Previous qualitative observations on the reaction of the galena contained in the ores during acid pressure oxidation at about 150 °C suggests that galena reacts rapidly to form PbSO The relationship between recovery yield of silver and zinc and acidity was described in The reason that recovery yield of silver kept increasing may be that the initial acid level had a pronounced negative effect on the rate of formation of jarosite by reducing the rate of hydrolysis of ferric ion. Dobrokhotov and Verban ( Recovery yield of silver from the pressure leaching residue increased with increasing initial acidity of the pressure leaching system. The increase in recovery yield of silver was caused by the high level of acidity, which reduced the precipitation kinetics of jarosite and minimized the competition (with iodide ion) for silver ion. The silver extraction from the pressure leaching residue was attributed to the high acidity, which minimized the precipitation kinetics of jarosite and competition for silver ion by the jarosite phase during the pressure oxidation. Silver's deportment into the lead-hydronium jarosite during the pressure oxidation was minimized, while its deportment into the cyanide-soluble silver iodide was promoted. The relationship between recovery yield and sodium iodide addition was described in High dosage of sodium iodide enhances its competition with jarosite for silver. The relationship between recovery yield of silver and zinc and oxygen pressure was described in At higher oxygen pressure, oxygen is more soluble in the leaching system (Eq. Since more ferrous ion is oxidized to ferric ones, more jarosite is formed, and the jarosite precipitation could compete for more silver ion with iodide. The relationship between recovery yield of silver and zinc and stirring rate was described in Minor relativity between extraction and stirring rate implies that external diffusion is not likely to be the rate-determining step in such leaching process. There remains much work to judge which is the rate-determining step of internal diffusion and chemical reaction. Because that the silver-bearing complex ores are complicated physically, chemically, and mechanically, and the extremely complex thermodynamic and kinetics may exist in the acid pressure oxidative leaching, the experimental results may not be real facts. But at least, conclusions are safely drawn as follows. Silver recovery decreased at higher temperatures (140–170 °C) because of the enhanced stability and kinetics of lead-hydronium jarosite formation, but this could be overcome by increasing acidity and iodide concentration of the autoclave slurry. In addition, oxygen pressure has both adverse and inadverse effect on silver recovery, and stirring rate doesn't affect silver recovery significantly when it reaches 400 rpm. Like most acid pressure oxidative leaching of sphalertie, zinc leaching (recovery) has the same trend, namely, temperature and oxygen pressure are dominant factors on its leaching (recovery). Recovery yield of silver and zinc reaches 71.5% and 41.29%, respectively, under optimum leaching conditions: temperature, 130 °C; time, 120 min; acidity, 1.4 (acid/ore ratio); NaI, 1.8 g; oxygen pressure, 0.7 MPa; stirring rate, 400 rpm. Silver and zinc recoveries of by acid pressure oxidative leaching of silver-bearing lead-zinc-iron sulfide ores are technologically feasible, which it's expected to prove. The author wish to thank Yu Deqing, the director of Technology Center of Yunnan Metallurgy Group Co., Ltd, Kunming for providing the facilities to carry out this work.