A novel glycine–nitrate process (GNP) has been developed to fabricate ultrafine W–20wt.%Cu (W–20Cu) composite powders, with ammonium metatungstate [(NH4)6H2W12O40⋅xH2O], cupric nitrate trihydrate [Cu(NO3)2⋅3H2O] as main raw materials and glycine[C2H5NO2] as a complexant and incendiary agent. Precursor powders were obtained after the self-propagation reaction in a suspension containing above materials. The precursor powders were then hydrogen-reduced to convert into W–20Cu powders. Phase constitution and morphology of the precursors, as well as the resultant W–20Cu powders were characterized. Density and microstructure of the sintered W–20Cu samples were tested to investigate the sinterability of the W–20Cu powders. It is shown that the GNP produces superfine W–20Cu powders with particle size of about 200nm. The powders show good sinterability. Relative density above 98.1% of the theoretical is achieved for the powder compacts sintered at 1200°C in hydrogen. The sintered W–20Cu samples have electrical conductivity of 40.1% IACS and a Vickers hardness of 278.W–Cu alloys have been widely used in heat sinks, high voltage electrical contacts, and electro-discharge electrodes due to the high electrical and thermal conductivity of copper and the low thermal expansion coefficient and high arc resistance of tungsten Much work has been done in improving the sinterability of W–Cu powders By now, many chemical methods such as co-precipitation, sol–gel, spray-drying and other processes have been tried to synthesize superfine or nanosized W–Cu powders with high purity and excellent sinterability In this work, precursor powders containing tungsten and copper oxides and salts were first synthesized from ammonium paratungstate and copper nitrate by the GNP method, and W–20 To synthesize W–20Cu powders, copper nitrate trihydrate [Cu(NO Phase composition of the calcined precursors and the reduced powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Morphology of the precursors and microstructure of the sintered W–20Cu samples were observed by scanning electron microscope (SEM). Morphology of the W–20Cu powders was characterization by transmission electron microscope (TEM). The particle size distribution of the W–20Cu powders was also measured by a laser particle size analyzer (Mastersizer-2000, Malvern). Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX) analysis was used to determine the ratio of Cu–W in the synthesized W–Cu powders. Density of the sintered W–20Cu specimens was measured by the Archimedes method according to the national standard GB/     Energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDX) analysis was carried out on the powders reduced in H  When W–20Cu compacts are sintered at temperature below the melting point (1083 When W–20Cu compacts are sintered at temperature above the melting point of Cu phase, the densification is related to liquid-state sintering, which is considered as a dominant sintering mechanism for W–Cu alloys  Electrical conductivity ( It was reported that the conductivity of W–Cu composites not only depends on the composition, grains size, porosity and impurity levels in the samples, but also is affected by the topological parameters such as W–W contiguity A novel chemical process, namely the glycine–nitrate process (GNP)-reduction method was proposed to prepare W–20 This work was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Education Bureau of Anhui Province of China under Contract No. KJ2010A274.