Study Objectives
                  The aim of this study was to determine the use of Boehler's angle (BA) and the critical angle of Gissane (CAG) in diagnosing calcaneus fractures in the ED.
               
                  Design
                  The study was conducted as a randomized, blinded, case-control trial.
               
                  Cases
                  One hundred thirty-three patients older than 15 years were included in the study. Sixty-five patients with computed tomography–verified calcaneus fractures (gold standard) and 68 ED patients with lateral foot or ankle x-rays without calcaneus fractures were included in the study.
               
                  Methods
                  One second-year emergency medicine resident, 1 third-year emergency medicine resident, 2 board-certified emergency medicine attending physicians, and 1 board-certified radiologist prospectively reviewed all films using the Picture Archival and Communication System digital radiology system. Cases and controls were randomized and the participants were blinded to final radiographic diagnoses. Participants determined whether there was a fracture on each x-ray and measured BA and the CAG using the digital angle tool in the Picture Archival and Communication System.
               
                  Results
                  Emergency physicians were 97.9% accurate in diagnosing calcaneus fractures (range, 97% to 99%). The mean κ value for emergency physicians was 0.96 (range, 0.94-0.985). Receiver operating characteristic curves were constructed for BA and the CAG. When compared with the gold standard, the area under the curve for BA ranged from 0.82 to 0.88. The area under the curve for the CAG ranged from 0.45 to 0.67. BA had an interclass correlation coefficient of 0.84 (95% confidence interval, 0.79-0.87). The CAG interclass correlation was 0.52 (95% confidence interval, 0.43-0.60). One fracture was missed by the radiologist and all of the emergency physicians because it was only visible on computed tomography.
               
                  Conclusion
                  BA is somewhat helpful and the CAG is not useful in diagnosing calcaneus fractures in the ED. Interrater reliability for BA is excellent, but for the CAG, it is poor. Emergency physicians were 97.9% accurate in making the diagnosis by reviewing the plain films without “assistance” of the angle measurements.Calcaneus fractures are frequently encountered by emergency physicians. The calcaneus is the most commonly fractured tarsal bone and accounts for 1% to 2% of all fractures Boehler's angle is formed by two intersecting lines: (1) a line connecting the posterior tuberosity of the calcaneus and the apex of the posterior facet of the calcaneus and (2) a line between the apex of the posterior facet and the apex of the anterior process of the calcaneus ( Another angle that has been used to diagnose calcaneus fractures is the critical angle of Gissane (CAG). The CAG is formed by two strong cortical struts that extend laterally and form an obtuse angle directly inferior to the lateral process of the talus The purpose of this study was to determine the diagnostic use of BA and the CAG in patients with and without calcaneus fractures. This case-control study enrolled 65 patients with computed tomography (CT)–verified calcaneus fractures who presented to an urban ED between January 2000 and April 2004. The study was approved by the hospital's institutional review board. Patients with calcaneus fractures were identified using Standard mediolateral foot and ankle radiographic projections were used. Patients were excluded if they were younger than 15 years or still had open growth plates. Patients were also excluded if they had a calcaneus fracture but did not have a CT. Sixty-eight consecutive patients with CT-verified calcaneus fractures were identified. Sixty-five patients with fractures were included in the study. One patient was excluded because he was a multisystem trauma patient and only had a CT of the ankle performed. One patient did not have a lateral foot or ankle radiograph archived in our system, and one patient had a known fracture that was originally diagnosed 5 months before at another institution and the fracture was healing. Sixty-eight consecutive patients with normal or alternative diagnoses on plain films were selected as controls, based on order of entry into the computerized radiology system. Patients were excluded from the control group if they fell from a height. One board-certified radiologist, 2 emergency medicine residents, and 2 board-certified emergency medicine attending physicians who were blinded to the patient's final diagnosis reviewed the radiographs of all patients using a computerized digital radiology system, the Picture Archive Communication System (PACS). Readers first determined whether there was a fracture based on reviewing the plain films, and recorded their results. They then measured BA and the CAG. Readers measured BA and the CAG on the PACS system using the angle tool. A guideline and pictorial on how to measure BA and the CAG was available for readers on the PACS workstation desk. Data were recorded on a standardized form. The order in which the x-rays were presented was randomized, and no identifying information was present. Data were entered into a standardized data collection form by the readers as they reviewed the radiographs. Subsequently, data were entered into a formatted Excel spreadsheet. They were then imported into SPSS (version 10.1, SPSS Inc, Chicago, Ill), checked, and cleaned. The accuracy of emergency physicians and the radiologist in diagnosing calcaneus fractures was determined based on comparison to the gold standard (CT). Measured angles were plotted against CT findings on receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. If an angle had an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.9 or greater, the angle was considered useful. For each reader, Emergency physicians were 97.9% accurate in diagnosing calcaneus fractures based on reviewing the plain films without assistance from the angles (range, 97% to 99%). Their mean The second-year emergency medicine resident and the 2 attending emergency medicine physicians missed an avulsion fracture of the posterior lateral aspect of the calcaneus that was present on only one plain-film view (oblique). The second-year emergency medicine resident also missed a fracture through the posterior tubercle. The radiologist had a sensitivity of 98.5% and a specificity of 100%. One fracture was missed by all readers because it was only visible on CT. Receiver operating characteristic curves were constructed for BA and the CAG. A common cutoff for the area under the curve (AUC) in determining the usefulness of a test is 0.9. When compared with the gold standard, the AUC for BA ranged from 0.82 to 0.88 ( The AUC for the CAG ranged from 0.45 to 0.67 ( A subgroup analysis of patients with compression fractures was performed because BA and the CAG are disrupted primarily in compression type injuries. The AUC for BA improved minimally (range, 0.85-0.91), and the AUC for the CAG was worse (range, 0.32-0.54) in this subgroup of patients. The main limitation of the study is that patients in the control group did not receive CT scans. It is possible that a patient in the control group had a calcaneus fracture not seen on plain radiographs. This would decrease the sensitivity for both BA and the CAG. Readers in our study were looking specifically for calcaneus fractures and may have a higher sensitivity of identifying fractures compared to physicians practicing in a general ED examining a radiograph obtained for “foot pain” or other generalized complaint. The real-world sensitivity of identifying fractures may be lower because of this limitation. Finally, as we note in the The most common mechanism of injury leading to fractures of the calcaneus are falls from heights and motor vehicle accidents. The position of the foot at the time of impact, the force of the impact, and the quality of bone all determine the location of fracture lines and the pattern of comminution. The downward force of the patient's body is transmitted through the talus, which acts as a wedge and splits the calcaneus in its midportion. This downward force compresses the posterior facet and crushes the central portion of the calcaneus. This mechanism of injury disrupts BA and the CAG. Compression of the calcaneus results in a decrease in BA and straightening of the lines connecting the apex of the posterior facet and the superior aspect of the calcaneus, and the posterior tuberosity and the superior aspect of the calcaneus. Likewise, the CAG is disrupted when the calcaneus is crushed. The direction of the force and the position of the foot at the time of impact determine whether the angle becomes more acute or obtuse. The CAG can be disrupted in both directions. BA and the CAG can also be negative in severe injuries. Orthopedic surgeons frequently use BA and the CAG in reconstructing the normal anatomy of the calcaneus after a fracture. However, the use of the angles in making a diagnosis of a fracture has not been reported in the literature. Chen et al measured BA in 120 patients with normal lateral foot/ankle x-rays in an ED setting and found a range of 14° to 50° with a mean (SD) of 30 ± 6 Gupta et al measured BA and CAG in 25 patients with 27 intraarticular calcaneus fractures and found that the mean (SD) preoperative BA was 15 (14). The mean (SD) CAG in those same patients was 127 (19) Our study evaluated the use of BA and the CAG in 65 patients with CT-verified fractures and 68 patients without calcaneus fractures. BA had good interrelater reliability, indicating that the measurement was reproducible among the physicians who participated in the study. Sensitivity and the AUC are most important when using a test to determine if there is a fracture. The AUC for BA was less than 0.9, which leads one to conclude that the sensitivity of using this test alone is inadequate. The CAG measurements were not reproducible, sensitive, or specific. Even when only compression fractures were included in the analysis, performance of the angles did not significantly improve. In our study, one fracture was missed on plain films and was only picked up on CT. The fracture was comminuted with significant disruption of bony architecture. It was surprising that the fracture was not visualized on plain films even after we retrospectively reviewed the films and knew a fracture was there. Patients with calcaneus fractures typically complain of heel pain, inability to bear weight on the affected extremity, swelling of the heel, and ecchymosis tracking toward the sole of the foot. If a high index of clinical suspicion exists for a calcaneus fracture, and plain films are negative, a CT scan should be ordered. Based on the ROC curves, BA may aid in the diagnosis, and the CAG is not useful in diagnosis of calcaneus fractures in the ED. Emergency physicians were 97.9% accurate in making the diagnosis by reviewing the plain films without “assistance” of the angle measurements. Interrater reliability for BA is excellent, but for the CAG, it is poor. Calcaneus fractures may present with normal plain films. A CT scan should be ordered if a physician has a high index of suspicion with negative plain films.