Minerals in the solid state can be activated by mechanical process. As a result of this activation, a number of important processes can be influenced in terms of their fundamental kinetic behavior. This in turn leads to a number of potential applications for mechanical activation for improved extraction of metals. This book provides a comprehensive account of most of the important investigations of the influence of mechanical activation that have appeared in the scientific literature over the past three decades. The author concentrates on presenting experimental data in a more or less uniform format and context so that the readers can easily find existing results that are of potential interest in a wide range of situations that are of interest in extractive metallurgy. The book is organized into eight chapters. After a short introductory Chapter 1, five modern experimental techniques for the examination of solid surfaces are discussed: infrared spectroscopy, photoelectron spectroscopy, electron parametric resonance, Mössbauer spectroscopy, and of course X-ray diffraction are covered in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 covers the physico-chemical properties of mechanical activated minerals. This chapter provides the scientific underpinning for subsequent chapters. Many of the results are presented in terms of semiempirical quantitative models so that readers are able to assess the potential effects and benefits of mechanical activation on their systems and processes. Many examples of spectra that are obtained when using the spectroscopic methods are presented and interpreted, and this should help readers choose appropriate investigative tools for their own systems. Chapter 4 contains an account of polymorphous transformations induced in minerals by mechanical activation. Chapters 5, 6 and 7 are likely to be the most obvious sources of information on three potentially exploitable aspects of mechanical activation. Thermal decomposition of mechanically activated minerals is discussed in Chapter 5, chemical leaching of mechanically activated minerals in Chapter 6, and bacterial leaching of mechanically activated minerals in Chapter 7. The final chapter discusses the role of mechanical activation in a number of existing industrial extractive metallurgical processes. This book is unique in that it is the only comprehensive account of the research work that has been published on this important topic. The potential for improvement in extractive metallurgical processes via a combination of new mineral surface and defect formations is clearly demonstrated. The book will be a valuable source of information and will be valued by researchers and engineers who need to understand how the state of the solid mineral can affect its behavior in a variety of processing contexts.