Although relatively uncommon, isolated fractures of the zygomatic arch can sometimes be difficult to stabilise following reduction. We present a simple method of stabilisation using a Kirschner wire.Fractures of the zygomatic bone also usually involve the arch, and in these cases reduction of the fracture is generally all that is needed for realignment. However, occasionally only the zygomatic arch fractures. Most of these fractures are stable after indirect reduction. Delay in treatment, or severe comminution or displacement, however, may make reduction unstable, The arch fracture is reduced using the preferred standard method, and the bone fragments are held in their anatomical position with an elevator. The zygomatic prominence is identified by palpation. An imaginary line dropped from the lateral canthus can aid in its identification. The Kirschner wire is aimed so that it passes through the zygomatic prominence to emerge in the infratemporal fossa just deep to the zygomatic arch ( The arch alone is fractured in 2–20% of fractures of the zygomatic complex. A number of internal supports have also been described. These include the insertion of an epistaxis balloon catheter Lew et al. Most of these methods have the disadvantage of an external highly visible component which may interfere with normal daily life to a considerable extent. The obtrusiveness of the appliance may lead to its premature removal, leading to relapse of the fracture. The method we have described has the advantage of being extremely simple using readily available equipment. The reduction is adequately supported and the wire is relatively invisible, allowing it to be left in place for as long as necessary. The small scar left at the entry point of the Kirschner wire after its removal is almost invisible. Whereas three-dimensional stability is important in the stabilisation of malar fractures, the same is not the case with isolated arch fractures, the important principle in the treatment of which is to prevent medial displacement of the fragments. This simple method fulfils that need adequate.