We report here direct measurements (in situ monitoring) of stress evolution and plastic deformation due solely to first-order phase transformations during lithiation/delithiation of Sn thin films. The ‘stress plateaus’ observed during galvanostatic cycling against Li coincided with the ‘potential (cell voltage) plateaus’ corresponding to two-phase regimes. Preliminary analysis attributes this behaviour to stresses corresponding to eigenstrains associated with the formation of new intermetallic Sn–Li phases with significantly different molar volumes than the parent phases. Against this backdrop, we report here observations obtained with in situ monitoring of stress development during lithiation/delithiation of Sn thin film electrodes. In addition to the overall magnitudes, this paper focuses on some of the finer details of the stress developments recorded during phase transformations. Our results indicate that this needs to be considered in greater detail while developing mathematical models and designing innovative electrode architectures. The materials used for investigation were thin films of β-Sn (∼200 A plot depicting the electrochemical behaviour recorded during galvanostatic cycling of Sn is shown as the black line in Overall, it can be observed that compressive stress develops during the lithiation half-cycle, with nearly complete stress reversal during the delithiation half-cycle ( Before more detailed consideration of the ‘stress plateaus’, it is helpful to start by considering elastic stresses in the film that may arise due solely to volume changes being constrained by the much thicker stiff substrate. The in-plane strain ( Using a value of 0.3 for In this regard, a closer look at the stress–time plot ( The net ‘corrected stress’ that develops upon completion of the lithiation half-cycle is ∼−1.4 Further consideration of the results in In the absence of detailed prior information about the Hall–Petch behaviour of polycrystalline Sn, a rough estimate of the flow stress ( Hardness data from the literature provide some idea about the yield stresses for the different Sn–Li intermetallics Understanding this phenomenon thoroughly requires a rigorous evaluation, which is presently underway. In order to present here an approximate analysis for this flatter stress response, we assume that the new Li–Sn intermetallic phase nucleates as inclusions within the parent matrix. The normal eigenstrains ( As also reported in In an attempt to establish some correlation between these observations and the electrochemical behaviour, it is hypothesized here that, since it becomes possible for the constrained Sn–Li system to better release some of the stresses during the phase transformation occurring at ∼0.45 From To summarize, based on our in situ studies, we present here experimental evidence for the occurrence of plastic deformation during phase transformation (i.e. the formation of new Sn–Li intermetallic phases) upon lithiation/delithiation of Sn thin film electrodes. Prior to the onset and upon completion of any phase transformation, the deformation appears to be elastic. Preliminary analysis indicates that the elastic stresses corresponding to eigenstrains associated with the formation of second intermetallic phases within the matrix of the parent phases are large enough to initiate plastic deformation. On the one hand, such plastic flow could be somewhat beneficial if they relieve some of the stored elastic strain energies, which would otherwise detrimentally affect the thermodynamics (i.e. reduce the electrical energy obtained). On the other hand, the potentially more serious implication of plastic deformation is the tendency to degrade the overall dimensional stability and mechanical integrity of the electrode materials. 