The data presented in this article contain datasets of passive noise measurements at regolith sites in Adelaide, South Australia. The data were acquired using three component (3C) LE-3Dlite Lennartz seismometers with an eigenfrequency of 1 Hz. The data were acquired at eight sites across Adelaide׳s regolith in a hexagonal array layout. Four tests, each with a duration of 30 min, were conducted at different times. The ambient noise data can be used for both horizontal to vertical spectral ratio (HVSR) analysis and array analyses, which are essential to obtain the site fundamental frequency and the ellipticity of the fundamental mode Rayleigh waves at the measured site. The array analyses are useful to obtain the dispersion curves, which are needed to estimate the shear wave velocity profile.  The ambient noise data can be used in the development of further experiments at other regolith sites The data can be compared to other measurements for provide greater insight The HVSR curves serve as a benchmark for other researchers The data are important to evaluate the reliability of ambient vibration data analysis and for comparison of other sites with similar or divergent geophysical characteristics. The data in this article contain a series of measurements of ambient noise (microtremor) at regolith sites in Adelaide, South Australia ( A hexagonal array with a radius of 50 m was used in the measurement process, as shown in All the seismometers used for the noise data acquisition are three component (3C) LE-3Dlite Lennartz seismometers with an eigenfrequency of 1 Hz, as shown in In order to be provide a stable measurement platform at each site, the seismometers were placed onto of a 20 mm thick circular concrete slab over a generally firm to a stiff ground surface, which was previously cleared of vegetation and any pebble-sized rubble. The seismometers were leveled by adjusting the legs so as to minimize any instability during recording. For consistency with the measured horizontal vibration, all the seismometers were also oriented to magnetic North. Furthermore, to maintain the stability of the seismometer during the data acquisition, all the seismometers were protected from wind-induced vibrations by means of a plastic container and stabilized with a paving block on top, as shown in Prior to data acquisition, all of the equipment sets were examined to assess their repeatability. All equipment sets were run simultaneously at the same location, with a separation distance of approximately 0.5 m from one another for at least two days. The results of this huddle test are presented in The Geopsy At each survey location, noise measurements were conducted for at least 2 h, at a sampling frequency of 100 Hz. Field data were filtered using a cutoff frequency of 50 Hz. Only recordings on three instruments (in a triangular arrangement) were used for the horizontal to vertical spectral ratio (HVSR) analysis and the vertical seismometer readings from all instruments were used to analyze the spatial autocorrelation (SPAC). At each of the 8 sites, four tests, with a duration of 30 min, were conducted at different times using all instruments. An example of the field data sheet is shown in Analysis of the spectral ratio, between the Fourier amplitude spectrum of the horizontal (H) and vertical (V) components of the ambient noise, is fundamental to the horizontal to vertical spectral ratio (HVSR) method. The selection of the windows with the most stationary wave forms is a crucial initial step in computing HVSR spectral ratios. This selection is used to exclude transient vibrations The computation of HVSR is performed by taking the root mean square of the horizontal components of the Fourier amplitude spectra (F In the process, several parameters (window length, threshold of the short-time average/long-time average (STA/LTA) and the lengths of STA/LTA) were employed. Each selected window was then smoothed using a smoothing constant of 40 HVSR analysis was carried out using the method proposed by Shear wave velocity profiles were obtained by inverting the HVSR ellipticity curves using the process recommended by  Transparency data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at  