Hydrocyclones are used for classification purposes in the mining and mineral processing industries. According to their geometry and under certain operating conditions, hydrocyclones may present roping, which is a defective operation. Studies have related the roping phenomena to many variables such as hydrocyclone geometry and operating conditions. Some authors established a connection between the solids concentration of the feed and the discharge as one of the factors that generate roping. Other authors presented factors such as the apex and the vortex finder diameters, inlet pressure and the relationship between roping generation and the air core. This research aims to study the effect of inlet pressure and particle size distribution in the feed on roping in hydrocyclones. We develop a model using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) in order to study a 75-mm hydrocyclone operating with a variable flowrate and fed with two different materials. Each material is characterized by five granular phases interacting with each other and the model is validated by comparison with experimental data. The turbulence is treated using the Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) and the Eulerian Multiphase Model is used for the interactions between phases. The granular phases are described by the kinetic theory of granular flows (KTGF). The characteristics studied were: (i) air core and material distribution inside the hydrocyclone, (ii) underflow shape and spray angle, (iii) flow and solid concentrations, (iv) efficiency curve and separation size and (v) particle size distribution in the underflow and the cut sizes. According to the results, the particle size distribution of material in the feed has a direct impact on underflow behavior; when operating with coarser material the device tends to rope as the spray angle decreases. The same happens with an increase in the feed pressure. The roping condition generated by the coarse material directly affects the efficiency of the hydrocyclone, triggering an increase in separation size. The underflow particle size distribution tends to be coarser with an increase in the inlet pressure. When the inlet pressure decreases, the overflow particle distribution tends to be finer.Hydrocyclones are used for classification purposes in the mining and mineral processing industries ( Many experimental methods of analysis have been used to understand hydrocyclone performance, including Electrical Impedance Tomography ( Many empirical studies by previous researchers conclude that the feed and underflow concentration and the apex-to-vortex ratio are the main factors involved in the generation of roping (    Using a 150-mm polyurethane hydrocyclone with d  Due to the hydrocyclone geometry and the vortex flow induced by the tangential feed, a high turbulence level is presented, making its simulation complex. Moreover, the multiphase nature of the flow due to the presence of the air core, the suspended particles in the flow and the number of different particle diameters must be considered for the simulation ( The turbulence simulation associated with the problem is generally approached with the Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) ( The particles in the flow have been addressed in different manners such as the Eulerian-Eulerian Model, the Mixture Model ( In most studies, the simulation of a hydrocyclone is divided into two or three phases. In the first phase, the air core is generated using the RSM and VOF model (     For this work, the hydrocyclone geometry was selected based on the following idea: the hydrocyclone must be able to generate roping in at least one of the six cases at hand. Thus, and based on the work of Our hypothesis is that the feed is one of the main factors in the generation of the roping condition and that the interaction between granular phases is an important factor in the computational fluid dynamics (CFD), which has not been considered in prior studies, in which a mono-diameter phase has generally been used. The particle size distribution in the feed has an explicit impact on the hydrocyclone behavior and a particular relationship with roping. The multiphase flow is modeled with the Eulerian multiphase model, considering all phases as an interpenetrating continuum. The solid phases are described with the kinetic theory of granular flows (KTGF). The associated turbulence is modeled with the Reynolds stress model (RSM) and the wall effect is treated as a standard wall function. The Eulerian multiphase model defines the volume Eq.  The liquid-solid interactions are defined according to the Gidaspow model ( When For granular flows in a compressible regime The solids stress tensor contains shear and bulk viscosities arising from particle momentum exchange due to translation and collision. A frictional component of viscosity can also be included to account for the viscous-plastic transition that occurs when particles of a solid phase reach the maximum solid volume fraction. The collisional and kinetic parts, and the optional frictional part, are added to give the solids shear viscosity The collisional part of the shear viscosity is modeled as The following expression is used to model the kinectic viscosity The solids bulk viscosity accounts for the resistance of the granular particles to compression and expansion. It has the following form The frictional viscosity included in the calculation is given by The Reynolds stress model describes the anisotropic turbulence by solving any component of the Reynolds stress tensor, together with an equation for the dissipation rate. The transport equation that employs the method is defined by Eq. The test rig was a 75-mm hydrocyclone with a 15-mm apex diameter and 25.4-mm vortex finder diameter. The geometric characteristics are presented in The computational domain is made up of the hydrocyclone’s main body, the overflow pipeline and a small section of the atmosphere below the underflow. The domain was discretized by a 233,240 hexa-hedrical grid, with equi-size skew quality between 0 and 0.74. The inlet particle size distribution was discretized in five mean diameters, with each diameter representing the 20% of mass (see The model was validated by comparing the mass flow rate and their solid fractions, underflow discharge angles, selectivity (partition curve) and particle size distribution in the underflow, respectively. A comparison of underflows and solid fractions showed that the experimental and simulated values were similar, but not the water overflow. A comparison of the experimental values with those predicted by our numerical simulation of the underflow discharge angles shows good agreement, with the simulation values between 3 and 5% lower than the experimental values. In the case of the partition curve there was good agreement regarding the intermediate particle sizes, but discrepancies in the cases of the coarser and smaller sizes. Finally, the particle size distribution of the underflow and the selectivity showed good agreement between the simulated and experimental data. We studied the effect of inlet pressure and particle size distribution over hydrocyclone performance. These variables establish the particle size distribution which has a direct impact on the air core and the underflow discharge type. This behavior directly affects hydrocyclone selectivity. The hydrocyclone geometry and feed concentration were constant in this work. Finally, the underflow discharge was obtained experimentally and simulated, allowing us to observe the relationship of the inlet parameters with the underflow discharge angle and roping. With a cross-sectional view of the hydrocyclone, the air core (see The air core and the underflow discharge have a particular relationship given by the operating conditions. The increase in inlet pressure or the particle size distribution in the hydrocyclone feed generates a reduction in the air core that tends to cause roping. In roping cases (V and VI) the air core disappears (see For a constant alimentation flow, if we increase the particle size distribution thickness, solid material would concentrate in the conical zone of the hydrocyclone. Same happens if we maintain the same particle size distribution but the feed flow is increased. This behavior contributes to the air core rupture and generates roping (see The hydrocyclone geometry with a In The flows discharged and solid volume fractions were measured experimentally and obtained using the computational model. An increase in inlet pressure increases all underflows and their solid volume fractions, while the solid volume fraction in the overflow decreases. A small particle size distribution increase generates an increase in underflow, solid underflow and solid volume fraction in the underflow, while the overflow, solid overflow and solid volume fraction in the overflow decrease. But when the hydrocyclone is operating under roping conditions, the solid overflow discharge is not proportional to the pressure inlet (see  For a fine particle size distribution in the feed, a pressure inlet increase implies a percentage increase in recovery according to size in the underflow (see case II and case I curves). For cases II and III, we observe an optimization in the efficiency of the hydrocyclone. A coarser particle size distribution in the feed causes separation diameter to increase, especially in roping cases. In spray cases, a pressure inlet increase generates a short-circuit decrease, but in roping cases no relationship is observed.  The underflow particle size presents an enlargement with a pressure inlet increase when the feed material is coarser. A pressure inlet increase generates an increase in particle distribution thickening in the underflow and a decrease in the overflow. This behavior can be observed in the cut size (d In roping cases, the underflow and overflow particle size distributions are similar for different pressure inlet (see A CFD model of a laboratory hydrocyclone was presented using the ANSYS Fluent commercial code, modeling the turbulence with RSM and an Eulerian Multiphase Model for the phase interactions. The air core, particle size distribution inside the hydrocyclone, flow rate, concentration, particle size distribution and shape of the underflow and hydrocyclone selectivity were studied. The model accurately described the hydrocyclone behavior and was validated with experimental data. The hydrocyclone with a d The air core and underflow shape are closely related. An inlet pressure increase generates a decreases of the spray angle; likewise, when the feed material is coarser the spray angle also increases. The roping condition starts when the hydrocyclone is operating at 1.0 bar and fed with the coarse material (case V). In roping cases, there is a higher accumulation of granular material in the conical zone of the hydrocyclone, which favors the production of this discharge type. When the hydrocyclone operates with coarser material, the underflow and its solid concentration increases; the same happens when the inlet pressure is increased for the same type of feed. In roping cases, the solid discharged in the overflow is not proportional to the inlet pressure. For a fine particle size distribution in the feed an inlet pressure increase results in an increase in the percentage of solids in the underflow. Meanwhile, a coarser particle size distribution in the feed causes an increase in the separation size especially in roping cases (for the same pressure inlet), with the maximum difference between cases II (spray) and V (roping), from 21.55–23.5 µm to 30.5–34.0 µm. When we increase the feed pressure the short-circuiting decreases and we are close to roping (see  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We acknowledge the financial support of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: