Gold is a significant byproduct of the base-metals industries. This chapter focuses in particular on the practice of recovering gold from the copper industry (anodic slimes), the nickel industry, the PGM refineries, as well as within lead and zinc smelters. Recovery of gold from electronic scrap and other industrial wastes is increasingly practiced. New hydrometallurgical processes have also been developed to recover gold directly from ores or concentrates of copper, nickel, lead, or cobalt; these are also briefly described.Although most of the gold produced each year originates from primary gold ores or concentrates, a significant amount of gold is recovered as byproduct from the production of base metals (BMs) and from the recycling of scrap. From a gold world production of approximately 2600 This chapter discusses the recovery of gold as a byproduct from copper smelters and from the other BM industries. There are often platinum group metals (PGMs) that are also recovered as a component of the byproduct; more detailed discussion of gold recovery with PGMs may be found in The current chapter will focus on commercially applied processes, while also considering proposed new processes and emerging technologies. Previous Gold is often associated with chalcopyrite in ore deposits, and efforts are therefore made at the mine to maximize the recovery of both gold and copper, either using a combination of gravity and flotation techniques or flotation alone. Using available techniques, some of the gold can be recovered directly as a gold concentrate, with, for example, gravity techniques in the grinding circuit, but usually significant quantities remain within the copper concentrate. Gold can be present in the copper concentrate as free gold particles or in solid solution in the chalcopyrite itself. For example, at Norilsk, the chalcopyrite has been measured to contain between 1 and 7 During the smelting operation, gold, silver, and other PMs remain closely associated with copper, first within the matte and then within the blister. Finally, during electrorefining of the copper blister, gold is concentrated and collected with the anode slimes. The composition of anodic slimes varies from smelter to smelter, depending on the types of feeds and the operation. During the smelting of copper concentrates, gold and other PMs are almost quantitatively collected within copper. In the blister anodes, gold is exclusively present in solid solution. Most of the copper in the anode dissolves during electrorefining and approximately 5–10 Anodic slimes contain significant amounts of copper, lead, silver, selenium, nickel, and tellurium, and various smelters have over the years elaborated a multitude of schemes to separate gold from all the other components in the slimes. Various examples are presented in the following sections of processes used to recover gold from copper anodic slimes. Most copper concentrates also contain small, but not insignificant, quantities of PGMs. These eventually find their way, together with gold and silver, into the copper refinery anodic slimes (see Processes used could be essentially pyrometallurgical in nature or a combination of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical. In 1998, Noranda CCR Division commissioned a new anode slimes treatment plant ( The recovery of gold from the Moebius cell mud had remained largely unchanged since the 1930s. Disadvantages of this process included a high (30%) circulating load of Pd through the acid leach of gold mud from the Moebius cell and significant gold in-process inventory. A new process, developed at the Noranda Research Center, has been installed to overcome these problems. A simplified process flowsheet of the new installation is illustrated in The incoming gold mud typically assays 45% Au, 35% Ag, 14.2% Pd, 1.5% Cu, and 0.5% Pt. The new process generates 99.99% Au, 90% Ag cement for recycling to the doré furnace, and a Pd/Pt concentrate assaying 90.8% Pd, 3.2% Pt, 2% Cu, 1.35% Pb, and 0.66% Se. In 1988, the silver refinery produced 801 The company went through a series of mergers and acquisitions since 2005 (Falconbridge and Xstrata, now under Glencore control). The CCR refinery's products include copper cathodes, gold, silver, and other specialty metals and chemicals, including selenium, tellurium, copper sulfate, nickel sulfate, and a concentrate of PGMs ( The process used at Pori ( The electrolyte slimes undergo a series of stages: decopperizing by oxidative leach followed by filtration; nickel removal by pressure leaching at 160 In 1983, Outokumpu Pori refinery produced 38 The refinery commissioned to treat Phelps Dodge's anodic slimes has been described in detail ( The silver-leaching step is based on the metathesis reaction: The calcium nitrate is produced by reacting hydrated lime to consume nitric acid generated at the anode, as per the reaction: Moreover, gold is separated from the remainder of the precious metals (PGMs) using SX. Very pure products are achieved using this new process, 99.95% and 99.995% for silver and gold, respectively. After 2 In 2007, Freeport-McMoRan acquired Phelps Dodge Corporation. The main nickel-bearing sulfide mineral, pentlandite [(Fe,Ni) Some of these nickel deposits can contain significant PGMs (Merensky Reef, UG-2 Reef in South Africa, Norilsk), but gold is also found as a minor constituent in these ores. In the Merensky Reef ores, gold is found almost exclusively as metallic gold or electrum [Au In Norilsk ores, gold mineralization is also associated with the sulfides, with higher gold grades in the disseminated ore type than in the massive ore type ( Palladium–gold associations are also identified in other deposits, such as the Lac des Isles deposit in Ontario (Canada), as shown in Depending on the relative ratio of nickel and PMs in a concentrate, it will be processed in a nickel or a PM smelter. The recovery of gold from PGM concentrates is discussed in The Inco process for the treatment of its Sudbury ores has been well described (  Starting from a low PGM grade (∼1 The final refining step consists of transforming the high-grade PM concentrate into high-purity (>99%) individual elements (Pt, Pd, Ir, Os, Ru, and Rh), as well as recovering the gold and silver accompanying the PGMs. Several reports describing the chemistry and principles underlying the refining of the PGMs have been published ( The classic refining process used for many decades by Inco at its Acton refinery in the United Kingdom is illustrated in simplified form in The process described in Because of the factors described above, the industry was forced to introduce new separation technologies, namely SX and ion exchange (IX). Due to the selectivity and efficiency of the SX and IX processes, several refineries have opted for a total leach approach followed by a sequential metal separation with the aid of SX. The process used at Acton by Inco is presented in a simplified form in Falconbridge in Sudbury treats ores similar to Inco's but the approach to recover BMs and the PMs is completely different ( The nickel and the cobalt are fully recovered to pure metals from a chloride system; the copper is roasted to form sulfates and is recovered conventionally from sulfate solutions. The PMs are concentrated in the sulfuric acid leach residue. The residue is reduced to metal using hydrogen and leached with chlorine under controlled redox potential to minimize the dissolution of PMs. The solid residue is the primary PM concentrate; it is smelted to matte in an electric furnace; the matte is granulated and leached with HCl/Cl The Mining and Metallurgical Company, Norilsk Nickel (MMC Norilsk Nickel), is one of the largest producers of nickel and PGMs in the world. Norilsk has operated a metallurgical complex to treat its ores for many years. The present process is illustrated in A new process, developed in-house by Norilsk Nickel to overcome the shortcomings of the present operation and make use of the most modern technology, is depicted in At the smelter, a high-copper converter matte is produced, with a copper-to-nickel ratio of about 2:1; the matte would be granulated, wet-ground, and then treated in the new BM refinery using a sulfuric acid–leaching technology composed of: an atmospheric decopperization process whereby matte is used to decopperize the nickel anolyte; atmospheric iron hydrolysis using nickel or sodium carbonate (under oxidizing conditions); and an oxidizing pressure-leaching stage, followed by autoclave refining of the copper concentrate. The acid-leaching technology maintains the sulfur balance by treating a bleed of the nickel anolyte with sodium carbonate to produce nickel carbonate and a sodium sulfate effluent. Process design ( Significant improvements incorporated in the modified PGM refinery were: Pressure leaching to process both the copper and the nickel anode slimes Refinery wastes (rich in Rh), used catalysts and gravity concentrates treated in separate lines All resulting PGM concentrates and smelted to matte in a Kaldo furnace The resulting matte pressure-leached, eventually to produce a silver concentrate (AgCl), PGM concentrate No. 1 (Pt With this process, the slimes-processing cycle would be reduced to 4 Gold is sometimes found in association with sphalerite [(Zn,Fe)S], although the association is rather rare. When the mineralogy is favorable and the concentration of gold warrants it, the possibility of separating gold from the zinc at the concentrator is real. One such example is given by Minera El Toqui in Chile ( At Minera El Toqui, the zinc ore from the Doña Rosa mine assays 9% Zn and 1.93 Zinc metal is won from zinc sulfide concentrates via a variety of processes, some pyrometallurgical but mostly hydrometallurgical. The most commonly used process, the so-called roast-leach electrowinning (RLE) process, does concentrate the PMs in one stream, as illustrated in Gold and silver in the original concentrate accumulate in the leach residue, together with the lead. Due to the mass losses during roasting and leaching, the PM content of the leach residue is increased several fold. As an example, gold and silver in the Brunswick Mining and Smelting zinc concentrate increases from 0.3–0.4 Processes have been developed to recover silver and gold when the value of these elements in the leach residue warrants it. At the Balen plant of Vieille Montagne in Belgium, the hot-acid leach residues were being floated to selectively recover first a silver–gold concentrate using a standard sulfide promoter, followed by lead sulfate flotation using a laurylamine or sulfonate collector ( At the Iijima Refinery of Akita Zinc Co., treating a zinc concentrate assaying 1.2 Leach residues are also floated at the Zhuzhou Smelter in Hunan, China ( Direct leaching of the zinc leach residue has also been proposed, and various lixiviants have been suggested, such as cyanide and thiourea ( Leaching of a zinc residue assaying 20–23% Zn, 1–1.5 Another approach to recover gold and silver from jarosite leach residues from the zinc industry was proposed by Tecnicas Reunidas of Spain; in the Plint process, summarized in Dynatec (formerly Sherritt Gordon) has developed a zinc pressure-leach process to directly leach sphalerite [(Zn,Fe)S] without prior roasting. Several commercial installations have been operated successfully for many years. The process can be simply described as illustrated in The overall process chemistry can be represented as Compared to the RLE process, the leach residue contains Au, Ag, and elemental sulfur. The pressure-leach residue can be further treated by floating the elemental sulfur and residual unreacted sulfides (e.g., chalcopyrite and pyrite), the so-called S During the pressure–oxidation process, most of the silver is converted into argentojarosite [AgFe Direct cyanidation of the S–S flotation tailings could recover up to 90% of the gold but only 20% of the silver (locked as argentojarosite), with high consumption of cyanide (due to CNS formation) and lime ( Eventually, the silver enhancement treatment process was developed to destroy the jarosite by reaction with lime at 90° After sulfur melting and filtering, the S–S concentrate represents, in the case of the HBMS plant in Manitoba, only 6% of the weight of the original zinc concentrate feed, and it assays 1.8% Cu, 14.8% Fe, 24.7% Zn, 54.6% S A process developed by Canmet to recover gold and silver from that product is summarized in Using this approach, 93–100% of the gold could be recovered in the matte. As an alternative to matte smelting, several hydrometallurgical approaches were also evaluated, including thiourea leaching, acidic chlorination, and cyanidation. Only cyanidation gave gold extractions high enough to be retained: gold extraction as high as 91.5% (silver extraction of 57%) but with a cyanide consumption of 48 In cases where zinc and lead smelters are fully integrated, such as at Cominco's Trail or Korea Zinc's Onsan Operations ( Eventually, the gold and silver in both zinc and lead concentrates end up in the anodic slimes from the lead electrorefinery, and are recovered from there in the PMs refinery. The association of silver with lead minerals, in particular galena [PbS], is well known and documented, but gold is also frequently found in lead concentrates, and its recovery follows closely that of silver. Galena concentrates are usually smelted to produce lead bullion. Smelting techniques are numerous, ranging from the traditional blast furnace to the more recent Kivcet, QSL, and Ausmelt processes. The affinity of gold and silver for lead metal has been known since ancient times, and gold and silver are well collected in the metallic lead phase during smelting, irrespective of the type of melting process used. Studies of PMs deportment in The bullion is then processed to metallic lead using either thermal or electrometallurgical techniques ( During the pyrometallurgical refining of lead bullion, silver and gold are removed to the target <10 Typical lead bullions assay between 1000 and 4500 Depending on the operation, the PM-Zn alloy composition varies between 6% and 25% Ag. The alloy is then melted in a doré furnace, and the doré silver is usually electrorefined in conventional Balbach Thum cells to produce 99.99% silver cathode, with the anodic slimes periodically collected and leached to produce a 98% gold product ( During electrorefining, the composition of the lead anode slimes will vary depending on the starting lead anode composition; at Cerro de Pasco, for example, anode slimes contained 35% Sb, 22% Bi, 14% Pb, 9% Ag, and 1000 Various hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to produce lead from galena concentrates without going through a smelting stage. Cyprus Metallurgical Processes Corporation (Cymet) piloted a dry chlorination process that is illustrated in a simplified form in The results presented indicated extractions of 99% for both lead and silver. No mention of gold was made. Ferric chloride leaching of galena has been investigated as early as in the 1920s. The main reactions involved are presented next: The process is simply illustrated in This was the basis of the Minemet process ( Variants of the ferric chloride leach for galena concentrates include the Canmet FCL process and the USBM process ( A recent process has been developed by Engitec that allows direct leaching of galena concentrate coupled with electrowinning of the lead directly from the leach solution ( The chemistry underlying the FLUBOR  Galena is attacked by ferric fluoborate, to generate lead fluoborate, ferrous fluoborate, and elemental sulfur. Gold and silver in the original galena feed are concentrated in the leach residue, which must be further treated to recover the PMs it contains. Electrolysis in the FLUBOR Metallic lead is produced at the cathode, while the ferrous fluoborate is reoxidized to ferric fluoborate at the anode, as per the following half-reactions: This process has been piloted at a large scale at the Doe Run Company, Missouri, USA. No mention has been made of the recovery of silver and gold in that process. Cobalt has traditionally been recovered as byproduct of copper (in Central Africa) and nickel. Gold is only rarely associated with cobalt minerals, but the occurrence exists. One such example is the NICO deposit in Canada where gold occurs associated with cobalt arsenides and cobaltiferous arsenopyrite. A process was developed to recover gold and cobalt from the NICO deposit, as indicated in Using that process, 95% of the gold can be recovered using standard carbon-in-leach (CIL) on a pressure-oxidation residue. This process has been thoroughly piloted at SGS and a full feasibility study completed. It awaits funding to reach commercialization. Some electronic scrap has for years been recycled to copper smelters, and therefore its PMs content is eventually recovered within the Cu refinery anodic slimes ( More recently, mostly due to government regulations, increasing amounts of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) are recycled, albeit not to the same extent in various parts of the world. It has been estimated that the European Union (EU), for example, in 2008 collected 7 The treatment of this type of material has required the development of specialized equipment and technology at the smelter. In particular, the ISASMELT™ technology has been adapted to handle the recycling of various materials, including WEEE, as, for example, by Aurubis in Lünen, Germany, and Umicore in Hoboken, Belgium ( The Umicore process is illustrated in a very simplified form in The basis of Umicore process is a unique metallurgical flowsheet based on the use of copper, lead, and nickel as collectors to guarantee high recoveries for all PMs (and the other metals). The Umicore plant production capacity exceeds 100 Further information on the recovery of gold from secondary sources, including spent autocatalysts and sweepings, may be found in Present-day technology to treat high-grade PGM concentrates (smelting to matte, BM refinery) is effective and well established. There are a few situations, however, where it is not suitable: (i) the concentrate is too low-grade or contains too many deleterious minerals for the smelter (i.e., Cr Because of these potential issues, much effort has been devoted to the development of alternative process routes. Because hydrometallurgical plants are best suited for small operations, this is the direction usually taken by the organizations searching for alternative processes. A few of these emerging new technologies will be described in the following pages. A discussion of the application of hydrometallurgical processes in PGM refineries can be found in This process was developed to recover PMs (gold The following were the recommended process parameters: Roasting: 300–700 Leaching: 70 10 24–40% solids Geobrom 3400 is a sodium bromide solution in which liquid bromine is dissolved. It is a proprietary reagent manufactured by Great Lakes Chemical Company. Under those conditions, recoveries were 90% Au, 85% Pt, and 70% Rh. This process was developed at Lakefield Research in the early 1990s ( The process consisted of: partial oxidizing roast of the concentrate, pressure leaching (HCl/HNO The PLATSOL™ process was developed at Lakefield Research in the late 1990s by International PGM Technologies to treat PolyMet's NorthMet (formerly Dunka Road) deposit within the Duluth Gabbro in Minnesota, USA ( The Panton process was developed by Platinum Australia and Lonmin plc and comprises a roast/leach flowsheet ( The Kell process, consisting of sequential steps of pressure oxidation, heat treatment, and chlorination leaching, was originally patented by The process has been subjected to integrated pilot-scale testing ( As a byproduct, gold is mostly recovered in copper smelters, and processes to recover gold from refinery anodic slimes are varied; just a few typical examples have been presented in this chapter. The fundamental reasons for the successful recovery of gold in the copper industry are, on the one hand, the preferential association of gold with copper in sulfide ores (which makes for high gold content in copper concentrates) and, on the other hand, the natural concentration of gold in a very small mass (anodic slimes). This translates into a concentration factor of about 4 through the copper smelter, followed by a concentration factor of 100–200 in the electrorefinery. The result is a high-grade gold feed to the PM plants. The same can be said for the gold in electronic waste, in copper–nickel concentrates, and in PGM concentrates. Gold in lead concentrates, although low in tenor, follows silver closely to the bullion into the Parkes concentrate or the anodic slimes and is therefore well recovered. The case of gold from zinc concentrates is different–gold tenor is typically fairly low in the concentrates; moreover, in existing processes, there is no stream wherein gold is well concentrated (except perhaps the super-hot leach residue), and, as expected, iron products (jarosites, basic iron sulfates, and others) are the main contaminants. Notwithstanding, processes have been developed to recover gold from zinc concentrates, economics permitting.