The reactions between dimethylsulfonium methylide and 1,3-diene- or 1,3,5-triene-1,1-dioates under specific conditions enable the highly regioselective tandem ylide addition–eliminative olefination to provide 1,3-butadien-2-yl- or 1,3,5-hexatriene-2-yl-malonates. Alkylation at malonate methine carbon of 1,3-butadien-2-ylmalonates with a suitable alkyl halide having in-built functionalities for a dienophile generation led to quick assembly of precursors for type 2 intramolecular Diels–Alder reaction. Syntheses of functionalized bicyclo[n.3.1] alkenes (n=5 or 6) with the double bond at the bridgehead position have been achieved via the IMDA. An asymmetric version of this reaction has been developed using a MacMillan's imidazolidinone catalyst, which provided a bicyclo[5.3.1] alkene with very high enantioselectivity. In situ methylation at malonate methine carbon of 1,3,5-hexatriene-2-yl-malonates followed by intermolecular Diels–Alder reaction with N-methylmaleimide provided the cycloadduct with complete regiocontrol and high diastereoselectivity.Carbon–carbon double bond forming reactions play important role in organic synthesis and a large number of methods have been developed over the past century. Amongst these, ylide mediated olefin synthesis from carbonyl compounds especially with phosphorus stabilized carbanions such as Wittig We were curious to know whether this novel olefination is applicable to extended conjugated system like 1,3-diendioates Bicyclo[ For T2IMDA, the dienophile component is attached to 2-position of the 1,3-diene with an appropriate tether. For this, 1,3-butadienes substituted with suitable functionality at 2-position is a prerequisite, which would enable the attachment of the dienophile fragment. A number of methods have been developed for their preparation. When 4-phenyl dienedioate To find the generality of the olefination–alkylation process, a few diendioates By quenching the reaction with a suitable alkyl halide, which has desired tether length and an in-built dienophile, or has the capability to provide one, the system would be ideally suited for T2IMDA. The cycloadduct from T2IMDA reaction would be the bicyclo[ Inspired by this, we next aimed to make the lower homologue, bicyclo[5.3.1] alkene system. For this, diene-2-yl malonate Bicyclo[5.3.1] alkenes are the key structural feature in many natural and biologically important molecules. They also possess a number of chiral centers depending upon the substituents. At this stage it was therefore imperative to induce asymmetry during the build up of the bicyclo skeleton. MacMillan and co-workers Subsequent to our studies on the olefination of dienedioates, similar reactions between the trienedioates The reactivities of alkylidene malonates with extended conjugation for dimethylsulfonium methylide mediated olefination have been thoroughly investigated. The studies have shown that in all cases the sulfonium ylide adds to the alkylidene malonates exclusively in 1,4-fashion leading to 1,3-butadien-2-yl- or 1,3,5-hexatriene-2-yl-malonates. No other regioisomer formation was observed. This study led to the synthetically valuable intermediates suitable for quick assembly of dienophiles thus ready for a T2IMDA. The ability of this methodology has been demonstrated by synthesizing a bicyclo[6.3.1] dodecene and bicyclo[5.3.1] undecene skeletons efficiently in a domino Knoevenagel–T2IMDA sequence with excellent stereocontrol. An asymmetric version of the T2IMDA using a chiral organocatalyst has been achieved with very high enantio- and diastereocontrol. 1,3,5-Hexatriene-2-yl-malonates also underwent DA cycloaddition with   Suitable X-ray quality crystals of A mixture of α,β-unsaturated aldehyde (10 A mixture of α,β-unsaturated aldehyde (7 A solution of the appropriate dienal To a −10 To a −10 A solution of sodium dimsylate (2.5–4 A solution of sodium dimsylate (3 A solution of A solution of the dien-2-yl-malonate A solution of acetal A mixture of aldehyde  Oxalyl chloride (80 A mixture of aldehyde A mixture of aldehyde Water (33 Sodium borohydride (5 Benzoyl chloride (15 Yield: 149 Yield: 87%. A solution of triene   A solution of triene    Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at