Rockfill materials undergo additional deformation when immersed in water under constant-stress conditions. This phenomenon caused by flooding is called wetting deformation. Researchers have investigated wetting deformation via many factors through laboratory tests on scaled materials. However, the size effect on wetting deformation has seldom been studied due to the limited size of test equipment. To investigate this topic, a set of single-particle crushing tests was conducted on Gushui rockfill materials under wet and dry conditions, and triaxial wetting tests of samples with different grain sizes under constant confining pressure and stress ratio conditions were simulated by discrete element method (DEM). The single-particle crushing tests showed that wetting significantly reduced particle strength and stiffness and that particle strength decreased with increasing particle size. The stress-strain curves obtained by the DEM simulations were in good agreement with the experimental results. The wetting deformation of the large-sized sample was larger than that of the small-sized sample, especially under a high stress ratio and confining pressure. The wetting volumetric and axial strains had a linear relationship during flooding, and their ratio was greatly affected by the stress ratio. The size effect on wetting behavior should not be ignored, especially for high-rockfill dams.Rockfill materials are widely used in geotechnical structures and undergo rapid or sudden deformation without any changes in the applied load when immersed in water Laboratory tests have been conducted to investigate the wetting phenomenon in coarse aggregates. Oldecop and Alonso All of the abovementioned studies showed that particle breakage is one of the main factors influencing wetting deformation because water makes particles more vulnerable to crushing and triggers sudden deformation. Particle crushing may be influenced by many factors, such as the initial water content, initial density, particle size, confining pressure and stress conditions. However, few studies have focused on the size effect of wetting deformation due to the size limitation of test equipment and the complexity of the wetting test. Many single-particle crushing tests have shown that particle strength decreases as particle size increases In this study, the effect of size on particle strength was introduced into DEM to investigate its influence on the wetting deformation of rockfill materials. First, a set of single-particle crushing tests was conducted on moderately weathered basalt rockfill particles under dry and wet conditions to investigate the size effect and water softening effect on rockfill particles. Then, the consolidated drained (CD) triaxial tests and stress path tests with constant stress ratio (CSR) were simulated to determine the microparameters under saturated and dry conditions. Triaxial tests of wetting deformation under a CSR path were simulated, and the DEM simulation results were compared with the experimental results. Finally, triaxial tests with different particle sizes were simulated under different stress paths to study the effect of size on wetting deformation. A single-particle crushing test was performed on a single rockfill particle using the test apparatus shown in  Tensile strength is calculated by The Weibull distribution has been widely used as a statistical tool to fit the strength distribution of rockfill particles. The survival probability The points in All the test results were statistically analyzed according to the particle size fraction. The relationships between the survival probability and characteristic stress for the dry and wet particles of different sizes are shown in To study the size effect of ballast rockfill, Ovalle et al. For a given probability of survival, tensile strength is proportional to a power function of  To further investigate the water effect, the test results are summarized in In addition, the normalized change in diameter Δ The average values of The particle crushing criterion is generally related to the maximum contact force or its equivalent stress As According to the Weibull distribution in Eq. Two patterns are selected here to characterize the form of fragmentation after crushing, as shown in Tapias et al. A series of triaxial tests on Gushui basalt rockfill materials was conducted by Jia et al. Commercially available PFC The ratio of the normal stiffness to the shear stiffness is fixed, and the normal stiffness is related to the particle diameter to ensure that the macroscopic properties of samples with different maximum particle sizes are unchanged when no particle breakage occurs Here, The sample is enclosed by a deformable boundary consisting of a set of rigid, frictionless triangular plates, which simulate a rubber membrane In this model, the failure criterion has 5 parameters: Under the dry condition, the failure criterion parameters were assigned according to single-particle crushing tests. Water has no influence on the particle shape, so the rolling resistance coefficient was the same as that of the saturated sample. However, water reduces the friction coefficient between particles; therefore, the friction coefficient was assumed to decrease by 10% following Baud et al. The CSR wetting tests were simulated under three paths for  To investigate the effect of the particle size on wetting deformation, CSR wetting tests on samples with a maximum particle size of 300 mm were simulated. The grain size distribution used here was parallel to that for Generally, conventional CD wetting tests under different stress levels (  Numerical simulations show that the particle size has a significant effect on wetting deformation. The wetting deformation is mainly influenced by the stress ratio, confining pressure and particle size. For the sake of simplicity, a relationship that includes these main factors is proposed as Eq. The simulated wetting axial and volumetric strains of samples with different stress states and maximum particle sizes were summarized and fitted by Eq. The ratio between the wetting volumetric and axial strains To investigate the particle size effect and water effect of rockfill particles, a set of single-particle crushing tests was performed on moderately weathered basalt rockfill materials with different particle sizes under wet and dry conditions. Based on the single-particle crushing tests and a set of CD and CSR experiments, DEM was employed to simulate wetting deformation in samples with different particle sizes under different stress paths. The generalized Russell-Wood failure criterion was employed, and the model parameters were determined based on the statistical strength data of the dry and wet particles. The following main conclusions were obtained. Moderately weathered basalt rockfill material has strong water sensitivity, and the presence of water reduces its average stiffness and tensile strength. The softening coefficient of the strength has an average value of 0.72. The values of the parameter The wetting characteristics determined from the CSR tests for the Gushui rockfill materials were accurately captured by the DEM simulations, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The wetting axial strain and volumetric strain increase with increasing The wetting deformation of the sample with a maximum particle size of 60 mm is less than that at 300 mm under the same stress ratio and confining pressure. Because the particle strength decreases as the particle size increases and since larger particles are more susceptible to breaking, the effect of the size on wetting deformation is significant and deserves sufficient attention. The magnitude of the wetting deformation is greatly affected by  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the