The mass flowrate of particles (ton/h), entering the froth by true flotation, was evaluated from direct measurement of bubble load (ton/m3) and gas flowrate (m3/h). This information, together with the concentrate mass flowrate, allowed the estimation of the froth recovery of floatable mineral in a 130m3 rougher flotation cell.
                  It was found that mineral transport along the froth was mainly non-selective, and also the contribution of valuable minerals recovered by entrainment was negligible, if compared with minerals recovered by true flotation. Thus, a direct estimation of the froth recovery was obtained, without arbitrary assumptions about the grade of mineral transport by entrainment and drainage.
                  This simple procedure allows a non-biased and independent evaluation of the effect that design and operating variables have upon the collection and froth zones performance, in large flotation cells. The use of this approach for flotation cells diagnosis and development of new control strategies is considered.Metallurgical performance in flotation-related processes has been typically evaluated by two key indexes: mineral recovery and concentrate grade. From a practical point of view three approaches are commonly used to characterize the overall recovery in flotation equipment. In this case the process has been described by a “black box” model where the influence of the froth phase was not separated from the influence of the pulp zone processes. This type of approach has been typically applied for batch flotation tests where a hundred percent recovery of minerals within the froth phase was usually assumed ( The two stage model is a more realistic representation of the flotation process. According to  More recently, the same approach of using an apparent rate constant,  The use of mass balance assuming collection zone first order kinetics and froth recovery has been considered for flotation column characterization ( The overall recovery can be related to the collection and froth zones recoveries, from mass balance, according to Thus, the overall recovery, for floatable minerals (true flotation) or entrained minerals, can be described by the following relationship: So far, refined models have not been taken into account in the calculation of recovery and performance of the flotation equipment by means of solving the material balance equations, because still most of the simplifying assumptions, parameters and boundary conditions need to be validated. Froth recovery has been directly measured using modified pilot flotation columns ( More recently, a new approach has been developed for direct calculation of the froth recovery based on the evaluation of the bubble loading ( The bubble load The mass transport The froth recovery of floatable minerals Substituting Eqs. The experimental study was developed in the rougher flotation bank of the new concentrator at El Teniente Division, Codelco-Chile.The rougher circuit consists of four parallel lines, each one of seven 130  The overall air flowrate entering the cell was evaluated at the cell air input pipe, of 25 A manual gas holdup sensor was used to measure the local air holdup below the pulp–froth interface. Details of the gas holdup sensor are described in the literature ( A system for bubble-particle aggregates capture was developed ( This device allows the bubble load and local gas flowrate measurement, just below the pulp–froth interface, in order to calculate the actual mineral transport from the pulp to the froth, by true flotation Eq. ( The operation consists of a discrete sampling of bubbles for a period of about 10 Experimental tests were developed in the first cell of the rougher flotation bank. A total of three sampling campaigns was developed where the feed solids flowrate varied in a range of 745–883   The pulp containing the mineral transported by bubbles into the sampler was filtered, weighed and analyzed per size classes for Cu, Mo, Fe. Also, the local superficial air rate was calculated for each sample, as described previously. The froth recovery estimates are in good agreement with results obtained by  From The mineral flowrate (tph) by true flotation, at the pulp–froth interface, corresponds to the mineral entering the froth attached to the bubbles, and was evaluated from the bubble load measurement, superficial air rate measurement and the cell cross-section at the interface level, Applying the student test, at a confidence level of 99%, it was concluded that the mean Cu grade at the final concentrate overflow (18.1 Thus, even assuming that bubble load transport along the froth was non-selective, a significant degree of mineral contamination was present in the final concentrate due to gangue entrainment, as it was expected.  During this test, the froth depth was 15 Regarding these results it can be observed that either zone (pulp or froth) has the potential to become dominant. Thus, in order to develop a proper control strategy for metallurgical improvement, it is firstly necessary to evaluate the pulp and froth zones recovery, separately; only then can one decide where to focus one’s effort. Some limitations related to the maximum bubble load and transport conditions have been reported by  Bubble load samples, collected in five tests at different conditions, were analyzed for Cu, Mo, Fe, and by size classes. Also, for each test, samples were collected at the top of froth and analyzed for Cu, Mo and Fe.  From In order to evaluate the effect that entrained mineral grade has upon the froth recovery estimation a sensitivity analysis was developed. The range explored for the grade of entrained mineral varied from a minimum equal to cero (model assumption in Eqs. From In flotation columns, it is well known that mineral entrainment is more effectively prevented near the pulp–froth interface because of wash water added on top of the froth. Thus, in order to estimate the froth recovery in flotation columns assumptions of Eq. In order to evaluate the collection zone recovery, The interest of using a rate constant distributed function Experimental studies have shown that operating variables affect the pulp and froth zones performance in a different and often opposite way. In this sense, the procedure presented here allows the direct estimation of the froth recovery, as well as to determine the pulp zone recovery. Thus, the actual flotation rate constant, Direct measurement of bubble load to calculate froth recovery of floatable particles (true flotation) is a powerful tool to evaluate the impact of the pulp and froth zones in the overall flotation performance, separately. It is now possible to investigate the effect that main variables such as reagents, air flowrate, froth depth, pulp density, particle size, etc., have upon the collection (pulp) and separation (froth) stages in an industrial flotation device. The top of froth grade was only around 2% higher than the bubble load grade, even for different size classes, which means that the froth transport of collected mineral (true flotation) was essentially non selective. A simple model to estimate the froth recovery of minerals by true flotation was derived in terms of the bubble load and other measurable variables (gas rate, concentrate flowrate and mineral grades). It was found that the contribution of valuable minerals recovered by entrainment was negligible, if compared with minerals recovered by true flotation. Thus, the froth recovery model was validated. Further work is now being developed in order to extend the application of this methodology for different flotation plants considering different operating conditions and cell sizes. The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1070106, and Santa María University, Project 270522.