Quantifying the rockburst consequence is of critical importance to reduce the hazards with preventative measures in underground mines and deep tunnels. Contours of energy components within a pillar model are plotted at different rockmass damage stages, and plastic strain work and released energy are proposed as indicators of rockmass damage consequence. One pillar model under different loading stiffness is simulated to assess indicators of pillar burst and the resulting damages. The results show the rockmass damage under soft loading stiffness has larger magnitude of plastic strain work and released energy than that which is under stiff loading stiffness, indicating the rockburst consequence can be quantified with plastic strain work and released energy in numerical models. With the quantified rockburst consequence, preventative measures can be taken to avoid severe hazards to mine safety.With the increasing demand of mineral resources and depletion of near-surface ores, the depths of underground mines have made the mining activities one of mankind’s most dangerous types of work The types of rockburst can be classified into three types: (1) strain burst, (2) pillar burst, and (3) fault slip Cook and Salamon revealed that, when the stiffness of a loading system is larger than the post-peak stiffness of the failed rock, the rock will fail in a violent and unstable manner By integrating the equations of different energy components into UDEC software, the stored or released energy in each zone at each time step can be tracked and analyzed Rockmass failure in compression or slip along discontinuities can trigger seismicity, but mining-induced movements and seismicity in wall rock does not necessarily cause localized rockmass damage A rock pillar (6 m × 4 m) with a mesh size of 0.2 m was developed in UDEC and loaded quasi-statically through two elastic beams (10 m in width) on either side ( The mechanical properties of granite presented by Zhao and Cai was used as the starting point for the rock properties in the pillar ( The rock pillar has a peak strength of 340 MPa, and vertical stress-strain curves of the pillar between the different length of beams are plotted in The plot of vertical stress with loading time shows rapid stress reduction within the pillar after the pillar peak strength ( The change of energy components, including the total strain energy, elastic strain energy, and plastic strain work, is tracked during the quasi-statically loading process in numerical models. Since the length of loading beams vary from 5 to 30 m, the influence of loading system stiffness on pillar failure can be analyzed by comparing the change of energy in the models ( Before the pillar peak strength, a large amount of elastic strain energy and plastic strain work has been stored and created in the models, respectively. A rapid decrement in elastic strain energy and increment in plastic strain work can be observed in all the six models. In all the six models, elastic strain energy in the model is released in the form of plastic strain work and kinetic energy, which explains why the decrement in elastic strain energy is always larger than the increment in plastic strain work. Since part of elastic strain energy can be dissipated into kinetic energy, the decrement in total strain energy can be observed in all six models. After the pillar burst, the energy components continue to change due to the constant loading work from the top and bottom surface of the loading beams. When the length of beams increases from 5 to 30 m, more and more elastic strain energy is stored in the model at the pillar peak strength, but after pillar burst, less and less elastic strain energy is left in the numerical models. However, the plastic strain work is the same at the pillar peak strength in all models, but the pillar between longer beams has a larger magnitude of increment in plastic strain work during pillar burst. During a pillar burst event, elastic strain energy becomes plastic strain work and kinetic energy, so the decrement in elastic strain work is larger than the increment in plastic strain work, resulting in a decrement in total strain energy in the model. A rapid change of elastic strain energy, plastic strain work, and total strain energy also can be used as indicators of rockburst. With the decreasing of loading system stiffness in the models, more elastic strain energy can be stored at the pillar peak strength, so a large magnitude of plastic strain work and released energy is expected for pillar burst under soft loading systems. The rapid decrement in total strain energy and plastic strain work can be used as not only indicators of rockburst but also as potential indicators of rockburst intensity and consequence. When the pillar fails under different stiffness of loading systems, different magnitudes of increment in plastic strain work and decrement in total strain energy can be observed during the pillar failure process. Since plastic strain work is a parameter that quantifies the amount of work of creating non-reversible deformation in the rockmass, the magnitude can stand for the degree of plastic deformation in the rockmass. The plot of plastic strain work within the pillar shows that all six models have the same plastic strain work before the pillar failure, but the magnitude increases with the length of the loading beams after the pillar burst ( The quantification of rockmass damage with plastic strain work not only provides us an estimation of the rock burst consequence but is also an indicator to compare the rockburst consequence in different scenarios. It is clear that the pillars between longer beams will have larger increment in plastic strain work during the pillar burst, which confirms the soft loading system is a contributing factor to the occurrence of rockburst. Total strain energy is defined as the sum of elastic strain energy and plastic strain work, so a decrement in total strain energy means the decrement in elastic strain energy is larger than the increment in plastic strain work during the pillar burst. Most of the elastic strain energy is dissipated into plastic strain work in the models, but a surplus of elastic strain energy will be dissipated into kinetic energy The released energy (the decrement in total strain energy) after the pillar peak strength can be observed in all six models, and a pillar between longer beams has a larger magnitude of released energy (see Since the maximum instantaneous kinetic energy is time-dependent and time-sensitive, it cannot be used to indicate the rockburst intensity with high accuracy, making the released energy as a better indicator of rock failure intensity. For example, the decrement in total strain energy is 1 and 42 MJ for the pillar between the beam length of 10 and 20 m, respectively, while the maximum kinetic energy for these two cases is 0.2 and 0.23 MJ ( The energy distribution in each zone of the model can be plotted to show the energy state before and after the pillar burst. In this study, the pillar between the beam length of 25 m is chosen as an example to demonstrate the change of strain energy during pillar burst. This pillar has a big decrement in elastic strain energy, increment in plastic strain work, and decrement in total strain energy when it fails, so failure can be regarded as a typical pillar burst. The loading times of 13.5 and 13.6 s correspond to the moments just before pillar burst and just after pillar burst, respectively. A great change of total strain energy distribution within the pillar can be observed before and after the pillar burst because a large amount of elastic strain energy from the loading system is transferred into plastic strain work in the pillar (see The distribution of elastic strain energy within each zone of the pillar and part of the beams is plotted in The plastic strain work distribution within the pillar before and after the pillar burst is plotted in Tracking the energy components in numerical models, rapid decrement in elastic strain energy, increment in plastic strain work, and the decrement in total strain energy could be used as indicators to distinguish between stable rock failure and unstable rock failure. During a pillar burst, the decrement in elastic strain energy is always larger than the increment in plastic strain work, and the surplus of elastic strain energy is the energy source of kinetic energy in the models. A softer loading system can store more elastic strain energy before a pillar burst, which will increase the magnitude of plastic strain work and released energy during pillar burst. After a pillar burst, a larger magnitude of plastic strain work and released energy is observed for the pillar under soft loading systems, so these two energy components could be used to quantify the rockburst consequence in numerical models. Moreover, released kinetic energy is a better indicator of rockburst intensity than instantaneous kinetic energy. During a pillar burst, a large amount of elastic strain energy from the core of the pillar and loading beams was transferred into plastic strain work in the core of pillar, where little plastic strain work was created before the pillar burst. A wedge failure on both sides of the pillar was expected before pillar burst, which would greatly increase the elastic strain energy concentration in the core of the pillar. The research conducted for this study was funded by the