The spatial arrangement and abundance of the elements: C, H, N, O, S often correlate or directly influence a plethora of coal properties. For >90years, attempts have utilized the ultimate (elemental) analysis of coal to predict a wide variety of properties such as: calorific value (higher heating value), volatile matter, vitrinite reflectance (mean maximum), Hardgrove grindability index, helium density, aromaticity, etc. While many relationships resulted in graphical plots that have utility even today, numerical values can also be directly calculated utilizing the correlations. These have the potential to allow rapid predictions and low-cost approaches to coal property determination. Here the many correlations addressing multiple coal properties were reviewed and where possible evaluated against a sampling of the Pennsylvania State University Coal Sample Bank and Database for vitrinite-rich (>80% by point counting) United States coals. Over 42 correlations were found in the literature. While some correlations, such as calorific value predictions are accurate over a wide range of compositions, others are restricted in applicability to a select rank range. For many correlations, there are challenges to predict the property accurately, over a wide range, but may capture the trends.The structure and resultant property/behavior of coals are often dependent on the spatial arrangement and abundance of the elements: C, H, N, O, S, also water and cations in low-rank coals, mineral matter and process conditions: particle size, mass, heating rate, etc. If we ignore the latter components and focus on the elemental composition, it is possible to predict a large number of coal parameters. Even if there is no direct cause–effect link between composition and properties, the systematic transformations accompanying coalification often permit correlations. Thus, while causation and correlation need to be separated, there is an opportunity to build on the remarkable extended studies of coal that have been 70 plus years in preparation. These studies often generated graphical plots which still serve the needs of the coal science community, for example Seyler's plot The Penn State Coal Sample Bank and Database currently houses 1058 coals of the 1579 samples collected over the past 45 Calorific value of coal is one of the most important parameters for predicting coal behavior, defining rank (for much of the rank range), for evaluating its potential use in combustion systems The elemental content is in weight percent on a dry basis. Most of the coal-specific relationships were developed for regional coals. They often follow the approach of Dulong, and later Dryden Values in square brackets indicate mass basis values. Singh and Kakati developed empirical models to predict HHV for Indian coal samples Mazumdar developed a correlation that relates theoretical oxygen requirement for complete combustion of coal (O Channiwala and Parikh went a step further and developed a unified correlation for estimating HHV of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels from elemental analysis (Eq. Parikh et al. developed a unified correlation for estimating HHV of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels from proximate analysis (Eq. Sheng and Azevedo reviewed correlations to predict HHV of biomass based on its ultimate, proximate analysis, and biochemical composition (such as cellulose component) Majumdar et al. Selected models, based on elemental composition (and ash yield), were tested and compared for their predictability on 971 coal samples, ranging from lignite to anthracite, obtained from the Penn State Coal Sample Database. However, it should be noted that the validity of the published equations holds only for the rank-range for which they were derived. With exception of the Sheng and Azevedo model Volatile matter is an integral part of the ASTM classification system The Borrego et al. Neavel et al. Whole dataset and applying an intercept to the analysis Selected samples of the dataset and applying an intercept to the analysis Selected samples without intercept VM*: Ash uncorrected, otherwise sulfate-free ash  Vitrinite reflectance (mean maximum) ( An improved correlation based on results given by McCartney and Teichmüller George et al. Smith and Smith Recent regression analysis approach generated Eq.  Average absolute deviation values obtained from correlations applied to PSU Coal Sample Bank and Database are compared in Coal properties can often be predicted by the degree of aromaticity. van Krevelen and colleagues determined molar volumes and aromaticity via a graphical densimetric method via a group contribution approach A linear correlation was also generated by Niksa Aromaticity, determined through single pulse excitation There is the expectation that “the macroscopic physical properties of a substance depend to some extent on its density because the interaction between the molecules is a function of the intra-molecular distance” Neavel et al. Neavel et al. Additionally, they also developed a correlation to estimate the density of organic matter in coal on a dry-ash-free basis (Eq. Mazumdar Walker et al. Strugala The density of mineral matter (d Based on the dependency of the specific volume of hydrocarbon moieties (1/d  The Hardgrove grindability index (HGI) is an important practical measure for coal handling and utilization, especially for pulverized-coal-fired boilers The free swelling index (FSI) is an empirical value that can be used to determine the caking characteristics of coals. It is measured by heating particulate coal in a closed crucible to 820 Coal rank and petrographic composition are important factors in direct liquefaction behavior Using full maceral reflectogram data from an automated coal petrology approach, O'Brian et al. related (separately) various compositional data and volatile matter for Australian coals and for a few coals coke parameters (reactivity index and coke strength after reaction) with graphical approaches Winschel had demonstrated a general reduction of CO There is a rich history and a wide variety of predictive equations that relate to elemental composition and coal properties. Specifically, there have been attempts to predict the higher heating value, volatile matter yield, vitrinite reflectance, aromaticity, density, the Hardgrove Grindability Index, the free swelling index, pyrolysis yields, direct liquefaction yields, and carbon dioxide yields. Greater than 40 relationships were collected and where possible evaluated for their utility broadly with a subset of the Penn State University Coal Sample Bank and Database. For some relationships, the causation directly produces good agreement, typically however for a limited rank range that reflects the correlations creation intent. For other correlations, the often-systematic transformations accompanying coalification typically enable a reasonable proxy or reasonable trend given the complex nature of coal.