An experimental method of determining the probability of fibre shortening in the form of a selection function during refining has been developed based on comminution models used in the crushing and grinding industries. The method was validated by comparing experimentally measured selection functions to theoretical estimates for a model refining process. Selection functions were experimentally determined for a series of pilot refining trials that examined five refiner plate patterns operating over a wide range of specific intensity and specific energy. We concluded that the probability of fibre cutting during refining is proportional to the applied energy and fibre length and that for a single refiner at constant specific energy the selection function increased with Specific Edge Load (SEL) and was approximately independent of feed consistency. For a constant specific energy, achieved using a wide range of flow rates, consistency, applied power and plate pattern, selection function was shown to strongly correlate with SEL.Imposition of cyclic strain on fibres is the common denominator of all types of refining. This extends even to ultrasonic irradiation, which can produce a beating action. The presence of cyclic strain suggests that the refining action weakens the fibre by a fatigue process Before summarizing these models, it is instructive to review the literature regarding the refining action. We consider here both the hydrodynamic flow field and the mechanical force imparted to the fibres. To begin, high-speed photography has been used to visualize the refining process Early attempts to measure the force on fibres were largely measurements of the pressure on the refiner bar surface or of the total thrust acting on the refiner plates. For example, Goncharov Semiempirical models have been developed to describe the action of refiners The variables One of the earliest quantitative expressions for In the analysis, Danforth Some attempts have been made at extending these relationships to account for additional variables. The approaches include the development of the Specific Surface Load (SSL) by Lumianen Another approach has been to estimate directly the number and intensity of impacts on fibres. Leider and Nissan Page The objective of this work is to explore the usefulness of the fibre length distribution and comminution theory to develop insights into how energy is transferred to the fibres during bar impacts. Specifically, we investigate the use of comminution theory to calculate the probability of a fibre being cut as a function of fibre length for a wide range of operating and design variables. Comminution models have been used in the mining and crushing industries for more than 40 years to predict particle size distribution changes during processing Corson Most of the past experimental work on pulp fibre comminution relied on using the Bauer-McNett and Clarke classifiers to provide information on fibre length changes during refining and the calculations were performed without the aid of a computer. However, these instruments provide only limited information: there are only five fractions in these classifiers and these fractions are not sharply separated The rate of change in fibre length distribution,   This equation shows that as energy is added to the pulp and cutting takes place, there is an exponential decrease in long fibre content and an exponential increase in short fibre content. Furthermore, the selection function In this study, it is necessary to specify the form of the breakage function, The elements of For an assumed selection function and the measured initial fibre length distribution, a prediction of the fibre length distribution after refining, The fibre length distributions were determined using automated fibre length analyzers [Kajaani FS200 and Optest Fibre Quality Analyzer (FQA)] During refining, short fibres are generated in two ways: by cutting the fibre and by removing pieces of the fibre wall. The second mechanism is not accounted for in this model and complicates the calculation of Two experiments were carried out. The first was a validation experiment to ensure that our methods are accurate and valid (see The second was a series of pilot plant refining trials to examine how the key design and operation variables, plate pattern, consistency, feed rate and power affect fibre cutting. The pilot-scale refining trials were conducted using the same Northern softwood reinforcing pulp. The study used a 22 in. Beloit Double Disc pilot refiner and a Escher–Wyss laboratory refiner. The trials examined five different plate patterns. For each plate pattern, a range of energies and intensities were explored.  For high-intensity treatments, there is a proportional increase in fibre cutting as more energy is applied to the pulp. This suggests that cutting is not a fatigue process, i.e., fibres do not require a threshold number of impacts before being cut. Most likely, the fibres require only one impact of sufficient intensity to break and these impacts occur randomly and through out the refining process. The selection function was shown to be approximately independent of specific energy for the other high-intensity refining trials. It was not possible to measure the selection function for low-intensity refining trials at low energy because there was very little measurable cutting. The independence of selection function on applied energy allows comparison of selection functions between refiners operating at different energies, as long as a measurable amount of cutting occurs.  The selection function in While selection function also increases generally with Specific Intensity, the trend is not as consistent as for SEL. In particular, the selection function appears to be independent of consistency, especially for wide groove refiner plates. For finer grooved plates, small variation in cutting was evident that is consistent with the results of Batchelor et al. All of the calculated selection functions were found to be approximately linear with fibre length and have an intercept at the origin. Such linearity allows us to define the selection function by a constant of proportionality, The constant of proportionality provides a single parameter that increases as the total amount of cutting increases, i.e., the more cutting the higher the value of   In previous work A comminution model of low-consistency refining was developed and used to calculate the fibre cutting rate as a function of fibre length using the fine-grained length data available using modern fibre length analysis instrumentation. The experimentally determined cutting rate was shown to agree well with analytic estimates of a model refining experiment designed to validate the experimental methods. From the pilot plant refining trials, we conclude that The probability of a fibre being selected for cutting during refining is proportional to the applied energy and fibre length. For high-intensity treatments, this suggests that fibre shortening is not a fatigue process but occurs randomly throughout the refining process. For a single refiner at constant energy, the selection function was shown to increase with SEL and was shown to be approximately independent of feed consistency. The measured selection function was shown to be strongly correlated with SEL for a constant specific energy achieved using a wide range of flow rates, consistency, applied power and plate pattern. Thus, it was observed that fibre cutting was nearly independent of pulp consistency. The optimal tensile strength increase is achieved by applying energy at an SEL that is on the onset of cutting. This study was partially funded by Forest Renewal British Columbia (FRBC) through the Advanced Papermaking Initiative (API) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). To validate our experimental methods and Matlab calculation routines, we conducted a series of model refining experiments for which an analytic expression of the selection function was known and compared them with the experimentally determined selection functions. A series of standard handsheets were prepared using a Northern softwood kraft reinforcing pulp. The handsheets were cut into strips using a commercial paper cutter. One set of three handsheets was cut into 2 mm strips and the other two sets of three were cut into 5 and 7 mm strips. The uncut handsheets were disintegrated and used as the unrefined pulp. The handsheets were disintegrated and samples were run through the FQA. A minimum of five and up to eight repeats were made for all samples and the resulting fibre length distributions were averaged to minimize statistical error. For each set of handsheets, the fibre length distributions were saved electronically and used as input to the Matlab program that calculated the selection function. Cutting a handsheet with a paper cutter differs from the process of cutting fibres in a refiner. In a refiner, the fibre length distribution is continually changing with time. In a paper cutter, the change in fibre length distribution is discrete, such that the comminution equation is given by The selection function for a perfectly random sheet of paper undergoing ideal cutting can be derived analytically, assuming the fibre are uniformly oriented and distributed throughout the handsheet. The selection function is given by The total number of fibres cut is calculated by examining the mass of fibre under the cut line, assuming that the line is The simplified selection function provides a good estimate for circular handsheets.   Given the experimental difficulties and assumption required there is good agreement with the experimentally determined selection function and the analytic estimate, which provides confidence in our method to calculate