Traceability of concentrates is required to introduce transparency in the trade of raw minerals. In this context traceability may be considered as a kind of inversion process: studying the product sold (i.e. the concentrate) in order to identify the original ore, in terms of ore deposit-type and if possible, location. The difficulty of making this inversion from concentrate toward bulk ore corresponds to the “memory loss” of the crude ore which occurs during mineral processing. Based on textural characterization and the chemical composition of the material at different steps of processing, as well as the minimum residence corresponding to each step, an estimation of this “memory loss” is proposed and the relations between memory loss and global kinetic rate of flotation are established.
                  “Memory loss” calculations are applied to the Neves Corvo plant. Throughout the process, the parameter of memory loss increases respectively from 0 to 195.06 for Cu; 0 to 46.15 for Zn and 0 to 0.43 for Fe. The “global memory loss”, namely as the “experimental memory loss”. For the Neves Corvo plant at the moment of the study this “experimental memory loss” was 14,146min for Cu, 3408min for Zn and 36min for Fe. The results show that “memory loss” is greater for Cu than for Zn, thus emphasizing the importance of secondary elements for traceability purposes.The demand in mineral resources is increasing rapidly, but there is a lack of transparency in the trading of concentrated raw mineral materials. This is a concern of the French Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy ( Control of trade in the mineral industry would be facilitated by traceability of concentrates. Further, as pointed out by The traceability problem may be considered as a kind of inversion process: studying the product sold (i.e. the concentrate) to identify the original ore. The determination of the origin of a concentrate implies to involve up from the concentrate to the bulk ore, taking into account the transformation during mineral processing. In this study a new method, namely the “memory loss” method, is proposed to estimate the difficulty of realizing such an inversion that is to say which quantifies the loss of identifiable characteristics during mineral processing. In other words, the “memory loss” indicates the difficulty to realize an inversion from the concentrate toward the bulk ore. The “memory loss” method may also be useful, alongside other methods, as a tool to characterize a given mineral processing operation. First, the “memory loss” method will be presented. Then its relation with sampling and flotation kinetics will be emphasized. Finally, an example taken from the Neves Corvo (Portugal) mineral plant will illustrate the use of the “memory loss” method. It could be useful first to recall some concepts concerning sampling for granular materials. A sampling method is described as equiprobable if, in a lot L, consisting of If an equiprobable sample is used to determine a characteristic of the lot, there will remain an incompressible error related to intrinsic properties of the material. This is the fundamental error of sampling related to the Constitution Heterogeneity ( The flow sheet of a mineral processing operation is always complex and is sometimes confidential. In order to compare either different treatments applied to similar ores or similar treatments applied to different ores, it is necessary to simplify the processing chain and extract the most crucial parameters. The proposed method does not attempt to describe the whole range of the numerous and complex phenomena involved in the mineral valuation process, but to provide a simplified holistic representation of the mineral treatment. The mineral processing of a given ore can be considered as a process in which the memory characteristics of the bulk ore are removed. At a given step, namely i, of the process, this “loss” can be evaluated by a “memory loss” parameter (pml Let us consider a mineral processing operation of We can define a parameter that estimates the “memory loss” of the bulk ore characteristic at step To evaluate the “loss of memory” we choose to use a limited number of characteristics selected to facilitate the necessary measurements. In the parameter “memory loss”, the overall mass flow at each stage of the processing is not considered. However the chemical composition at each stage in the mineral processing is taken into account; indeed, according to Eq. For For It is worth noting that, for an effective mineral processing operation, the value of the “memory loss” increases during treatment. In the ideal case, the content of useful metal within the concentrate is equal to the metal content in the useful mineral. We also use a minimum residence time, because each grain may remain in the circuit indefinitely. The minimum residence time corresponds to the nominal time of a given stage. A graphical representation of the “memory loss” parameter during mineral processing is given in During comminution, only the characteristics of fragments (i.e. size and shape) may vary. To compare different mineral processing, or similar mineral processing applied to a different ore, it is necessary to have an invariant reference whatever the treatment and/or the ore considered. This reference could be a perfectly ineffective mineral processing defined as: ∀ According to the sampling theory of granular materials of Choosing the perfectly ineffective treatment provides a reference that is: (1) unambiguously defined, (2) easy to use, and (3) consistent whatever the processed ore or the considered mineral processing. Using a measured characteristic reference in the concentrate would be less convenient, because the deduced value always varies from one ore to another. Finally, selecting a reference involved in Gy’s theory will allow further developments taking into consideration the sampling theory of granular materials of this author. Whatever the residence time, a perfectly inefficient mineral processing operation is characterized by a null “memory loss”; the metal contents in the bulk ore, the concentrate and the residue are all equal by definition. In plot of The “memory loss” (ML) of a bulk ore characteristic during a mineral processing is defined as: The integral of the “pml This integral function characterizes the mineral processing of a given mine, at a given time. This integral also estimates the difficulty of making the inversion from concentrated to bulk ore, and can be regarded as a way to express the error associated with this inversion. The experimental “memory loss” (ML In case of a mineral processing using flotation techniques, the rate of “memory loss”, should consider the kinetics of flotation. Thus, pml The laws of flotation kinetics, defined by analogy with the kinetics of chemical reactions, have been considered to be complex to use because of the numerous parameters involved ( In case of first order kinetics, the evolution of a bulk ore characteristic over time is: which after integration gives: According to ML In case of a second order kinetics, the evolution of a bulk ore characteristic over time is:  Eq. According to ML By changing the variable: The Neves-Corvo ore deposit is located in the Portuguese province of Alentejo. Somincor (Sociedade Mineira de Neves-Corvo) is the operator. It is the largest massive sulfide Cu–Zn deposit in Europe and one of the largest in the world. Production started at the end of 1988 and copper concentrates have been exported throughout the world since January 1989 ( The materials (powders) used in this study were selected from seven stages of the mineral processing at the Neves Corvo concentration plant ( The chemistry of the samples S1–S4, were acquired by using a handheld XRF spectrometer. Before analysis, all rock powders (S1–S7) were compacted into pellets using a Perkin–Elmer hydraulic press. To validate the results obtained on samples S1–S4, the chemical composition of samples S5–S7 obtained by portable XRF and given by Somincor were compared (  Using the portable XRF spectrometer ©Niton data, the “memory loss” parameter (pml) for Cu, Zn and Fe has been calculated, according to As shown in An estimation of the global kinetic rate of flotation for Cu and Zn has been done using Eqs. The discrepancy between the values of experimental memory loss (ML Calculations of ML The order of the kinetic flotation is in the range between 1 and 2. In order to improve the interpretation, the number of samples taken needs to be increased in the flotation part of the plant. Whatever the reason for the difference between the values of ML The experimental “memory loss” (ML Work in progress attempts to describe the velocity of “memory loss” during mineral processing using the formalism of the Liapunov theory of stability (see for example The value of ML The final aim of this study, which is a part of a comprehensive study on ore traceability, is to establish a database of the characteristic parameters of different mineral processing. Parameters to characterize a mineral process could be: mineralogical composition, identification of textural microfacies of target minerals, pseudo paragenetic sequence, and the contents and distribution of minor elements in targets minerals. The authors are grateful for the financial support by convention no