Among various infections, chronic osteomyelitis is one of the most challenging in terms of treatment. This infection is more common among patients with open fractures and those who have undergone elective orthopedic procedures. The treatment of osteomyelitis requires high antibiotic doses and an aggressive and multifaceted surgical approach. The use of parenteral antibiotics alone, without debridement, is not sufficiently effective, due to the formation of sequestra and the low vascularity of the affected area. The surgical options available for patients with chronic osteomyelitis include sequestrectomy, curettage, and intramedullary reaming, although these procedures usually result in bone defects that require further surgical intervention. Polymethyl methacrylate or calcium phosphate beads, impregnated with antibiotics, are commonly placed in such cases; however, this option has several disadvantages, including the need for future removal of cement, uncontrollable local release of antibiotics, and the need for broad-spectrum agents. The resulting bone defects also require additional treatments involving vascularized fibula grafting, intramedullary nails, use of techniques like Masquelet and Ilizarov, and even soft tissue transfers. All of these methods have certain limitations, such as the eventual requirement of more than one surgical event. Certain growth factors aid in the development and vascularization of new bone, such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1). We propose that nanoparticles of BMPs, IGL-1, and microorganism-specific antibiotics can be placed on the surface of intramedullary nails. These nanoparticles can be attached to various different polymeric materials such as poly(d,l-lactide), which is a biocompatible and biodegradable polymer, and can be positioned in several layers, to ensure controlled and systematic release. The placement of nanoparticles at the infection site alone will also ensure local delivery of the drugs only to the required areas. Moreover, these intramedullary nails will be useful for both infected non-unions and mal-unions. Over time, the nanoparticles will eradicate the infection and stimulate new healthy bone formation, whereas the intramedullary nail itself will provide constant stability and immobilization. This model provides new and revolutionary ideas for the development of individualized technologies in medicine.Osteomyelitis has been one of the most challenging and problematic conditions encountered by orthopedic surgeons and infectious disease specialists over the past several years. The incidence of osteomyelitis after elective orthopedic surgery ranges from 0.7% to 4.2% The bone is well protected against external pathogens. However, this feature may represent a double-edge sword from a clinical standpoint, as it may not only resist infection to some extent, but may also resist the therapy administered for these infections. Early diagnosis is vital for successful management of osteomyelitis, along with the use of appropriate antimicrobial and surgical treatments based on the principles described by Cierny in 1983 Osteomyelitis is characterized by inflammation of the bone, induced by an infecting organism. This infection can be restricted to a particular section of the bone or it may comprise several segments including the bone marrow, cortex, periosteum, and the adjacent soft tissues. The most common causative agents are One of the problems with chronic osteomyelitis is the formation of sequestra, which are areas of dead infected bone contained by a compromised envelope of soft tissue. The infected foci in the bone are delimited by sclerotic and somewhat avascular bone that is enclosed by thickened periosteum, muscle, and subcutaneous tissue. This scar tissue cover, which is avascular, reduces the effectiveness of systemic antibiotics ( The treatment of chronic osteomyelitis usually requires comprehensive aggressive surgical procedures, including the debridement of infected and dead bone, sequestrectomy, curettage, and dead-space management However, these alternatives are also associated with disadvantages such as the rapid degradation time scale (weeks), which is shorter than the bone in-growth rate. This limits the capacity of the material to release substantial amounts of drugs for an extended period of time Several surgical options are available for the treatment of chronic osteomyelitis, including sequestrectomy, curettage, antibiotic bead pouch use, intramedullary antibiotic cement nail use, intramedullary reaming, biodegradable antibiotic delivery system use, and closed suction drain use. Various procedures are also available for reconstruction, including bone grafting, induced membrane technique (Masquelet technique), vascularized fibula grafts, soft tissue transfers, Ilizarov technique, intramedullary nailing, and adjunctive therapies (hyperbaric oxygen, platelet-rich plasma, BMPs, pulsed electromagnetic fields, and ultrasound) An important limitation of the current standard treatment is that the antibiotics placed within the cement are broad-spectrum antibiotics, and hence not microorganism-specific, which may lead to a higher likelihood of pharmacological resistance or lesser than desired pharmacological efficacy. Moreover, patients will often require another surgical procedure for the removal of the cement, since this material does not provide adequate biomechanical stability In addition, it is difficult for the systemically administered antibiotics to cross the sequestrum and the relatively avascular sclerotic bone surrounding it. Moreover, the extensive debridement required produces a large bone defect, which weakens musculoskeletal support, causes unaesthetic disfigurement, requires filling with bone grafts or bone substitutes, and frequently requires the implantation of permanent braces The concentration of antibiotics needed to treat chronic osteomyelitis is high, and the duration of administration needs to be sufficiently long to ensure the eradication of the infection. The optimal method for achieving eradication is through the local administration of the antimicrobial drugs At present, there are no personalized treatments that use microorganism-specific antibiotics with growth factors for inducing osteogenesis via attachment on implants, such as intramedullary nails, which contribute to stability throughout the biologic healing process. We sought to create and use an intramedullary nail coated with bacteria-specific antibiotics and growth factor nanoparticles for the treatment of chronic osteomyelitis, infected non-unions, infected mal-unions, and arthrodesis of the long bones. This approach will not only ensure antimicrobial effects, thus minimizing the risks of antimicrobial resistance and recurrence of the infection, but also stimulate osteoblastic differentiation and proliferation, thus enhancing the formation of healthy bone tissue and providing stable and strong fixation of the bone ( In the current models of intramedullary nails with antibiotics and cement, the antibiotic agent covers the whole shaft of the nail, which results in the unnecessary administration of antibiotics to the healthy bone and the delivery of an insufficient amount of antibiotics to the infected bone. In such cases, the duration for which the antibiotics persist within the cement cannot be controlled and may be suboptimal As mentioned before, the current therapies wherein cement with antibiotics are employed involve broad-spectrum antibiotics. As microorganism cultures and sensitivity tests are conducted after surgery and the results may take several weeks, it is common practice to use empiric antimicrobial agents such as vancomycin, gentamicin, tobramycin, and cephalosporin The most common causative pathogen of osteomyelitis, The proteins selected to coat our nail, which are implicated in the bone formation and mineralization process should possess high osteogenic effectiveness. It is essential to achieve a perfect balance between the antibacterial (therapeutic) and osteogenic (regenerative) performance of the biomaterials Nanoparticles can range in size from 1 to 100 Nanoparticles can deliver drugs via 2 mechanisms: (1) nanoparticles integrate with either a microbial cell wall/membrane or osteoblast cell wall/membrane and liberate the drug into the cell cytoplasm, or (2) the nanoparticles can unite to the cell wall and operate as a drug depository to constantly release the drug molecules. These molecules will then disseminate into the inside of the cell Moreover, nanoparticles can be produced in various forms, such as liposomes, solid lipids, and dendrimers Nanoparticles can also be coated with polymeric materials, which can stabilize the drugs on the surface and can serve as a reservoir for drug encapsulation while ensuring a controlled and sustained release Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) are a different excellent drug delivery system that has gained increasing interest over the last decade. SLN can be used for the delivery of drugs with a larger molecular size (50–1000 Dendrimers are greatly structured and regularly branched globular macromolecules. The branched characteristics of the dendrimers contribute to the vast surface area to size ratio, which grants for greater reactivity with cells The nanoparticle preparation technique involves spray drying, emulsion polymerization, solvent evaporation/extraction, interfacial polycondensation and physical encapsulation Interestingly, nanoparticles can be applied in several layers, which enables the augmentation of the quantity of antibiotic, BMP, and IGF-1 that can be loaded on the implant. Moreover, this method allows for the placement of nanoparticles containing a specific drug on the outer surface, which would be released initially. For example, the antibiotic can be placed in the superficial or most external surface of the nail coating, such that the drug can initiate the infection eradication phase. The deeper layer would contain the growth factors (BMPs and IGF-1), which would be subsequently released to initiate the bone reconstruction phase ( As a result of the high levels of mechanical wear and friction during the introduction of the device into the bone, the coating material must be manufactured so that the loss of this material is minimal. Titanium surfaces have demonstrated more favorable properties than steel surfaces in this regard Coating intramedullary nails with nanoparticles containing both antibiotic and growth factors (IGF-1 and rhBMPs) have many benefits, such as (1) the local and precise administration of microorganism-susceptible antibiotics with a long and controllable rate of release for the successful eradication of pathogens, (2) local and accurate administration of rhBMP and IGF-1 at a controllable and extensive release rate for the generation of new, healthy bone; (3) augmentation of the vascular supply of new healthy bone such that systemic antibiotics can resolve the remaining infection; and (4) maintaining the stability and immobilization of operated bone, to reduce the risk of pathologic fracture and movement and achieve successful healing. There are some limitations to the regional utilization of growth factors by means of collagen sponges or other carriers for the treatment of bone defects, like ectopic bone development in non-target tissues including nerves and blood vessels. The use of BMP-coated implants with polymers might beat this clinical problem The systemic administration of antibiotics can occasionally lead to toxicity; hence, serum levels are routinely assessed, and serial adjustments are frequently needed. The serum level of antibiotics measured following the placement of antibiotic cement is normally too low to cause systemic effects We also propose the placement of drugs in several layers, with the objective of achieving well-controlled and systematic release of the antibiotic and growth factors. The antibiotic can be placed in the outer surface, and will thus be the first drug to be released. The growth factors are placed in the inner surface, and are hence released and can function once the infection is completely or almost eradicated. A lower dose of antibiotics can be placed in the inner surface along with the growth factors, in order to ensure a continuous antibiotic release. All the drugs can be placed in a polymer, such as PDLLA, which has been proven to be effective. Over time, this polymer will dissolve, thus leaving the intramedullary nail for constant and permanent stabilization. The nail can be removed if needed, based on the patient’s clinical status. The duration of treatment with antibiotics and growth factors will depend upon the patient’s clinical status and the microbiological characteristics of the pathogen. To assess the status of the infection and to quantify bone regeneration, serial measurements of serum inflammatory markers and radiographic evaluations of the site of infection can be performed, which are strong indicators that the amount of nanoparticles being released is either sufficient or if the nail should be replaced. In this article, we discussed the creation of an individualized intramedullary nail coated with nanoparticles containing antibiotic and growth factors for the treatment of osteomyelitis with bone defects, although this method can also be used for the treatment of infected non-unions, infected mal-unions, arthrodesis, or as prophylaxis in open fractures with or without bone loss. A number of conditions need to be established before the use of this nail: First, is that the nail’s coating should not be damaged during implantation in order to maintain quality, quantity, and strength of the coating material, therefore, the amount lost during insertion should be minimal. There are three main approaches to accomplish this: reaming of the inner cortex of the bone to enlarge the medullary canal, creating a longitudinal osteoteomy to place the nail and, enhancing nanoparticle adhesion and integration of the polymer thru chemical and physical processes; the first two approaches will reduce friction during insertion, and the last will increase resistance of the layers. Second, the exact amount and combination of nanoparticles for a successful eradication of the infection and regeneration of bone must be investigated, although this will be done on a case-by-case basis. Third, the optimal material and structure of the polymer and of the nanoparticles should be determined, in order to demonstrate further its effectiveness and safety. Last, the cost of the nail should be comparable to that of standard treatments, so it can be more accessible to patients. Not all osteomyelitis cases can be treated similarly. Medicine requires more individualized treatments in order to achieve better outcomes. Our intramedullary nail spearheads this new trend in individualized orthopedic surgery, and the salient features are as follows: (1) the nanoparticles containing the antibiotic and growth factors are not placed in the whole shaft, but only at the required contact location, thus ensuring local delivery at the specific site alone; (2) the antibiotic placed is microorganism-specific, as broad-spectrum antibiotics are associated with several disadvantages, whereas a specific-microorganism antibiotic ensures a higher rate of success in the eradication of the infection; and (3) the amount and type of growth factor, and rate of release can be adapted, based on the patient’s clinical condition. This model will be used for other devices, such as screws, other types of nails, Kirschner or Steinmann pins, plates, and even prostheses for joint replacement. We also envision its use in applications that extend beyond orthopaedics, such as in dentistry, where good integration of implants is needed. In the future, other materials will be coated and used, like sutures, stents, catheters, and others. Furthermore, nanoparticles can deliver other drugs for instance, chemotherapy agents, hormones, steroids, antivirals, and anti-inflammatory drugs. Current technologies impose limitations and boundaries to the full development of our implant, nevertheless, we are certain that in the near future, the materialization of our invention will benefit mankind with its boundless applications, such as the few described herein. No financial support was received for this study. All authors declare that no conflicts of interest exist for the publication of this manuscript. The authors would like to thank Evangelina Torres Olguin and Lorenzo García from the Alcatrazzo Studio for their help with the illustrations and Elsevier for Language Editing Services.