Facing a lack of methods and criteria to characterize feed particle properties, a grinding–fractionation process was applied to pea seeds to obtain different particle size fractions, physically and chemically defined. Seeds were first ground with a hammermill on a 4mm screen. The flour obtained was divided into nine granulometric fractions with a sieving classifier using a large range of mesh openings from 2.5 to 0.122mm. To interpret the results, hulls and kernels were separated with an air classification device and ground on a 0.5mm screen. Classification efficiency of the granulometric fractions was checked. Each fraction was characterized by chemical composition (crude protein — CP, starch, crude fiber — CF, water-insoluble cell walls — WICW and ash) and also physically by particle size distribution, median diameter (d
                     50), a dispersion parameter (logarithmic standard deviation), specific surface area (SPSA), total porous volume (TPV) using a nitrogen adsorption apparatus, bulk density and apparent density (DENap. — helium multipycnometer device). The fractionation process led to well-differentiated fractions. Great differences in chemical composition of the granulometric fractions were noted. The smaller the size, the higher the contents of both CP (from 21.8 and 25.7% DM) and starch (from 47.9 to 62.2% DM), and the lower the cell wall contents (CF from 0.9 to 11.8% DM and WICW from 5.9 to 22.4% DM). Within a range of d
                     50 (from 59 to 2720μm), the SPSA (from 0.102 to 0.418m2
                     g−1) increased with particle fineness, and seemed to be an interesting criterion to characterize specifically each fraction. The TPV values were low (from 0.1 to 0.8mm3
                     g−1) and the densities values showed irregular evolution on the granulometric distribution (bulk density from 530 to 666gdm−3 and DENap. from 1.427 to 1.465gcm−3). A general significant evolution (p<0.05) of chemical composition according to the geometry of the particles (d
                     50 and SPSA) appeared. The chemical and physical characteristics of the size fractions seemed to reflect the different comminution laws followed by the hulls and the kernels, while grinding pea seeds. This phenomenon would have led to a physical separation of the botanical constituents of the pea seed, with coarse fractions in which hulls are accumulated together with a majority of parietal constituents, finer fractions enriched with kernels and cellular constituents and the smallest fraction mainly composed of starch granules.The grinding process has often been applied to feeds because of its nutritional and zootechnical impact. This effect is explained by an increase of the ratio surface/volume of the substrate and by the breakdown of cell walls structures, leading to an increased accessibility to cellular contents ( As a consequence of the heterogeneous tissue structure ( The aim of the study is to check to what extent the classification of pea flour ( Smooth pea seeds ( The seeds were first ground with a pilot scale hammermill Forplex A0 type (92106 Boulogne-Billancourt, France) using a circular 4-mm screen. The peripheral speed of the rotor was 65 Particle size was determined on a duplicate 100-g sample with a Bühler laboratory siever MLU 300 (Bühler-Miag, 9240 Uzwil, Switzerland) using a set of woven-wire cloth sieves having a diameter of 26 The particle size distribution of very fine flours as ground hulls and kernels fractions was determined using laser (Helium-Neon: wavelength 633 The size of particles was reported in terms of median particle diameter ( With the laser particle size analysis, the repeatability on the The feed flow which is classified on a screen of size They are calculated for each The apparent density (g The bulk density (g The specific surface area of the particles (SPSA in m The total porous volume (TPV, cm Assuming a cylindrical shape of all the pores existing on the external surface of the particles, an average pore radius ( Moisture, crude protein (CP) and crude fiber (CF) contents were determined according to official methods ( The SAS package ( The sharpness of cut ( The whole pea flour presented a median particle diameter of 0.669 It should be noted that the hulls and kernels analysis can improve the interpretation of the results for the different granulometric fractions. However, a direct comparison between these fractions is not valid as they were derived from two levels of grinding. The apparent density (DENap.) of the whole pea flour was of 1.432 The measured surface area values varied from 0.102 to 0.418 The comparison with the calculated surface area allows an assessment of the distortion coming from the spherical shape hypothesis used in this calculation ( The total porous volume values ranged between 0.1 and 0.8 The fractionation led to marked differences in chemical composition of the granulometric fractions ( The cumulated percentages on each size class for the various characteristics are presented in The chemical carbohydrate parameters STA, CF, WICW were well-correlated, while the CP appeared mainly linked to the CF alone (| There were less significant correlations between the physical parameters ( The throughs almost always presented an extreme position in the relationship between variables. This is due to high values of SPSA, SPSAra., TPV and a very low value of Finally, moisture was linked negatively to the SPSA criteria, although the measurement was done on dry samples after the out gassing ( We notice a general evolution of the chemical composition (CP, STA, CF, WICW) according to the geometry of the particles ( The two first components (10 variables and 10 observations) accounted for 81% of the total variance ( The projection of the granulometric fractions on the components ( a group of coarse fractions (F2.5, F1.94, F1.52, F1.04), that contain more cell walls and less starch, that have a higher moisture level, an intermediary or even low value for F1.94 of bulk density and a low value of SPSA; a group of intermediate to fine size fractions, enriched with CP and starch, poorer with cell walls, and higher in bulk density; a group with the throughs alone, higher in SPSA and SPSAra., higher in starch content, but lower in CP content according to the F0.122 fraction, and with a low value of bulk density, close to that of F1.94. The applied fractionation process produced nine particle size classes well-differentiated from each other with narrow particle size distributions (except for the throughs), but well spread over a large granulometric range (size of particles between <0.1 Regarding fraction characterization, chemical composition variations were due to a more or less deep and fast separation of different botanical constituents of the pea seed. These differences in composition have to be avoided in close-circuits grinding whose purpose is to spare energy through a proper association of grinding and screening machines. Conversely, in some mineral or food industries (flour milling, semolina industry, dehulling in oil production) fractionation has to be used in order to remove specific components from the raw materials. These results with peas are in agreement with those from Among the physical characteristics, two groups are distinguished: these are the measures linked to the morphology of the particles ( In contrast to our density results, several authors showed that as feed particle size decreases, density increases ( In the same way, it is doubtful that TPV could be regarded as a significant parameter in the characterization of fractions. Even if it appeared highly correlated to the median diameter ( In a more global approach, the different physical and chemical characteristics of the granulometric fractions seemed to reflect the fact that hulls and kernels follow different comminution laws. So, two populations of particles were coexisting: a population of hull particles accumulated in the coarser fractions (F1.94 to F1.04), and a population of kernels, probably bi-modal and more represented in the medium and fine fractions. Effectively, the first element suggesting the differential grinding behaviour of hulls and kernels was their different particle size distribution, in spite of being ground on the same screen. The higher elasticity of hulls made them more resistant to the crushing action of the grinder, certainly because of their high content of structural carbohydrates ( Nine granulometric fractions were produced with a good classification accuracy. They were characterized chemically and physically. The observed results or existing relationships appeared complex as was also the grinding process that led, after fractionation of a pea flour, to granulometric fractions of variable physical and chemical characteristics. According to the constituents of the seed, there were different comminution laws, that could explain these results. The application of different particle characterization methods (linked to shape or mass of the particles), other than simple sieving appeared interesting to define more specifically and completely the feed particles. It is necessary indeed, to take into account different points in order to compare with other research studies: The type of apparatus (e.g. granulometry by mechanical sieving and granulometry by laser diffraction) can give different results as The criteria of particles qualification, as the definition of their size (e.g. mean particle size or specific surface area); besides The intrinsic qualities of the substrate (moisture, chemical composition, mechanical properties of the cells...) ( The technological process of preparation (type of grinder…), as The authors thank the representatives of the GIE Euretec II (ARRIVE, CCPA, CETIOM, GUYOMARC’H, ITCF, ONIDOL, SANDERS, SOFIPROTEOL, UCANOR, UNICOPA, UNIP) for advice and support of this work within the Eureka project Europroteins EU-623. We gratefully acknowledge Pr Sauvant, Dr. Giger-Reverdin and Dr. Chapoutot for advice and E. Drouet and G. Lorand for technical collaboration. We thank the IDAC laboratories (Institut Departmental d’Analyse et de Conseil — PO Box 80603, 44306 Nantes cedex 3, France) for the chemical analysis, and the laboratory of chemistry of the Sanders Aliments Company (PO Box 32, 91201 Athis-Mons cedex, France) for the determination of the Water-Insoluble Cell Walls.