Average Specific Gravity and Work Index of Selected Minerals Abrasive Index of Selected Minerals (Averaged over 200 determinations) Conversion of Material Size to 80% Passing Equivalent Bulk Density of Steel Rods Charged in Tumbling Mills Specifications of New Grinding Steel Rods Standard Sieve Sizes A more complete list of sieve sizes and different international standards are available in the spreadsheet conversion.xls available for download from Bond Work Index Test Procedure for Determination of the Bond Ball Mill Work Index The procedure described by Bond (1960) is as follows. The Bond Ball Mill Work Index determination is carried out in a standard test mill and under standard conditions. The test mill has an internal diameter of 305 mm and is 305 mm long. It has a smooth lining with rounded corners, and no lifters. The ball charge consists of a specified number of balls, weighing approximately 20.1 kg, and ranging in diameter from 15.2 to 44.4 mm (0.6 to 1.75 in.) diameter (43 of 1.75, 67 of 1.17, 10 of 1, 71 of 0.75, 94 of 0.61 in.). Mill speed is set at a standard 70 rpm. The circuit being simulated is shown as follows: The test screen size is chosen to match the operating mill grind size since the measured Bond work index will change with closing screen size. For example, if the desired circuit grind size is a A detailed description of the test procedure follows: The dry feed is crushed to −3360 μm (−6 mesh), using staged crushing. Add the crushed ore, −3.36 mm, to a 1000 mL measuring cylinder to the 700 mL mark, lightly packed and not overly consolidated. Weigh the resulting mass of ore, Calculate the ideal period product (IPP) assuming a 250% circulating load (the mass of circulating material is 2.5 times the new feed to the closed circuit or the screen undersize, at steady state. If the mass of the new feed is 1 and the mass of the circulating load is 2.5 then the mass being ground in the mill is 3.5) Determine the sieve analysis of the feed. Ensure that the test screen size is one of the screens used in the size analysis. If the feed sieve analysis shows that more than 28% is finer than the test screen size, take the number of revolutions for the first period as zero and pass the feed charge directly over the test screen to remove the undersize and then bring the total feed charge mass for the next period up to the desired mass by the addition of a representative amount of new feed. Place the feed charge, Run the mill for At the end of the grind, dump the charge onto a heavy duty screen to separate the balls from the ore. Inspect the mill and ball coatings and remove any if present. Return the balls to the mill. Screen the mill discharge at the test screen size. Weigh and record the total screen oversize, Calculate and record the mass of test screen undersize (product), Calculate the amount of product size material in the feed using the feed sieve analysis and the amount of new feed present in the mill charge at the beginning of the period. Calculate the net grams of product which is the mass of product minus the mass of product size material in the feed. Calculate the net grams produced per revolution, Add a representative amount of new feed to the test screen oversize to bring the combined mass up to the mill charge, Calculate the mass that should be ground in the next period in order to obtain the desired circulating load. This amount is the ideal period product (step 3) minus the amount of product size material in the mill feed (step 12). Calculate the number of revolutions, Return the combined circulating load and new feed to the mill and repeat steps 6 to 17. At least five periods of grinding should be completed. The net grams per revolution should approach an equilibrium value, where the net grams per revolution becomes constant for at least three periods, or the net grams per revolution shows a reversal in trend. Take an average of the net grams per revolution of the last two or three periods, Determine the size distribution of the test screen undersize (product). Determine the 80% passing sizes of the product, Calculate the laboratory Work Index from the following equation:    The Bond formula applies specifically to wet, closed-circuit grinding in a ball mill with an internal diameter of 2.44 m and a feed of minus 3350 μm. To relate the calculations to other mills requires the use of a number of empirical efficiency factors. A spreadsheet, Bond Work Index Test Procedure for Determination of the Bond Rod Mill Work Index The procedure described by Bond (1960) is as follows. The Bond Rod Mill Work Index determination is carried out in a standard test mill and under standard conditions. The test mill has an internal diameter of 305 mm and is 610 mm long. It has a wave lining. The rod charge consists of eight rods, weighing approximately 33.38 kg, and is 533 mm in length. Six rods are 38.1 mm in diameter and the remaining two rods are 44.5 mm in The circuit being simulated is shown as follows: The test screen size is chosen to match the intended circuit grind size. A detailed description of the test procedure is as follows: The dry feed is crushed to –13.2 mm, using staged crushing. Add the crushed ore, −3.36 mm to a 2000 mL measuring cylinder to the 1250 mL mark, lightly packed and not overly consolidated. Weigh the resulting mass of ore, The mass Calculate the ideal period product (IPP) assuming a 100% circulating load (the mass of circulating material is equal to the new feed to the closed circuit or the screen undersize, at steady state. If the mass of the new feed is 1 and the mass of the circulating load is 1 then the mass being ground in the mill is 2.0) Determine the sieve analysis of the feed. Ensure that the test screen size is one of the screens used in the size analysis. If the feed sieve analysis shows that more than 50% is finer than the test screen size, take the number of revolutions for the first period as zero and pass the feed charge directly over the test screen to remove the undersize and then bring the total feed charge mass for the next period up to the desired mass by the addition of a representative amount of new feed. Place the feed charge, Run the mill for At the end of the grind, dump the charge by removing the feed and cover plate, tilt the mill 45° downward and run the mill for 30 revolutions. The rods are retained inside the mill by a grid. Screen the mill discharge at the test screen size. Weigh and record the total screen oversize, Calculate and record the mass of test screen undersize (product), Calculate the amount of product size material in the feed using the feed sieve analysis and the amount of new feed present in the mill charge at the beginning of the period. Calculate the net grams of product which is the mass of product minus the mass of product size material in the feed. Calculate the net grams produced per revolution, Add a representative amount of new feed to the test screen oversize to bring the combined mass up to the mill charge, Calculate the mass that should be ground in the next period to obtain the desired circulating load. This amount is the ideal period product (step 3) minus the amount of product size material in the mill feed (step 12). Calculate the number of revolutions, Return the combined circulating load and new feed to the mill and repeat steps 6 to 17. At least five periods of grinding should be completed. The net grams per revolution should approach an equilibrium value, where the net grams per revolution becomes constant for at least three periods, or the net grams per revolution shows a reversal in trend. Take an average of the net grams per revolution of the last two or three periods, Determine the size distribution of the test screen undersize (product). Determine the 80% passing sizes of the product, Calculate the laboratory Work Index from the following equation:    Rod Mill Power at Mill Pinion shaft (Horsepower) Magnetic Susceptibility of Selected Minerals Volume magnetic susceptibility, κ Magnetic Intensity Required to Attract Discrete Minerals Work Function of Selected Elements and Their Oxide Surfaces The work function depends on the structure of the surface of a mineral, for example the value of the work function of silver on face (100) face is 4.64 eV and on the crystal face (111) is 4.74 and polycrystalline silver is 4.26 eV. Work Function of Selected Oxides and Rare Earth Oxides The Hall Effect The Hall Effect is a proof of the migration and movement of electrons subjected to an external electro-magnetic force. When a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to a thin sheet of a conductor or semiconductor through which a current is made to flow by connecting the ends to a source of potential difference like say, a battery, then a potential gradient is set up at the opposite sides of the semiconductor sheet. This can be seen from      From a known value of the electronic charge, the density of mobile electrons can be determined. The ratio ( μ μ   When the majority of carriers are electrons then If the resistivity of the sample, ρ, is measured by the normal methods, then the mobility, For further reading: Kasap S. Hall effect in Semiconductors. Retrieved: September 28, 2015, from Ilegems M, Dingle R. J Appl Phys 1973;44(9):4234–5 Dielectric Constant of Selected Minerals at Room Temperature (17–22 Dielectric Constant of Selected Inorganic Liquids Dielectric Constant of Selected Organic Liquids [For a fuller reference see Laplace Transformation The Laplace transformation is a mathematical operation that helps to solve linear, ordinary differential equations with constant coefficients. The Laplace transforms “ That is, variable Laplace transforms of common differential equations from time domain τ to Laplace Transforms of Common Hardware* Mechanical Network Electrical Network Common Conversion Factors An extended list of conversion factors, physical constants, composition of chemical compounds, mineral data, screen size equivalents, and general geometry formulae is available for download as a spreadsheet from: