Knowledge of the functional and conservation state of a structure is a fundamental aspect in order to achieve its maintenance and preservation. Having adequate techniques for reaching this purpose is one of the most important aspects for professionals working about built-up structures. Geometry usually plays an important role in the diagnosis of these structures, and for masonry arches particularly. The most common software packages focused on the stability analysis of masonry arches use rigid blocks assuming masonry as plastic material into the context of Limit Analysis Theory.
                  This paper presents the first results of a novel methodology for the analysis of arch bridge stability based on the construction of integral 3D models of entire vaults. This geometric reconstruction is achieved thanks to the employment of non-destructive techniques such as photogrammetry and Ground Penetrating Radar. Then, stability of vaults is evaluated through a tool specifically developed using Matlab software.It is a fact that knowledge of the functional state as well as the conservation state of a structure is a basic and fundamental aspect in order to achieve its maintenance and, sometimes, its preservation. An example is the case of historical infrastructures. Several solutions for the survey of infrastructures are nowadays in the market. In infrastructure management systems, there usually exists an initial phase focused on routine inspection, where, by means of a quick and simple documentation, the first diagnosis of the current state of the structure is obtained. When some indicator for alert about condition state, or conservation state, of a structure in this initial step is detected, a protocol for special deeper inspection has to be initiated in order to analyse in deep all the symptoms of deterioration. The availability of adequate techniques for reaching this purpose is one of the most important features tackled by structural engineers. Several authors are focusing their investigations towards the structural stability of masonry arches The most common software packages focused on the analysis of stability of masonry arches (e.g. RING) use rigid blocks assuming masonry as plastic materials into the context of Limit Analysis Theory. Livesley In recent years, Historic bridges were also modelled through these remote non-destructive technologies, which have provided the geometric basis for the construction of arch mechanical models based on the information of visible faces of the masonry. Although the implementation of visible information (at the ends of vault) into the geometric model is the most extended practice when performing masonry arch evaluations, no data about the internal geometry of the vault is considered. For example Until now knowledge of arch bridge thickness as well as the geometric configuration of other internal elements required the use of destructive methods such as trial pits in the carriageway. This kind of intervention must be avoided, mainly having into account that historical bridges have not only an infrastructural function but also an important patrimonial value. In this sense, a complementary non-destructive tool must be investigated in order to complete 3D geometric models with accurate information of non-visible parts. Solla et al. [ In This paper presents the first results of a novel methodology for the analysis of arch bridge stability based on the construction of integral 3D models of entire vaults. This geometric reconstruction is achieved thanks to the employment of non-destructive geomatic techniques such as terrestrial photogrammetry and Ground Penetrating Radar. After geometric models are built, they are evaluated through a tool specifically developed using Matlab software for the stability of masonry arches. Because the main aim of this work is to build a more realistic geometric model of the arch in order to test its load carrying capacity, an approach based on two geomatic techniques was tackled: Close Range Photogrammetry (CRP) for the external geometry reconstruction and Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) for the arch thickness estimation. After taking both photogrammetry and radar measures they were integrated into the same 3D model. After that, the geometric models in different locations of the masonry arch were used for the subsequent structural evaluation of the masonry structure. The main steps of the proposed methodology are summarized below: A non-destructive and low cost geomatic technique was selected to create a model with the main geometry of the arch bridge as well as the particular vault geometry. This geometry is limited to the external visible faces of masonry due to the physical principles of the technique. As shown in For the case study presented in this paper, a digital single lens camera model Nikon D200 mounted with a great angular Nikkor 20 For data acquisition, a network of convergent images was designed. In such configuration the configuration of masonry blocks is registered from different points of view with optimum convergent angles of 90° between cameras and object's points as shown in Due to the dimensions and configuration of the bridge structure and the reduced field of view of the camera, it is not possible to contain the whole structure in a single shot with an acceptable spatial resolution. For that reason, it was necessary to take the images of smaller parts of the bridge (shorter distances from camera to bridge), constituting each of these smaller parts a photogrammetric model. For each model reconstruction it is necessary to take, at least, two images (optimum three images) centred on the bridge surfaces with convergent angles of 90°. In general, overlaps of 60% between images will permit the external orientation of that model, and to get all the models externally orientated in the same coordinate system (triangulation) overlaps of 40% between consecutive models are required According to the mathematical principles of photogrammetry, the solution for the external orientation is achieved thanks to the identification of a minimum number of common points between the conjugated images that compose a model (according to collinearity and/or coplanarity conditions; for more detail see These targets, or control points, are especially important for the vault under study because based on them the GPR profiles are set out. Thanks to this, it is possible to register the geometry of external faces of the vault by photogrammetry, and the measured GPR profiles are accurately georeferenced in the same coordinate system ( The inner voussoir's thickness is a structural parameter that greatly influences the stability and durability of masonry arches. Nevertheless, this is an internal element that cannot be inspected with the traditional optical technologies (i.e. total stations, laser scanners, and photogrammetry), and the use of geophysical prospection becomes necessary. In this sense, GPR is a geophysical method that produces an overall qualitative internal image and provides a higher penetration depth. To reach the voussoir's thicknesses composing the arch under study, a central frequency of 1  GPR data sets were composed by two longitudinal lines of data collected over the longitudinal intrados surface of the arch ( The pavement thickness into the pathway was also a valuable structural detail to reach by GPR. To avoid the amount of reflections generated at the arch–ring interface, an additional GPR survey was therefore carried out through the pathway of the bridge to facilitate the detection of the paving–fill interface. The GPR profile was collected, over the studied arch, in the longitudinal direction at the central part of the pathway. The 1 Before interpretation, GPR processing filters were employed in order to reduce clutter or any unwanted noise in the raw-data, to enhance extraction of information from the signal received and to produce an image of the subsurface including all the features and/or targets of interest, which makes GPR data interpretation easier. Each radargram was filtered by ReflexW v5.6 software using the processing sequence described in Moreover, considering the precise arch geometry provided by photogrammetric methods, the radargrams collected over the intrados surface of the vault were corrected for topography and the tilt of the antenna. These static corrections are recommended to improve the accuracy in imaging subsurface After collecting both photogrammetric and GPR data, 2D profiles at different locations in the vault under study were accurately created. The theory of masonry structures considers “masonry” as a heterogeneous material, with great compressive strength, very low traction strength of the mortar join and a high friction coefficient. The compression stress that normally appears in masonry historic constructions is quite low so they do not usually present as a danger for its stability due to excessive compression of materials (unless the fabric is not well mechanized). The current work was made through the method of rigid blocks developed by The main advantage of evaluating masonry as a group of individual “rigid blocks” is that it facilitates a wider evaluation of the influence of different mechanic properties and effects, as friction coefficient between blocks, damages of blocks or joins, displacements, etc. The method proposed by Livesley To find the solution of the system of equations Livesley proposed to build a system where all the equations of each voussoir are integrated (Eq. With the equation system Livesley proposes to use the linear programming to optimize the lambda factor, imposing boundary conditions for the different unknowns. To optimize the lambda factor, the present study uses the SIMPLEX method Once the lambda factor is obtained, if we focus the attention on the value of the different unknowns and take out those that have the same value wherein the limit was imposed by the boundary conditions, we can obtain the associate hinges to this lambda factor. A total of 155 images, grouped into 38 models, were used to create the whole 3D model of the Lubiáns Bridge. 177 control points were measured by total station so it was possible to scale, level and locate the 3D model of the bridge in the global coordinate system as well as to check the final accuracy of the global model. The overall geometry of the bridge as well as the contours of regular masonry blocks were defined through the restitution of 3400 points. From these points it was possible to draw the contours of masonry as shown in Five models, composed of 20 images, allowed the reconstruction of the vault under study. On the external face of the ashlars that compose the vault 15 control points were fixed in order to define the trajectory where the GPR profiles have been measured along. The GPR data acquired over the intrados surface of the vault provided the ring-stone thickness. The thickness of the pavement was also identified observing the GPR data acquired over the pathway of the bridge ( Before the GPR data were used to perform the structural analysis, the accuracy of this method needed to be validated. In that sense, a comparison between photogrammetric and GPR data was performed in order to check the error of the method when measuring voussoir's thickness at the end of the vault.  In addition, the profile obtained from the outer radar profile was compared with that of the photogrammetric one upstream in order to analyse the effectiveness of GPR in providing accurate thickness values. The structural analysis was performed with a software specifically developed using Matlab software. This module is being implemented into a masonry bridge management system that is being developed by the same research group. This module is based on rigid blocks theory developed by Livesley. The unit weight of masonry and backfill was 20 The initial geometries for the analysis were collected by GPR profiles at the vault ends and in its central part, and by photogrammetry at the vault ends. For the analysis all the GPR measurements (steps) were used as individual joins with different conditions depending of its real physical behaviour (joins or blocks). The origin of position for the load is the left intrados at the skewback. As shown in A novel methodology for the construction of 3D models of masonry vaults was developed and tested. This methodology consisted on the integration of both photogrammetry and Ground Penetrating Radar as metric documentation tools for the 3D reconstruction of a masonry vault. Photogrammetry allowed the visible geometry to be reconstructed with high levels of accuracy. GPR allowed the measurement of non-visible structural elements to be done, particularly, the inner arch thickness in the central part of the vault. A 3D photorealistic model of the whole structure was obtained as well as detailed model of contours of all masonry ashlars, where the averaged RMSE for point restitution was better than 3 The difference between considering real geometry measured by photogrammetry at both upstream and downstream ends of the vault and geometry estimated by GPR was tested through the structural evaluation of the bridge. A software based on Matlab language was specifically developed for this kind of structures by implementing the limit analysis theory based on rigid blocks method developed by Livesley Photogrammetry and GPR geometries at the ends of the vault were compared in order to estimate the error of GPR when estimating arch thickness; thus, evaluating the influence of heterogeneous dielectric properties of the masonry, displacements of the antennas during data acquisition due to irregular masonry faces, etc. After comparing arch geometry captured by both methods an averaged error of 2 After performing the structural analysis with the described software it was found that there are non significative differences in collapse load when considering geometry at vault ends by photogrammetry and GPR. When comparing the results of structural analysis between geometries at vault end and at central part of the vault (both measured by GPR) differences of 19% were found, mainly due to the significant differences of both geometries. Since these differences are related with the safety factor of load, it reinforces the necessity of considering real geometry of non-visible structural elements, and consequently, focuses the geometric study of masonry vaults in the determination of real arch thickness by non-destructive methods as GPR. The authors want to give thanks to the