In this paper, the discrete element method (DEM) is employed to analyse the wet granulation process. It is essentially a computer simulation of various types of interactions of particles in a rotating drum that eventually results in tracking of trajectories of each particle and particle agglomerates. Non-linear spring-dashpot type contact models are used to monitor particle–particle and particle–wall interactions. The contact between the particles in the presence of a binder is modelled by the well-known JKR theory. To establish the potential of this numerical approach, a 10-cm rotating drum is simulated with a polydispersed system of particles of top size 1 mm. A scraper is suitably located within the drum to restrict the motion of the adhered particles along the mill shell. A spray zone is located within the drum such that the particles receive the binder dosage only within this spray zone. A drying time is also specified beyond which the particles no longer adhere together. Implementation of these ideas within the computer program makes the simulation more realistic, which in turn allows prediction of the steady-state size distribution of the agglomerates.Agglomeration or granulation of particles is achieved in a variety of ways in mechanical equipment where the particles are brought into contact. Once in contact, the admixture of the particulate mass and binder tends to remain intact and subsequently grows to form a granule subject to various competing forces. The process is typically carried out in revolving units that range from tumbling drums and fluidised beds to high-shear mixers and extruders. The objective is to utilise the fines to form spherical agglomerates. This is brought about in stages: formation of green agglomerates followed by drying and induration. While monitoring and controlling the process of agglomeration is known to be quite complex, it is the formation and growth of agglomerates that has been the subject of intense research for an understanding of the mechanisms involved. In the early 1970s,  From a mechanistic standpoint the agglomeration process can be visualised as a two-step process that begins with initiation of shear flow within the particulate mass and subsequent formation of agglomerates in the presence of binders. While the DEM has been successfully used to address the former problem as in the case of tumbling mills ( The granular dynamics model used in this study is the DEM originally proposed by In the DEM particles are treated as discrete entities, which interact with each other at the interface when they are in contact. The particle interaction rules are based on well-established contact mechanics theories, which relate the contact force to the relative approach of particles. The Hertzian theory (see In the presence of adhesion JKR theory is assumed ( The particle interactions are modelled as a dynamic process, the evolution of which is advanced using an explicit finite difference scheme to obtain the incremental contact forces and then the incremental displacements of the particles. Each cycle of calculations that takes the system from time During the process of agglomeration, particles come close to each other and form bonds whose strength is determined by the existing adhesive force. In dynamic situations, as it is practised in a rotating drum, the adhesive particles form agglomerates which subsequently grow and break. A steady-state distribution of agglomerate size is eventually attained within several revolutions of the mill. The purpose of this paper is to use DEM to examine the evolution of the agglomerate size spectra and the effects of various factors that affect the agglomeration process. Inside the agglomerating drum particle clusters stabilise and grow. These can be of irregular shape whose trajectories inside the drum are quite difficult to predict. Depending on the shape of the agglomerates the trajectories of particles of same mass may vary. In a series of numerical simulations trajectories of agglomerates of different shapes and sizes were tracked. The results showed that the trajectories were quite sensitive to the orientation of the major axis of the agglomerate with respect to the mill axis. A typical simulation result showing the trajectory of an agglomerate comprising of 50 particles at 60% of the critical speed of the mill is shown in In actual practice, one deals with not just one agglomerate but many agglomerates of varying sizes. To study the evolution of the size spectra of the agglomerates, a 10-cm diameter drum was simulated in two dimensions. A scraper was suitably positioned within the drum to restrict the motion of the adhered particles along the mill shell. A spray zone was located near the With the above assumptions regarding the agglomeration process, several simulations were carried out with a peak value of the interfacial energy of Visual inspection coupled with quantitative analysis of the agglomerate size distribution provides a better understanding of the evolution of the size spectra. However, the definition of the size of an agglomerate is imprecise. In practice, sieve sizes are used to classify agglomerates into different size ranges, but ambiguities arise since breakage may occur due to the vibratory nature of the sieving process and the fact that elongated agglomerates may or may not pass through the sieve depending on the orientation of their long axis. Similar uncertainties arise in numerical simulations when considering the size of the agglomerates. Here, the size is defined in terms of the mass of an agglomerate During the process of agglomeration, the particles by virtue of their interfacial energy tend to form agglomerates that grow with time. Depending on the spatial nature and magnitude of the forces acting on an agglomerate, it may either break or retain its size. Eventually, the charge attains a steady-state size distribution of agglomerates. This aspect of evolution in the size spectra is illustrated in It is quite unlikely that during agglomeration all the particles form agglomerates. In fact, there is finite fraction of the total particles that always remain as singlets (single particles). The dynamic variation of the singlets and the size of the largest agglomerate in terms of number of particles are shown in It has been determined that for a given particulate system, a threshold value of the bond strength must exist between particles for agglomeration to occur. Once the threshold is reached the particulate system is able to sustain itself and reach a dynamic state of equilibrium in terms of the agglomerate size distribution. For the particulate system under study, it was found that the size distribution did not change significantly even by tripling the magnitude of the interfacial energy. This is evident from While the simulation was able to illustrate the prevailing inter-relationship between the operating parameters and the corresponding size distribution, the understanding of the micro-mechanics of the process was far from clear. In particular it was difficult to explain why the number of particles associated with the largest agglomerate size fluctuated so much. The observed fluctuations in the number of particles were due to the agglomerate growth and breakage. Therefore, it is important from a practical standpoint to determine the factors that affect the largest size of the agglomerate. In order to study the variation in the size of the largest agglomerate, a careful analysis of the dynamics of the process was considered by analysing the variation in the torque. The torque required to hold the mass of the charge in motion at any mill speed can be determined from the contact forces acting on the mill shell. At first, the components of the contact force The variation in the mill torque is shown in The process of agglomeration is quite complex and not amenable to direct simulation. While the population balance technique is invariably used to describe the evolution of size spectra, it has merely served as a black box tool. For the first time an attempt is made here to show the evolution of size spectra by actually observing the formation and breakage of the particles. In this work the agglomeration process was modelled by the DEM that incorporates rigorous contact models for particle–particle interaction in the presence of adhesion. The model was developed to study the agglomeration problem in two-dimensions only. Using this model it was possible to predict the steady-state size distribution of the agglomerate mass for a very hypothetical and simplified system. Nevertheless, the preliminary simulation results clearly illustrate the dynamic nature of the process. In particular it was determined that due to the very nature of the agglomeration process in a rotating drum the largest size of the agglomerate attainable is finite for a given set of operating conditions.