This study presents a three-dimensional development of the n–k–g influence function with the aim of predicting subsidence phenomena and characterizing the shape and dimensions of the corresponding trough. The parameters “n” and “k” characterize the ground and “g” is related to the gravity. This function depends on two physical concepts: the first is gravity, which characterizes the forces acting on the ground, and the second, the convergence of the roof and floor of the mine workings due to the stress state of the ground. Caving in of the roof generates direct subsidence, and the swelling of the floor, indirect subsidence, which allow us to establish the shape of the trough.
                  The physical concepts introduced are fundamental in the mathematical implementation of the n–k–g influence function, allowing a more intuitive interpretation of the subsidence trough and notably facilitating the work of calibration, validation and sensitivity analysis. These concepts likewise allow the scope of application of influence functions to be extended to non-horizontal seams, also taking into account the quality of the rock mass and the presence of preferential sliding directions, in both the roof and the floor of the seam.
                  In the development of this paper, we shall first see the physical concepts considered, to then present the three-dimensional implementation of our n–k–g influence function. We shall see the results obtained when calibrating the proposed numerical model with real data obtained from subsidence measurements in a coalmine in the Coal Basin of Asturias, situated in the North of Spain.Ground subsidence is the movement of the ground due to the loss in sustaining capacity of the sub-soil. In the majority of cases, this is directly related to human activities that either alter the water table or when carrying out deep-pit mining of ore. The ground that is above the excavated area is altered, collapses, is partially compacted and progressively subsides as the work of extraction advances. We may speak of two types of mining subsidence depending on its extension. On the one hand, there is localized subsidence, which is concentrated in areas in the proximity of the excavated area and takes the form of a highly localized abrupt depression that is limited in extension. Extensive subsidence, on the other hand, results in the formation of a topographic depression on the surface (subsidence trough) that is more or less regular in shape and which is directly related to the depth of the excavated areas being exploited in the mine. In these cases, the subsidence is large in the central area and decreases progressively towards the sides, said subsidence being accompanied by horizontal displacement. The movements of the ground produced by these two types of subsidence may produce damage to buildings, roads, railway lines, oil pipelines or any other infrastructure in the surrounding areas. To estimate, quantify and prevent this damage, models must be established that allow us to determine a priori issues such as what the greatest vertical displacement of the surface of the ground will be and where it will be produced, or what the lateral extension of said subsidence will be. To answer these questions, different numerical methods have been developed in recent years The application of any of these numerical methods to real cases has to be accompanied by the development of three processes: calibration of real data, validation and sensitivity analysis. Calibration is the process of configuring a numerical model on the basis of the input data on the subsidence registered in the field. It implies executing several models, changing the parameters that characterize the subsidence until the model simulates the real behavior of the ground with the appropriate degree of reliability. Validation is the process of confirming the goodness of the calibration, considering an independent data set to that used as input, which has been obtained subsequent to this calibration. Finally, sensitivity analysis consists in varying the parameters of the proposed mathematical models, with the aim of estimating how this affects the results. This allows us to determine the most significant parameters and to predict the subsidence that will be produced in the future. Having established these steps, we shall now go on to develop the approach that we have adopted in our work, initially describing the theoretical basis of our method and subsequently applying it to a series of real cases. The study presented here includes the introduction of a series of physical concepts that enable ground subsidence to be studied on the basis of its real behavior and of how the excavation carried out underground is transmitted to the topographic surface in the form of subsidence. Taking the methods that use To do so, the effect of two concepts that have not been taken into account in the traditional analysis of influence functions will be introduced. The first is gravity, which characterizes the forces acting on the ground, and the second is the convergence of the mine workings due to the stress state of the ground, a geometrical concept that when applied to the roof and floor of the mine workings allow us to define the shape of the expected subsidence trough by breaking the total subsidence down into two types of subsidence: direct subsidence (due to the convergence of the roof) and indirect subsidence (due to the convergence of the floor). These two concepts are fundamental, as they enable the phenomenon of subsidence to be interpreted in a more intuitive way. This will distinctly facilitate the calibration, validation and sensitivity analysis of the phenomenon of subsidence under study. On the other hand, the method developed in this paper enables the subsidence of seams of any slope whatsoever to be explained, even totally vertical seams, thus avoiding the limitation of We shall call this new function the Firstly, we shall introduce the physical concepts on which our interpretation of subsidence is based to then go on to formulate these concepts mathematically in a new generalized influence function. We shall then see its application to the simulation of sub-vertical seams, and finally we shall present the results of our model in a particular case corresponding to the Coal Basin of Asturias (situated in Northern Spain). When carrying out underground excavation, the stress state of the ground is modified and a series of movements appear in the rock mass, directed towards the interior of the excavated cavity. Said movements have a preferential direction that depends on the free faces and on the direction of gravity. When speaking of longwall coal mining, the geometry of said cavities, in which the thickness of the seams is small in relation to their length and width, the displacements of the wall rock, though important, are not found to be representative with respect to the phenomena of roof and floor convergence. Taking a horizontal coal seam of this type as a reference, the alteration of the stress state will cause movements of the ground in a vertical direction, downwards from the roof and upwards from the floor. The direction of these movements depends on two effects: stress effect in the perimeter of the excavated cavity, the direction of which is determined by the normal unit vector A gravitational effect, the direction of which is determined by a vertical unit vector Let As can be seen in The caving in of the roof results in a new cavity, though now above the previous one. Similar phenomena to those described above will again be produced in the new cavity, such that the caving in of the roof of this cavity will in turn once more generate another cavity situated above it, which will be progressively transmitted upward, possibly reaching the topographic surface, where subsidence appears. This situation is analogous to the movement of a bubble (the cavity) in a fluid (the ground), in which an upward push acts on the bubble. The process that triggers subsidence may thus be described by means of two interrelated phenomena: The movement of the ground towards the cavity, with a downward trajectory due to the combination of the effect of stresses perpendicular to the cavity and the action of gravity. The migration of the cavity towards the topographic surface, which follows an identical direction to the movement of the ground, though in the opposite sense. Therefore, once the excavated cavity is produced, the ground surrounding it collapses and caving in progresses vertically until possibly reaching the topographic surface (see The cavity is transmitted both vertically and horizontally in such a way that the maximum subsidence occurs at point In the case of the movements of the floor of the mine workings, there initially exists a tendency for the cavity to progress downward, as a result of the stress state in the surrounding area. However, this effect is counteracted by gravity, which impedes the development of this tendency, rapidly checking it. Let us now consider a non-horizontal seam such as the one represented in To explain what occurs in terms of the progression of cavities, it must be borne in mind that the ascending cavity follows the direction marked by the vector This trajectory is similar to the one that a bubble would follow in a fluid when a horizontal component is initially given to its movement and corresponds to a parabola whose axis is parallel to Once the subsidence reaches the surface, the displacements that it generates are distributed throughout the affected area, as represented in Said point on the surface, Moreover, as a consequence of the position of the seam, the possibility exists of the cavity progressing from the floor, i.e. “caving in of the floor” may be produced in a similar way to that of the roof. This situation is schematically represented in Therefore, the mining of an inclined seam may originate two subsidence troughs: one corresponding to the movements induced in the roof of the seam, which will be denominated from here on It can be seen in As well as the length of the trajectory, which will condition the degree to which the cavity will be checked in its ascent, the magnitude of the vectors The relative positions of When Values of If the ground is homogeneous and isotropic in the roof and floor of the excavated cavity, then we shall have Firstly, the rock mass corresponding to the geological roof may be different to that of the floor. It might therefore occur that the material of the roof may be very solid, for instance sandstone with very little fracturing, and that the material constituting the floor may be not at all solid, for example a carbonaceous shale. Under these circumstances, it is logical to suppose that the greater part of the subsidence will proceed from the floor of the seam, i.e. the floor or indirect subsidence may be greater that of the roof. The case may even arise of no roof subsidence taking place (whether as a result of the checking phenomena described above or because the roof does not actually cave in). In order to take into account this effect, a proportional distribution of the maximum possible subsidence must be carried out as a function of the RMR (Bieniawski's Rock Mass Rating) of the ground in the roof and in the floor. Another cause of the appearance of anisotropic phenomena is to be found in the existence in certain rock masses of planes of very marked weakness (for example, schistocity in slates) that will influence the trajectory of the movement of the ground towards the underground cavity. Depending on the importance of the weak planes, the effect of the vector Although Having studied the above concepts using the two-dimensional case as a frame of reference, we now go on to develop the three-dimensional case. This will allow us to eliminate errors due to the effects of the face ends, and hence extend the use of the proposed method to excavations of any geometry whatsoever (tunnels, chambers and pillars, etc.). The proposed formulation is presented below, following the same process as that described in the two-dimensional case. In order to determine the subsidence at the topographic surface originated as a result of underground mining, two qualitatively differentiated circumstances must be analyzed: On the one hand, said subsidence will depend on the geotechnical characteristics of the ground, on the dimensions of the cavity and on the relative position between the underground cavity and the surface. This dependence may be determined by means of different methods, among which the influence functions method was the one chosen. On the other hand, subsidence does not develop instantaneously, but needs a period of time to commence after the opening of the cavity and may extend over a period of years after said opening. It is possible to approximate the calculation of subsidence via a two-dimensional model without hardly any loss in precision, when: The geometric model of the ground and of the seam may be sufficiently approximated by its cross section and its normal extrusion. The width of the mined seam is sufficiently large. The seam is sufficiently deep for the effect of the end of the mined area not to have an influence. In these two-dimensional models, strips are considered along the cross section perpendicular to the line of maximum dip of the seam. It is thus assumed that all the strips affect the topographic surface in a similar way, generating identical subsidence. This hypothesis is not true in the areas at the face ends, but is acceptable in mine workings with sufficient length for the effect of this edge to have little significance. In excavation geometries in which this requisite is not fulfilled, it will be necessary to correct the end effects by means of a study in three dimensions. Note that it is precisely in these end areas where the deformations derived from subsidence have a greater influence. We shall next develop the concepts that were taken into consideration in a three-dimensional model of the subsidence phenomenon. For reasons of simplicity, many of the concepts are introduced in two dimensions, although the implementation was carried out entirely in three dimensions. In this case, the working model will be made up of the seam, which is considered to be variable in thickness, and which will be represented by means of its medial surface. This surface area is approximated by means of successive plane elements without any loss in precision, each one of constant thickness. The topographic surface will be treated similarly, considering it to be broken down into plane tiles. We shall assume both simplifications to introduce our numerical modelization, subsequently indicating how the integration on the seam is carried out more precisely using curvilinear coordinates (see  The topography was considered to be a plane. Although in the more general case this is an irregular surface, this approximation does not suppose an inconvenience, since any surface may be approximated via plane segments. It is assumed that in the seam belonging to the strip under study, an elemental excavation unit of volume Since in the majority of coalfaces the thickness Let us now see how to generalize to three dimensions the concepts introduced above in relation to the effects of gravity and stress. The first step to solve the problem of determining surface subsidence is to define the consequences that the mining of an elemental excavation unit has at any point on this surface. Subsequently, this influence is extended to all the mined elements by means of an added process. Bearing in mind the aforementioned phenomena, this process implies the following steps: the excavation panel to be mined must be broken down into elemental excavation units As each elemental excavation unit generates direct and indirect surface subsidence, it is necessary to first ascertain the points of maximum roof and floor subsidence of each one of these units. These points will be obtained by intersecting the topographic surface with the respective upward parabolic trajectories of the cavity. Once the points of maximum subsidence on the surface are known, the magnitude of subsidence is distributed according to the The direction of movement of any point on the surface towards the cavity will likewise be marked by a parabolic trajectory, as will be justified in Once the subsidence value , calculated using the influence function, and the direction of movement are known, the movements are determined along a pair of vertical and horizontal axes. Adding for each point on the topographic surface the vertical and horizontal movements contributed by the excavation of all the elemental units of the production panel, due to both roof and floor subsidence, we obtain the total subsidence at this point. We shall now elaborate in detail each of these steps for a three-dimensional model. In the circumstances described above, when mining element A, the ground situated in the roof and in the floor tends to move towards the cavity following the stress and gravitational effects described in In the case of roof movements, the vectors of the stress effect (Eq. In the case of floor subsidence, the initial trajectory of the movement will be marked by the same stress and gravitational effects, given by: The vectors that define the caving-in trajectories, which are initially those described in the above section, are readjusted the further the affected ground is from the cavity, i.e. as the cavity progresses towards the surface, in order to adapt to the parabolic trajectory, which is the one that best fits said ascent. The intersection of the parabolic trajectories of the roof and floor with the topographic surface will allow us to obtain the points on the surface at which the excavated element A generates the greatest subsidence. To determine the equation of the parabolic trajectory of the roof, two concepts must be taken into account: initial direction of movement is marked by the vectors This direction tends to a vertical orientation as the movement rises towards the surface. This physical situation is similar to that of a parabolic ballistic trajectory It must pass through point Its initial direction is This direction must be corrected by the effect of the vector As can be seen, the effects of stress and gravity are considered as having a negative sense, i.e. they are upward vectors whose vertical component must therefore be positive. The initial direction of movement is readjusted the further the affected ground is from the cavity. In this case we are dealing with a parabolic trajectory in three dimensions, whose position vector is a function of a parameter Any point on the parabolic trajectory will have the coordinates: In an analogous way to what occurs in the equation that defines the trajectory of a parabolic shot, the parameter Thus, when The point of maximum surface subsidence, Two values are thus obtained for As regards floor subsidence, the parametric equation of the parabola will cut the topographic surface at the point given by the equation: From which we can deduce The point The coordinates of the points of maximum subsidence will thus be given by: This is the name given to the subsidence caused by the excavation of an elemental unit on the topographic surface. The subsidence corresponding to the caving in of the roof will be determined first, to which will then be added that corresponding to the caving in of the floor (which in many cases is a swelling). This can be seen in The method of influence functions is used to obtain the elemental subsidence, from among which the influence function denominated A horizontal seam is considered, with a thickness If This maximum subsidence that appears at point It can be seen in Eq. The first factor takes into account the relationship of the subsidence with the depth of the mining activity, being inversely proportional to the depth squared. The second factor, which adopts an exponential form, represents the relationship of subsidence as the horizontal distance increases between the point of maximum subsidence ( Given any point The elemental roof subsidence at  As regards the direction of the subsidence at point It is therefore necessary to determine the parabolic trajectory that defines the movement of point must pass through point It must pass through point It is assumed that the subsidence due to the excavation of element These three conditions are translated into parametric coordinates in the following equation: In this equation, the vector Once the equation of the parabola is established, it is now only necessary to calculate its tangent vector at point Hence The same process as described above to obtain the elemental roof subsidence must be followed to obtain that of the floor. The movements taking place at any point Its magnitude will be obtained from the influence function: Its direction will be the tangent (taken in the downward sense) to the parabolic trajectory of the floor: Thus, once the horizontal and vertical displacements suffered by any point on the topographic surface due to both roof and floor subsidence have been calculated, the total displacements or total elemental subsidence at We shall call this new generalized function the When defining the roof and floor influence functions, two parameters, respectively, denominated An elemental cavity is assumed of width The volume The distribution between both volumes will not generally be the same, since two effects intervene in this process: the effects of stress and gravity on the roof and floor are defined, the resulting vectors in both cases ( The geomechanical characteristics of the materials situated in the roof and floor of the seam may be different (with different RMR values), and hence the caving in will progress at different velocities, developing asymmetrically. In effect, assuming a material with a very low RMR in the roof and another very solid material in the floor, the collapse of the roof would be so rapid that there might not be time for floor subsidence to develop. Analogously, it might occur that we have a roof with a very high RMR and a poor quality floor, which would favor the development of floor subsidence, compensating the lower magnitude of the vector of indirect subsidence. We therefore have another two proportionality factors, which will be called Considering both effects, the following formulations are proposed to determine the value of The total subsidence To carry out this integration, the medial surface The vector of the first component, The three components of elemental subsidence at a point The three components of subsidence at a point The differential element  The horizontal and vertical components of the total subsidence produced at point From these components, we shall obtain the total subsidence corresponding to our generalized All the methodology developed above was implemented in the C++ language in the To test the validity of the proposed formulation in mine workings with a high dip, we shall use a case from the literature, specifically the one described in Panel A–H, with a thickness of some 2.5 To control the effects of these excavations on the surface, levelings were carried out during two years at the benchmarks represented in Given the layout of the benchmarks, it is not appropriate to determine the trough of real subsidences all over the topographic surface, since there would be appreciable errors. Therefore, calibration of the subsidence parameters was carried out on the cross section defined by said benchmarks (control sites).  In this figure, it can be seen that the measured and calculated subsidences fit very well at the ends of the cross section, i.e. in the areas of influence of panels A–H and B–V. However, they are slightly overestimated (some 2  Note that the maximum tractions are produced around panel A–V, up to 0.48 In this paper, the generalized The study of these new physical parameters enables us to justify the appearance of the double subsidence trough and to determine the points of maximum subsidence with varying dip angles of the seam. To do so, it has been especially important not only to check the value of magnitude of subsidence, but also to put forward a parabolic approximation that simulates the gradual variation of the subsidence vector. The consideration of roof (direct) subsidence and of floor (indirect) subsidence is a tool that reinforces the physical interpretation described in this paper, and enables the subsidence of completely vertical seams to be simulated in a more reliable way. The obtained results fit the numerical values registered in the field well. Moreover, the task of calibration has been simplified, since although there are more parameters that may vary, each one is fitted to a physical behavior that is easily predictable. Finally, it should be pointed out that the entire numerical modelization derived from this new generalized influence function has shown itself to be a useful tool for determining subsidence in coal seams similar to those mined in Northern Spain, characterized by being highly inclined seams situated at relatively important depths. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Paul Barnes for the preparation of this paper in English. Thanks are due to the anonymous referees for their valuable suggestions.