The relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties for a wide range of composite materials based on polycrystalline cubic boron nitride and aluminium as a binder phase (PcBN–Al) has been examined. The PcBN–Al composites were made using high-pressure, high-temperature (HPHT) sintering methods, yielding materials with grain sizes of cBN between 2 and 20μm and an initial amount of Al binder between 15 and 25vol.%. Hardness ranged between 15 and 40GPa, while fracture toughness and strength were between 6.4–8.0MPam1/2 and 355–454MPa, respectively. Fractography was employed to investigate the large scatter in fracture strengths and correlate fracture strength with fracture toughness through the size of the fracture origins.Cubic boron nitride (cBN) has excellent physical properties, in particular high hardness of 50 Sintering of cBN is difficult due to the predominantly covalent bonding Wentorf and Rocco It is important to know the mechanical properties of polycrystalline cBN materials such as hardness, fracture toughness and fracture strength, In this work, the effect of mean grain size of cBN (2–20 The cBN–Al composites were made by powder processing followed by reaction sintering under high-pressure, high-temperature (HPHT) conditions. 10 compositions of the composite materials were made using various cBN powders of grain size ranging from 2 to 20 The mixed powder was then uniaxially compacted at 5 Density measurements were done on the sintered composites using the Archimedes principle. The microstructure and phase content of the composites were analysed using scanning electron microscope (SEM) ‘LEO1525FE’, equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy detector (EDS) ‘Oxford link Pentfet’ and X-ray diffraction (XRD) ‘Philips PW1710’. The amount of unreacted aluminium was determined using Rietveld refinement analysis using Topas A version 4.1 and structural models used were taken from the ICSD – version 1.4.4. The grain size and binder content in the sintered materials were determined using polished cross-sections and quantitative image analysis of SEM-micrographs taken at a magnification of 5000 and 3000 times, respectively, for the G2 and G6, while G10 and G20 were taken at 1000 times. The cBN-particle size given in The sintered samples were cut into required dimensions for characterization and mechanical properties testing. The specimens were subjected to hardness, bending strength and fracture toughness testing at room temperature. Samples for characterization and hardness measurements were cut into 10 Fracture toughness For statistical analysis of strength data the Weibull distribution was applied. Their parameters, characteristic strength,  The microstructures of the 15 and 25  The hardness is determined by the amount of the ultra-hard cBN phase. At lower content of binder phases there are more cBN–cBN contacts thus leading to higher hardness. The hardness decreases with increasing cBN grain size in agreement with the Hall–Petch relationship The hardness of the PcBN–Al composite materials produced in this work is in the same range as the hardness published by other authors. The hardness of single crystal cBN grains is 50 The results of the SEVNB fracture toughness measurements are summarized in Considering the effect of grain size of cBN the highest fracture toughness values were achieved with grain sizes >10 The measured fracture toughness values are above those reported for cBN materials of 3–6  The high fracture toughness is substantiated by crack deflection/bridging observed during crack propagation ( The results of bending strength measurements are summarized in  Crack initiating flaws were characterized for 10–15% of the tested specimens of each batch (in total 200 specimens were tested), from specimens of low, of medium and of high strength. In most cases the crack initiating flaws were clearly identified. The identified flaws were quite large, having a maximum diameter of 100–500 If we assume that the measured fracture toughness, The failure initiating flaws were often found to be elongated with aspect ratio from 1.5 to 5, see examples in The microstructure and size of the flaws indicate not intensive enough deagglomeration and homogenization of cBN and binder during powder processing. The high aspect ratio and parallel orientation of the flaws point out that they originate before the HPHT step and underscore the deficiencies in powder processing. The poor correlation of strength and cBN grain size and binder content is presumably due to the very broad scatter of flaw sizes and its weak correlation to processing of the individual material batches. The scatter of strength of the different materials differs significantly as witnessed by the range of The hardness of the PcBN materials prepared with Al binder is high as expected due to the hard cBN phase. It decreases with increasing cBN grain size and increasing binder content. Fracture toughness is high compared to other PcBN materials. Fracture toughness depends on grain size and binder content, but to a much lesser extent than hardness and has a less clear tendency. The cracks propagate mostly through the binder phase; there are signs of crack deflection and crack bridging. Crack deflection may be associated with residual stresses in the constituent phases. The high fracture toughness values are in good correlation with the observed sizes of fracture origins and the corresponding strength values. Strength values are low compared to literature values. They show no clear dependence on grain size and binder content. Both facts are due to very large strength limiting flaws. Thanks to the following organizations for funding and sponsorship;