In 1970 Neer Iannotti et al Boileau et al Fractures of the proximal humerus that are best suited for hemiarthroplasty include 4-part fractures, head-splitting fractures, impaction fractures of the humeral head with involvement of greater than 50% of the articular surface, and 3-part fractures in elderly patients with osteoporotic bone. The cortical bone of the greater tuberosity thickens as one moves distally to the point at which the tuberosity becomes confluent with the shaft. Fractures produced by high energy often extend into the thicker cortical bone of the humeral shaft and bicipital groove. Current prostheses available for humeral head replacement have different body shapes. For example, they may differ with regard to the number of fins, and the shape and position may differ depending on implant design. The relationship of these fins to the proximal humerus can be helpful as a reduction tool. The lateral fin is roughly 8 mm posterior to the bicipital groove when the prosthesis is implanted in 30° of retroversion ( With the tuberosities reduced, design features of the prosthesis can be used to enhance fixation. For example, a medial hole in the proximal body of the prosthesis can provide additional horizontal fixation. The geometry of the prosthetic body plays a role in fixation stability. An irregular shape improves the effects of a cerclage compared with a smooth circular shape. Body size selection is intricately related to tuberosity bone mass in conjunction with canal diameter. A provisional component should always be tried before final implantation. The distal diameter of the canal should not be used as the primary determinant of body size. In the elderly patient, the diameter of the canal is larger relative to the proximal body. An oversized proximal body will be selected if distal canal diameter is used as the sole determinant of size. To reduce the tuberosities, the surgeon is forced to remove cancellous bone or accept a malreduction. Proper body size is selected after trial reduction proves that anatomic relationships have been restored and tuberosity bone mass is preserved. This requires the trial stem to be stable. Several systems now exist that will control the height and version of the trial component. Preparation for tuberosity osteosynthesis begins with tag sutures that serve initially to mobilize the tuberosities. These are placed at the tendon-bone junction. If the tuberosities are comminuted, a Krakow weave is placed into the substance of the infraspinatus, supraspinatus, and subscapularis. This permits traction without further comminution of the tuberosities. These initial sutures are used for the horizontal fixation of the tuberosities after the prosthesis has been implanted. We frequently place a suture limb through the anterior fin of the prosthesis and cross into the opposite tuberosity fragment. Alternatively, if a single lateral-fin prosthetic shape is used, the mid portion of the greater tuberosity should overlie the lateral fin during horizontal reconstruction. Before the prosthesis is cemented, drill holes, 1 cm distal to the surgical neck fracture on the humerus, are made on either side of the bicipital groove. These will be used for vertical fixation, attaching the tuberosities to the shaft. The most common configuration is a figure-of-8 with two No. 5 Ethibond sutures. Typically, these are the last sutures to be placed in the rotator cuff and tied. If there is bony comminution of the tuberosities, tying these sutures can dramatically over-reduce the tuberosities distally toward the shaft. Three-millimeter, cottony, double-armed (needle on each end) Dacron is placed through the medial hole of the prosthesis. The prosthesis is then cemented. The posterior limb of the Dacron stitch captures the greater tuberosity by placing it through the posterior cuff. The anterior limb captures the lesser tuberosity by placing the suture through the subscapularis ( The horizontal fixation between the tuberosities is tied first. Care must be taken to maintain reduction of the tuberosities at the proper height relative to the prosthetic head. A separate marking suture can be placed at the most cephalic portion of the greater tuberosity so that its location can be visualized. Next, the Dacron suture is tied. Because this is placed circumferentially around the tuberosities, a significant force may be applied with minimal chance of comminution. Finally, the vertical sutures are tied. Once again, the infraspinatus and supraspinatus are grasped with the proximal limb of the shaft suture. Satisfactory bony apposition of the shaft and the tuberosities will prevent over-reduction of the tuberosities with the shaft as will the previously placed horizontal fixation ( Certain fracture patterns merit special consideration because, if not recognized, they may result in tuberosity failure. We have treated several patients with avulsion of a small fragment of the greater tuberosity that was retracted superiorly by the supraspinatus. In this instance, a Krakow weave is placed through the tendon of the supraspinatus, and additional drill holes are placed in the shaft to allow for passage of the suture limbs of the Krakow weave. This is necessary to oppose the deforming forces generated by the supraspinatus ( Failure to reduce the tuberosities properly will greatly affect the functional results. Levy et al An experimental model was developed to understand the consequences of tuberosity malposition better. In this study, nonanatomic tuberosity reconstruction led to significant impairment in external rotation kinematics and an 8-fold increase in torque requirements. Failure to position tuberosity fragments properly in the horizontal plane may result in postoperative motion restriction. Clinical outcomes of shoulder arthroplasties with regard to restoration of the distance measured from the top of the humeral head to the top of the greater tuberosity also have been evaluated. The relationship between an increased head-to-tuberosity distance and poor outcome after shoulder arthroplasty has recently been described by Moskal et al. Boileau et al Nonanatomic tuberosity reconstruction also may increase the likelihood of superior migration of the humeral component. Late development of superior migration and its effect on outcome have been seen previously. Tanner and Cofield Nonunion of the tuberosities was a rare problem in our series. Only 2 patients were noted to have nonunion of the lesser tuberosity. In several other reports, both nonunion and resorption of the greater tuberosity were modes of failure. An attention to detail during tuberosity fixation is of paramount importance to minimize these problems. Technical errors that can result in an increased head-to-tuberosity distance include humeral lengthening by cementing the prosthesis proud, using a head segment that is too thick, and over-reducing the greater tuberosity distal to its normal anatomic location. In our series, over-reducing the greater tuberosity distally was the most common operative error ( Prosthetic malposition can contribute to malreduction of the tuberosities. If the prosthesis is excessively retroverted, then all subsequent steps will be compromised. Anatomic tuberosity reconstruction leads to pain relief and function at or above shoulder level. Despite variable geometry, known anatomic relationships can facilitate tuberosity reconstruction. This requires a reproducible technique, an instrumentation system, and a prosthesis that can maximize tuberosity reconstruction. A rod and a split cylinder will be used schematically to illustrate the factors necessary to consider the shear stresses applied to the contact surfaces between the prosthesis Unfortunately, there is no clear arithmetic expression relating this frictional coefficient to the underlying factors. It is widely accepted, however, that these factors include the surface roughness, geometry, presence or absence of a lubricant, and chemical composition of both contact surfaces and that geometry and lubrication each have a greater influence on this value than surface roughness. In the case of 4-part fracture reductions, the contacting surfaces are the proximal end of the prosthesis and the cancellous bone of the tuberosities. This area is lubricated with synovial fluid postoperatively and later by serous fluid. The normal force, N, is radial to the frictional surface and is largely the result of the force exerted by the cerclage translated through the tuberosities to the prosthesis. The normal force is also dependent on the surface area of the cerclage and the compressibility of the osseous tissue in the tuberosities. Equations The contact surface area (A) is largely dependent on the geometry (circumference of prosthesis proximal end, size of fins) but is also somewhat dependent on the normal force exerted. Because it is the area of close contact from which the friction is derived, increased normal forces increase the contact area. In addition, given that shear stress changes inversely with surface area (A), a decrease in surface area—with a consistent normal force (N) applied by the cerclage—will increase the shear stress necessary to initiate sliding.