 Maximize fixation in the distal fragments Ensure that all distal fixation contributes to stability at the supracondylar level  Each screw should pass through a plate Each screw should encage a fragment on the opposite side that is also fixed to a plate An adequate number of screws should be placed in the distal fragments Each screw should be as long as possible Each screw should engage as many articular fragments as possible The screws should lock together by interdigitation, thereby creating a fixed-angle structure and linking the columns together  Plates should be applied such that compression is achieved at the supracondylar level for both columns Plates used must be strong enough and stiff enough to resist breaking or bending before union occurs at the supracondylar level Distal humerus fractures represent a very challenging injury. For years, these injuries were universally treated using relatively unstable internal fixation (wires or unstable plate constructs), which led to a substantial rate of poor outcomes secondary to nonunion, stiffness, or posttraumatic arthritis. The outcome of these injuries has been greatly improved by better understanding of these injuries, facilitated by more widespread use of computed tomography (CT) with three-dimensional reconstructions improved internal fixation implants and techniques selected use of elbow arthroplasty From a practical perspective, there are four major fracture patterns: supraintercondylar fractures, partial articular fractures, shear fractures of the capitellum or a more extensive portion of the articular surface, and low transcondylar fractures. The rate of distal humerus fractures in the United States has been estimated to be 43 for every 100,000 people, which translates to approximately 130,000 distal humerus fractures every year. Fractures of the distal humerus have a trimodal epidemiology distribution. In the pediatric age, children tend to sustain supracondylar fractures or partial-articular physeal injuries, described in the section on pediatric trauma. Most high-energy distal humerus fractures are seen in active middle-age adults as a result of motor-vehicle accidents, falls from a height, or, rarely, sport-related injuries. Elderly patients with underlying osteopenia may sustain comminuted distal humerus fractures with falls from a standing height. Patients presenting to the emergency room or the office with a fracture of the distal humerus involving the columns and the articular surface should be carefully evaluated to identify preexisting elbow pathology and possible associated injuries (both in the same upper extremity and in other locations), as well as to characterize the extent of the elbow injury. Preexisting elbow pathology (i.e., inflammatory arthritis, previous injuries) may incline the decision-making process toward elbow arthroplasty. The soft tissue envelope should be assessed to identify open fractures and, in the elderly patient, relatively frail skin. It is also important to assess and document the functional status of the median, radial, and ulnar nerves. Plain anteroposterior and lateral radiographs may be sufficient for the more simple fracture patterns. We have a low threshold to obtain a CT scan with three-dimensional reconstruction when the morphology of the fracture is difficult to understand on plain radiographs, unless it has already been decided to proceed with elbow arthroplasty, as in this case a CT scan provides little help intraoperatively ( Treatment options for management of complex supraintercondylar fractures of the distal humerus include nonoperative management, internal fixation, and arthroplasty. Nonoperative management may be selectively considered in low-demand elderly patients whose comorbidities contraindicate surgical intervention. Desloges et al. reported on 32 fractures treated nonoperatively: at most recent follow-up, 19 patients were available (40% were dead or lost to follow-up). Of the remaining 60% of the patients, 70% reported a satisfactory outcome, despite a 20% radiographic nonunion rate. Even though low-demand elderly patients treated nonoperatively may do well without surgery, most authors agree that distal humerus fractures involving the columns and the articular surface are best treated operatively. Controversy remains regarding the ideal technique for internal fixation of supraintercondylar column fractures. Use of a plate on each column has become the standard of care; luckily, internal fixation techniques using only wires, screws, or one plate have been largely abandoned. For the more simple fractures with no comminution, orthogonal and parallel dual plating probably provide equivalent results. However, for the complex distal humerus fracture, parallel plating is superior. Our preference is to operate on these injuries with the patient under general anesthesia, in the supine position, and with the arm over the patient's chest; alternatively, the patient may be positioned lateral or prone. Our patients are typically consented for a postoperative brachial plexus axillary block for pain control and the block is only performed provided the distal neurologic exam is normal after surgery. The arm is draped free, taking care to ensure exposure of a large enough surgical field both proximally and distally. Our preference is to cover the skin with iodine-impregnated adhesive film. We use a sterile tourniquet in order to avoid contamination of the proximal edge of the surgical field and to allow easy removal for proximal extension of the approach if needed. The main landmarks include the location of the ulnar nerve, the tip of the olecranon, the subcutaneous border of the ulna, and the posterior central line of the arm. The incision is placed over the subcutaneous border of the ulna, curves slightly medial to the tip of the olecranon, and continues proximally centered on the posterior aspect of the arm. The incision needs to be longer distally if (1) the ulnar nerve will be formally transposed, (2) plate fixation will be used for an olecranon osteotomy, or (3) the anconeus will be formally lifted with the extensor mechanism for exposure. The proximal extent of the skin incision is based on (1) the anticipated length of the plates to be used, (2) the size of the patient, and (3) the need to formally identify the radial nerve when an extra-long lateral plate is to be used. The ulnar nerve may be (1) decompressed and left in situ, (2) formally transposed in an anterior subcutaneous pocket, or (3) transposed during the case and then repositioned in its anatomic location. The rate of postoperative ulnar nerve symptoms is probably underreported, and currently available literature does not allow determination of whether the ulnar nerve should be transposed or left in situ. Our preference is to formally transpose the ulnar nerve in the majority of cases; care is taken to preserve the perineural vascularity as best as possible, and the position of the nerve is constantly observed and ensured to be safe during fracture reduction, plating, and insertion of wires and screws. The medial intermuscular septum is oftentimes partially resected distally to avoid tenting of the nerve. We favor in situ decompression of the ulnar nerve in the uncommon circumstance when the lateral column is fractured but the medial column is not, and placement of a medial plate becomes unnecessary. Fractures with a single intraarticular fracture line may be properly approached using the so-called bilaterotricipital approach. However, most fractures need more extensile exposure by either detaching the extensor mechanism off the ulna in various ways (triceps split, triceps reflection from medial to lateral [Bryan-Morrey], from lateral to medial [extensile Kocher], or posteriorly [TRAP approach]) or performing an olecranon osteotomy. Our preference is to use a chevron-shaped olecranon osteotomy ( Our first step to perform an olecranon osteotomy is to elevate the triceps off the distal humerus using a periosteal elevator. The dissection is then carried medially and distally, dividing the capsule and posterior band of the medial collateral ligament until the bare area of the olecranon can be visualized. The periosteum on the dorsal aspect of the ulna is then marked with electrocauterization in a chevron shape with the tip distally. The lateral limb of the chevron is then extended laterally, dividing the anconeus muscle. Two small Hohman retractors are placed medially and laterally in line with the planned osteotomy and used to lever the ulna up and away from the distal humerus in order to avoid inadvertent damage to the distal humerus cartilage; alternatively, the ulna may be lifted with a drain or a sponge passed around the greater sigmoid notch. The osteotomy is initiated with a thin microsagittal saw and completed with an osteotome. The osteotomized fragment is then mobilized proximally with the triceps and part of the anconeus. Reduction of the articular surface must be anatomic whenever possible to avoid incongruity that would contribute to posttraumatic arthritis and/or limited motion. Reduction along the columns should be anatomic as well, provided adequate contact and compression can be achieved; otherwise, intentional nonanatomic reduction is preferred if it allows better contact and compression. This includes moderate amounts of shortening and translation. We feel strongly about the benefits of parallel plate fixation using precontoured periarticular plates. The Mayo Clinic principles and technical objectives for internal fixation of distal humerus fractures were published in 2007 and remain valid today ( Anatomic reduction of the articular fragments is achieved by derotating the fragments attached to the common flexor and extensor groups and piecing together the rest of the articular fragments with small Kirschner wires (see Next, medial and lateral plates are provisionally placed (see Once maximal distal plate fixation has been accomplished, compression at the supracondylar level is applied on each column sequentially. On the side to be compressed first, the provisional screw in the oblong hole is backed out, compression is applied with a large pointed reduction clamp across the column, and the compression is maintained by insertion of a proximal screw in the compression mode (see Additional small cortical fragments may be fixed with small screws, wires, or absorbable pins. The use of locking screws is controversial; on one hand, locking screws provide better stability, but on the other hand, many locking screws can only be inserted in a specific trajectory, which may not be ideal for complex fractures, especially in the distal segments. We do favor locking screws to complete our fixation proximally. When the lateral plate needs to be extended, it is important to formally identify and protect the radial nerve ( Bone loss is more common at the supracondylar level. When the amount of bone loss is extensive enough not to allow an anatomic reduction with adequate contact and compression, we utilize the technique of metaphyseal shortening ( Bone loss on the central portion of the trochlea can occasionally occur. As long as the distal humerus has the capitellum on the lateral side and the medial trochlea, the elbow articulation can function well provided the width of the humerus is not shortened. In these circumstances, we favor placement of a structural graft in the middle, recessed so that it will not articulate ( When an olecranon osteotomy has been performed for exposure, anatomic stable fixation of the osteotomy is important. Plate fixation is probably the strongest, but it is also associated with a higher rate of skin breakdown after surgery, The nature of these injuries and the additional morbidity associated with internal fixation lead to a very substantial inflammatory response in the soft tissues around the elbow. Edema control is the mainstay of early postoperative care: the elbow is lightly wrapped in a compressive dressing, an anterior plaster splint is applied to keep the elbow in extension, the elbow is elevated for one or more days, and ice may be applied. Elbow range-of-motion exercises are initiated as soon as the soft tissue response seems to be reasonably well controlled. Active and active-assisted range-of motion exercises are instructed; motion may be facilitated by the use of continuous passive motion (CPM) or static braces. CPM seems to be extremely useful to accelerate recovery and may lead to a better final motion arc. However, it is labor intensive, expensive, and not devoid of complications, including wound problems and nerve irritation in some instances. We do recommend CPM for compliant patients and transition them to static braces between 2 and 4 weeks after surgery. Prevention of heterotopic ossification with postoperative radiation should probably be avoided due to the increased risk of nonunion The outcome of internal fixation for supraintercondylar distal humerus fractures is difficult to interpret because the severity of injuries included in different studies is difficult to compare, and there may be variations in the accuracy of elbow motion measurements. The outcome of parallel-plating fixation techniques was first reported for a group of 34 elbows with complex injuries: 45% were open, and most were classified as Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) classification C3. Few studies have focused on complications following internal fixation of distal humerus fractures, but interestingly, the nature of complications has shifted over time. We recently reviewed the complications experienced after internal fixation of 89 consecutive distal humerus fractures. Forty-three elbows (48%) had at least one complication. There were five distal humerus nonunions (5.6%), 14 wound complications or deep infection (15.7%), persistent ulnar neuropathy in 9%, heterotopic ossification visible on radiographs in 41.6% (although it was surgically removed in only 6.7%), and posttraumatic osteoarthritis or stiffness requiring release in approximately 6% of the elbows. Wound complications were much more common when plates were used for olecranon osteotomy fixation. Distal humerus fractures may lead to a devastating outcome when treated poorly. When complications occur, salvage options are commonly suboptimal and oftentimes lead to an unsatisfactory result. Widespread use of computed tomography with three-dimensional reconstruction has improved the management of the more complex fractures. Internal fixation remains the mainstay of treatment. Parallel plating using precontoured periarticular plates is our fixation technique of choice. However, internal fixation should not be pursued at all costs, and many elderly patients with comminuted injuries are much better off with elbow arthroplasty. Advances still need to be made in order to improve the overall outcome of these injuries. Hardware failure and nonunion have decreased over the last decade thanks to the selective use of elbow arthroplasty for elderly patients with osteopenia and the use of precontoured periarticular parallel plates when fixation is attempted. However, we have made little progress in developing less invasive exposures; preventing wound complications, infection, and heterotopic ossification; or improving the management of the ulnar nerve. These may be the areas of research that will lead to even better management of distal humerus fractures in the near future.