This article is extension of the earlier work (Khajehzadeh et al., 2016), where quantitative mineralogical information of slurry samples was achieved using an on-stream LIBS analyzer. Despite the great advances in the analytical methods and laser-based measurement techniques, the industrial developers are still demanding novel ideas enabling differentiation between minerals having similar elemental contents such as hematite and magnetite or silicon-bearing minerals such as quartz and other mixed silica minerals since they have different flotation properties. The available analytical techniques for LIBS spectral analysis (including the earlier work of this research) could not distinguish between such minerals with identical elemental contents. This work at first presents data fusion of LIBS and reflectance spectroscopy and then discusses the data fusion of reflectance spectroscopy and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) measurement techniques operating on the same slurry samples. The results will show that such data integrations enable on-stream and quantitative identification of slurry mineral contents specially for hematite, magnetite, quartz and ferrorichterite which are important minerals in iron ore beneficiation.Climate and environmental changes have increased the concerns about natural and specifically water resources. Mineral concentration processes typically consume large amounts of water and therefore every action resulting in saving water and energy is an advantage. For example, one of these water consuming processes is flotation. It is expensive, complex and usually slimes influence the process. In concentrator plants where the quality of ore is poor the magnetic and gravity separations are usually followed by a flotation process. It is very advantageous to bypass the flotation when the grade from magnetic separation is high enough. Additionally, the flotation process of quartz has different properties from other silicon-bearing minerals. Therefore, accurate and online measuring of mineral grades of slurry samples in flotation processes is quite beneficial. As lasers represent rapid and high-tech measurement techniques, the laser-based methods have recently become of increasing importance in the mining industry. However, the majority of the online and on-stream analytical techniques is based on elemental analysis or performed offline when applied to mineralogical identification. The previous work of this research thoroughly discussed the importance and difficulties of quantitative and online mineral identification of slurries ( In order to optimize the process control, mineralogical information is necessary. However, on-stream and close-to-real time mineral identification is challenging. Developing new measurement setups only for the purpose of mineral identification is costly, requires subtle calibration and needs proper space for installation in the plant. Therefore, quantitative identification of mineral contents through the elemental assays collected from the streams of the process is efficient and economic. The concept of mineral estimation from the chemical assays is usually expressed by the term elemental-to-mineral conversion. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) ( LIBS has a very simple spectroscopic setup for implementation and provides more emission lines per elements than XRF. It has better performance than XRF when measuring elements lighter than titanium ( In (  As reported by This work is structured as follows. First, the results of the earlier work (LIBS mineralogical analysis) are presented briefly. Then, the possibility of quantitative mineral identification using reflectance spectroscopy is evaluated. Next, data fusion is performed on the reflectance and LIBS spectra and the improvement of the mineral estimation will be demonstrated. Then, the data related to two channels of iron peaks coming from the K-alpha and K-beta lines of XRF spectra are recorded. After that, those two XRF intensities of iron peaks are appended to the reflectance spectra (data fusion of XRF and reflectance spectroscopy) and finally significant improvement in the mineral estimations of the slurry samples will be presented. A set of 14 slurry samples was available from the tailings stream of a flotation plant where the plant belonged to an iron ore concentrator. The iron ore concentrator was operating by magnetic and gravity separation processes. Additionally, the processes were followed by a reverse cationic flotation of quartz (gangue mineral) ( Prior to the mineral estimation of the measured spectra, training data is required for modeling. Therefore, Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) was used to produce the mineralogical assays of the slurry samples. SATuration MAGnetization ANalayzer (SATMAGAN) technique was applied to measure the concentration of magnetite (  The measurement setup of LIBS system in this research was a laboratory prototype of Courier 8 SL ( In order to overcome the instabilities in the LIBS spectra stemming from the intrinsic characteristics of liquids such as shaking, motion and splashes during measurement and to compensate the light energy absorbed by water, 200 laser pulses for each sample were accumulated. Such accumulation mitigates the noise and exposes the elemental peaks. This procedure was repeated three times and the three accumulated spectra were averaged to generate the final LIBS spectrum of the sample. Then, the data pre-processing is performed. First, the LIBS spectra are baseline corrected by an asymmetric least squares smoothing algorithm (  Infrared reflectance spectroscopy utilizes the spectral signatures resulting from interaction of electromagnetic radiation with sample material, which are due to the physicochemistry and relative abundances of infrared-active mineral species, their grain size and the viewing geometry ( In order to enhance the performance of the on-stream slurry mineral identification, the slurry samples measured by LIBS technique were scanned by a reflectance spectroscopy analyzer. The source of illumination is a halogen lamp ( Each reflectance spectrum, collected with the above described setup, contains 960 intensity values from 400 According to Beer-Lambert law, the concentration of absorbing particles is in linear relation with the absorbance coefficient:  X-ray fluorescence (XRF) has been a dominant elemental analysis technique for slurry analysis, since 1960s ( The X-rays can be generated using a radioactive source or an X-ray tube, which generates the x-rays electrically. The X-ray tube can be turned off when analysis is not needed. The radiation from the sample can be measured using wavelength dispersive (WDXRF) or energy dispersive (EDXRF) methods ( An Outotec Courier 6 SL slurry analyzer ( Fe fluorescence radiation lines, K X-ray fluorescence emission intensity decreases with decreasing atomic number. Emission of elements below Ca get completely absorbed by the water in the slurry, protective windows and air in the spectrometer. Therefore, due to the lack of elemental peaks in the XRF spectra, XRF technique was used as a supplementary method for the reflectance spectroscopy technique. The K Suppose X denotes an Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression is the technique applied for mapping the measurements to the mineral concentrations. PLS is a statistical method introduced by When the problem is about on-stream mineral identification, the number of samples is often considerably less than variables. Providing more samples and more measurements for training data is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, the problem of m Leave-one-out is the cross-validation method used for model selection. At each iteration of the algorithm, one spectrum is left out for validation and 13 spectra are employed for training. The algorithm runs 14 times and the mean squared error (MSE) of both training (13 spectra at each iteration) and validation data (left-out spectrum at each iteration) are calculated for each mineral separately. Then, the training and validation errors are calculated while the number of latent variables are increasing from 1 to m. By increasing the latent variables, continuous decrease of the training error is expected while the validation error is expected to have an initial decrease and then followed by a rise since the model is over-fit and is unable to estimate the unseen data. After selecting the model with the right number of latent variables, for each left-out spectrum the R-squared value (coefficient of determination) of the model prediction is calculated. Finally, the average of 14 R-squared values coming from 14 iterations is reported as the performance of the model for each mineral. It is worth to note that R-squared value explains the percentage of the response variable variation that is explained by a linear model. In this chapter, the results of LIBS technique for quantitative mineral identification is briefly discussed. Then the capability of reflectance spectroscopy technique for mineralogical analysis is presented. Next, the data fusion of LIBS and reflectance spectroscopy is discussed. After that, the fusion of reflectance spectra and the two-iron channels of XRF measurement technique will be proposed.   There are numerous reports about the capability of reflectance spectroscopy for detection of hematite.   According to the model selection presented by The data combination is simply performed by appending pre-processed reflectance spectra to the pre-processed LIBS spectra. There will be no need for further pre-processing of the data after this combination. Although such data fusion increases the dimension of the data significantly (almost double compared with LIBS spectra alone), during model validation using PLSR technique the number of latent dimensions are selected so that only the most relevant information are taken into account.   A related point to consider is that the reliability of the mineral content predictions is mainly justified by the process of model selection ( XRF measurement techniques are widely applied for direct measurement of slurry elemental contents. However, Section   In this work, instead of the physical fusion of the measurement techniques, the combination was performed on the collected spectra and is known as data fusion. For corporations that produce multiple analyzers and for clients who have already installed those analyzers, it is more economic and time-saving to perform data fusion of different installed analyzers rather than the physical combination of them.  The following sections will discuss the performance of different techniques and data fusions in detail. Section In order to emphasize the advantage of transforming reflectance to absorbance using Beer–Lambert law and to provide an evidence for the validity of the approach, The reflectance spectroscopy measurement is affected by the solids content and particle size of the slurry. In a laboratory setup with a small number of slurry samples these factors can be assumed to be relatively constant and a calibration model can be calculated. However, in real on-stream analysis applications these factors are typically unknown. Additionally, both the solids content and particle size vary depending on the feed ore properties and operating point of the process meaning that a constant calibration model does not necessarily hold for longer periods of time. Therefore, application of reflectance spectroscopy for online slurry analysis needs frequent calibration while it is an expensive and time consuming procedure. One approach to solve this issue is to calibrate the reflectance model using the results of other available online analyzers. However, as hematite could not be measured accurately with LIBS spectra and more elemental lines of XRF is required for online calibration of reflectance spectroscopy, this issue will be studied in the extended work of this research using more samples. Section Given In order to clarify how PLS algorithm assigns coefficients to independent variables, Section This study focused on the quantitative mineral identification of the tailing slurry samples. The samples came from an iron ore concentrator where the on-stream analysis of quartz, hematite and magnetite would provide means to improve the process performance. The approach was to obtain mineralogical analysis by combining the measurement data of available slurry analyzers (data fusion) rather than introducing completely new measurement techniques. Three different techniques (LIBS, XRF and reflectance spectroscopy) were used for the measurements. It was shown that the on-stream mineralogical assaying of the slurry flows could be improved significantly by data fusion of different slurry analyzers. The data fusion was performed using partial least squares regression technique. Data combination of reflectance spectroscopy and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy enhanced the quantitative identification of hematite, magnetite, quartz and ferrorichterite. Also, the combination of accurate XRF iron data with the reflectance spectral measurements provided valid estimates of the slurry mineral contents. This study demonstrated the capability of data fusion from different slurry analyzers for online quantification of the important minerals in a flotation plant. In general, the correct selection of the analyzers included in the estimation depends on the available analyzers at the plant, type of ore and mineralogy. Since the proposed data fusion is based on both mineral and element raw data, the correlation of minerals and elements in the ore affect the performance of the analysis. The samples used in this study were from an iron ore concentrator where quartz was the main gangue mineral. The PLS-based approach performed well when estimating abundant minerals like quartz and magnetite. The estimations of hematite was improved specially after data fusion of reflectance spectroscopy and XRF. Given the results of this research and the previous work (