Affecting factors, such as ore size, leaching temperature, holding time, alkaline concentration and liquid: solid ratio (volume/weight) (L/S), were studied to leach refractory hemimorphite [Zn4(Si2O7)(OH)·H2O] zinc oxide ores with NaOH solution in this paper. The impact of leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals was checked through experiments. Results showed that when the ores of 65–76 µm size were leached for 2 h at 358 K in the presence of 5 mol/L sodium hydroxide and liquid:solid ratio of 10:1, the leaching rate of Zn, Al, Pb and Cd were about 73%, 45%, 11% and 5%, respectively, but that of Fe was less than 1‰. Moreover, the leaching experiments were repetitive and reliable. And the kinetic study indicates that the calculated activation energy is 45.7 kJ/mol, which illuminates that alkaline leaching the refractory hemimorphite [Zn4(Si2O7)(OH)⁎H2O] zinc oxide ores is controlled by the chemical process of the reaction of leach liquor and ores in the whole leach process.Nowadays, new technologies to produce zinc metal from oxidized zinc ores are being developed as it is becoming more difficult to find new sphalerite mines. Oxidized ores contain zinc in various carbonate and silicates minerals, such as smithsonite (ZnCO Now, extensive study has been carried out on the treatment of zinc silicate ores by hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical methods( Abdel-Aal and To this day, more has been published as related to an alkaline treatment of low grade zinc oxide ores or dust partly because Fe can't be leached and silica gel can't be formed during the process. Mineralogical studies showed that smithsonite(ZnCO The zinc oxide ores used in the present study were from Lanping town in Yunnan Province of China. The particle size distribution and chemical analysis of the concentrate were shown in Leaching experiments were carried out in a closed polyethylene vessel in a water bath, which was placed on a thermostatically controlled magnetic stirrer. The leaching of the ground ore (− 0.076 Where, In the kinetic tests, 20 g of ore was added to the 1500 mL of 5 mol/L sodium hydroxide solution at a fixed temperature. The temperatures studied ranged from 298 K to 358 K and the ore size from − The effects of particle size, alkaline concentration, leaching temperature, holding time and L/S on the leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals, such as Al, Pb and Cd, from zinc oxide ore were carried out. The effect of particle size on the leaching of metal from the zinc concentrate was studied. In these experiments, the initial alkaline concentration 5 mol/L, leaching temperature (358 K), L/S 10:1 and leaching for 2 h were maintained as shown in A plot of the percentage of leached Zn and its concomitant metals against sodium hydroxide concentrations was presented in Under the condition of 5 mol/L sodium hydroxide and L/S 10:1, the ores of 65–76 µm size is leached for 2 h at different temperature. Data on the leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals such as Al, Pb, Cd and Fe were plotted in Interestingly, the leaching recovery of Pb and Cd decreased with the increase of temperature. The reasons might be that the leaching velocity of Zn and Al increased with rapid consume of alkaline, and Na The leaching recovery of metals from zinc oxide ores was also examined against time using the zinc oxide ores (65–76 µm size) when sodium hydroxide concentration was 5 mol/L, temperature 358 K and L/S 10:1. The results plotted in On the condition of 5 mol/L sodium hydroxide, the ores of 65–76 µm size are leached for 2 h at 358 K and data on the leaching rate of Zn and its concomitant metals such as Al, Pb, and Cd were plotted in In order to validate the reliability and fidelity of the results from single factor experiments, some replicated experiments should be carried out. The results of single factor experiments data on the leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals such as Al, Pb, Cd and Fe were obtained in  Dissolution of zinc from the zinc oxide ores in sodium hydroxide solution may be represented by reactions (1) and (2). Therefore, the size of the initial particle may be gradually reduced as the reaction proceeds. Generally speaking, the shrinking core model (SCM) with variable particle size can be used to describe this reaction ( Based on the experimental data plotted in In the chemically controlled process, OH  Ore size affected little on the leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals. The leaching recovery of Zn and its concomitant metals were repetitive and reliable. When the ores of 65–76 µm size were leached for 2 h at 358 K in the presence of 5 mol/L sodium hydroxide and L/S 10:1, the leaching recovery of Zn was above 73%, while Al was above 45%, and Pb and Cd were 11% and 5%, respectively. The calculated activation energy is 45.7 kJ/mol, and it can be concluded that a chemically controlled process is the controlling step. This study may provide definite reference to make full use of refractory zinc oxide ore containing hemimorphite (Zn This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB13603).