Ferric iron (Fe3+) is an important low-cost oxidant in hydrometallurgical processing. High-rate iron oxidation and removal of iron and sulphate from solution at low pH and ambient temperature and pressure were successfully demonstrated at laboratory scale. A two-stage continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) system operated with a mixed culture of mesophilic iron oxidisers was fed with a range of influent solutions (pH1.0–2.2) containing (gL−1): 15 Fe2+, 1.5 Cu, 1.5 Ni, nutrients and trace elements. An overall iron oxidation efficiency of 96–99% was achieved with rates of 1.0–1.1gL−1
                     h−1. The two-stage sequential reactor design permitted optimisation of overall oxidation kinetics by facilitating the growth of low (460–480mV vs Ag/AgCl) and high (530–700mV) redox potential iron-oxidisers in the respective reactors. Molecular methods confirmed that Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was able to thrive in the two-stage system along with Leptospirillum ferriphilum despite the high redox potential in the final effluent. Iron and sulphate precipitation rates and efficiencies increased with increasing influent pH. The effluent pH of the CSTR system, where acid consuming iron oxidation and acid producing iron precipitation reactions were balanced, was found to be at 2.05–2.06. The percentages of influent Fe, S, Cu and Ni removed as precipitates were 8.2–54%, 3.7–33%, 0.25–2.5% and 0.01–0.26%, respectively, with the amount depending on the influent pH. The two-stage CSTR system for bio-catalysed iron oxidation and precipitation is promising as a unit process for a variety of hydrometallurgical processes, as it allows iron removal from ferrous solutions without the requirement for additional neutralising chemicals and has low losses of base metals due to co-precipitation. This work demonstrates that a high rate of iron oxidation and removal can be achieved without the use of a physical growth support matrix, thereby facilitating continuous removal of iron and sulphate which, in turn, enables the process to be readily scaled up.Ferric iron (Fe Bio-catalysed Fe A key feature, and control parameter, of iron oxidation and precipitation reactions is the acid consuming and generating effect of ferrous oxidation and ferric precipitation, respectively. Fe Jarosite formation is common at low pH (<2) and involves the incorporation of a monovalent cation (A in reaction Schwertmannite, which also occurs in a number of species variants ( In the absence of the addition of external acid/neutralising agent, the Fe The iron-oxidising bacteria commonly used in bioreactors include The aim of this study was to determine the performance and key parameters of Fe A mixed culture inoculum of iron-oxidising microorganisms was cultivated in a stirred tank reactor (1.5 A CSTR system was set up for iron oxidation and precipitation experiments at room temperature (20–25 The CSTR system was started as one-stage system consisting of one bioreactor and one settler only, with the second bioreactor and settler added on day 35. The air flow rate was initially set to 1.5 After operating the system with HRT of 6 The bioreactor influents and effluents from the two CSTRs were sampled for pH, redox potential, Fe Influent and bioreactor solution pH was measured using a TPS smart-CHEM meter (with pH — TPS, plastic body pH sensor, double junction with porous teflon BNC plug, part # 121207) after removing precipitates by centrifugation at 21,800 For analysis of Fe Influent and bioreactor samples for soluble Fe, Ni, Cu and S analysis were filtered through PALL 25 For counting cells in bioreactor samples, microorganisms were detached from the precipitates by sonicating the samples 5 times for 1 Microbial cells in the sludge were visualised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a filtration method ( Samples taken for protein analysis (10 Microbial inocula and bioreactor samples (10 DNA was extracted using PowerSoil® DNA Isolation Kit (MO-BIO Laboratories # 12888-100) according to the manufacturer's instructions except a bead beater was used to disrupt cells. Samples were beaten at 48,000 Bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA genes were amplified with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with a BIO-RAD C1000 Thermal Cycler for denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) using nested PCR approach with two primer sets. Each reaction (25 Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis was performed using the DCode Universal Mutation Detection System (Bio-Rad) as per the manufacturer's instructions. An 8% (w/v) polyacrylamide gel (40% acrylamide/bis solution, 37.5:1) was prepared in TAE buffer with solutions sterilised using 0.2/0.8 The 16S rRNA gene sequences were edited using BioEdit software. The closest relatives of the species were identified by comparing the sequences to those in GenBank database ( The HRT of the two-stage CSTR system was decreased stepwise to determine the lowest HRT that allowed stable process performance. The HRT was successfully decreased from 45 The HRT of the two-stage CSTR system was decreased stepwise to determine the lowest HRT that allowed stable process performance. The HRT was successfully decreased from 45 The percentage of overall Fe As a result of Fe Depending on the influent pH, the percentages of influent Fe, S, Cu and Ni removed as precipitates were 8.2–54%, 3.7–33%, 0.25–2.5% and 0.01–0.26%, respectively ( Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were successfully amplified from the DNA extracted from the inoculum and bioreactor samples, but no archaeal PCR products were obtained, indicating that the role of archaea in the bioreactors was insignificant. A summary of the bacterial species detected is given in The effect of influent pH on the effluent pH of the room temperature system is shown in the concentration of Fe the total concentration of Fe This empirical model was used to plot the dashed lines on the graph in A second empirical model (Eqs. It should be cautioned that the empirical models are valid only for the conditions used in this study. Used with these parameters, the empirical models approximate Fe Using these iron oxidation and precipitation processes within a heap leaching flow sheet context with a high pyrrhotite content, for example with ores found in the Talvivaara deposit in Finland ( This study provides the necessary information for the assessment of ambient temperature, continuous flow iron oxidation and precipitation processes with air aeration, within a hydrometallurgical processing flow sheet. No carrier material or neutralising agents are needed and iron removal is achieved from high strength iron liquor at a pH where a high proportion of Fe precipitation occurs. Thus continuous precipitate removal can be applied with only minor losses of Cu and Ni. Most previous studies on biological iron oxidation in suspended cell bioreactors have been conducted with lower influent Fe This study determined for the first time the key process performance parameters for a two-stage CSTR system for biological iron oxidation and precipitation. The described process can be used in a variety of hydrometallurgical flow sheets where Fe The following are the supplementary data related to this article Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Financial support from