In a large course, grading assignments is a time-consuming process requiring considerable resources. Online homework software systems are therefore increasingly being utilized. In this article, we will detail our experiences implementing online homework assignments in our course CH E 243: Engineering Thermodynamics; a large, multi-section course with more than 600 students/year in 4 sections. In Year 1 we employed commercial software, and in Year 2 we developed our own online assignments. In both years, assignments had both online and written components. After each year we conducted a survey of the students to gage their perception regarding the implementation and benefits of the online and written assignments, and the contribution of these tools to the students’ ability to master the material. We found that most students were satisfied with the online system, and recommended using it again the following year. Students generally perceived written assignments to be more helpful in achieving mastery of the course material than the online ones. Students perceived our in-house developed system much more positively than the commercial software (as did we). Overall, we perceived that the class performance was better when our own online assignments were used, and the number of students who failed the course was reduced.In the face of increasing class sizes, diminishing resources, and the availability of a plethora of commercial tools and platforms, the use of online homework is on the rise in post-secondary institutions ( Many studies have examined whether online homework software in post-secondary courses has a statistically significant effect on learning—usually measured in terms of student performance on exams—and the results are mixed. While learning outcomes may or may not be improved by the use of online homework software, students generally rate these tools positively. In one study (which used commercial software), 85.7% of students in an introductory chemistry course were in favor of continued use of online homework ( There are subtle challenges associated with the selection and implementation of a successful online homework system. Online homework systems may be in-house developed, or provided by a third party such as a textbook publisher (often in accompaniment of a particular textbook). Each of these platforms offers advantages and disadvantages. Commercial systems can be readily purchased, and may offer functionality such as adaptive-responsiveness and direct links to relevant sections in the textbooks. However, when implementing a commercial system, the professor has limited control over content, and the system may be expensive for students to access ( In this article, we will detail our experiences implementing online assignments in a large, multi-section, second-year engineering course with over 600 students per year in 4 sections. The central focus of the course is problem solving, and the course traditionally includes 10–11 written assignments. In Year 1 of the described experience, we employed commercial textbook publisher's web-software to replace approximately half of each assignment with an online component (so that each assignment was 50% online and 50% written). In Year 2, we developed our own online assignments, and implemented a system where ∼60% of the assignment was online, and ∼40% written. Simpler concepts were ‘practiced’ in the online assignments, leading to a more complex written question. In our course, graduate student teaching assistants (TAs) who formerly would have acted as graders were re-assigned to staff a Help Desk open 11.5 This study was conducted around a large second year engineering course taught at the University of Alberta: CH E 243 Engineering Thermodynamics. This is a required course for second year students in many disciplines (including Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Engineering Physics, Materials Engineering Mining Engineering, and Petroleum Engineering) and a recommended technical elective for others (Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Civil Engineering). Most students are in their second year of study. In the fall term (in which the study was implemented over two consecutive years), there are 4 sections of the course (each taught by a different instructor), with more than 600 registered students. Assignments and exams are consolidated for all sections. Two of the authors have taught the course multiple times (6 times previous to Year 1 (ALE), and 11 times previous to Year 1 (JAWE)). The main emphasis of the course is on problem solving, with content focused on the first and second laws of thermodynamics. Typical assignment and exam questions include multiple equations and/or steps and may have more than one correct solution path. In 2014 (Year 1), we adopted a textbook publisher's commercial online homework system. We decided to use this online system for approximately 50% of each assignment. The other 50% of the assignment consisted of a written problem or problems, to enable the students to develop and practice complex problem-solving skills ( In 2015 (Year 2), we chose to develop our own in-house online homework system. This system was implemented using the Moodle platform. This platform is available to all instructors at our University. In previous years, we used Moodle simply for the delivery of material, such as posting assignment questions and solutions, and old exams for study purposes. The Moodle system allows for the creation of question banks, and the instancing of questions from these banks as quizzes. Students access the system using their unique Campus Computing Identifier (CCID), making it simple to map grades to the class list. A summer student was hired to implement the system, working full time over the 4-month summer term, with regular consultation with ourselves. Questions were based largely on questions from the textbook and on assignments from the previous years. The summer student prepared both the questions and detailed solutions, and, wherever possible, included 5 versions of each question to reduce copying (where the different versions required the same calculations to be performed using different numbers). In Year 2, approximately 60% of each assignment was online, with 40% written. In our course, we consider the main value of homework to be to enable student learning rather than for assessment. Given this emphasis on learning, for numeric assignment questions in the online assignments, students were given many tries to get the correct answer (33 tries in Year 1, which was then reduced to 10 tries in Year 2, due to a Moodle limitation). This kept the focus on learning Grading is a labor-intensive process, and in previous years there were typically 480 grader hours per term assigned to our course. With the transition to online assignments, 40% of the grader hours were replaced by increased TA hours so that TAs could staff a new Help Desk, open 11.5 Ethics approval for this student-survey-based study was obtained from the Research Ethics Office at the University of Alberta. Three months after the end of the class (well after students received their results), a survey was prepared. Students were contacted by email and asked to voluntarily participate in the survey. Responses were collected using Google Forms. The CCIDs of the students were used to ensure that students responded only a single time (when more than one response was received from a single student, only the latter response was included). Responses were cross-referenced against course marks by CCID. Identifying features were then decoupled from the data. Additional data on student perceptions was obtained from the Universal Student Ratings of Instruction (USRI) scores of the two instructors involved in the study for the relevant and previous years. The instructors accessed their own data through an online system. Data related to student performance was collected from course records. Proper selection or development of a suitable online homework system is key to ensuring that the overall time required to administer the course is reduced rather than increased, and that desired learning outcomes can be achieved. In Year 1, we implemented a commercial system. This system was aligned with the textbook selected for use in the course that year, and the questions mirrored those found at the end of each chapter. To reduce copying, the software randomized the numbers in some questions. There were a number of technical challenges associated with this system, which, at the time, was a new product from the publisher. While the system was developed to accompany a specific textbook, only a limited selection of the problems were available online, making it challenging to cover all of the desired material in a given assignment (despite the fact that we had complete control over the written portion of the assignment). We felt that some questions available were too complex to be marked using an automated system, as it was very difficult for students to troubleshoot multi-part problems based only on the feedback of whether or not their final answer was correct. A number of minor technical errors (such as incorrect answers) were also encountered. Due to the large class size, uniquely cross-referencing the collected assignments against the class list also required considerable care, and students were required to register using their CCID to facilitate the process. Great care must be taken to select a suitable software system. In addition, cost to students must be considered. An important advantage of implementing our own system was that we could tailor the questions to the platform. Online questions were designed to be completed prior to the written assignment, and focused on building basic skills, understanding, and confidence. Conceptual (non-numerical) concepts were tested using multiple choice or true/false questions. Computational questions tended to be shorter, and to focus on testing only a few concepts at a time. The written problem included on each assignment tended to be more complex, incorporating more steps and/or multiple concepts at a time. This approach is in some ways similar to a recent report from The main disadvantage of implementing this Moodle-based system was the resources required: namely institutional funding for the student as well as the time commitment of both the student (who worked full time) and the instructors. Beyond just determining the questions, considerable time was required to enter the questions into Moodle, format the text and figures, specify the solutions (with acceptable tolerances), and test the system. The value of this effort certainly scales with class size—as classes grow larger, the time saved on grading can more than make up for the time invested. From our point of view, an added benefit of the course reorganization was the creation of the Help Desk, which was open 11.5 In our course, the main purpose of assignments is to enable students to practice their problem-solving skills, and achieve mastery of the course material. In terms of summative assessment, assignments make up only a small part of the students’ grades (10% of their overall score in Year 1, and 15% in Year 2). Despite this, it is through completion of the assignments that we expect a large portion of the students’ learning to occur. It is therefore important to us to ensure that assignments (in whatever form) continue to enable student learning. It is difficult to compare class performance from year to year, as student grades may fluctuate due to factors such as the level of difficulty of the exams and overall capabilities of a cohort. Nonetheless, a comparison of the number of students who earned less than 50% of the total marks in the course can provide some insight into overall performance. The number of students who earned less than 50% of the course marks decreased from 44 students in 2013 (the last time that purely written assignments were used) to 25 students in 2014, to zero students in 2015. There is some evidence in the literature that there is a correlation between performance in online homework and performance in the course overall. Some studies have suggested that exam grades are related to the amount of online homework undertaken, in terms of total number of questions correctly completed ( To compare the performance in online homework assignments, written assignments, and exam performance (midterm and finals), for both Years 1 and 2, the student scores on each type of homework were plotted against scores on the other type of homework and exams. For example, The R values for all correlations are presented in As in previous studies, this data shows that there is only moderate correlation between online assignment performance and exam performance. Performance on the online assignments is therefore a poor predictor of overall performance in the course. Surprisingly, the grades from the written assignments are also only weakly to moderately correlated to exam performance. The strongest correlation is seen between the online and written assignment grades, indicating that students perform comparatively well or poorly regardless of the medium of delivery (online or written). The correlations in Year 2 are generally lower than in Year 1, likely because the grades in Year 2 on each component of the assignment are higher overall, allowing for less differentiation among students at the top end of the spectrum. The correlations in each year between the online assignments and the final exam marks are only slightly lower than those found by When considering whether to implement a change to a course, instructors are often concerned about how the change will impact the course evaluations that they receive from students. At the University of Alberta, anonymous course evaluations are administered near the end of the term using the ‘Universal Student Ratings of Instruction’ (USRI) tool. The responses to two questions from prior years were compared to present years: (1) ‘Overall the quality of this course was excellent.’ (2) ‘Overall this instructor was excellent.’ Both instructors already received very high ratings in each of these categories, and the ratings either stayed the same or improved from previous years. For each year (Years 1 and 2), an invitation to complete an online survey (administered with Google Forms) was sent to all students who were registered in the course approximately 3 months after the end of the course. 115 responses were received from the 615 students enrolled in Fall 2014. In terms of grades, these students spanned the continuum of grades awarded in the course (from A+ down to F). The average numerical grade of the respondents We considered that students utilizing online tools for the first time may have different perceptions than students with more experience with online homework systems. In our results, only 5 students in total indicated that this was the first course that they had taken that used online homework (Year 1: 3 students, Year 2: 2 students). Neither the novelty nor the unfamiliarity of online homework systems was therefore expected to impact the results. The survey included a number of questions aimed at examining student perceptions regarding the utility and benefits of homework (online and written). The main findings are shown in In Year 1, students responded that written problems were generally more helpful than online problems in mastering the course material (4.3 As our assignments are intended to enable learning, high quality (correct and informative) feedback is important to us. Students were asked a number of questions regarding the quality of feedback that they received both from the online homework system and on their written assignments. The questions and results are summarized in Within each year, the reliability of grading by each method was perceived as being similar—with the perceived accuracy of grading of the online assignments (3.8 Commercial, third-party online homework systems have many attractive qualities: they are easy to adopt, can track textbook content, and can offer additional functionality such as integrated links to the relevant section of the textbook, and/or adaptive responses. However, students must pay for access to these systems either by purchasing a new textbook or purchasing digital access (which may or may not be bundled with an ebook). While textbooks can be resold after a course is done, online access can often come with a limited time of use (example: 1 Firstly, we inquired whether students had to bear additional costs to access the online software. We asked the question: ‘Did access to [Commercial Software] cost you anything to participate’? A range of answers were available: 1. No — I would have purchased the hardcover textbook anyway, 2. No — I would have purchased the electronic textbook anyway, 3. No — I did not participate in the online problems, 4. No — another reason, 5. Yes — I had a used textbook, but purchased the electronic textbook to access the online problems, 6. Yes — I purchased the hardcover textbook primarily to access the online problems, and 7. Yes — I purchased the electronic textbook primarily to access the online problems. 8. Yes another reason. The results are shown in Overall, only 36.7% of students indicated that there were no additional costs to participate in the online homework system, as they would have purchased either a hardcover or online textbook anyway (responses 1 and 2). 12.2% of students indicated that they had to purchase access to the software (including ebook) despite the fact that they already had access to a used textbook (response 5). 40.9% of students indicated that they purchased a new textbook or ebook primarily to gain access to the online homework assignments (responses 6 and 7). It is unclear as to whether more people would have purchased and/or borrowed a used book if acquiring access to the online, commercial system had not been required. As the cost of purchasing access to the online textbook and homework assignment software was about 60% of the cost of purchasing a new textbook, the marginal cost for those with a used textbook was not trivial. While each year we assign a ‘Required’ (rather than ‘Recommended’) textbook for our course, we have noticed from past discussions with students that they do not always have access to the book. We therefore explicitly asked the students about their access to the book: “Do you usually purchase textbooks (used or new) for your courses if the textbook is listed as required?” (1 One option proposed at our university to reduce the financial burden on students has been to make on-line assignments (with an associated cost) optional. To determine if students would opt in voluntarily, in Year 1 we posed the question: “If the purchase and use of on-line homework software were optional, how likely would you be to opt-in? (1: not very likely, …, 5: likely)”. The responses show that students are fairly unlikely to opt in voluntarily, with an average response of only 2.7 Students were asked for their suggestions for future implementations of the course: “This year, the reduced grading time from the use of [commercial online homework software] (replacing some of the written-submission hand-graded problems) allowed the operation of the CH E 243 Help Desk. With respect to grading resources and the quality of the online system, would you have preferred: 1. What was done this year: some written problems, some online problems, and a Help Desk, 2. More written hand-marked problems, no online problems, and no Help Desk, or 3. Only online problems, no written problems, and even more Help Desk hours.”. The results are shown in We expected that the responses to some of the survey questions would be correlated to student grades. To test this expectation, we plotted survey responses (for all questions which had a scale of 1–5) As described above, a higher R magnitude is indicative of a higher correlation between the two variables being compared. In general, |R| In post-secondary education, increasing class sizes and diminishing financial resources are putting increased pressure on instructors to do more with less. Concurrently, advancements in technological tools have opened new possibilities in terms of both delivering and grading assignments using automated, online systems. When considering the use of such systems, instructors will likely be concerned with factors including: whether student learning is enhanced or inhibited as compared with previous homework methods, how student perceptions of the level of instruction and of the homework itself are impacted, and with the ease and challenges of implementing such systems. In this article, we discussed our experiences introducing online homework assignments in a large, multi-section, second-year engineering course. As the course focuses on the development of problem-solving skills, we opted to replace the use of all-written, graded assignments with a hybrid assignment model comprised of both a written and online component. In Year 1 we used a commercial, third-party software system for the online component; in Year 2 we used an in-house system implemented through Moodle. Financial resources that were previously dedicated to grading assignments were instead used to support TAs at a Help Desk for students. In general, we felt that the transition to the hybrid model was a success. The introduction of the Help Desk reduced the number of students seeking help outside of office hours. Teaching ratings (as collected by the ‘Universal Student Ratings of Instruction’ tool) were not impacted (stayed the same or improved). Student performance improved in Year 1 and improved further in Year 2, with considerably fewer students receiving less than 50% of the course marks. While the third party commercial system and the in-house developed systems were fairly similar in content, the in-house system offered more flexibility in terms of the range of questions available. This allowed up to focus the online component of the assignments on shorter questions aimed towards building skills that could be applied in more detailed written assignments. In addition, both students and the instructors found the commercial software interface difficult to use. In a survey of student perceptions, students viewed the availability of immediate feedback as a valuable benefit of the online assignment system. Students strongly recommended continuing the use of the system in future years. We gratefully acknowledge funding from both the