Using an experimental system that mimics stone fragmentation in the renal pelvis, we have investigated the role of stress waves and cavitation in stone comminution in shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL). Spherical plaster-of-Paris stone phantoms (D = 10 mm) were exposed to 25, 50, 100, 200, 300 and 500 shocks at the beam focus of a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter operated at 20 kV and a pulse repetition rate of 1 Hz. The stone phantoms were immersed either in degassed water or in castor oil to delineate the contribution of stress waves and cavitation to stone comminution. It was found that, while in degassed water there is a progressive disintegration of the stone phantoms into small pieces, the fragments produced in castor oil are fairly sizable. From 25 to 500 shocks, clinically passable fragments (< 2 mm) produced in degassed water increases from 3% to 66%, whereas, in castor oil, the corresponding values are from 2% to 11%. Similar observations were confirmed using kidney stones with a primary composition of calcium oxalate monohydrate. After 200 shocks, 89% of the fragments of the kidney stones treated in degassed water became passable, but only 22% of the fragments of the kidney stones treated in castor oil were less than 2 mm in size. This apparent size limitation of the stone fragments produced primarily by stress waves (in castor oil) is likely caused by the destructive superposition of the stress waves reverberating inside the fragments, when their sizes are less than half of the compressive wavelength in the stone material. On the other hand, if a stone is only exposed to cavitation bubbles induced in SWL, the resultant fragmentation is much less effective than that produced by the combination of stress waves and cavitation. It is concluded that, although stress wave-induced fracture is important for the initial disintegration of kidney stones, cavitation is necessary to produce fine passable fragments, which are most critical for the success of clinical SWL. Stress waves and cavitation work synergistically, rather than independently, to produce effective and successful disintegration of renal calculi in SWL. (E-mail: pzhong@duke.edu)Disintegration of renal calculi in a lithotripter field is the consequence of dynamic fracture of stone materials due to the mechanical stresses produced either directly by the incident lithotripter shock wave (LSW) or indirectly by the collapse of cavitation bubbles When a LSW impinges on a stone surface, at least two types of stress waves (longitudinal and transverse waves) will be generated at the wave entry site and propagate into the stone material Alternatively, the production of characteristic fracture patterns in stone models has been described by the “squeezing mechanism” In comparison to stress-wave-induced fragmentation, cavitation damage in SWL is characterized by surface erosion with numerous minute pittings, produced either by the secondary shock waves or microjet impingement due to the violent collapse of bubbles near a stone surface ( In this work, a series of experiments were carried out using a phantom system that mimics In this study, we used a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter with a truncated ellipsoidal reflector (semimajor axis a = 138 mm, semiminor axis b = 77.5 mm, and half-focal length c = 114 mm). The lithotripter was operated at the typical clinical setting of 20 kV and 1-Hz pulse repetition rate. Based on measurements using a fiberoptic probe hydrophone, the pressure waveform (see Spherical stone phantoms ( To mimic stone comminution in the renal pelvis, a recently developed phantom system was used The stone phantoms were randomly divided into two populations for shock-wave treatments either in degassed water or in castor oil. To determine the dose-dependency of stone comminution, samples in each population were further subdivided into six groups ( To identify the contribution of cavitation alone to stone comminution in SWL, another set of experiments was performed using the plaster-of-Paris stone phantoms in an experimental HM-3 lithotripter. This laboratory lithotripter is equipped with a transparent water tank, so that high-speed shadowgraphs can be recorded to visualize the transient shock wave-stone interaction In degassed water, stone phantoms break up progressively as the number of shocks increases  To determine the contribution of stress waves, stone phantoms were immersed in castor oil to suppress cavitation To isolate the contribution of cavitation alone to stone comminution in SWL, a plaster-of-Paris stone phantom was placed off-axis transversely from F2 by 13 mm. As shown in When the stone phantom was placed off-axis, only 3% of the stone mass was fragmented to less than 2 mm after 30 shocks at 24 kV in the experimental HM-3 lithotripter Paired kidney stones of similar composition, size, shape and weight were exposed to 200 shocks at 20 kV in the HM-3 lithotripter either in degassed water or in castor oil. The results, shown graphically in The fragmentation of kidney stones in SWL is the consequence of dynamic fracture of stone materials in response to the mechanical stresses produced either by LSW or cavitation The observation that stone phantoms and kidney stones immersed in castor oil cannot be fragmented into passable pieces (see On the other hand, when cavitation is the only contributory force for stone comminution, the resultant fragmentation efficiency is very low, compared with that produced by the combination of stress waves and cavitation (see As observed in this and other studies Stress waves and cavitation are both found to be important for the success of stone comminution in SWL. Although stress waves are initially important for breaking up kidney stones into distributed pieces, their effectiveness is hindered when the size of residual fragments becomes less than half of the compressive wavelength in the stone material, due to destructive superposition of reverberating waves inside the residual fragments. Cavitation, on the other hand, although working at a much slower rate of stone comminution, can significantly weaken the structure of the stone surface, making it much more susceptible to the impact of ensuing LSWs and associated bombardments of cavitation bubbles. Therefore, stress waves and cavitation work synergistically, rather than independently, to produce effective and successful disintegration of renal calculi in SWL. Optimal utilization of the stress waves and cavitation in SWL may help to improve treatment efficiency and reduce adverse tissue injury. This work was supported in part by NIH through Grants No. RO1-DK52985 and RO1-DK58266, and by a Research Grant from the Whitaker Foundation. The authors acknowledge the technical assistance of Yufeng Zhou in fabricating the test chamber and tissue-mimicking phantom. The authors also express their gratitude to Thomas Dreyer and Marko Liebler from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany, for their collaboration on the measurements of pressure waveforms in an HM-3 lithotripter using a fiberoptic probe hydrophone (FOPH 300).