Los Angeles abrasion, Uniaxial compression, and porosity tests were performed on 35 different rock types collected from different areas of Turkey, nine of which were igneous, eleven of which were metamorphic and fifteen of which were sedimentary. To investigate the possibility of predicting the Los Angeles (LA) abrasion loss from the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), the results of the tests were analyzed using regression analysis. A good correlation between L.A. abrasion loss and UCS was found. In addition, it was seen that when the rocks were classified into classes according to porosity, the correlation coefficients were increased. Concluding remark is that derived equations can reliably be used for the prediction of L.A. abrasion loss from the UCS.Rock aggregate is a material used in very different construction works. It is used in building constructions and most public projects including roads and highways, bridges, railroad etc. An enormous amount of aggregate is used in the world each year. The demand of crushed stone aggregates has increased from day to day, because of increasing expansion of highway and other construction works and decreasing natural aggregate resources in the world. Abrasion resistance is an important property of aggregates. The abrasion resistance of aggregates is generally tested using the Los Angeles (L.A.) testing machine. The L.A. abrasion test was originally developed to provide a quantitative method for evaluating the quality of aggregates for use in highway construction. The test measures the resistance of aggregate to wear due to attrition between rock particles and also to impact and crushing by steel spheres. Although the L.A. abrasion test is relatively simple, it is time consuming and requires more sample comparing to the UCS test. Core samples used in the UCS tests are generally obtained during the field investigation of a rock aggregates deposit. On the other hand, UCS test is usually carried out to determine the quality of the rock aggregate. Therefore, if the UCS strongly correlates with the L.A. abrasion value, it can be used for the prediction purposes. Some researchers have investigated the correlations between L.A. abrasion test and uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). Kazi and Al-Mansour Although the correlation between UCS and L.A. abrasion loss has been investigated by some researchers, the relation between the two parameters has not clearly been defined. In this study, 35 different rock types were tested to investigate the relation between UCS and L.A. abrasion loss. L.A. abrasion loss, UCS, and porosity values of each rock type were determined and the results were statistically analysed. A total of 35 different rock types were sampled, 9 of which were igneous, 15 were sedimentary and 11 were metamorphic. Quarries, granite and marble factories, and natural outcrops in Nigde, Kayseri, Konya, Antalya and Afyon areas of Turkey were visited and rock blocks were collected. Each block sample was inspected for macroscopic defects so that it would provide test specimens free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. The location and the name of the rocks are given in Uniaxial compression tests were performed on trimmed core samples, which had a diameter of 38 mm and a length-to-diameter ratio of 2. The stress rate was applied within the limits of 0.5–1.0 MPa/s. The tests were repeated at least five times for each material type and the average value was recorded as the UCS. ASTM method C 131-66 was used for the L.A. abrasion test. Test samples were oven-dried at 105–110 °C for 24 h and then cooled to room temperature before they were tested. There are four aggregate sizes grading to choose from in the ASTM method. Grading D was used in the tests. 6 steel spheres were placed in a steel drum along with approximately 5000 g aggregate sample and the drum was rotated for 500 revolutions at a rate of 30–33 rev/min. After the revolution was complete, the sample was sieved through the No. 12 sieve (1.7 mm). The amount of material passing the sieve, expressed as a percentage of the original weight, is the L.A. abrasion loss or percentage loss. Porosity values were determined using saturation and calliper techniques. NX size core samples were used in the tests. At least three samples were used for each rock type. The test results given in Firstly, UCS values were correlated with corresponding L.A. abrasion loss values and a good correlation was obtained (  To see how the correlation varies with the rock class, regression analysis was performed for igneous rocks, metamorphic rocks and sedimentary rocks, respectively ( As shown in the Eqs. To develop stronger relations, the tested rocks were divided into three groups according to porosity ( The former studies on the relation between UCS and L.A. abrasion loss generally conducted for one rock type or, one or two rock classes and for limited number of rocks. This study embraces all rock classes (igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic) and the number of rocks tested is high. In addition, the UCS and L.A. abrasion values of the tested rocks have a wide range. The UCS values range from 24 MPa to 210 MPa and L.A. abrasion values range from 10% to 76%. So, developed equations are more general and more useful. The L.A. abrasion loss, UCS and porosity tests were carried out on 35 different rock types to investigate the relation between the L.A. abrasion loss and UCS. A good correlation between UCS and L.A. abrasion loss was found. Also, it was shown that if the rocks are classified into classes according to porosity, the correlation coefficients increase. Eq. This study covers igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks and the range of the UCS and L.A. abrasion values of the tested rocks is wide enough for the generalization. Concluding remark is that the derived equations can reliably be used. This work has been supported by the Turkish Academy of Sciences, in the framework of the Young Scientist Award Program (EA-TUBA-GEBIP/2001-1-1).