It is now well accepted that process automation, closed-loop control and optimisation technologies enable higher feed rates, more consistent product qualities, lower utility usage and higher yields in a diverse range of process industries. In the minerals processing industry, as a general rule, it is advisable to consider the grinding circuit first, as good operation here is necessary for stable operation in the rest of the plant. Operating conditions in a grinding circuit are frequently such that production is significantly reduced due to the effects of process disturbances, most notably those associated with the feed ore.
                  This paper demonstrates the design of a robust control scheme for a semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mill. Feedback (FB), feedback plus feedforward (FF) and reduced order (i.e. less complex) robust controllers were all developed and tested—each providing tight control over the SAG mill power draw by adjusting the feed rate to the mill. This example clearly shows that using the available Matlab-based controller design package, it is possible to develop robust (i.e. in terms of strict guarantees on both controller performance and stability, despite model uncertainties) control systems for the minerals industry as readily as for other industries where advanced control is more routinely used.There are considerable economic incentives for utilising advanced control techniques in the mineral processing industry, typical drivers being increasing mine operating costs (leading to demands on concentrator managers to improve valuables recovery and/or plant throughput) and the need to meet ever tighter environmental constraints. To meet these demands, an efficient process control system in seen as one of the most cost-effective options available. However, to more fully exploit the capabilities of modern data acquisition and control equipment, the minerals industry needs to consider greater use of advanced (typically model based) control systems. The major problems associated with the modelling and control of semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mills are the lack of on-line process information (such as particle size distributions and ore hardness, and the inherent complexity of the grinding process itself (which makes any mathematical modelling from first principles a real challenge). A validated dynamic model is generally the first step towards the successful implementation of any advanced control system, and fortunately a number of models have been proposed to predict the dynamic behaviour of grinding processes A typical grinding circuit consists of a SAG mill, a ball mill, a scats crusher, mill discharge screens, together with primary and secondary cyclones. This study is focused on the primary grinding circuit where the SAG mill is operating in closed-loop fashion, as shown in The modelling approach taken here involved describing the grinding process in terms of a population balance for each particle size of interest The empirical relationship giving the gross power drawn by the SAG mill is By putting all time derivatives equal to zero, the dynamic SAG mill model is converted to a steady-state model comprising a set of nonlinear algebraic equations (which were solved using the Matlab package). Comparisons showed that the predictions from this model were all within ±30% of plant measurements and comparable in accuracy to results from a commercial mineral flowsheeting package. The primary grinding circuit is subject to a number of dynamic disturbances, one of the more common being a change in the feed particle size distribution (which may be characterised by the size for which 80% of the material is smaller, In general terms, the benefits sought from improved primary grinding circuit control include increasing throughput at the desired grind size, reduction of grinding ball consumption and minimisation of the SAG mill power requirement. In the absence of an adequate control system, any disturbance to the process will be reflected in changes to the solids hold-up within the SAG mill, changes in the circulating loads, and eventually changes in the size distribution of the product sent on to the flotation circuit. In the plant under consideration, the major constraint on maximising the feed rate to the plant is the limitation on the SAG mill draw power. If the feed size distribution were to increase and/or the feed were to became harder, then more solid material would be held up in the SAG mill, which would draw more power. As a result, this study concentrated on designing a controller whose objective was to keep the SAG mill power at a set value (somewhat below the maximum permissible) by manipulating the ore fresh feed rate. The simplest controller would employ feedback (FB) only control by adjusting the SAG mill feed rate to maintain the SAG mill power draw at its set-point value. As with any feedback controller, such a system can only take action after a disturbance has affected the process and caused a measurable deviation from the set-point. A simple remedy here is to include a feedforward (FF) control loop that also adjusts the SAG mill power draw, but this time on the basis of a measurement of the disturbance(s) affecting the system. A feedback–feedforward (FB–FF) control system should reduce the effects of disturbances propagated downstream through the process (here to the flotation circuit). To reject disturbances, however, such a control scheme must be able to detect them with reasonable accuracy. In this case, the main disturbances are associated with fluctuations in the feed ore physical properties (e.g. the hardness and size distribution). Hardness and size distribution are known to be correlated—in that a coarse feed is generally the result of a hard ore, and vice versa. Thus, the only disturbance considered in this study was the feed size distribution (as measured by the The FB–FF controller architecture is shown in Any process control book, such as  The “PI” response in For the PI controller, the results for different values of It should also be realised that both robust controllers were asked to meet very tight stability and performance specifications. If these design specifications were relaxed, then these controllers would be able to take more aggressive control action—resulting in tighter regulatory control. This trade-off is one of the major benefits of robust control—by setting the stability/performance requirements, the control engineer is indirectly setting how aggressive the controller can be. Thus, this approach is providing a much more systematic means for designing a controller than the heuristic rules (such as Ziegler-Nichols A dynamic model of an industrial primary grinding circuit has been developed. The steady-state version of this model was in acceptable agreement with both plant data and results from a commercial mineral flowsheeting package. The SAG mill component of this dynamic model was used to design and test a robust controller whose aim was to maximise feed throughput by maintaining the SAG mill draw power close to its maximum permissible level. The robust control design methodology (all of which is implemented within Matlab based software) was used to design two The SAG mill example used in this study is a simple single-input single-output (SISO) system. One of the major attractions of this methodology is that it can be readily used to design robust multivariable controllers that take account of all control loop interactions while still guaranteeing all user specified stability and performance requirements. Indeed, robust multivariable controllers are now successfully operating in a number of industrial applications (e.g. providing control on complex distillation columns with tight product quality specifications). It would seem that such an approach to controller design has a place in the minerals processing industry wherever similar control quality is required.  appearance (or breakage) function for size grinding ball charge within the SAG mill [t] grinding balls addition rate [t/h] diameter of the cylindrical section of SAG mill [m] total flowrate of stream flow of solids of size length of cylindrical section of SAG mill [m] length of cone-end of SAG mill [m] loaded mill weight [t] empty mill weight [t] SAG mill draw power [kW] empty SAG mill draw power [kW] breakage rate of solid particles of size rate constant for attrition of grinding balls [h fraction of SAG mill's critical speed maximum singular value The classical approach to feedback controller design has followed a frequency domain approach, where for a given single-input single-output (SISO) plant described by the linear transfer function model Simply stated, the linear The last design requirement, In an analogous way, performance for this uncertain system requires that the The first step in the design of a robust controller for the SAG mill involves obtaining linear dynamic models (expressed as transfer functions) for the impact of the manipulated variable (i.e. feed flowrate) and the disturbance (i.e. the Effective techniques are, however, available using optimisation tools and The “shaping process” referred to previously involves determining the three weighting functions in For the SAG mill case, the following weighting functions were found to be satisfactory One of the “nice” features of the robust design procedure is that it is a straightforward matter to consider using lower order controllers A typical PI controller has the following transfer function: