Inefficient light absorption and poor charge separation are considered as two major bottlenecks for achieving highly efficient bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (BHJ OSCs). In the present study, we have introduced an additional phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) layer to modify the interface between ZnO based electron transport layer (ETL) and photoactive layer comprised of Poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b; 4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl-alt-(4-(2-ethylhexyl)-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thio-phene-)-2-carb-oxylate-2-6-diyl)] (PTB7-Th):PC70BM. This interface engineering has quenched the electron–hole recombination at the interface and has improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) from 6.65 to 7.74%. Devices were fabricated in an inverted geometry having a structure ITO/ZnO (40 nm)/PC70BM (5 nm)/PTB7-Th:PC70BM (70 nm)/MoO3 (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm). Additionally, V-grooved textured PDMS films were attached to the backside of OSC substrates which has further improved PCE to 9.12%. Our study suggests that the performance enhancement as observed in OSCs with V-grooved textured PDMS films could be due to increased total optical path length of the incident light within the device.Solution processed bulk heterojunction organic solar cells (OSCs) offers many advantages such as good cost-efficiency balance, short energy payback time and unique form-factor and therefore have attracted a significant attention in recent years Some of the approaches of device engineering involve use of different combinations of electron and/or hole transport layers, solvent additives, incorporation of metal, dielectric and/or semiconducting nanoparticles (NPs), etc. Thus, present study aims to simultaneously address issue of inefficient light absorption and inefficient charge collection. Thus, we have introduced an additional PC PTB7-Th (Lumtec), PC Sol gel ZnO was prepared by the method reported elsewhere PDMS textured film was prepared by the method reported by Changsoon Cho et al. At first, photoactive blend comprised of PTB7-Th (10 mg) and PC The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics curves of fabricated devices with and without PC All simulations were performed using the finite element method (FEM) using commercially available COMSOL Multiphysics. Both Ray optics and wave mechanics module were studied. For geometric optics, surface is illuminated with 3 rays/release and general reflection wall condition is employed. For EM frequency domain, transverse magnetic wave in-plane vector was considered along with scattering boundary condition for inactive boundaries. The groove period and thickness of textured film was ∼50 μm and ∼25 μm respectively. For all simulation purpose, the refractive index was assumed to be constant and were considered as RI   Taking into consideration absorption data and simulation studies, devices were fabricated with inverted geometry having a structure ITO/ZnO/PC At first, effect of the PDMS textured film on the control device (ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC To elucidate the effect of the only PC To explain the improvement in performance parameter for the devices with the PC In conclusion, we have successfully made a V-grooved textured PDMS film and applied it on the backside of OSC substrates along with an introduction of PC The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Center of Excellence in Nanoelectronics (CEN), National Center for Photovoltaic Research and Education (NCPRE), Department of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science (MEMS) and Sophisticated Analytical Instrument Facility (SAIF) at Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT Bombay) Mumbai for providing various facilities for device fabrication and characterization. A.Y. thanks the