Trauma in pregnant or early post-partum patients presents numerous multidisciplinary challenges. The physiology of these patients is altered from baseline (relative anaemia, hyperdynamic circulation, and positional vena cava compression), affecting assessment and monitoring of traumatic injuries. Pregnant and post-partum patients are at increased risk of venous-thromboembolism (VTE) due to the hyper-coagulable physiologically adaptive mechanisms to prevent post-partum haemorrhage. VTE prophylaxis is almost always required in the pregnant surgical patient We treated a 32-year-old female, 36-week pregnant, who suffered significant crush injuries between a reversing car and a truck. She sustained a comminuted pelvic fracture, closed left femoral fracture and an open Gustillo and Anderson 3B fracture of her right tibia. She was transferred to Leeds General Infirmary Major Trauma Center (MTC) by air ambulance and underwent emergency caesarean section, pelvic ex-fix stabilisation, left femoral traction and debridement and ex-fix and negative pressure dressing to her open right tibial fracture. The baby was healthy and uninjured. The open tibial injury was treated as per BOAST 4 guidelines and underwent definitive fixation and free flap reconstruction 48 hours post-injury. A free gracilis muscle flap was used to cover the tibial defect with an overlying split-thickness skin graft. On table, despite good vessel flow and tension-free end-to-end anastomosis with the posterior tibial artery and vein, the arterial anastomosis clotted repeatedly and required revision twice. No technical problems were identified with the anastomoses, only thrombus around the anastomotic site. Pre-operatively, our trauma team surgeons had identified that this patient was in a highly coagulable state and at risk of VTE and flap thrombosis, however at less than 48 hours post-partum via caesarean section the risk of uterine haemorrhage was not insignificant. The comminution and contamination of the fracture required early definitive treatment of the injury which could not be delayed until after the post-partum period (approximately 6 weeks). A literature search revealed two articles describing trauma free flaps in pregnant patients, but no literature regarding the post-partum trauma patient. Therefore, the combined experience of four plastic surgeons experienced in microsurgery and trauma was amalgamated and a plan formulated. After the second anastomosis clotted, the patient was given Ketorolac (NSAID) and one bolus of 5000 iu of IV heparin, intra-operatively. The third anastomosis did not clot and no significant bleeding was identified. The flap was loosely inset with minimal sutures and dressings to allow flap monitoring and to identify any haematoma or bleeding. Post-operatively the patient received treatment dose of intravenous heparin for three days and thereafter was prescribed 150 mg of aspirin per day in combination with prophylactic low molecular weight heparin, at 4500 u per day for a further six weeks. The patient has since been reviewed in a combined ortho-plastic trauma clinic and she, her baby and family are doing well, though it is relevant to note that the early (day 2) involvement of clinical psychology was paramount in this case. As mentioned, no articles describing the early post-partum management of free flap surgery were identified in our literature search, however two articles report the use of free flaps in traumatic injuries of pregnant patients. Leong and Granick Meger et al These cases describe women in the earlier trimesters of pregnancy, and describe the anastomotic hypercoagulability present in such patients. However, the emergency caesarean delivery of a nearly full-term fetus in a patient with multiple pelvic and long bone fractures adds another dimension of complexity to such a situation, where excessive anticoagulation could result in haemorrhage of the uterus, femur or pelvic bones and vessels. Whilst trauma in pregnant and post-partum patients is relatively uncommon, it is a situation that requires significant planning and multidisciplinary cooperation. Trauma teams treating these patients must be aware of the unique risks and complications that can arise and require surgical, physiological, pharmacological and psychological expertise. We hope that the details of this case inform any future teams as to a pathway of treatment that was successful in treating this lady in her post-partum period. There are no conflicts of interest, and no funding in relation to this article.