Microfluidic solvent extraction (μSX) of platinum and palladium from chloride leach solution using Alamine 336 had been conducted. The leach solution was produced by leaching of spent automotive catalysts. A microfluidic Y–Y channel embedded in a Pyrex™ microchip was used as the extraction system. Platinum and palladium extractions (>99%) occurred at μSX contact time as fast as 1s with subsequent marginal extraction efficiency increases for longer contact times with comparable extraction performance to that of bulk SX. Findings from this preliminary study are useful in initiating a new metallurgical technique in the field of recovering precious (high-value) metals present in low concentrations which are otherwise not technically amenable (or economically viable) to extraction using current conventional methods.Microfluidics is scientific field that relates to the characteristics and manipulation of laminar fluid flows at very low Reynolds number (<50) along micro-sized channels. The design of such systems affords benefits on numerous aspects such as enhanced surface area-to-volume ratio and faster diffusion which facilitate efficient liquid extractions and phase separations ( In conventional mineral processing industry, solvent extraction (SX) is used to separate and recover metal ions based on their relative solubilities in aqueous leach solution and organic extractant. Industrial-scale SX is generally conducted in a two-stage unit operation namely In this study, extraction of platinum and palladium from a pregnant chloride leach solution (liquor) produced from a novel leaching method for spent automotive catalyst was conducted using the microfluidic approach. Such catalyst contains either platinum or platinum/palladium combinations which is used to transform carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons to carbon dioxide and moisture. Platinum group metals (PGMs) are present in very marginal quantities in these catalysts ( The pregnant leach solution used in this project was generated by treatment of spent automotive catalysts using a patented process ( A microfluidic Y–Y channel embedded in a Pyrex™ microchip (Institute of Microchemical Technology, Japan) was used for The pH of the PGM leach solution was determined to be 1.72 using a pH meter equipped with Metrohm Unitrode electrode. From a purely The extraction process generally involves a two-step ion exchange reaction that results in formation of chlorocomplexes from Pt(IV) and Pd(II) ( In a typical Pt(IV) and Pd(II) recovery process, they are stripped from the organic complexes using either hydrolysis, anion exchange or reduction unit operations ( The single middle microchannel was separated into two by a guide structure which maintains the co-flow of the two liquids. Liquid flows were maintained for several minutes to ensure that the system has reached stability before samples were taken. In any case, it is essential to maintain continuous flow for both the aqueous and organic streams because flow discretization disrupts consistent ion diffusion across the liquid–liquid interface. The Reynolds numbers for all flows performed in this study are estimated to be lower than five, indicating laminar flow with virtually non-existing mixing regime. This is an important feature of  A proof-of-concept for the preliminary application of The authors acknowledge funding from Murdoch University. Technical assistance provided by Mr. Kenneth Seymour is gratefully acknowledged.