Surface force measurements were conducted using the force apparatus for deformable surfaces (FADS) to better understand the stability of the wetting films formed on hydrophobic surfaces in the presence of KCl and MgCl2. The measurements were conducted using thiol-coated gold surfaces as robust model hydrophobic surfaces. The results obtained in pure water show that the wetting films of water on weakly hydrophobic surfaces are metastable due to the presence of a repulsive double-layer force in the films. At high concentrations of KCl, the wetting films become unstable due to double-layer compression, causing them to rupture. In the presence of MgCl2, both contact angles and hydrophobic forces decrease due to the adsorption of the hydrolysis products such as MgOH+ ions and Mg(OH)2 precipitates on the surface. The FADS data obtained in the present work were analyzed using the Frumkin-Derjaguin isotherm to determine the roles of the short- and long-range hydrophobic forces in determining the stability of the wetting films formed on hydrophobic surfaces. The results of the present study are discussed in view of the roles of electrolytes in seawater flotation. Shortages of fresh water in high Andes Mountains forced the local copper industry to use seawater to produce copper and molybdenite concentrates by flotation. The seawater near the City of Antofagasta, Chile, contains 0.48 mol/L Na It appears that difficulty in seawater flotation of porphyry and andesite copper ores containing molybdenite lies in the depressing action of the hydrolysable cations, i.e., Mg A Direct-Q water purification system (Millipore) was used to obtain ultrapure water with a resistivity of 18.2 MΩ/cm. All the glass beakers were cleaned by immersing them in base baths (potassium hydroxide saturated with isopropanol solution) overnight, rinsed thoroughly with the ultrapure water, and dried under an air-clean bench. Sulfuric acid (98%) from Spectrum Chemical MFG and hydrogen peroxide (H The cantilevers used for FADS measurements were fabricated in-house from a double-side polished silicon wafer with dimensions of 15 × 3 × 0.05 mm. Both sides of the cantilevers were vapor deposited with 70 nm thick layers of gold (99.999% purity) by means of an electron beam physical vapor deposition system (PVD 250, Kurt J. Lesker). Prior to the gold coating, a 5-nm thick layer of chromium (99.99% purity) was deposited first to improve adhesion between gold and silicon. The gold-coated cantilevers were cleaned in a freshly prepared piranha solution (7:3 by volume of H After the gold coating, a cantilever was hydrophobized by immersing it in a 10  The forces calculated from the curvature changes are compared with those measured simultaneously using the cantilever spring. The direct force measurement is based on monitoring the spring deflections using a fiber optic sensor based on the Fabry-Pérot interferometry. From the deflections and the spring constant, one can obtain a force vs. time and force vs. film thickness curves at any point in a TLF. Detailed procedures for determining the spring constants will be described elsewhere. Thus, the FADS is designed to study bubble-surface interactions using an air bubble effectively as a force sensor. According to When an air bubble is pressed against a flat surface in water, the intervening liquid drains in accordance to the Reynolds lubrication equation, The second term of Eq. The overall force,  Also shown in the figure are the Π  Note here that  The surface force curve (blue) was obtained by integrating Eq.   Based on the force parameters presented in These results suggest that high concentrations of 1:1 electrolytes, e.g., KCl and NaCl in sea water, should not have a detrimental effect on flotation in general. On the contrary, the electrolytes should compress the double-layers around particles and bubbles and thereby prevent the wetting films from becoming metastable. This may be the case for the minerals with relatively weak hydrophobicity such as the naturally hydrophobic minerals, e.g., coal, talc, and molybdenite. It is no wonder why researchers discovered the salt flotation phenomenon – a process demonstrating the benefits of doing flotation in solutions of high electrolyte concentrations. On a more hydrophobic surface, e.g., xanthate-coated chalcopyrite, hydrophobic force may be strong enough to override the film stabilizing effect of a strong double-layer force and give rise to a good flotation recovery. Based on this logic, the high concentrations of NaCl (∼0.5 M) in seawater should actually help the flotation of molybdenite more so than the flotation of copper sulfide minerals. The CH    Note here that the hydrodynamic force curve (red) obtained at 10 That the long-range hydrophobic force became weaker and shorter ranged at the higher KCl concentration can also be seen by comparing the shapes of the spatiotemporal film profiles shown in  The FADS measurements conducted at pH 8.5 and 2 × 10 The next set of FADS measurements were conducted with a C Also shown in  The data presented heretofore may be summarized as follows. The presence of a 1:1 electrolyte such as KCl in solution should not deter minerals flotation. Rather, its presence should improve the flotation kinetics by minimizing double-layer repulsion during bubble-particle interaction. In addition, the electrolytes can prevent the TLFs of water formed on weakly hydrophobic minerals such as coal and molybdenite from becoming metastable and thereby promote the process of bubble-particle attachment. Problems may arise when the electrolytes present in the pulp phase of a flotation cell include hydrolysable cations, e.g., Mg A question may be asked as to why molybdenite is more susceptible to depression than the copper sulfide minerals in a seawater flotation circuit for the andesite ores. The answer may lie in the fact that molybdenite is a layer-structured mineral, with its basal surfaces being hydrophobic while its edges hydrophilic. The MgOH The force apparatus for deformable surfaces (FADS) has been used to measure the surface forces in the wetting films of water formed on hydrophobic surfaces at varying concentrations of KCl and MgCl The FADS data obtained in MgCl Authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the