An efficient modelling technique based on one dimensional (1D) beam finite element analysis for buckling of thin-walled laminated composite beams having open/closed sections is proposed. The formulation derived has sufficient generality for accommodating arbitrary stacking sequences of the individual beam section walls, and includes all possible couplings between axial, shear, bending and torsional modes of deformation. The effects of transverse shear deformation of the section walls and out-of-plane warping of the beam section are considered where provision exists to restrain or allow warping deformation. The incorporation of shear deformation leads to a problem in the finite element implementation of the proposed beam kinematics, but this is successfully addressed adopting a novel modelling concept. Numerical results obtained for the sample cases of open sections I beams and closed section box beams are presented. The numerical results are benchmarked/compared to data available in open literature, and it is shown that the proposed model performs very well. Finally, a study of the effect of axial and end moment loading, acting alone or in combination, on the buckling response of thin-walled composite beams is presented.The use of long beam like structural components having a thin-walled construction is common in many real-life engineering products such as wind turbine blades, helicopter rotor blades, aero-structures, ship masts and many other civil engineering applications such as composite beams, columns and reinforcement. In recent years, laminated fibre reinforced composite materials (hereinafter referred to as composites) have gained widespread acceptance and usage as structural materials in various engineering products including the above mentioned structural applications. The rationale is that composites helps to enhance the structural performance significantly due to high specific strength and stiffness in addition to high fatigue resistance and durability. The use of composite structural elements utilising multi-layered composite laminates with arbitrary fibre orientations of the individual layers (plies) provide a high degree of flexibility in tailoring the structural performance, but this can lead to complexities in their behaviour due to couplings between different modes of deformation. Thus, the use of composites introduces additional challenges in the modelling of composite structures of thin-walled construction, which is already inherently complex for thin-walled structures made from isotropic materials due to warping deformation and other characteristic behaviours. In principle, the load-response behaviour of the thin-walled construction composite structural elements of open or closed cross section may be analysed using a 3D modelling strategy based on solid or shell finite elements (FE), but this modelling technique is unfeasible in many cases due to high computational cost and time. To address this problem previous research available in open literature has proposed to develop alternative modelling techniques, preferably based on 1D FE beam elements, which leads to more efficient and affordable techniques for modelling e.g. Refs. [ The relevant previous research can be broadly divided into two groups based on the approaches used for determining the constitutive matrix of the beam element. The first approach is based on ‘analytical techniques’, while the second alternative utilises a two-dimensional (2D) cross-sectional analysis based on a 2D finite element model for calculating the cross-sectional matrices. Hodges et al. [ Vo and Lee et al. studied the behaviour of thin-walled composite beams having open [e.g. 13] and closed [e.g. 14] sections, including buckling analysis. It is observed that their analyses are mostly based on classical lamination theory, thus neglecting the effect of shear deformation of the composite laminated section walls. However, composite laminates are generally weak in transverse shear due to their low shear stiffness and strength relative to the extensional rigidity and strength. Thus, it is important to incorporate the effect of shear deformation to ensure reliable predictive capability for all relevant loading scenarios. In order to address this issue, Vo and Lee [ Kim et al. [ Piovan and Cortinez [ Ascione et al. [ The formulations presented by both these groups [ The aim of this study is to develop a consistent formulation that includes the effect of shear deformation as composite materials are compliant/weak in shear as mentioned above. In this formulation, the issues associated with the existing modelling approaches e.g. Refs. [ Numerical examples of thin-walled composite beams having different cross sections, material configurations, boundary conditions and other features have been analysed by the proposed model, and the results obtained are presented in terms of predicted critical buckling loads (axial and end moment loads) and buckling mode-shapes. A significant amount of the numerical predictions have been compared and benchmarked against results available in literature, and it is demonstrated that the proposed modelling approach provides a very close match with other model predictions, and that it generally performs very well. New numerical results are also presented for a number of problems that may be beneficial to future research efforts in this area. The conventional treatment adopted for incorporating transverse shear deformation in an isoparametric finite element context requires a C Adopting the above, a 3 noded beam element as shown in  In Although the effects of warping displacement in beams having closed cross sections is generally not as significant as for beams with open cross section [ The displacement at any point of the shell wall located at a distance Substituting the above expressions for The potential energy ( Now the strain energy appeared in the above equation can be expressed in terms of stress The relationship between the above stress and strain vectors for a ply of the laminated shell wall having any orientation can be expressed using its constitutive matrix The above equation is written in terms of all five stress and strain components typically occurring in a shell element, but some of these components will not be present in the present problem due to the restrictive assumption adopted that the beam cross section will not change shape during deformation. Thus, there will be no bending and shear deformations in the The substitution of the expressions for the local displacement components, at any point of the shell wall in terms of the global displacement components (Eq. The local strain vector can now be decoupled in terms of the cross section stiffness matrix ( By substitution of Eqs. All individual elements of the matrix [ For the purpose of this study the warping function The external forces considered in this study, which will be causing the buckling of the thin-walled composite beams are axial force ( Using Eq. Eqs. The individual elements of the matrices For the 1D finite element implementation of the thin-walled beam theory based on the energy expressions presented in the previous section, quadratic Lagrangian interpolation functions are used for the axial deformation, while cubic Hermitian interpolation functions are used for the torsional deformation. This ensures the desired C It should be noted that The unknown constants ( The above equation can be substituted into Eq. Again Eqs. The above equation is substituted into Eq. Now the strain energy (Eq. Eq. In this section, numerical examples of thin-walled composite beams having I and box sections are analysed using the developed modelling approach. Initially, the results predicted are compared and benchmarked against analytical and numerical results available in literature to show the performance of the model proposed herein. After this, the results of parametric studies are presented to demonstrate the effect of different parameters on the buckling behaviour of the considered thin-walled cross section beams. A thin-walled laminated composite beam having a span of 6 m is studied assuming plane stress conditions (  The critical buckling loads predicted by the modelling approach developed in this study is shown in A cantilever mono-symmetric I section beam length of 1.0 m is investigated for 7 different wall stacking sequences (see A composite I-section beam having a span of The behaviour of a 5 m long I-section beam subjected to eccentric axial loading as shown in The I-section beam has been analysed using the proposed model for three distinct values of the eccentricity; The effect of different predefined axial loads on the critical end moments causing buckling of an 8 m long beam having a box section has been investigated as well. The box section is assumed to be of width Initially, the box section beam is analysed using the method presented herein to estimate the critical buckling loads ( To study the effects of varying the stacking sequences of the section of the section walls further, the same box section beam is analysed in an exactly the same manner assuming A clamped I-section beam subjected to axial compression loading is considered. The effect of different fibre orientations ( The mode shapes the lateral displacements The case of a simply supported I-section composite beam subjected to combined eccentric axial compression and end moment loading is considered, see In addition to the eccentric axial compression load  A cantilever I-section beam subjected to axial and end moment loading is considered, with a focus of investigating a wide range of interactions between the axial compression and the end moment loads. The following beam dimensions are assumed; span Similarly, a parametric study is conducted in which the end moment In this section the behaviour of a 10 m long I-section beam is studied in a similar manner as in the previous example analysing four different values of the flange width ( In this section a simply supported composite box section beam subjected axial and end moment loading is considered. The beam is assumed to be of span Similar to the previous example, the behaviour of an 8 m long composite box-section beam is investigated considering four different values of flange width ( The variation of critical axial load for the buckling of the four different box-beam cases when subjected to varying preload end moments is shown in A new technique for the buckling analysis of thin-walled composite beams subjected to axial forces and end moment loading has been presented. The new technique is based on one-dimensional beam element formulation that helped to improve the computation efficiency significantly in contrast with a typical full-blown three-dimensional finite element model using solid or shell elements. The proposed model is valid for thin-walled open and closed section beams, and is especially well-suited for the analysis of the load response and buckling behaviour of composite beams displaying complex mode interactions. The formulation is general, includes axial deformation, torsion, bi-axial bending and transverse shear deformation as well as out of plane cross-sectional warping. The cross-sectional matrices of the beams are derived analytically and includes all the possible couplings between the abovementioned modes of deformation. The effect of shear deformation of the beam section walls is included in the formulation, which typically demands a C The non-zero elements appearing in the upper triangle of the symmetric matrix [ The non-zero elements appeared in the upper triangle of the symmetric matrix The non-zero elements appeared in the upper triangle of the symmetric matrix