The collecting ability of dodecylamine (DDA) and dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride (DTAC) as two cationic collectors was investigated in the flotation of pyrolusite and calcite by carrying out the flotation experiments, FTIR analysis, zeta potential tests and contact angle measurements. The single mineral flotation experiments show that the maximum differences between the floatability of pyrolusite and calcite occurring at a pH of 7.5 in the presence of DTAC is more than that of DDA. This means that DTAC acts more selectively than the DDA collector. In the microflotation experiments carried out on the artificially mixed minerals, the MnO content and recovery in the pyrolusite concentrate obtained by DDA collector is greater than that achieved by DTAC. As evidenced by ore flotation results and contact angle measurements, in the presence of both collectors, sodium carbonate acts more effective than calcium chloride as calcite depressant agents. In the ore flotation experiments, a pyrolusite concentrate containing higher MnO grade and recovery is obtained using DDA collector in comparison with DTAC. These results indicate that the collecting power of DDA is significantly more than DTAC collector. FTIR analysis and zeta potential tests show that both collectors adsorb on the surface of pyrolusite and calcite through the electrostatic interactions. Also, these analyses indicate that the adsorption of DDA on the surface of both minerals is greater and stronger than that of the DTAC collector.Manganese and manganese compounds are mainly used in the steel industry. Due to the continuous increase in the world steel production, much attention has been paid to the manganese production and manganese recourses ( Collectors as surfactant agents play the most important role in the flotation of minerals ( The parameters related to the amines flotation varies with changes in the number of hydrocarbon radicals attached to the nitrogen. The surface charge, zeta potential, counter ion concentration, solution pH and solution conductivity are the most important factors in the cationic flotation ( Dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride (DTAC) has been widely used in the flotation of oxide minerals such as diaspor ( On the other hand, calcite as the main gangue mineral should be depressed in the flotation process. In the previous works, some chemicals such as sodium silicate, sodium hexa methaphosphate, zinc oxide, quebracho and complex hydrophilic anion A1 In this work, two cationic collectors including dodecylamine (DDA) and dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride (DTAC) were used for investigating the flotation behaviors of pyrolusite and calcite minerals. Their efficiency was compared using flotation experiments, zeta potential tests, contact angle measurement and FTIR analysis. These two collectors were chosen because of their better results in comparison with Armeen TD and Armac C as two other cationic collectors ( The samples used in this work were taken from Amir Charagah deposit located in the north of Tabriz, Azerbaijan province, north–west of Iran. The purified samples of pyrolusite and calcite with the chemical composition presented in Dodecyl ammine (DDA) and dodecyltrimethylammonium chloride (DTAC) were used as cationic collectors in the flotation experiments. The characteristics of these collectors and the other flotation reagents used in this work are illustrated in The microflotation experiments were conducted in a 300 The flotation experiments were carried out on 300 The zeta potential of purified samples in the suspension was measured by a Malvern instrument (Nano ZS, ZEN3600, UK) according to its manual procedure. The purified samples were ground under 20 The contact angle of distilled water on a polished section of calcite was measured using a sessile drop method in the presence of different collectors at various concentrations of depressants. The mirror-like polished section was immersed in 300 The roughness of the surface is the most effective parameter which affects the contact angle measurements ( For evaluating the nature of the interaction between the various collectors and the minerals, the quantitative FTIR analyses were carried out by NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA). The mineral samples were ground to smaller than 0.02 The effect of pH value on the flotation recovery of pyrolusite and calcite in the presence of two examined collectors are illustrated in   In order to investigate the effect of DDA and DTAC collectors on the flotation of pyrolusite from calcite, the microflotation experiments were carried out on the mixture of pure pyrolusite (20 However, the MnO content of an optimal concentrate obtained by DTAC (32.8%) is comparable with that of DDA (33.5%), but its recovery is meaningfully low. The optimal pyrolusite concentrate with 33.5% MnO and 90.7% recovery is achieved using 7.5 Based on the microflotation results, the ore flotation experiments were carried out at pH For achieving a suitable concentrate of pyrolusite, the flotation experiments at optimal conditions were carried out on the tabling pre-concentrate with 21.5% MnO and 88.9% recovery. This pre-concentrate was produced by tabling the ore sample with a size of − The zeta potentials of the purified pyrolusite and calcite minerals were measured in the presence of cationic collectors at optimal pHs. The results are shown in As shown in The contact angle of pure calcite in the absence of any flotation reagents was measured 40.3° which is very close to the reported values in the previous works ( The FT-IR spectra of pyrolusite and calcite in the absence and presence of DDA and DTAC at a pH of 7.5 are illustrated in As seen from Also, the comparison of In the cationic flotation, RNH As shown in By adding sodium carbonate and calcium chloride, the concentration of some ions such as CO As shown in As shown by microflotation results (  The flotation experiments carried out on the single minerals indicate that the maximum flotation recovery of pyrolusite in the presence of DDA and DTAC are 89% and 73%, respectively. These recoveries are achieved at a pH of 7–8 when the dosage of collectors is 10 The flotation experiments on the artificially mixed minerals show that using 7.5 FTIR analyses and zeta potential measurements indicate that both collectors adsorb on the surface of pyrolusite and calcite through electrostatic forces. The adsorption density of DDA collector on the surface of both minerals is more than that of DTAC. Also, DDA collector attraction on the surface of both minerals is stronger than that of DTAC collector. In the flotation of pyrolusite using cationic collectors, sodium carbonate and calcium chloride are suitable depressant agents for the calcite mineral. The flotation results and contact angle measurements show that sodium carbonate depresses the calcite flotation more effectively than calcium chloride. By carrying out the froth flotation on the tabling pre-concentrate using DDA collector and sodium carbonate as a depressant agent, a favorite pyrolusite concentrate can be achieved. Thus, the combination of gravity separation and froth flotation can be a suitable process for beneficiation of the studied manganese ore deposit.