This work was designed to study the hydraulic properties of sludge deposit, focusing on the impact of operating conditions (i.e. loads and feeding frequencies) on air entrance (aerobic mineralization optimization) into the sludge deposit. The studied sludge deposits came from six 2m2 pilot-scale SDRBs that had been in operation for 50months with three different loads of 30, 50, and 70kg of SSm−2
                     y−1. Two influents were assessed (i.e. activated sludge and septage) presenting different characteristics (i.e. pollutant contents, physical properties…). Two experimental approaches were employed based on establishing the water retention curve (capillary pressure versus volumetric water content) and the hydrotextural diagram to determine the hydraulic properties of sludge deposit. The study obtained valuable information for optimizing operating conditions, specifically for efficient management of loading frequency to optimize aerobic conditions within the sludge deposit.While activated sludge treatment is still the most widely used among biological treatment processes, it is nevertheless characterized by high residual sludge production, whose management (treatment and disposal) accounts for 50–60% of total wastewater treatment costs ( In SDRB systems, both dewatering and mineralization processes allow long-term sludge reduction. Sludge dewatering is achieved by two combined processes: drainage and evapotranspiration ( Two combined approaches initially developed for unsaturated soil and granular media studies are proposed: (i) the establishment of a hydrotextural diagram for the identification of transformation stages and densification capacity of sludge deposit during drying ( Theories underpinning the hydrotextural diagram and water retention curve are detailed. Experimental results obtained on sludge deposit from pilot-scale SDRBs fed either by activated sludge or septage are presented in terms of their structuring and water retention abilities. Finally, an example of continuous water content monitoring using tensiometers is presented. The study used 6 pilot-scale SDRBs, each 2 The tensiometer was not originally developed to measure water content. However, earlier attempts to continuously monitor water content using Time Domain Transmission (TDT) or Frequency Domain Reflectometry (FDR) have failed due to the high conductivity of the deposit and the fact that shrinkage cracks develop along instrument rods ( Rainfall was also monitored using a rain gauge. The influent sludge tested (i.e. activated sludge and septage) were characterized in terms of classical wastewater parameters. In addition, specific measurements were done to assess sludge dewaterability. The measurement methods are well described in The ability of the sludge deposit to retain water and shrink was determined by establishing both the hydrotextural diagram and the water retention curve of the deposit. Sludge deposit is a triphasic medium (solid, water and air when unsaturated), with the respective phase proportions being dependent on the drying state of the deposit. Phase proportions can be well described by a hydrotextural diagram as defined by Once the solid density ( The degree of liquid saturation ( Eq. The relationship between liquid saturation and gravimetric water content can be fitted using the following power law ( So, in unsaturated conditions, Eq. Plotting    The hydrotextural diagram thus provides valuable information on sludge deposit deformability, which can be related to the loads applied, the influent sludge, or other operating conditions. The packing ability of the deposit indicates the volume reduction due to dewatering, and may thus influence the deposit’s growth accumulation rate. Furthermore, the sludge deposit’s transition from plastic to solid state is important for approximating its texturing abilities. Moreover, As outlined above, the solid density ( Solid densities of deposits have been measured with a helium pycnometer (Multivolum Pycnometer 1305, Micromeretics, France). The solid density values obtained for activated sludge and septage deposits are 1480 and 1450 Water mass ( In light of Atterberg’s consistency limits, only plastic limit was measured (i.e. transition between plastic and solid state) as it is the most relevant value for the drainage ability of a medium. Note also that sludge hydraulic parameters can only be determined for a medium in its solid state ( The water retention curve (WRC) is a widely-used approach for defining the behaviors of unsaturated porous materials. It defines the relationship between the gravimetric water content ( The WRC is determined by tests that use the axis translation technique to impose increasing capillary pressure on samples ( Experimental results can be fitted using a mathematical model to obtain a continuous relationship. Van Genuchten’s model (Eq. According to WRC for each deposit were estimated by lab measurements using a sandbox and a pressure chamber for low (from 0.01 to 9.8 Sandbox lab measurements were performed on undisturbed deposit samples: two samples (100 Pressure chamber laboratory measurements were carried out on disturbed samples. Sludge samples were first kneaded to homogenize their water content. Then, the sludge was compacted to get a cylinder of 25  It is important to note that the experimental points are clearly more dispersed for septage than for activated sludge. This may be explained by: (i) the low sample water contents (<4 Nevertheless, while applied load did not influence the drying path, it did influence the water content obtained at the end of a drying period. Final water content increased with increasing bed loads, at identical drying period durations ( In addition, these diagrams yield information on the impact of type of influent on sludge deposit behavior. First, differences in phase arrangement were observed, which is linked to packing ability, with regard to hydric state (i.e. saturated or unsaturated): In saturated conditions, the variation in total volume is exactly equal to the volume of water removed. In unsaturated conditions, volume of water removed is not exactly balanced by total volume variation due to air entry into the porous voids. Moreover, the decrease in observed relative variations between saturation state and desaturation state indicates gradual rigidifying of the deposit, which is in accordance with the solid state ( These results suggest that activated sludge deposit presents higher deformability than septage deposit. In fact, the obtained hydrotextural parameter Thus, if the VS content of the two influents ( Chemical oxygen demand (COD) fractionation of the inlet sludge ( The hydraulic loads of each batch are completely different between the two sludge types due to their initial SS concentration. Hydraulic loads were ten-fold higher for activated sludge (37 One result highlighted here to better operate the system, i.e. favor aerobic conditions and drainage, is the minimal water content that needs to be reached during a rest period in order to ensure aeration of the deposit. These minimal values can be determined by establishing the hydrotextural profile (i.e. Based on experimental results, If drainage is affected by type of sludge and by hydraulic load applied (compaction), the only way to dry the deposit, once free water exits, is evapotranspiration. In other words, suction forces are needed to remove the remaining water. The evapotranspiration dryability of the deposit can be determined by exploiting the water retention curve. Results of the WRC obtained from the lab measurements (i.e. sandbox and pressure chamber) are plotted together for each deposit ( First, it should be underlined that samples with a significantly high organic matter content lead to longer equilibrium times, which may induce changes in sample composition ( In contrast, as illustrated in These measurements show that drying due to drainage and then evapotranspiration will be easier with septage deposit than activated sludge deposit, since septage deposits requires less capillary pressure in order to dry out. Monitoring the tensiometer readings in pilot systems allows the observations obtained at lab-scale to be confirmed. According to In order to transpose the obtained pressure head data into water content data, the WRC needs to be fitted. As mentioned earlier, only experimental points corresponding to a solid state of the deposit (i.e. The strong non-linearity of the fit might result in local minima. As a result, uncertainty estimates obtained by this method are often over-optimistic. There is a lack of reference values in the literature to which the results obtained could be compared. However, The high confidence intervals may be due to the combination of the two methods (i.e. sandbox and pressure chamber) creating discontinuity in sample weights. Moreover, organic matter content is more easily biodegradable in activated sludge deposits than in septage deposits, meaning that activated sludge deposit composition may have evolved during the course of the experiment, whereas more stabilized samples, such as the septage deposits, lead to narrower confidence intervals ( Finally, the relationship obtained between water content and pressure head allowed conversion of tensiometer time-series values into water content. Only the water contents in unsaturated conditions are given here ( These results were compared to moisture field measurement taken just before in-feed (data not shown). Relative error percentages vary from 18% to 53%, with no particular trends in terms of load or influent type. Obviously, the degree of accuracy of the hydraulic parameter assessment is the main reason for the observed differences, although the deposit variability in space may also play a role. Indeed, field samples were taken at about 20 Nevertheless, the water content evolutions obtained, as presented in For activated sludge. Lab results show that the more loaded the bed is, the less it dewaters. With respect to the feeding/resting period (i.e. 5/24 For septage. None of the three tested loads (i.e. 30, 50 and 70 The correspondence between lab-scale observations and tensiometer-based field monitoring argues in favor of using tensiometers to monitor SDRB drying performances. Even though the water content conversion needs to be further improved, this method could still be highly valuable for SDRB management. It allows air entrance time to be identified, and then optimizes bed rotation in order to promote organic matter mineralization. This time rotation will vary according to season. Minimum water content reached at the end of the rest period tends to decrease with the approach of summer (evapotranspiration). While drainage after each feeding batch allows up to 90% of the water to be removed within 24 This observation is in agreement with visual observations on reed development. Reed regrowth was earlier on septage-fed pilots than on pilots fed with activated sludge. In addition, reed colonization was not completely achieved in June on activated-sludge pilots fed at 50 Finally, inserting a second tensiometer at a different depth would have allowed better beds management by making it possible to compute the pressure gradient. Indeed, pressure gradient is the main driving force in porous media, and is directly correlated to evapotranspiration and drainage. The hydrotextural approach gives a water content threshold (i.e. This work was supported by the ONEMA research program. Thanks are given to wastewater syndicate of Andancette for experimental set-up which took place in their wastewater treatment plant. In addition, the authors really want to thank Dr. Thierry Ruiz who trained us in the hydrotextural approach, and provided us lot of relevant remarks about results discussion. Thanks are also given to many others members at Cemagref for laboratory work assistance.