The influence of temperature on mineralization of plant litter and pre-existing soil organic matter (SOM) involves not only the prevailing temperature, but also how it has changed through time. However, little is known about how temperature variability through time influences mineralization processes. Here, we investigated how short-term temperature history affects the mineralization of SOM and plant litter in soils from different agricultural management systems. We used soils from a long-term experiment with conventional and organic management treatments to set up microcosms. The microcosms were exposed to eight days of contrasting temperature regimes (different mean temperatures and constant versus fluctuating temperatures). Microcosms were then returned to a common temperature of 16 °C, 13C-labelled plant litter was added to half of them, and CO2 efflux was measured over the following week. We found that SOM and litter mineralization were both sensitive to the temperature history, with lower mean temperatures during preliminary treatment associated with higher mineralization during the subsequent common-temperature incubation. This effect persisted through the week after temperature differences were removed. Different patterns of temperature fluctuation and agricultural management did not significantly affect mineralization during common-temperature incubation. The history sensitivity of litter mineralization, despite litter being added after temperature differences had ended, indicates that the temperature history effects may be driven by short-term microbial acclimation. We conclude that organic matter and litter mineralization, which are key processes in the carbon cycle, are sensitive to short-term temperature history. This suggests that future investigations of soil CO2 efflux may need to take recent weather effects into account.Plant litter and older soil organic matter (SOM) are crucial inputs to soil food webs ( Previously reported dynamic effects of temperature change indicate that SOM mineralization can be affected by past temperatures. SOM mineralization at the same prevailing temperature can be enhanced by lower temperatures experienced in the past, demonstrated for contrasting temperature histories over seven days ( Prevailing temperature not only controls the mineralization of SOM, but also of plant litter, with higher temperatures typically increasing litter mineralization rates ( Litter and SOM mineralization are affected not only by abiotic factors such as temperature, but also by land management. In agricultural ecosystems, soils under organic management are known to host different microbial communities ( Here, we studied how short-term temperature history affects the mineralization of SOM and litter in conventionally and organically managed soils. Whereas most previous studies have added litter to soil before applying temperature treatments, and therefore could not unambiguously separate the effects of acclimation from differences in the depletion of labile litter compounds, we excluded depletion effects by adding litter only after re-establishing a standard temperature for all treatments ( Soil samples were collected from the Soil Health Treatment experiment at the Vredepeel agricultural experimental station of Wageningen University in May 2019 (51°32′27.6″N 5°50′55.7″E). The soil is a cultivated Gleyic Podzol with 1.1% clay, 3.7% silt and 94.9% fine sand ( Soil subsamples from each plot were randomly assigned to six different temperature regimes for eight days of preliminary incubation (Stage 1). The temperature treatments were as follows ( Following Stage 1, all soil samples were equilibrated to a temperature of 16 °C for six hours and then transferred from the centrifuge tubes into airtight 500 mL plastic tubes with rubber septa fitted in their lids. Half of the tubes contained 15 mg of freeze-dried isotopically-labelled ryegrass litter ( Twenty-four hours after litter addition, headspace gas was sampled with a syringe into pre-evacuated Exetainer vials (Labco, Lampeter, UK). Tubes were immediately returned to the incubator with lids slightly ajar to allow for gas exchange. The flushing, 24 h incubation, and sampling process was repeated on day 4, and again on day 7. CO Mineralization rates were calculated from headspace CO SOM-derived CO The different temperature history treatments in Stage 1 altered CO Stage 1 temperature treatments affected the mineralization of the litter added at the start of Stage 2 (F Litter addition resulted in priming effects ( Temperature is a principal determinant of SOM and litter mineralization, and all soils experience variations in temperature over time. Here we have shown that differences in short-term temperature history influenced the mineralization of both SOM and of freshly added litter, and that these effects persisted for at least a week after temperature differences had ended. These observations were for soils from a single site, but potentially represent general phenomena. Further experimentation will be necessary to verify these findings in other soils and land-use contexts. In line with our first hypothesis, we found that a short-term history of lower temperatures (Stage 1) resulted in higher SOM mineralization in the seven-day measurement period of Stage 2. We showed that SOM mineralization was lower in soils with a history of 25 °C compared to 4 °C and we found a decreasing trend in mineralization with increasing temperature across all three constant-temperature treatments. These results are in line with previous findings over different durations of temperature history ( Neither SOM nor litter mineralization were much affected by the variable temperature treatments. Instead, the mineralization patterns of these treatments resembled the constant 16 °C treatment, to which they were closest in time-averaged mean temperature. Previous studies have reported divergent effects of short-term (e.g. diurnal) temperature cycles relative to constant temperatures ( In contrast to our third hypothesis that temperature history effects would subside within a week after temperature differences were removed, we found that SOM mineralization showed no significant interaction between temperature treatment in Stage 1 and measurement time in Stage 2. Thus, although microbial acclimation could occur in just 8 days, these effects were not readily reversible and persisted for at least a week after temperature differences had been removed. While seasonal and climatic differences are already recognized as key drivers of mineralization ( Neither mineralization nor its response to temperature history differed between organic and conventionally managed soils. The moderately significant management × time interaction for litter mineralization likely arose from slightly different effect sizes for time, rather than a strong direct influence of management. This was unexpected, considering that these agricultural systems are known to have substantially different microbial communities ( Mineralization of both SOM and newly added litter are sensitive to the temperature regime experienced by the soil in the preceding eight days. Lower mean temperatures during preliminary treatment were associated with higher mineralization during the subsequent common-temperature incubation. The history sensitivity of litter mineralization, with litter added after temperature differences had ended, provides evidence of short-term microbial acclimation to temperature. Furthermore, effects of temperature history can persist for at least a week, indicating that SOM and litter mineralization rates may be dependent on recent weather conditions. Thirteen years of different agricultural management (conventional or organic) did not affect SOM or litter mineralization. We conclude that organic matter mineralization, a key process in the carbon cycle, is sensitive to short-term temperature history. We suggest that future investigations of litter decomposition and soil CO The authors declare that they have no known competing interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Many thanks to Gerard Korthals, both for the use of the Soil Health Treatment experiment and for his contributions to the Vital Soils project. Thank you also to Johnny Visser and Harry Verstegen for arranging access to the Vredepeel experimental farm, and to Hans Zweers for his assistance with CO