Hypothesis
                  We reviewed the outcome of angular stable plates in addressing displaced lateral-third clavicle fractures. We investigated union, shoulder function, request for implant removal, and return to sport. Our hypothesis was that these implants provide predictable union and return to sports without the negative consequence of leaving plates in situ, reducing the requirement for a second surgery.
               
                  Methods
                  We undertook a retrospective review of a consecutive series of patients who underwent this surgery between 2007 and 2010. Nineteen patients with a mean follow-up of 25 months were included. Postoperative follow-up was performed at 2 weeks and monthly thereafter until union was assessed as achieved clinically and radiographically. Two telephone interviews at a mean of 7 months and 25 months postoperatively assessed shoulder function by Oxford Shoulder Score, presence of any plate or scar discomfort, need for implant removal, and return to sport.
               
                  Results
                  Nineteen patients achieved union by 4 months (median, 12 weeks; range, 6-16 weeks). The mean Oxford Shoulder Score was 46 (range, 41-48) at a mean of 7 months (range, 3-18 months) and 47 (range, 44-48) at 25 months (range, 18-48 months). Initially, 2 patients requested implant removal; later, however, both declined surgery. No plates have been removed. Four patients complained of mild plate discomfort but did not wish removal. All patients had returned to sporting activities.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Angular stable plate fixation of Neer group II, type II clavicle fractures resulted in a 100% union rate with excellent return of function with no mandatory need for removal.Distal-third clavicle fractures account for approximately 12% to 15% of all clavicle fractures. Neer classified clavicle fractures into three parts. Because of the instability created by the unhindered downward pull of the shoulder girdle on the distal fragment and the unimpeded superior pull on the medial fragment by the trapezius muscle, these fractures have a 20% to 44% risk of nonunion. Prolonged immobilization is associated with persistent shoulder dysfunction, Various surgical techniques have been described, including K-wires, threaded pin fixation, tension band wiring, and hook plate fixation. Each fixation technique has its own associated complications, which include wire migration, acromioclavicular joint arthrosis, subacromial impingement/erosion, and peri-implant fracture. Precontoured low-profile distal-third locking plates have made angular stable fixation possible. A major advantage over fixation techniques is that neither the acromioclavicular joint nor the subacromial space is violated, thus providing no indication for implant removal. The purpose of this study was to determine postoperative shoulder function, union rates, and the need for implant removal. Nineteen consecutive patients who were operated on from 2007 until 2010 were included. Seven surgeons (6 authors and 1 trainee) from the same academic department performed the surgeries. All had displaced group II, type II clavicle fractures ( Surgical fixation with superior distal-third precontoured locking plates was employed in all patients irrespective of degree of comminution of the distal extent. These were Acumed (Hillsboro, OR, USA) or Synthes (Solothurn, Switzerland) plates. In our earlier cases, we used Acumed plates; later, Synthes plates were favored because they are made from stainless steel and have more lateral screw positions. Surgical technique has been described adequately by Lee et al A shoulder immobilizer was used after surgery for the first 2 to 4 weeks (depending on the surgeon's impression of strength of fixation). A retrospective review of radiographs and clinical notes was performed to assess time to radiographic union and to note any early complications ( A telephone questionnaire was performed at a mean of 7 months postoperatively (range, 3-18 months). This included an Oxford Shoulder Score (OSS) and further questions including presence of plate and skin discomfort, any desire for hardware removal, and whether there had been return to the preinjury level of sport participation ( The cohort consisted of 19 patients; 17 patients were men. Average age was 44 years (range, 29-55 years). All 19 patients were followed up until union. All patients had radiographic union within 16 weeks (median, 12 weeks; range, 6-16 weeks) after surgery. There were no early complications. One screw was noted to penetrate the acromioclavicular joint but was asymptomatic ( At initial telephone interview at a mean of 7 months postoperatively (range, 3-18 months), 15 respondents were included; 4 patients were unobtainable. The OSS (mean, 46; range, 41-48) revealed satisfactory shoulder function. Two patients (13%) experienced plate discomfort and would consider plate removal when the treating physician agreed that sufficient healing had taken place. Three patients (20%) considered themselves not back to their normal participation in sporting activities. A second telephone interview was performed at a mean of 25 months (range, 18-41 months); 12 respondents were included, and 7 patients were not available. The OSS revealed satisfactory shoulder function with a mean score of 47 (range, 44-48). Four patients (30%) described mild discomfort when carrying heavy backpacks. Of these 4 patients, 1 patient (8%) experienced ongoing mild scar discomfort, and 1 patient (8%) wished to have the plate removed; interestingly, this was despite having previously chosen not to have this done. Two patients (17%) stated that their overhead function was not back to normal, reducing their OSS by 2 points each; however, the OSS was still within satisfactory range. One of these patients had a concurrent rotator cuff tear diagnosed 4 months after injury with ultrasonography. The other had prolonged rehabilitation because of an undisplaced greater tuberosity fracture diagnosed on magnetic resonance imaging at 3 months. Both of these patients were managed nonsurgically. They both had delayed recovery compared with the group and despite having good long-term OSS scores (44 and 46, respectively) subjectively reported that they had not returned to normal sporting participation. Union rates in displaced Neer group II, type II fractures are lower than in other clavicle fractures, carrying a 20% to 44% risk of nonunion. Jupiter Surgical complications are specific to each method of fixation. Second surgery is required in other techniques, such as pins, wiring, hook plates, and Bosworth screws. This is usually performed at 3 months, once bone union has been confirmed. Complications associated with these techniques may lead to early removal of the implant, thus compromising union rates as described in case reports. All patients should routinely be advised of the risk of plate discomfort during the early postoperative phase and the possible need for removal. Longer term follow-up of these patients reveals that there have been no complications associated with other techniques, such as hook plates and pins. There are limitations to this retrospective case series. Despite all patients being followed up to union, the questionnaire was performed on only 15 patients at 7 months and 12 patients at 25 months because of contact details having changed. Our telephone questionnaire assesses only subjective patient reporting of return to sporting level; this is likely to be biased. There was no control group for this cohort, so comparative observations are difficult to make. In this small series, there was a 100% union rate for group II, type II fractures treated with angular stable superior plates. Only 1 patient requested removal of hardware at medium- to long-term follow-up. All patients returned to preinjury sporting activity participation (mean, 4 months), with the exception of 2 patients who had delayed recovery because of a concurrent rotator cuff tear and tuberosity fracture. There were no complications. Mandatory second surgery is avoided in this technique, reducing cost and recovery time. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.