We show how we used stable nitrogen and oxygen isotopes in ammonium and nitrate to identify and quantify nitrogen transformation and nitrogen sources at the LKAB mining site in northern Sweden. Stable nitrogen isotope analysis worked as an excellent tool for tracing nitrogen cycling in rapidly moving process waters. The isotope analysis was performed on the mining process waters at seven different key points along the water flow and we identified nitrification, ammonia volatilisation, and ammonium adsorption as nitrogen transformation processes. The source of nitrogen is historically explained as undetonated ammonium-nitrate based explosives. We used nitrate nitrogen and oxygen isotopes to quantify four nitrogen sources in the accumulated water in the mine as well as three sources in an above ground process water reservoir. The nitrate isotope data showed that most of the nitrate (70–80%) in the accumulated water underground originated from a sampling point located close to the surface and only a minor fraction (5–20%) originated directly from undetonated explosives (direct dissolution of NH4NO3 and nitrification of NH4). Nitrate from natural groundwater formed roughly 12% of mine water nitrate. In the above ground process water reservoir isotope data indicated another source of nitrogen coming from undetonated explosives.High nitrogen discharges from mine sites have been known for over a decade and has been the subject of several studies ( Isotope analysis has been used previously to trace nitrogen cycling processes ( The hypothesis of this study is that stable isotope data can be used to trace biogeochemical transformations and various sources of nitrogen in mine waters also within mines and associated processing plants. The study was carried out as a pilot-study at the Kiruna iron mine in northern Sweden, with the objective to investigate if stable nitrogen and oxygen isotope data can be used to identify biogeochemical nitrogen transforming reactions and various nitrogen sources, both in the mine as well as in the processing plants. Water samples were collected in the Kiruna mine and the associated processing plants for determination of ammonium, nitrate and dissolved oxygen concentrations, nitrogen isotope composition of ammonium and nitrate, oxygen isotope composition of water and nitrate, as well as the tritium activity in the mine water. The LKAB (Luossavaara Kiirunavaara AB) mine in Kiruna is located in the sub-arctic northern part of Sweden (lat. 67° 50.9’; long. 20° 11.7’, The LKAB Kiruna mine is the largest underground iron mine in the world, with an annual ore production of 25.3 million tons ( The mined ore is transported from the underground mine to the processing plants located on the surface. Water accumulated in the mine is transported via a pumping system up to the processing plants and then discharged to a tailings pond and a clarification pond ( With the sublevel caving method used in the mine, boreholes are loaded with explosives months before the charges are detonated. During this time some of the explosives can dissolve in infiltrating groundwater, and subsequently enter the mine and process water flow in the form of dissolved ammonium and nitrate. In addition, ammonium and nitrate are most likely also leached from waste rock stored on the surface ( The Geological Survey of Sweden has measured nitrogen species in groundwater in northern Sweden since the mid-1970s. The closest sampling point is located roughly 40 km south-east of Kiruna and shows values between 1.5 and 2.1 mg l The concentrations of ammonium and nitrate change with the flow of process water from the mine, through the mineral processing plants and into the tailings and clarification pond system ( Water samples were collected in June and October 2012 from different sampling points located at key points along the water flow from the mine, through the processing plants, and into the pond system. Below follows a brief explanation of the seven sampling points used in this study (location, water type, and sampling strategy) ( This sampling point is located approximately 240 m below the top of the Kirunavaara mountain, which is equivalent to about 60 m below the ground surface. It is located below a waste rock pile, thus indicating if nitrate or ammonium is leaching from the waste rock into the mine. This point also represents water that is unaffected by direct dissolution of undetonated explosives. KVA33 represents water collected at a pumping station where all the groundwater in the mine is pumped to the surface. This water is pumped to KVA86, a high elevation reservoir from which the water enters the mineral processing plants. It is important to note that all water in the mine is essentially groundwater that is pumped up via this station. This is the high elevation reservoir where water is briefly stored before it enters the mineral processing plants. This water is a mix between the mine water pumped directly to this reservoir, and recycled water from KVA159, which is water from the clarification pond. The water at KVA86 is dominated by water from KVA159, which represents 86% of the total water volume at KVA86 ( KVA160 is located in one of the processing plants. KVA160 receives water from the high elevation reservoir KVA86 and discharges water to the tailings pond. The water in KVA88 is the discharge water from the mineral processing plants. The water at KVA88 can be described as slurry, with suspended solids in the range 20–30 g/l (data from LKAB). This sampling point is located at the clarification pond, and represents water that is recycled back into the mineral processing plants. This water is pumped back to KVA86, which is the high elevation reservoir. This point is located downstream of the dam system, and represents water that is discharged to the receiving waters (Rakkurijoki and the Kalix River). The nitrate and the ammonium isotope analysis samples were filtered through 0.45 μm filters within 30 min of collection to remove suspended matter in the sample. The ammonium sample was also acidified to pH 4–5 with 0.1 M H Dissolved oxygen was measured directly in the field using a VWR DO200 instrument. The inorganic nitrogen species were determined at the LKAB accredited laboratory in Kiruna. Nitrate was determined using ion-chromatography and ammonium by the idophenol method (precision ±15%). For determination of δ Tritium was determined using electrolysis followed by liquid scintillation counting ( In this study the isotope signals for nitrogen in nitrate and ammonium, oxygen in nitrate and process water as well as tritium in water were used. Tritium was used to estimate the age of the water in the mine using the radioactive properties of Tritium (half-life of 12.4 years). Sampling of tritium in rainwater is conducted by the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) project GNIP (Global Network of Isotopes in Precipitation). The concentration of tritium is expressed as Tritium Units (TU), with 1 TU being equivalent to 1 tritium atom per 10 Ammonium equilibrium with ammonia can cause some ammonium to leave the system in the form of ammonia gas. This ammonia volatilization is often recognized by the distinct smell of ammonia and is known to occur at the Kiruna site due to ammonia smell within the ore processing plants. Ammonia volatilization increases the δ Ammonium has a tendency to adsorb to suspended particles, a process which can be detected using N isotope data as the heavier The general quoted isotopic composition of nitrate formed from nitrification is that during the intermediate nitrite formation, one oxygen atom is donated from O Recent studies have shown that the oxygen isotope signal from nitrification does not follow the standard formulation for nitrification, which is presumably due to exchange of H In most cases there are multiple isotope sources and fractionation processes that control the isotope signal of a sample. For instance, nitrification has a unique effect on the isotope signals of both dissolved ammonium and nitrate. The activity of tritium (half-life of 12.4 years, The change in the residual isotope signal via processes that prefer one of the isotopes can be calculated using the following linear equation (using nitrogen as an example) This is the Lord Rayleigh equation ( Based on the tritium samples collected in the mine at KEP21 and KVA33 ( The variation in the precipitation-tritium data is large (average ± 1σ = 18.15 ± 6.29 TU, Despite the fact that KVA33 receives water from the deep parts of the mine (maximum depth at time of sampling: 1045 m), this water is younger (∼7 years) than that collected at KEP21 closer to the surface (∼13 years) ( The water in KVA33 is younger than the sample time interval for precipitation shown in The groundwater data collected by the Geological Survey of Sweden ( The concentrations of ammonium and nitrate at the Kiruna mine are shown in The nitrate concentration is always relatively high within the mine system, with considerable variations within the range 16–34 mg/l NO3-N ( Similar to ammonium, also the nitrate concentration decreases along the water flow and reaches 16–18 mg/l NO3-N in the clarification pond, most likely due to dilution. A small amount of nitrate could also be denitrified in the clarification pond as indicated by the slight increase in the nitrate nitrogen isotope signal ( As both nitrification and denitrification depend on oxygen concentration the oxygen saturation was measured in all the sampling points. The process waters show close to 100% oxygen saturation in all sampling points for both October and June (   Using the The major nitrate sources at KVA33 are suspected to be 1) nitrate released directly from undetonated explosives, 2) nitrate formed from nitrification of ammonium in the explosives, 3) a diffuse flux of nitrate from the waste rock piles originating from ammonium adsorbed to waste rock and subsequently oxidized to nitrate (represented by KEP21), and 4) nitrate in infiltrating natural groundwater. The contribution from each source can be calculated via the assumption that the total nitrate concentration in a sample is a linear combination of nitrogen from the sources contributing to the sample. In the case of KVA33 (June) the sample {δ The isotopic signal from nitrification is known from the Rayleigh equation using an isotopic enrichment factor of 20‰ ( The unknowns in Equation The constrained solution indicates that water infiltrating beneath the waste rock piles could be the main nitrate source, contributing 70–80% of the total nitrate concentration at KVA33, with the other sources each contributing 4–12.5% ( The nitrate concentration in the high elevation reservoir (KVA86), supposedly a mix between water pumped up from KVA33 and the recirculated water from KVA159, does seem to have an additional nitrate source. This is indicated by the high nitrate concentration (33 mg/l), which is difficult to explain using a mixing model with just the two components KVA33 and KVA159 (16.4–18 and 17.1–19 mg/l NO3-N, respectively). The water in KVA86 receives mostly recirculated water (86.4% of incoming water) and the rest from water pumped up from KVA33. As mentioned in the previous section, ammonium δ The isotope signal in KVA86 appears to be a combination of nitrate from KVA159, KVA33 and the explosives signal ( The assumption that the nitrate in KVA86 partly originates directly from explosives is further strengthened if we combine the isotope signals with the concentration increase. Assuming a simple case where all the nitrate in KVA86 originates from KVA159 and explosives, which appears to be a near perfect mix between those signals in June ( The calculation used above can be expanded to take into consideration nitrate originating from KVA33 as well as from nitrification ( We suggest two possible explanations for the undetonated explosives entering the system in the high elevation reservoir instead of the underground pumping station. 1) This could be due to physical adsorption of the gel-based explosives to the mined ore and waste rock. The material is transported to the surface for processing via an elevator, where physically adsorbed explosives are dissolved in contact with water and enters the water transport system and is detected in the high elevation reservoir. 2) A second possible pathway for the explosives signal to reach KVA86 could be the washing of trucks and equipment used in the loading of explosives, since this washing is performed close to the high elevation reservoir. This study shows that stable nitrogen isotopes can be used as a tool both to track nitrogen transforming processes as well as quantifying nitrogen sources at the Kiruna mine site. Variations in ammonium δ Our results suggest that the water pumped up from the mine contains mostly nitrate that has infiltrated into the mine with groundwater, with leaching of waste rock piles as a possible nitrogen source. Thus, although ammonium nitrate-based explosives are the ultimate nitrogen source at the site, this study indicates that the circulation of nitrogen is complicated, involving also other pathways than that of direct dissolution of undetonated explosives in the mine. The relatively high natural nitrate concentration of 1.5–2 mg/l in the local groundwater affects both the concentration as well as the isotopic composition of nitrate in the mine waters. A significant amount of nitrogen from ammonium nitrate-based explosives appears to enter the above ground processing plant system at a high elevation reservoir within the system. Based on δ This project was funded by