Densification and mechanical behavior of graphite-free and graphite-doped ZrB2–TiC composites were investigated. Spark plasma sintering was used to achieve near fully-dense composites. Microstructural and phase analysis were carried out via scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction spectroscopy, to illustrate the sintering and toughening mechanisms in the fabricated samples. Results indicated that 1 wt% graphite nano-flakes can improve the hardness of the composite. However, 3% drop in relative density and ~6% decrease in indentation fracture toughness were observed. The formation of TiB2 and ZrC was verified in both TiC-contained composites, although B4C was recognized as the byproduct of reactive sintering in graphite-doped composite. Moreover, the microstructural analysis and the peak shifts in XRD pattern indicated the formation of a solid solution between the ZrB2 and TiB2 phases. Higher hardness of the graphite-doped sample was also attributed to the formation of B4C as a superhard interfacial phase. Toughening mechanisms as well as possible chemical reactions which result in the in-situ formed reinforcement phases were also discussed.Ultrahigh temperature ceramics (UHTCs), were initially attended by US air force and NASA in early 1960s. However, the development of the materials was discarded for a couple of decades, mainly due to high processing costs [ UHTCs, including borides, nitrides and carbides of transition metals, are currently considered as promising candidates for high-temperature (>1800 °C) structural applications [ Besides using reinforcements, modern sintering processes which have been developed through last two decades seem to be promising techniques to improve the sinterability and mechanical properties of ZrB The 3rd modality to improve sinterability of ZrB The sintering behavior of graphite-doped ZrB However, whereas several published reports illustrates densification behavior, sintering and toughening mechanisms as well as mechanical properties of SiC reinforced zirconium diboride through common processing methods such as PS and HP, there are relatively few reports on using other carbides in such UHTCs and/or modern sintering techniques [ Zirconium diboride, titanium carbide and graphite nano-flakes were used as the raw materials. The characteristics of the as-received materials are presented in The as-received powders were weighed based on the pre-designed compositions of samples ( The hardness of the samples was measured via 5 kg-loaded Vickers diamond pyramid through hardness measurement instrument (KM2/01-92123, Koopa Pazhoohesh, Iran) for 15 s. At least 5 indentations were applied on each sample and the average values were reported as the hardness numbers of the samples. The indentation fracture toughness (IFT) of the samples was calculated through direct length measurement of the corner cracks originated from the indents, using an Optical microscope (Olympus, Japan) and based on the Anstis’ formula as follows [ In which, K In which E Phase analysis as well as microstructural investigations were carried out via X-ray diffraction spectroscope (XRD, Philips PW1730) and a field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, MIRA3, TESCAN, Czech Republic) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer, respectively.   The formation of ZrC phase may be a result of chemical reaction between carbide additives with surface ZrO The reactive sintering behavior of the composite may became different when graphite nano-flakes taken into account. As it can be seen in The XRD patterns of ZT and ZTG samples are presented in As it was mentioned before, the in-situ TiB When the graphite additive is taken into account, as discussed before, several other products may be formed during sintering. The XRD pattern of ZTG sample shows the peaks of graphite and in-situ formed boron carbide (B The relative densities, hardness and indentation fracture toughness of both composite samples are presented in Although graphite nano-flakes seem to promote further in-situ carbide formation, it should be considered that higher amounts of graphite additive may result in lower hardness, as it cause higher fraction of remained graphite in the final microstructure. The constructive effects of graphite nano-flakes on the hardness of SPSed ZrB   The formation of micro-cracks at the interfaces of in-situ formed secondary phases with the matrix which is promoted by crystallographic and/or mechanical mismatch as well as different CTEs can be considered as another effective factor in the toughening behavior of the composite samples. Such micro-cracks can change the direction of an initial crack (crack deflection) or split it to several sub-cracks or in other word, branches. The crack branching mechanism can also be seen in In conclusion, nevertheless remained graphite flakes and porosities in the microstructure of ZTG sample which can damp the progressive cracks, it seems that better densification behavior of ZT sample can lead to better IFT outcomes. Such behavior can be attributed to tougher interfaces in ZT sample due to higher amounts of solved TiB The effect of graphite nano-flakes on densification and mechanical behavior of ZrB The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.