In recent years, the preservation of fruits and vegetables in cold storage has become an issue of increasing concern, ethylene plays a leading role among them. We found ZnO has the effect of degrading gaseous ethylene, however its effect is not particularly satisfactory. Therefore, we used simple photo-deposition procedure and low-temperature calcination method to synthesize Au, Ag, and AuAg alloy supported ZnO to improve the photocatalytic efficiency. Satisfactorily, after ZnO loaded with sole Au or Ag particles, the efficiency of ethylene degradation was 17.5 and 26.8 times than that of pure ZnO, showing a large increase in photocatalytic activity. However, the photocatalytic stability of Ag/ZnO was very poor, because Ag can be easily photooxidized to Ag2O. Surprisingly, when ZnO was successfully loaded with the AuAg alloy, not only the photocatalytic activity was further improved to 94.8 times than that of pure ZnO, but also the photocatalytic stability was very good after 10 times of cycles. Characterization results explained that the Au-Ag alloy NPs modified ZnO showed great visible-light absorption because of the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. Meanwhile, the higher photocurrent density showed the effective carrier separation ability in AuAg/ZnO. Therefore, the cooperative action of plasmonic AuAg bimetallic alloy NPs and efficient carrier separation capability result in the outstanding photoactivity of ethylene oxidation. At the same time, the formation of the alloy produced a new crystal structure different from Au and Ag, which overcomes the problem of poor stability of Ag/ZnO, and finally obtains AuAg/ZnO photocatalyst with high activity and high stability. This work proposes a new concept of using metal alloys to remove ethylene in actual production.In recent years, the noble metals have attracted great attention because of their outstanding physical, chemical and optical performances, which made them suitable as co-catalysts on some photocatalysts [ Bimetallic alloy is composed of two metals by a certain method. Recently, some studies have found that the semiconductors loaded with bimetallic alloy have many superior properties compared to that loaded with sole metal [ Ethylene is produced in natural sources, plants and plant products. It has some harm on the storage life, development and growth of many ornamental crops, fruits and vegetables at extremely low concentration [ The ZnO nanorods were prepared referring to the simple hydrothermal method [ The deposition of single Au NPs on the ZnO nanorods was synthesized via a photo-reduction method. Briefly, 0.15 g ZnO was dispersed in 100 mL H The Au-Ag bimetallic alloy NPs supported on ZnO nanorods were conducted with a co-photodeposition method. That is, a certain volume of HAuCl Morphologies were investigated by SEM (Hitachi S-4800) equipped with an EDS. XRD patterns were conducted on a Bruker AXS D8 diffractometer equipped with Cu Photocatalytic oxidation of ethylene was measured in a quartz-covered reactor with 400 mL volume irradiated by a 300 W Xe lamp. 0.12 g photocatalyst was dispersed uniformly in the bottom of the container with a rotor. The reactor was then sealed by the quartz cover and injected into 0.5 mL ethylene under stirring. Before turning on the lights, the container was stirred in the dark for 2 h to make ethylene and air in the container mix evenly and attain the adsorption and desorption balance. When the balance was achieved, the reactor was illuminated on top of quartz cover and 50 μL of gas mixture was sampled at regular intervals and tested by a gas chromatography. The XRD spectra of obtained products are shown in  To understand the different absorption of Au, Ag and AuAg loaded ZnO, the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of 0.8 wt% Au/ZnO, 0.8 wt% Ag/ZnO and 0.5 wt% Au@0.3 wt% Ag/ZnO samples, together with that of pure ZnO nanorods, are investigated and exhibited in As can be observed in  Besides, the information crisply exhibits that the AuAg/ZnO photocatalyst possesses not only a distribution of the Au-Ag alloy NPs but also the coexistence of unalloyed Au and Ag NPs. Similar phenomenon is also appeared in Au-Cu alloy loaded on TiO To obtain the surface chemical status of AuAg/ZnO before and after irradiation, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was carried out. Ethylene is used as an objective organic pollutant to measure the photocatalytic activity of the as-prepared products at 15 °C. The total experimental results are shown in In order to compare the photocatalytic effects of our synthesized photocatalysts with other photocatalysts, the photocatalytic degradation activity of AuAg/ZnO sample was compared with that of other photocatalysts such as Pt-TiO Besides the photocatalytic behavior, the stability of the photocatalyst is another vital character in practical application. To investigate the stability of 0.8% AuAg/ZnO, ten-test cycles were conducted under the same condition. In detail, In order to verify this conjecture, the stability of single Au/ZnO and Ag/ZnO has also been studied ( To examine the mineralization ratio of ethylene oxidation, the photocatalytic measurement over the AuAg/ZnO product is further conducted in The strong capacity of charge migration can be certified by the enlarged photocurrent [ Based on the above results, a feasible reaction mechanism is proposed in The phenomenon presented here shows that Au and Ag co-loaded ZnO sample in the suitable Au/Ag ratio is an outstanding product for the solar-light oxidation of C 