In situ intermetallic matrix composites were fabricated by an MA–PDS process with a matrix of Fe–28at% Al and volume fractions of particle TiB2 formulated at 0, 5, 15, and 25%. Mechanical alloying was carried out using a vibratory mill. During the mechanical alloying, Al, Ti, and B became fully embedded to the Fe lattice. Mechanically alloyed powders were sintered in a plasma discharge sintering system. As a result, Fe3Al matrix and TiB2 particles were successfully synthesized by this in situ process. The tensile properties of the binary alloy were significantly improved without any loss in tensile elongation. The composite also had improved tensile strength. However, composites that contained a high volume fraction showed poor tensile properties due to the presence of micro pores existed within the microstructure.Iron aluminides are good candidates for use in high temperature structural materials due to their low cost, relatively high melting point, comparatively low density, and excellent resistance to oxidation, sulfidation, and molten salts. However, their poor ductility and fracture toughness at room temperature hinder their use as structural materials. In order to improve room temperature ductility, and refine microstructure, grain refinement or the distribution of particles has been proposed In situ composites are multiphase materials in which the reinforcing phase is synthesized within a matrix during composite fabrication. Some advantages of the in situ process are that small sized reinforcements over a wider range of volume fractions can be achieved together with the production of clean and thermodynamically stable particle–matrix interfaces. TiB Since Benjamin In this research, in situ intermetallic matrix composites reinforced with TiB The composites used in this study were fabricated by an MA–PDS process. Fe–28 Mechanical alloying was performed at room temperature for 100 PDS was used to fabricate the in situ composites. The elastic modulus was measured using an ultrasonic pulse echo method and calculated by the following equation A tensile test was performed in an Instron tensile testing machine at room temperature. Specimens were cut from the sintered disk by electrical discharge machining. Because of limited availability of material, reduced size specimens were used with a gauge length of 10 We used a Field Emission Gun SEM (Philips XL30S), equipped with EDX to observe the size and shape of the mechanically alloyed powders and to analyze the microstructure of the powders and sintered samples. Normal metallographic procedures were also carried out. Several grinding and polishing steps were performed with diamond paste and fracture surfaces were also observed. XRD profiles were taken in a Philips X`Pert system using Cu   XRD profiles of the MA powders are shown in  XRD profiles of the sintered samples are shown in  Tensile properties are shown as a function of TiB The fracture surfaces of the specimens that showed improved tensile properties, MA0 and MA5, were investigated after tensile testing. Spherical particles are more effective for increasing compaction density Peak widening in the XRD profile is caused only by lattice defects The composite consisted of the light gray areas corresponding to an in situ particle rich zone and the dark gray areas to an in situ particle depleted zone. The average size of the particle rich zones was nearly the same as that of the milled powder. Therefore, the particle depleted zones are associated with the surfaces of the powders prior to the sintering. This is assumed to be due to the partial melting of particle surface. The mechanism of the formation of the particle depleted zone will require further investigations. Lloyd Specimen MA0 is a binary alloy without any reinforcement particles. Compared with the typical properties of iron aluminides, where the tensile strengths are in the range 500–900 Even though the powders prepared by mechanical alloying could have very fine microstructure, they were consolidated by sintering which required a high temperature. The short sintering time in the PDS process could hinder grain growth and leave a fine microstructure after sintering. This shows that the MA-PDS process is a very efficient method for improving the mechanical properties of iron aluminides. In the case of MA5, TiB As shown in On the other hand, MA15 and MA25 showed much lower tensile properties. The measured hardness values increased linearly with particle volume fraction, indicating the lower tensile properties are not due to the intrinsic poor properties but are due to extrinsic material defects. Therefore, the poor tensile properties in MA 15 and MA25 were mainly due to the micro pores in the microstructure. From the above experimental results, the following conclusions can be drawn. The shapes and sizes of the mechanically alloyed powders changed from a irregular shape to spherical due to the addition of Ti and B which were in situ reinforcement forming elements. In the MA powders which contained the in situ reinforcement forming elements, the particle sizes increased with increasing the amount of elements. In situ reinforcement, TiB The elastic modulus linearly increased with particle volume fraction. In the case of a binary alloy, the improvement in tensile properties was due to the fine grain size introduced during mechanical alloying. On the other hand, the improvement in the composite was due to the combined effect of grain refinement and particle strengthening. This work was supported by grant No.R12-2002-058-01003-0 from the Center for Advanced Net Shape Manufacturing and Clean Processes of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation. The authors also thank the Tohoku National Industrial Research Institute for providing the post-doctoral fellowship.