The increasing demand for batteries of higher performance characteristics has led to the development of several types of manganese dioxides with optimal battery characteristics. One of these types is produced by a partial leach of a manganese ore, to remove the non-manganese metals to a level acceptable for direct use in batteries. The resulting leach solution must, however, undergo treatment to remove the impurity metals. This paper reports the uptake of copper, nickel, cobalt, lead, iron and manganese from manganese chloride leach solution onto the chelating resin Dowex M-4195 in column experiments. The results demonstrate the ability to remove contaminants to an extent satisfying the quality criteria required for the utilization of the manganese chloride solution for preparing manganese chemicals. Column elution tests demonstrated that a two-stage elution scheme whereby sulfuric acid is first used to elute iron, nickel and cobalt from the resin, then a subsequent ammonium hydroxide elution recovers almost all of the copper is superior to a scheme in which ammonium hydroxide is used before sulfuric acid. However, neither of these elution schemes fully eluted all the metals tested in the study.There is a growing need for an environmentally sustainable method to separate heavy metals, sometimes present in only trace concentrations, from manganese and iron in acidic leach solutions. This growth in demand reflects both an increasing amount of manganese ores undergoing hydrometallurgical treatment, along with growing problems associated with managing the waste materials generated in the more traditional hydrometallurgical processes. Carbon–zinc batteries, the most common primary batteries worldwide, use a manganese dioxide cathode, with a carbon current feeder. Although the traditional Leclanché cell contains natural manganese dioxide, the so-called zinc chloride, heavy-duty carbon–zinc battery achieves a much higher capacity using synthetic manganese dioxide. Alkaline cells also use synthetic manganese dioxide ( Before precipitation or electrolysis, acidic manganese solutions must be purified to remove contaminants that would interfere with the precipitation processes, or the battery performance. The principal contaminants are iron, aluminum, potassium, and heavy metals such as copper, cobalt, nickel and zinc. Similar purification is needed when manganese ores are used as a feedstock for the chemical industry, or to produce electrolytic manganese for use in non-ferrous alloys. Traditionally, purification proceeds by (a) precipitating jarosite or alunite to remove potassium; (b) increasing the pH to precipitate iron and aluminum; or (c) precipitating heavy metals as sulfides ( Certain manganese minerals are often associated with non-manganese values. These include the copper and silver rich wad deposits of South America ( We have screened several commercial resins for their suitability for this separation, in a very acidic manganese chloride solution; the chelating resin Dowex M-4195 appears to be very promising ( Dowex M-4195 was developed in the early 1970s and has found some commercial applications, notably for adsorption of heavy metals. The resin is used at INCO's Port Colborne refinery in Canada ( Batch equilibration tests have shown that even at high total chloride and very low pH, Dowex M-4195 can adsorb many heavy metal ions from single-metal chloride solutions, but has a low affinity for manganese ( To address these issues, the adsorption behavior of Dowex M-4195 was studied using a packed column of resin, and a concentrated, multi-component solution obtained by leaching a manganese ore with hydrochloric acid. These studies confirmed that M-4195 is capable of removing a range of heavy metal impurities from an acidic manganese chloride solution. Elution studies were also done, and confirmed that elution would be the most challenging step in developing a commercial process for separating heavy metals from acidic manganese chloride solutions. Dowex M-4195 resin was purchased from Supelco–Sigma Aldrich Division. The as-received resin was rinsed with water several times to remove any leached materials. It then underwent a wetting procedure ( Feed solution for the loading tests was obtained by leaching manganese ore from the Azul mine in Para State (Brazil) at 90°C for 40 min with a 2.91 mol/L HCl solution, using a pulp density of 250 g of ore/liter of lixiviant ( Elution was done at 25 °C using 1 mol/L sulfuric acid (certified, Fisher Chemicals) and 4 mol/L ammonium hydroxide (certified, Fisher Chemicals). Resin was placed in a Plexiglas column, 750 mm long, 25 mm in diameter, with a bed height of 500 mm. These dimensions comply with the minimum recommended by A peristaltic pump was used to add feed solutions and eluant (ambient temperature) to the top of the column at a rate of 2 mL/min or 1.78 BV (bed volumes) per hour. 46 BV were run for the loading tests. The elution tests were run in two different sequences, each using both eluants. In the first sequence, 10 BV of sulfuric acid were initially passed through the column, followed by 10 BV of the ammonium hydroxide solution. The second sequence reversed the order in which these eluants were applied. To avoid contamination of each solution, 10 BV of distilled water were passed through the column before starting the elution tests, then another 10 BV were passed after using the first eluant. During both loading and elution tests, samples of the column effluent or eluate were taken from the base of the column every hour, for 26 h. Metal concentrations were analyzed using a Perkin Elmer model 3100 atomic absorption spectrophotometer, using flame absorption. All analyses were run at 25 °C in duplicate, except the samples from elution, where the low sample volume dictated a single analysis. The pH of solutions and samples was measured using an Orion pH/ISE meter with an Orion Ross combination pH electrode, calibrated using pH 1.0, 3.0 and 7.0 buffers (certified, Fisher Chemicals).  The curves clearly demonstrate the strong selectivity of the resin for copper over the other metals present in the leach solution; after 46 BV, copper had still not broken through the column. Lead, cobalt and iron broke through at around 9 BV, whereas nickel broke through at around 15 BV. C/C Manganese broke through the column shortly after feed was supplied, due to its low affinity for the resin, and its high concentration in the feed. The concentration of manganese in the effluent reached that in the feed (C/C   The loading behavior tests suggest that it would be possible to use the M-4195 resin to purify a concentrated manganese chloride solution containing moderate levels of iron and trace levels of Co, Pb, Ni and Cu, by stopping the feed before 9 BV. At this point, the effluent solution would satisfy the quality criteria required for the production of manganese carbonate, namely that heavy metals ≤  Sulfuric acid (0.5–1 mol/L), hydrochloric acid (6 mol/L), nitric acid (1 mol/L) and ammonium hydroxide (2–5 mol/L) have been reported to be useful eluants for Dowex M-4195 loaded with transition metals ( Preliminary elution batch tests were run to screen the efficacy of 1 mol/L sulfuric acid, 6 mol/L hydrochloric acid, and 4 mol/L ammonium hydroxide at room temperature. Nitric acid was not tested because of the alert by the resin manufacturer that strong oxidizing agents could damage the resin. One mol/L sulfuric acid was more effective in eluting iron, nickel, cobalt, lead and even manganese than 6 mol/L hydrochloric acid. Four mol/L ammonium hydroxide was very effective for copper elution. Although the combination of 1 mol/L sulfuric acid and 4 mol/L ammonium hydroxide appears promising for eluting all of the metal ions studied here, it is clear that the order in which these eluants are introduced may have a significant effect on the overall recovery of each metal, and the ease of subsequent separation and recovery. Accordingly, this order was investigated.   Overall, the first elution scheme, using sulfuric acid first, followed by ammonium hydroxide, would be preferable to the reverse. This gives better separation of individual ions, generally superior recoveries, and does not cause the flow problems induced when ammonium hydroxide was used as the first eluant. However, the use of two separate eluants would be cumbersome in a practical plant, and the incomplete recoveries from the resin would be problematic. Work now underway in the laboratory of one of the authors is investigating the use of aqueous solutions of chelating agents such as EDTA as eluants for Dowex M-4195. Results to date, which will be reported separately, are more promising than more conventional approaches to elution. Since it would be possible to recover individual metals from the eluate by electrolysis, this approach may permit commercial adoption of Dowex M-4195 for treatment of manganese leach solutions. Heavy metals, such as copper, nickel, cobalt and lead, can be effectively and selectively removed from a highly acidic manganese chloride solution using the chelating resin Dowex M-4195. Column experiments with a acidic leach solution containing 85 mg/L Cu, 100 mg/L Ni, 47.5 mg/L Co, 40 mg/L Pb, 6.0 g/L Fe, and 47.5 g/L Mn indicated that at approximately 9 BV, the heavy metals are removed to an extent that satisfies the quality criteria required for the production of manganese carbonate. The results confirm the high affinity of the resin for copper, which did not break through the column in tests lasting up to 46 BV. Even after saturation of the resin, copper continued to be adsorbed by the displacement of other sorbed metals. Based on the breakthrough curves, the overall affinity followed the sequence: Cu