This study concerns the utilization of waste steel-making slag, a by-product that contains mainly CaO, Fe2O3 and SiO2. The as-received slag was ground and thermally activated by temperature treatment from 110 to 1000°C for 24h. Although the as-received slag was amorphous, it became partially crystallized during grinding. These crystalline phases were larnite and iron oxide but other crystalline phases also appeared in addition to larnite after calcination. The uptake of Ni2+, PO4
                     3− and NH4
                     + by the samples was investigated from solutions with initial concentrations of 10mmol/l. The sample calcined at 800°C showed the highest Ni2+ uptake (4.85mmol/g) whereas the highest simultaneous uptake of PO4
                     3− (2.75mmol/g) and NH4
                     + (0.25mmol/g) was achieved by calcining the material at 700°C. The principal mechanism of Ni2+ uptake is thought to involve replacement of Ca2+ by Ni2+. The mechanism of PO4
                     3− uptake is mainly by formation of calcium phosphate while that of NH4
                     + involves sorption by the porous silica surface of the samples.Water pollution from municipal, industrial and agricultural sources is becoming a severe problem. Municipal water pollution is caused by wastewater from homes and commercial establishments, which contains relatively high concentrations of phosphorus, an element implicated in eutrophication. The characteristics of industrial wastewaters differ considerably both within and among industries. Wastewater discharged by enterprises that process ores and concentrates of non-ferrous metals is usually polluted with heavy metal ions, such as cadmium (Cd Many million tones of slag are generated as a by-product of steel making during the separation of the molten steel from impurities. Normally there is more residual iron in slag, which accounts for its darker color. This slag can be recycled into a range of useful products for building roads and pavements. Both commercial and synthetic slags have been utilized in various ways including the use of commercial blast-furnace slags and synthetic-slags for the preparation of calcium silicate hydrate and hydrotalcite by alkaline activation In the present study, steel-making slag was activated by grinding and calcining at various temperatures. The uptake properties of Ni The slag sample was obtained from the Oita factory of the Nippon Steel Co., Oita, Japan. Since the as-received slag was in the form of cm-sized chunks, it was first gently crushed in an iron mortar then reduced in an alumina mortar and pestle to 10–20 All the calcined samples and an uncalcined sample were subjected to Ni The average chemical composition of the slag is listed in Ni Ni The effect of pH on Ni NH During the NH Although the maximum uptake of PO The uptake of Ni VKJ thanks the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan for the award of a graduate fellowship (Monbukagakusho Scholarship) under which the present study was carried out. A part of this study was supported by The Steel Industrial Foundation for the Advancement of Environmental Protection Technology. We thank the Oita Factory, Nippon Steel Co., Oita, Japan for providing the slag. We are also thankful to Professor Dr. K.J.D. MacKenzie of Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand for critical reading and editing of the manuscript.