Synthetic osteoinductive materials that mimic the human osteogenic niche have emerged as ideal candidates to address this area of unmet clinical need. In this study, we evaluated the osteoinductive potential in a rabbit orthotopic model of a magnesium-doped hydroxyapatite/type I collagen ​(MHA/Coll) composite. The composite was fabricated to exhibit a highly fibrous structure of carbonated MHA with 70% (±2.1) porosity and a Ca/P ratio of 1.5 (±0.03) as well as a diverse range of elasticity separated to two distinct stiffness peaks of low (2.35 ​± ​1.16 ​MPa) and higher (9.52 ​± ​2.10 ​MPa) Young's Modulus. Data suggested that these specific compositional and nanomechanical material properties induced the deposition of de novo mineral phase, while modulating the expression of early and late osteogenic marker genes, in a 3D in vitro model using human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs). When tested in the rabbit orthotopic model, MHA/Col1 scaffold induction of new trabecular bone mass was observed by DynaCT scan, only 2 weeks after implantation. Bone histomorphometry at 6 weeks revealed a significant amount of de novo bone matrix formation. qPCR demonstrated MHA/Coll scaffold full cellularization in vivo and the expression of both osteogenesis-associated genes (Spp1, Sparc, Col1a1, Runx2, Dlx5) as well as hematopoietic (Vcam1, Cd38, Sele, Kdr) and bone marrow stromal cell marker genes (Vim, Itgb1, Alcam). Altogether, these data provide ​evidence of the solid osteoinductive potential of MHA/Coll and its suitability for multiple approaches of bone regeneration.A variety of medical conditions (e.g. traumas, diseases, deformities, tumor resection) may require bone augmentation and reconstruction strategies Many research groups have focused on developing controlled delivery systems to decrease BMP-2 doses and limit its side-effects ​or to deliver patient's cells more efficiently, however, engineering an osteogenic growth factor–free and cell-free synthetic scaffold for bone regeneration remains highly desirable Growth factor–free and cell-free composite scaffolds fabricated from hydroxyapatite, tricalcium phosphate ceramics, and polymer binders (e.g. PLA, PLGA) have been proposed with mixed outcomes Among composite materials for bone regeneration, biohybrid composite fabricated through bioinspired mineralization processes revealed to be highly successful in a few pioneer clinical studies in Europe Toward this end, we recently optimized a biohybrid composite scaffold consisting of magnesium-doped hydroxyapatite/type I collagen (MHA/Coll), synthesized through a biologically inspired approach, which recapitulates bone biomineralization The scaffold was synthesized as previously described The morphology of MHA/Coll was assessed by a FEI Quanta 400 scanning electron microscopy (SEM), coupled with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) detector (analyzing program: EDAX Genesis) (n ​= ​3). Scaffolds were sputter coated with 10 ​nm of Pt/Pd, via a Plasma Sciences CrC-150 Sputtering System (Torr International, Inc), and imaged at a voltage of 10 ​kV. Fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed using a Nicolet 4700 Spectrometer (n ​= ​3). KBr pellets of 10 ​mm in diameter were prepared by mixing 2 ​mg of grounded sample with 100 ​mg of KBr. Sixty-four runs were performed per sample. Spectra were analyzed by the software EZ OMNIC (Nicolet) after baseline correction. The amount of mineral phase nucleated on the organic template (type I collagen) was quantified by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA). The samples (n ​= ​3) were placed in alumina pans and subjected to a heating ramp from 25 ​°C to 800 ​°C, at 10 ​°C/min. A Q-600 TGA was used (TA Instruments). The volumes of the scaffolds (cylinders of 6 ​mm ​cm x 6 ​cm) (V The elastic properties of MHA/Coll were evaluated with atomic force microscopy (AFM) by extracting the Young's modulus from AFM-acquired force curves; a BioScope Catalyst AFM (Bruker Instruments) was used, in tandem with MLCT-E silicon nitride cantilevers, with spring constant and deflection sensitivity experimentally determined before each measurement. For each scaffold (n ​= ​3), 18 different 4-μm In Eq. The hBM-MSCs used in the present study were isolated from the bone marrow of two women (aged 28 and 35, respectively), at the Texas A&M Institute for Regenerative Medicine (Temple, TX, USA). 10 The medium utilized was composed of α-minimum essential media (MEM), 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2% glutamine, 1% β-fibroblast growth factors (FGF), and 1% streptomycin/amphotericin B (Gibco). Cells were serially passaged using TrypLE Express (Invitrogen) when at 80% confluency. At passage 4, 3·10 At 3 weeks, the 3D cultures (n ​= ​3) were imaged by a A1 confocal laser microscope (Nikon) and SEM. Cell distribution was assessed by confocal laser microscopy; the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (R&D Systems) and then stained with DRAQ5™ (Thermo Fisher), as per manufacturer's protocol. The scaffolds were visualized in the 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) field (350 ​nm), where they are intrinsically autofluorescent. Images were analyzed with the software NIS Elements (Nikon). The morphology of the cells was evaluated by SEM. For SEM imaging; cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde (Electron Microscopy Science) ​and then dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol, up to 100%, then vacuum dried Data were normalized to the amount of Ca, Mg, and P found in both cell-free Coll and MHA/Coll scaffolds (n ​= ​3). The gene expression of selected osteogenic marker genes and of the magnesium transporter 1 (MAGT1) and transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member (7TRPM7) (listed in The MHA/Coll specimens harvested from the rabbits at 6 weeks were designated to quantitative - polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR) analysis (n ​= ​8) ​and compared with specimens of native rabbit transverse process bone, used as control. Both scaffolds and tissue specimens were embedded in 1 ​mL of Trizol reagent (Life Technologies), homogenized and the RNA extracted with a RNeasy column (Qiagen), as per the manufacturer's protocol. RNA concentration and purity were measured using a NanoDrop ND1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies). The cDNA was synthesized from 1000 ​ng of total of RNA, using the iScript retrotranscription kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Transcribed products were analyzed using Taqman fast advanced master mix (ThermoFisher Scientific) and the appropriate target probes (Supplementary To assess MHA/Coll integration and follow bone regeneration, MHA/Coll was implanted unilaterally in rabbit, and bone formation was evaluated at 6 weeks, as previously described Under the effect of sedation, lumbosacral computed tomography (DynaCT) scans were acquired for all animals (n ​= ​12) at 24 ​h, 2, 4, and 6 weeks after implantation, with an Axiom Artis C-arm (d)FC (Siemens Healthcare). Scanning was performed with a 48 ​cm ​× ​36 ​cm flat-panel integrated detector. Acquisition parameters for DynaCT were as follows: 70 ​kV tube voltage, automatic tube current of 107 ​mA, 20 ​s scan. Each scan entailed 222° of rotation, with 1 image taken every 0.5° for a total of 444 images (each digital acquisition had a matrix of 514 ​× ​514 pixels) per acquisition. Three-dimensional rendering was obtained through the Inveon Research Workplace 4.2 Software (Siemen Medical Solution Inc.). All DynaCT imaging files were processed and analyzed using Siemens’ Inveon Research Workplace. Two regions of interest (ROIs) of identical dimensions were created. One on each surgical side, these ROIs defined the area of analysis to each side of our sample. Utilizing the Hounsfield unit values for tissue densities The implant was isolated from the proximal and distal ends of the spine using two axial cuts. The sample was then cut sagittally using the spinal canal as our center point. Afterward, each half was dehydrated and infiltrated and embedded with acrylic resin. Sections were created using the cut and grind technique with the EXAKT Cutting and Grinding System (5–10 μm sections at 500 μm between each level). Sections were stained with Von Kossa/MacNeal's Tetrachrome, Goldner's Trichrome, and hematoxylin and eosin staining (n ​= ​4). All experiments were performed at least in triplicates (for the exact number of replicates, see specific paragraphs). The statistical analysis was performed through the software Prism GraphPad. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a post-hoc unpaired The structure of MHA/Coll was evaluated by SEM ( Elemental analysis of MHA/Coll was performed using EDS, where a Ca/P ratio of 1.5 (±0.03) was observed ( TGA was performed to assess the extent of mineral phase nucleated on type I collagen. An approximate 40% loss of MHA/Coll initial weight was found, indicating an approximate 60% of actual mineral phase content within the composite ( After 3 weeks of culture, hBM-MSCs-MHA/Coll constructs were imaged by confocal laser microscopy to assess their overall morphology and cell distribution. Cells cultured on Coll in regular media, used as controls, resulted organized along the walls of the scaffold pores, and the scaffold itself was found highly porous ( Cells cultured on Coll in osteogenic media were found organized in bigger clusters, within and along the pore walls ( We identified a comprehensive panel of osteogenic marker genes and monitored their dynamic expression at early and late differentiation stages (1 week and 3 weeks, respectively) for hBM-MSCs cultured on MHA/Coll and Coll scaffolds (used as controls). For cells cultured on MHA/Coll, we observed a notable induction of osteoprogenitor marker genes and early osteoblast (OB) marker genes at 1 week ​and a less pronounced increase in their expression at 3 weeks; whereas late OB marker genes and osteocyte marker genes resulted expressed at a higher level at 3 weeks ( Considering the presence of calcium and magnesium in the formulation of our MHA/Coll, we investigated the Operatively, MHA/Coll was found easy to handle. When explanted, the implants were found significantly hardened and bone-like in appearance. Boney transformation of scaffolds was monitored by DynaCT ( At 6 weeks, histology confirmed the formation of an extended mass of bone-like tissue within the implants. A significant amount of mineral phase was found in MHA/Coll samples evaluated through Von Kossa stain, on non-decalcified tissue slices. The staining resulted of similar intensity to TB, used as control ( We assessed the stage of remodeling of the newly formed bone-like mass through q-PCR. Regarding the expression levels of the selected osteogenesis-associated marker genes, DLX5 (BMP-responsive transcriptional activator) was the only gene that was not overexpressed in the newly formed bone-like mass within the scaffold, compared with TP bone (not statistically significant), whereas the expression level of the remaining early and late osteogenesis-associated marker genes was significantly higher compared with the control (TP bone) (RUNX2 2.21 ​± ​0.24 (p ​< ​0.05), COL1A1 2.28 ​± ​0.16 (p ​< ​0.05), SPARC 3.19 ​± ​0.07 (p ​< ​0.01), and SPP1 3.67 ​± ​0.09 (p ​< ​0.001)) ( The selected bone marrow stromal cell–associated marker genes were expressed in the newly formed bone-like mass generated by MHA/Coll, but their level of expression was lower compared towith the control. Only VCAM1, which is usually downregulated during hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization, was found overexpressed 1.95 ​± ​0.25-fold compared with TP bone, suggesting newly developed hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) had low migration activity at 6 weeks. CD38, SELE, and KDR, which are key HSCs surface markers, were found expressed in the newly formed bone mass within the scaffold, at levels slightly lower than that of TP bone (0.54 ​± ​0.15, 0.51 ​± ​0.04 *p ​< ​0.05 and 0.61 ​± ​0.02 **p ​< ​0.01, respectively) ( Regenerative bone tissue engineering encompasses a wide range of different strategies, materials, and biologics aimed at regenerating bone Regenerating bone is characterized by the presence of woven, or immature bone, with Young's moduli that range from 30 to 1000 ​MPa depending on the distance from the fracture point, with an average of around 13 MPa We had previously found that hBM-MSCs upregulated OB-associated marker genes when cultured on MHA/Coll, Other biomaterials containing magnesium have been proposed for bone regeneration, as they allow for enhanced osteogenesis and increased bone density With the highest level of expression of MAGT1 being at the earlier time point Finally, particularly remarkable of this study was not only the efficient recruitment of progenitor and bone cells To our knowledge, this study reports for the first time the formation of an extensive mass of TB–like and cortical bone–like tissue within only 6 weeks after implantation, through a biologics-free scaffold, able to support the formation of both an osteogenic and hematopoietic niche. In this study, we reported the enhanced osteoconductive potential of MHA/Coll, a highly biomimetic hybrid composite, based on magnesium-substituted hydroxyapatite and type I collagen, synthesized through a bioinspired mineralization process of type I collagen. We first demonstrated its ability to induce, orchestrate, and harmonize the osteogenic differentiation of hBM-MSCs S.M., F.T., A.T., B.W., and E.T. conceived the initial idea and designed the study. S.M. fabricated and characterized the scaffolds and performed all The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Monica Sandri and Dr. Joseph Fernandez-Moure for their suggestions and troubleshooting. The authors thank Ms. Nupur Basu for her help with the culture of stem cells. The authors acknowledge the HMRI SEM core and HMRI ACTM core. Authors thank the Pre-clinical Catheterization laboratory of HMRI for DynaCT analysis and the Ratliff Histology Consultants, LLC, for processing of the histological specimens. This study was supported by the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at