This paper attempts to provide an insight in the application of calcium phosphate cements (CPC) in the field of drug delivery devices for the musculoskeletal system. Their ability to set once implanted within the body, giving a highly microporous material, allows incorporation of many types of drugs and biologically active molecules, without losing activity and denaturalization. Additionally, by being injectable these materials can be used in the growing market for new technologies of minimally invasive surgery, and in the treatment of difficult accessible sites. All these characteristics, together with the excellent biological behaviour of CPC, make them good candidates for drug delivery devices to be used in the pharmacological treatment of a great number of diseases of the bone tissue.The incidence of musculoskeletal disorders, such as osteoporosis and osteoarthritis has increased strongly in the last decades, due to the increasing life expectancy. In parallel, also the number of medications to treat and even prevent these diseases has expanded dramatically in recent years A range of materials has been employed as drug carriers, most of them being stable or biodegradable polymers. However, in the field of the pharmacological treatment of skeletal disorders, the specific characteristics of bone tissue should be considered. Thus, an ideal drug carrier for bone should be bioactive, which would ensure the ability of the materials to bond to bone tissue, and resorbable to allow its progressive substitution by newly formed bone. Additional advantages are provided if the material is injectable, since it would improve ease of administration, by allowing minimally invasive surgical techniques. All these properties are very well fitted by calcium phosphate cements (CPC), and therefore they should be competitive candidates to be used for this application. The development of CPC was an important breakthrough in the field of bioceramics for bone regeneration, since it supplied a material which was mouldable and which had the capacity of self-setting in vivo, within the bone cavity Unlike calcium phosphate ceramics employed as drug-delivery systems, where the drugs are usually absorbed on the surface, in CPCs the drugs can be incorporated throughout the whole material volume, by adding them into one of the two cement phases. This fact can facilitate the release of drugs for more prolonged times. Several studies related to the application of both commercial and experimental CPCs as drug carriers have been published. Some of the most relevant are summarized in Major attention has been paid to antibiotics, due to their wide areas of application: either as prophylactics to prevent infections produced during surgical interventions, or in general in the treatment of bone infections. In fact, one of the key factors for the success of surgical interventions aimed at the implantation of a prosthesis or of an osteoconductive material is the prevention from bacterial infections. Wound contamination, or postoperative infections following fracture repair, implantation of joint prosthesis or spine surgery, can cause serious problems. For this reason antibiotics are often provided as prophylactics, either orally or intravenously. However, the little accessibility of the site of infection to antibiotics delivered systemically lengthens often the treatment of bone infections over 1 year. Traditionally, a method applied to control locally the bone tissue infections has been the implantation of polymethylmethacrylate spheres (PMMA) loaded with gentamicin sulphate in the infection site. However, PMMA spheres are nonresorbable and must be removed after some months and replaced with other materials able to facilitate bone regeneration. Antibiotics can be likewise incorporated in hydroxyapatite or CPC have been considered as appropriate matrixes for the incorporation of other drugs with potential application in the musculoskeletal system, such indomethacine, an anti-inflammatory, nonsteroidal drug with wide application in different pathologies, such as chronical joint rheumatism A large number of osteogenic factors, peptides and small molecules have been associated with accelerated bone healing in animal models and human clinical trials. Growth factors are a large group of polypeptides, able to transmit signals which affect cellular activity In general, the studies on CPC as drug delivery systems tackle very different aspects, all of them relevant for this issue. In the first place, it is necessary to verify to which extent the addition of the drug (either to the liquid or the solid phases of the cement), interferes with the setting reaction, modifying either the rheological behaviour or the physico-chemical properties of the cement. Secondly, it is necessary to characterize the kinetics of drug release in vitro. Subsequently, the effectiveness of the cement to act as carrier for drug delivery in vivo must be assessed and carefully characterized. And as the final step, still to arrive, the clinical performance of the drug delivery system must be evaluated. The setting reaction of CPCs can be affected or modified by introducing a drug either to the powder phase or to the liquid phase, and as a consequence the physico-chemical and mechanical properties can change In other cases the change in the setting properties are caused by some chemical interaction with the dug, which can modify the kinetics of the dissolution-precipitation reaction and the morphology of the precipitated crystals. Thus, Ratier et al. It is well known that the release of drugs from any drug delivery device depends on different factors such as the microstructure, the type of bond between the drug and the matrix which holds it, and the mechanism of degradation (if any) of the matrix. The drug delivery devices are usually classified in three types depending on the mechanism which controls drug liberation Generally speaking, CPC could be ascribed to the first type of devices, where drug release is diffusion-controlled. Although some CPC are resorbable, in most of the CPC studied as drug-carriers the rate of matrix degradation (e.g. the cement itself) is much lower than the rate of drug liberation. For that reason it is possible to assume that the drug release is mainly controlled by the process of diffusion though the cement matrix and not by the degradation of the same. During cement setting, dissolution of calcium phosphates from the powder phase takes place, which is followed by precipitation of the new phase, which is in most cases precipitated hydroxyapatite. Despite the fact that the drug can be partly dissolved in this precipitated phase, as a rule it can be considered that the concentration of the drug is higher than its solubility in the matrix, and therefore the most part of the drug will be dispersed in the matrix. In this particular case, the drug-release kinetics follows Higuchi's law In addition, we have to consider that the matrix containing the dispersed drug, i.e. the CPC, is very porous. Indeed, it is formed by a mesh of interlocking of crystals which creates an open microporosity. This porous structure can vary depending on the starting materials and conditions, but normally it is higher than 30%. Pore sizes can differ as well, but generally they are in the nano-micro range, usually lower than 10 According to Eq. In this sense it must be pointed out that any modification of the geometric pore structure of the cement matrix during the drug release period will affect the delivery pattern. This change in pore structure can be produced either by a resorption of the CPC, or by the formation of an apatitic layer on the cement surface or even within the pores, due to its bioactive character, as reported in several studies by Otsuka et al. Any resorption of the CPC will modify the pore structure and affect the drug release pattern. Indeed, up to now it has been considered that CPC do not degrade while drug is released, or, in other words, that the porosity of the matrix is maintained constant during drug delivery. However, some authors have shown certain degree of degradation of CPC during drug liberation. For example, Otsuka Another factor that affects the release kinetics is the drug that is incorporated in the CPC. It is difficult to compare the drug release kinetics reported by different studies, due to the great differences in the experimental conditions. In most cases not only the drugs and the concentrations studied are different, but also the CPCs used as carriers, the geometry, the conditions of measurement of drug release, etc. However, it seems clear that the release kinetics depends strongly on the type of drug incorporated in the cement, as it conditions the interaction drug/matrix. In general, the release of antibiotics from the cements appears to be fast. Thus, Takechi reported a total amount of liberated antibiotic (flomoxef sodium) in a TTCP/DCP cement between 55% and 60% after 72 Moreover, this can vary also depending on the type of antibiotic. In a comparative study the release kinetics of three antibiotics, i.e. gentamicin, amikacin and ceftiofur incorporated either in a commercial CPC or in PMMA spheres was analysed In the cases where antibiotic release is considered to be excessively fast, a possible strategy is to incorporate some polymers in the CPC, in order to retard drug liberation. In this sense some studies have been carried out aiming at the formation of a gel into the cement pores which served as matrix for the antibiotic, by the addition of some gel-forming substance such as sodium alginate or chitosan The situation is very different in the case of growth factors, where the release kinetics seems to be very slow. This can be related to the high binding affinity of the protein for calcium phosphate ceramics. Recently, Blom et al. analysed the release kinetics of human recombinant TGF- One of the most exciting challenges in controlled drug delivery lies in the field of responsive delivery systems, with which it will be possible for instance to deliver drugs through implantable devices in response to a measured blood level. This is the approach adopted by Otsuka et al. who studied the rate of release of estradiol incorporated in a CPC, both in vitro and in vivo, by subcutaneous implantation in rats The number of in vivo studies is still low, and most of them have been performed in small animals, with the intrinsic limitations for results extrapolation to humans. The efficacy of several CPCs as carriers for antibiotics has been assessed in different animal models. Himanashi et al. A relevant question is whether it is reliable to extrapolate the in vitro drug delivery kinetics results to the in vivo behaviour of the drug carrier, even more in a material, such as CPC, which is far from inert when implanted. Indeed, surface changes in the cement such as the formation of an apatitic layer on the surface of the material caused by its bioactive character, or either by protein adsorption must be expected, that can modify the drug release kinetics. In this sense, different liberation rates were observed in an indomethacine-loaded CPC when the concentrations of released drug in vitro and in vivo, in a rat model, The in vivo results obtained by osteogenic factor-loaded CPC are very encouraging. A complete series of in vivo studies has been published by Seeherman et al., where different injectable osteogenic factor/carrier combinations have been reviewed in different large-animal models CPC have specific properties which make them competitive drug carriers for the musculoskeletal system. Together with their injectability and low-temperature self-setting ability, their bioactivity ensures an optimum interaction with the bone tissue. The drug release kinetics is affected by the variable resorption rate of CPCs, and by the morphological changes caused by its bioactive character. There is still a lot to be done in terms of adjusting it to different therapeutical needs and obtaining predictable drug delivery systems. The incorporation of osteogenic factors increases their potential as bone regeneration materials, provided an appropriate resorption rate of the CPCs is ensured.