Objectives
                  The present study investigated the effects of intrafibrillar-silicified collagen scaffolds (ISCS) on the osteogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells (hDPSCs) in vitro and in vivo.
               
                  Methods
                  The hDPSCs were co-cultured with ISCS or nonsilicified collagen scaffolds (NCS) in control medium (CM) or osteogenic differentiation medium (ODM). Cell cycle and cell apoptosis were analyzed with flow cytometry to measure the viability of hDPSCs. Reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting were used to evaluate the expression levels of osteogenic marker genes and proteins of hDPSCs. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining and alizarin red S assay were used to evaluate the ALP activity of hDPSCs and their calcium deposition potential. In addition, hDPSCs and scaffolds were implanted subcutaneously in nude mice for 8 weeks. Harvested tissues were immunohistochemically stained for osteocalcin (OCN) expression from hDPSCs, and stained with alizarin red S for examination of their calcium deposition in vivo.
               
                  Results
                  The ISCS had no adverse effect on hDPSCs, promoted their proliferation, and significantly up-regulated the expression of osteogenesis-related genes and proteins. The hDPSCs co-cultured with ISCS in ODM exhibited the highest ALP activity and calcium deposition in vitro. The ISCS promoted the OCN expression and calcium deposition of hDPSCs after ectopic transplantation in vivo.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Intrafibrillar-silicified collagen scaffolds significantly promoted the proliferation, osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of hDPSCs, when compared with NCS. This study demonstrates combining the use of hDPSCs and ISCS to promote bone-like tissue formation is a promising approach for clinical bone repair and regeneration.Regeneration of bone loss due to osteoporosis, arthritis, tumours and trauma is a major medical challenge. Seed cells are regarded as the basis of bone tissue engineering, which should possess the properties of self-renewal, high hyperplasia and osteogenic differentiation potential. Scaffolds not only serve as three-dimensional tissue templates, but also provide the microenvironment for attachment, proliferation and differentiation of stem/progenitor cells and release of bioactive molecules. To date, there has been no research on the effects of ISCS on proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of hDPSCs, and the potential combination of ISCS and hDPSCs in bone tissue engineering. In our previous studies, we have shown that ISCS promote osteogenesis of BMSCs. A silicifying medium was prepared from 3% silicic acid stock solution by mixing 40% partially-hydrolyzed tetraethyl orthosilicate (Silbond 40; Silbond, Weston, MI), absolute ethanol, water, and 37% HCl in the molar ratios of 1.875:396.79:12.03:0.0218 for 1 Pulpal tissues were obtained from non-carious third molars extracted from young healthy patients (18–25 years old) according to a protocol approved by the Ethics Committee of the Fourth Military Medical University. The dental pulp was minced and digested in a solution containing 3 To assess colony-forming efficiency, the cultured cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and stained with 0.1% toluidine blue after they were cultured for 10 days. Aggregates formed by more than 50 cells were scored as colonies. To identify hDPSCs, the cultured cells were incubated with fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibodies, including anti-CD29, anti-CD34, anti-CD44, anti-CD45, anti-CD90 and anti-CD105 (all from EMD Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA, USA), For the following studies, the hDPSCs were co-cultured with ISCS or NCS in transwell systems (BD Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) in CM or osteogenic differentiation medium (ODM). The ODM consisted of the aforementioned CM, supplemented with 50 The cytotoxic responses of hDPSCs in the presence of ISCS were evaluated using cell apoptosis and cell cycle analyses. The hDPSCs cultured in CM were exposed to ISCS or NCS in transwell systems for 5 days, while hDPSCs cultured in CM without any scaffolds were used as the negative control group (NCG). Cell apoptosis was analyzed using a FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (BD Biosciences). Briefly, at least 5 The NCS or ISCS were placed in transwell systems and exposed to hDPSCs cultured in ODM for 3 weeks ( After hDPSCs cultured in ODM were exposed to NCS or ISCS and similar cells cultured in CM were exposed to NCS (control) for 3 weeks ( After the hDPSCs cultured in ODM were exposed to NCS or ISCS and the hDPSCs cultured in CM were exposed to NCS for 10 days ( After the hDPSCs cultured in ODM were exposed to NCS or ISCS and the hDPSCs cultured in CM were exposed to NCS for 3 weeks ( Twenty μL of hDPSCs suspension (5 Sections for haematoxylin-eosin staining were stained with haematoxylin for 5 Statistical analysis was performed by using SPSS 18.0 Software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance and Student–Newman–Keuls multiple comparison procedures after validation of the normality and homoscedasticity assumptions of the corresponding data sets. Statistical significance was preset at The results of colony-forming test showed that the clone formation rate of hDPSCs was as high as 25% (supporting information, Fig. S1A and B). The majority of the hDPSCs in the colonies retained their fibroblast spindle shape, which was consistent with other mesenchymal stem cell populations. Results of cell apoptosis assay are shown in  Results of ALP staining are shown in Representative haematoxylin and eosin staining of subcutaneously implanted hDPSC-seeded collagen scaffolds in the control (NCS cultured in CM), NCS cultured in ODM and ISCS cultured in ODM are shown in Representative Alizarin red S-stained, hDPSC-seeded collagen scaffolds in the NCS-CM control, NCS-ODM group and ISCS-ODM group are shown in Representative immunohistochemical staining for OCN in hDPSC-seeded collagen scaffolds derived from the NCS-CM control, NCS-ODM group and ISCS-ODM group are shown in In the present study, human dental pulp stem cells (hDPSCs) and a novel intrafibrillar silicified collagen scaffold (ISCS) were used for bone regeneration. The results revealed that the ISCS significantly promoted osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of hDPSCs compared with nonsilicified collagen scaffolds (NCS). Thus the null hypothesis that similar to NCS, ISCS have no osteoinductive functions on hDPSCs has to be rejected. The high expression levels of specific osteogenic differentiation markers and the formation of osteocyte-like cells and ectopic bone confirm the differentiation of hDPSCs into osteoblasts in the present study. Previous studies on hDPSCs have produced conflicting results. Some studies demonstrated that when co-cultured with osteogenic differentiation medium and implanted in immunocompromised animals, hDPSCs could differentiate into osteoblasts and produce bone or bone-like tissue; such results are consistent with the observations in the present study. Biocompatibility is a major criterion for tissue engineering scaffolds because the scaffold should have no adverse effect on cell viability. Bioactive scaffolds in bone tissue engineering should be able to enhance the osteogenic potential of the seeded stem cells. It is speculated that the osteoinductive effect of ISCS on hDPSCs is due to their release of silicic acid. The stimulating effect of silicic acid on the osteogenesis of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) has been reported by many studies. This study was financially supported by the grant Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: