Diameter and distribution of the bubbles generated by water electrolysis are of vital importance in the electroflotation process of fine particles. It is well known that these parameters influence the efficiency of the flotation process because they affect the collision, adhesion, and transport mechanisms. Moreover, the smaller the bubble diameter, the better the recovery of fines due to the larger surface area of the bubble. Thus, the aim of this work was to evaluate the influence of some of these parameters on the diameter and distribution of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles, produced by electroflotation. A modified Partridge–Smith binary cell with platinum electrodes was used. The system pH, current density, electrolyte concentration, and electrode mesh spacing were evaluated. The results showed that the increase in the pH of the system produced two opposite behaviours in the diameters of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles. The diameter of the hydrogen bubbles decreased, whilst that of the oxygen bubbles increased. The increase in current density and electrolyte concentration caused a decrease in the diameter of the hydrogen and oxygen bubbles. Finally, the increase in the wire diameter and electrode mesh spacing caused an increase in the diameter of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles.Various types of gas bubbles are widely used in processes of separation and treatment of industrial effluents [ Several factors influence the production, distribution, and diameter of the gas bubbles, including the material of the electrode, dimensions and roughness of the electrode, pH of the system, current density, and electrolyte support concentration [ The characteristics of the electrode, such as shape, diameter, and electrode surface, influence the current density and the diameter of the bubble [ In electroflotation, the pH of the system influences the diameter of the bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen. Glembotsky et al. [ Many studies have investigated the influence of current density on the size of the bubbles. Such studies have shown conflicting results; for example, Landolt et al. [ Multiple studies have been carried out aiming to understand the influence of different factors on the bubble size generated by water electrolysis [ Platinum electrodes with 99.95% purity (platinum mesh manufactured to order by Qualyta Laboratory) were used as both cathode and anode. Platinum wires were woven in knitted form and coated on the rubber border ( Bubble generation was performed on two Partridge–Smith modified cells of 380 mL usable volume ( A schematic illustration of the experimental setup used in the measurement of bubble size is shown in In the water electrolysis experiment, the gas rate generated is given by Eq. The number of bubbles produced in the water electrolysis experiment can be calculated by Eq.  The platinum bubble sizer is a portable device used to measure the bubble size and the superficial velocity of the bubble. The bubble sizer is composed of a sampling tube connected to a sealed observation chamber. The bubbles follow an ascending course and pass through the chamber. The viewing chamber is made of plastic PVC with a single reinforced glass window. A lighting array (LED lights within the viewing chamber) is used to ensure image contrast. The chamber is sloped (angle 15°) to spread the bubbles into a single layer to limit overlap and to provide an unambiguous plane of focus. The sample of bubbles is photographed with a digital still camera, and special image analysis software processes the images to derive the bubble size distribution. The pH of the system influences the diameter of the hydrogen and oxygen bubbles in different ways, favouring either the increase or decrease of the bubble diameter. This influence is directly linked to the surface charge of the cathode and anode which varies as a function of the system pH due to the presence of H  At pH values above the PZC (i.e., above pH 2–3) the hydrogen bubbles undergo a charge inversion. Consequently, the surface charge of the hydrogen bubbles at neutral and alkaline pH is negative. This charge inversion causes a change from the attractive electrostatic interaction in acidic media to a repulsive electrostatic interaction in neutral and alkaline media. Thus, a repulsive force appears between the electrode and the bubble, causing a smaller growth of the bubble and favouring detachment of the bubbles with smaller diameters, as observed in The oxygen bubble diameter follows a pattern opposite that of the hydrogen bubble diameter. Oxygen bubbles have a zero charge point (PZC) at pH between 2 and 4 [  The current density is the most important operational parameter during electrolysis processes. This parameter influences the generation, distribution, and size of the bubbles. The increase of current over an electrode surface area increases the current density and, therefore, influences the kinetics of the electrolysis process.   The electrolyte concentration also plays an important role in the interfacial forces exerted on the bubble, which influence the bubble diameters [  The electrode mesh spacing also favoured an increase of the bubble diameters of hydrogen and oxygen. The increase in the electrode mesh spacing causes a weaker repulsive force between the surface charges of the electrode mesh wires. In view of this, the bubbles have a longer growth time resulting in an increase in bubble size. Sun et al. [ The electrolytic production of hydrogen and oxygen gas as a function of current density is shown in  The bubble sizer proved to be a versatile device capable of measuring the diameters of the bubbles produced during the water electrolysis process. This device facilitated the evaluation of the different factors that influence the bubble diameter of hydrogen and oxygen gases. According to the measurements obtained, the following can be concluded: The bubble diameter produced during the electrolysis of water is significantly influenced by pH. The Sauter mean diameter of the hydrogen bubbles decreases as the pH is increased, while that of the oxygen bubbles increases as the pH is increased. The increase in the current density caused decreases of the Sauter mean diameters of the bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen due to the increase in the nucleation rate which, consequently, produced a decrease in the growth of the bubbles. This caused a higher rate of detachment and, thus, a greater number of bubbles are released with a smaller bubble diameter. The increase in the electrolyte concentration caused reductions in the bubble diameters of both hydrogen and oxygen due to the resulting increase of the solution viscosity which, consequently, produced an increase in the surface layer stiffness of the bubbles (and reduction of the thickness of the double electric layer). This prevented the bubble growth, resulting in the reduction of the bubble diameter. The increase in the spacing of the electrode mesh favoured increases in the bubble diameters of hydrogen and oxygen. The increase in electrode mesh spacing resulted in weaker repulsive forces between the surface charge of the electrode mesh wires and the charges of the bubbles. Thus, the bubbles had a longer growth time, resulting in an increase in the bubble diameter. The authors acknowledge PUC-Rio (