The thermodynamics of ammonioalunite precipitation during the leaching of coal fly ash by ammonium hydrogen sulfate solution was studied, and it was found that ammonioalunite was formed above 448 K in the leaching system. Moreover, ammonioalunite was prepared by the hydrothermal synthesis method in an acid system, and its properties were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM). It was noticed that the increasing reaction temperature was beneficial to the formation of ammonioalunite. Ammonioalunite possessed a regular cubic structure and belonged to the hexagonal crystal system with the lattice constants of a = b = 6.995 Å, c = 17.681 Å, and the axis angles of α = β = 90°, γ = 120°. The conversion rate of ammonioalunite decreased with the increase of the ammonium hydrogen sulfate excessive rate, and the morphology of ammonioalunite changed to irregular particles. Ammonioalunite dissolved in alkali and α-Al2O3 was obtained by heating ammonioalunite at 1200 °C.Coal fly ash(CFA) is the main industrial solid waste produced from coal-fired power plants and causes serious effects on the atmosphere, land and water ( The traditional technologies of alumina extraction from HACFA are mainly divided into acid method ( Based on the sintering of HACFA with ammonium sulfate or ammonium hydrogen sulfate, a new technology for extracting alumina from HACFA by direct leaching with ammonium hydrogen sulfate solution has been already developed in our laboratory. In comparison to the sintering of HACFA with ammonium sulfate or ammonium hydrogen sulfate, the direct leaching process is more environmental-friendly. In our previous work( Ammonioalunite was first discovered by S. Altaner in 1988 ( The main substance in the leaching solution is ammonium aluminum sulfate, it is of great significance to inhibit the formation of ammonioalunite in ammonium aluminum sulfate solution for improving the extraction efficiency of alumina. Thermodynamics analysis is a tool to access the feasibility of process and can provide a theoretical basis for the research of ammonioalunite precipitation. In the present work, the thermodynamics of ammonioalunite precipitation in ammonium aluminum sulfate solution was investigated in detail. Moreover, the properties of the as-obtained ammonioalunite were also analyzed. Analytical-graded ammonium aluminum sulfate, ammonium hydrogen sulfate and ammonium sulfate were purchased from the National Pharmaceutical Group, China. Distilled water with conductivity less than 10 Ammonium aluminum sulfate solutions were prepared by dissolving ammonium aluminum sulfate in distilled water. The leaching test was carried out in a homogeneous reactor (JBJX-8/C-276 air bath produced by the Yantai Jian Bang Chemical Machinery Co. Ltd., China). Ammonium aluminum sulfate solution (60 ml) was put into stainless steel autoclave (100 ml) fixed on the rotating rack of the homogeneous reactor under a rotating speed of 60 r/min. After the test, the stainless steel autoclave was removed from the homogeneous reactor and cooled in cold water for ten minutes. The precipitate was collected by vacuum filtration and dried for the subsequent analysis. The conversion rate of ammonioalunite was calculated by Eq. Where, a = Conversion rate of ammonioalunite (%),  m = Mass of NH 0.2891 = Theoretical mass of ammonioalunite generated from one gram of NH The phase compositions of the as-prepared samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD-7000 diffractometer produced by Shimadzu Corporation, 40 kV, Cu-Kα radiation, 2θ = 10–80°, scan speed = 8°/min). The morphology of the samples was observed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; GeminiSEM 300 produced by Zeiss, Germany, 2 kV). The thermal analysis of the samples was executed by TGA-DSC(STA449C produced by Netzsch, Germany). The liquids obtained by leaching HACFA with ammonium hydrogen sulfate solution mainly contained H The thermodynamic data of the substances existing in reactions (3) and (4) at 298 K were obtained from Lange's Handbook of Chemistry. Based on the thermodynamic data at room temperature, the The In order to simplify the calculation of Where Z denotes the number of electrons in ions: In Eq. The values of A and D in the above equations are presented in The obtained values of α, β and γ from Eqs. The Furthermore, through a series of thermodynamic calculations, The relationships between Based on the thermodynamic analysis of reaction (4), a series of condition tests of ammonioalunite formation were carried out. Ammonium aluminum sulfate solutions were prepared with a concentration of 8 wt% (5 g NH Ammonium aluminum sulfate (5 g) was dissolved in different masses of water to prepare ammonium aluminum sulfate solutions of different concentrations (6 wt%, 8 wt%, 10 wt% and 12 wt%) at room temperature, and the resulting solutions were kept at 200 °C for five hours. It is evident from It is noticeable that H According to reaction (4), the mole of H The chemical reaction of alumina extraction by leaching HACFA with ammonium hydrogen sulfate solution can be expressed as: The chemical composition of HACFA is complex, and it contains several substances that can react with ammonium hydrogen sulfate. In order to ensure the extraction of alumina, it is necessary to add excessive ammonium hydrogen sulfate in the leaching process. Based on reaction (10), the amounts of ammonium hydrogen sulfate and ammonium sulfate were obtained by stoichiometric calculations. The effect of the ammonium hydrogen sulfate excessive rate on ammonioalunite formation is illustrated in The phase composition of ammonioalunite was analyzed by XRD (  The thermal decomposition process of ammonioalunite was analyzed by thermogravimetric analysis-differential scanning calorimetry (TGA-DSC) in First, the mass of the sample slightly decreased below 400 °C, and (H Second, HAl Third, Al Fourth, Al The solubility of ammonioalunite was also studied. Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide and ammonia solution were used to dissolve ammonioalunite at 25 °C (room temperature) and 95 °C, and the reaction time was 30 min. The obtained results are presented in The thermodynamics of ammonioalunite precipitation in ammonium aluminum sulfate solution was investigated in the current work. The The properties of ammonioalunite prepared in ammonium aluminum sulfate solution by the hydrothermal synthesis method were also studied. The as-obtained ammonioalunite possessed a cube-like structure and became decomposed with the increasing temperature. α-Al I have The present work was supported by the