Kinetics of the reaction between dead-burned magnesite and hydrochloric acid were investigated with special regard to the rate of chemical dissolution of MgO. The effect of process parameters viz. temperature, activity of H+ ions, and particle size and composition of the solid was investigated. The dissolution of MgO was strongly affected by temperature (from 45 to 75 °C) and particle size (from 63 to 355 μm), while the effect of composition of the solid was weak.
                  The results are presented in terms of the shrinking particle model. The dissolution of MgO is controlled by the chemical reaction of MgO with H+ ions at the liquid–solid interface. The apparent activation energy was 58–64 kJ mol−1. Acid concentration (from 1.0 to 5.3 M) was surprisingly found to have a decelerating effect on the dissolution rate of MgO, resulting in negative values of reaction order for H+ ions (from −0.1 to −0.2). We conclude that the leaching behaviour studied here corresponds to the regime referred to in the literature as the “initial stage of dissolution of MgO”. This regime, during which the dissolution rate increases rapidly despite a decrease in H+ concentration, is characterised by far from mass-transfer control conditions, which was exactly the situation analysed in the present work.A new chemical plant was recently built in Hačava-Hnúšt'a, Slovak Republic for producing high-grade synthetic magnesium oxide with extremely low boron content from Slovak iron-rich crystalline magnesites leaching of the raw-materials using hydrochloric acid; refining of the MgCl pyrohydrolysis of MgCl calcination and sintering of the “chemical” MgO. The raw-materials for this technological process—flue-dusts trapped in the dust-collectors of the rotary and shaft kilns for burning magnesite—represent, in general, mixtures of fine particles of original crude magnesite (mostly MgCO The reactivity of calcined magnesite is much higher, therefore the dissolution of dead-burned magnesite component in hydrochloric acid can, under certain conditions, control the overall output of the leaching reactor. Chemical dissolution of periclase, which is the major component of dead-burned magnesite, has been intensively studied and it was observed by various authors that the overall rate can be controlled by diffusion of liquid reactants/products or by the surface reaction, dependent on the reaction conditions The aim of the present work was to contribute to better understanding of the leaching behaviour of dead-burned magnesite by hydrochloric acid at higher temperatures and acid concentrations—the situation is shown in Chemical dissolution of burned magnesite in hydrochloric acid is a liquid–solid reaction in which no solid product is formed under the conditions considered in the present work. Due to sintering, porosity of dead-burned magnesite is less than 10%, which makes the model of non-porous shrinking particle applicable to the description of the leaching behaviour of the solid. The overall leaching process may be controlled by intrinsic chemical reaction or by external mass transfer diffusion of H surface chemical reactions according to diffusion of liquid products of the In the first approximation, the particles of dead-burned magnesite were considered to be spheres with original radius Apparent stoichiometric coefficient The bulk rotary-kiln dead-burned magnesite products from two plants, Košice and Jelšava, Slovakia were used in the present study. Sized fractions were obtained by dry-screening. The physico-chemical characteristics of the samples used for the leaching experiments are given in Leaching behaviour of the samples of dead-burned magnesite was tested in a 1.1 L isothermal well-mixed glass batch reactor with a six-blade turbine impeller, four baffles installed, and a thermometer (for more details, see When the HCl solution in the reactor had reached the required temperature, a small amount (0.75 to 1.5 g) of dead-burned magnesite was added. Samples (15 to 30 mL) of the reaction mixture were withdrawn from the reactor at appropriate time intervals, filtered and the solutions were analysed. The calcium, magnesium and iron contents of the liquors were determined by atomic absorption, EDTA method and spectrometric method using sulfosalicylic acid, respectively. The leaching experiments were carried out under reaction conditions which were: temperature from 45 to 75 °C and concentration of HCl from 1.0 to 5.3 M. The rate of dissolution of the magnesium is very sensitive to leaching temperature. A typical situation is shown in The experiments showed that the rate of transfer of magnesium to the solution decreased with increase in HCl concentration—an example is shown in From In selected experiments, 2–3 consequent runs were carried out under identical reaction conditions, using the product solution from each run as a lixiviant in the following one. It was observed that the rate of dissolution of the magnesium was not affected by the products of It was observed that the fraction of calcium dissolved reached 60–100% before the first sample of the reaction mixture was withdrawn from the reactor. While the dissolution behaviour of iron was very similar to that of magnesium for the samples MSK, a different situation occurred in the case of the samples MSJ—an initial period characterized by very high dissolution rates was observed, followed by a period of lower (and continuously decreasing) rate of iron dissolution Leaching behaviour of dead-burned magnesite was tested under reaction conditions which were characterised by a relatively high excess of the acid, to eliminate possible effects of the changes in lixiviant composition during individual runs on the rate of leaching. In this study, HCl/MgO molar ratio ≥32 was used and the concentration of hydrochloric acid in the bulk aqueous phase was kept constant within 0.1–6% rel. during each run. The value of heat-transfer coefficient for the transfer of heat through the liquid film at the surface of solid particles being ≈2.10 Applicability of the non-porous shrinking particle model (NSPM) to the reaction system studied was checked using graphical analysis. The scatter diagrams shown in  When the values of The decrease in the rate of transfer of the magnesium to the solution observed when increasing HCl concentration (see Since the reaction-rate constant The values of model parameters were obtained by a multiple regression using The apparent activation energy was found to be practically independent of the composition of the solid—the values 63±3 and 61±5 kJ mol Assuming the reaction-rate expression in the form of This result is in conflict with the theories and, indeed, most evidence in the literature (e.g. The dependence of initial dissolution rates on pH is either zero or very slight (kinetic order on H Likewise, the anion concentration is not important. The dissolution rate is sensitive to the concentration of dissolved cation; values of Mg The early dissolution rates are not particularly sensitive to the nature of the anion or to the particular cation. The values of the reaction order Kinetics of the reaction between dead-burned magnesite and hydrochloric acid (according to It was found that the dissolution rate of MgO decreases with increase in HCl concentration, with no regard to the solid composition under the conditions of the experiments in the present work. This behaviour seems to be in good agreement with the regime referred to in the literature as the initial stage of dissolution of MgO, during which the dissolution rate increases rapidly despite a decrease in H activity of H initial activity of H activity of H concentration of H initial concentration of H concentration of H diffusivity of HCl (m apparent activation energy (J mol pseudo-first-order reaction-rate constant defined by rate parameter in frequency factor in external mass transfer coefficient (m s parameter defined by radius of the solid particle (m) mean mole mass of solid (kg mol reaction order for H number of leaching runs rate of coefficient of correlation original radius of the solid particle (m) gas constant=8.314 J mol Reynolds number Schmidt number Sherwood number time of leaching (s) time necessary to attain a complete dissolution of the solid (s) temperature (K) fraction of solid dissolved temperature (°C) bulk density of the solid (kg m dimensionless time of leaching This work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (Grant 2/7040/2000) and INTOCAST MAGNEZIT Hačava.