Introduction
                  Reconstruction of complex injuries involving bone and soft-tissue in foot remains a tough challenge for surgeons. The free fibular flap is a popular flap for treating these composite defects. However, complications caused by microvascular anastomoses are not uncommon. Herein, we designed a pedicled fibular flap elevated in the ipsilateral leg for reconstruction of multiple defects in foot.
               
                  Methods
                  From July 2005 to April 2013, four patients with composite defects in foot were treated by pedicled fibular flaps. The defects were located in the first metatarsal bone and medial cuneiform bone in two patients, in the fourth metatarsal bone in one patient, and in the second to fourth metatarsal bones in one patient. The size of soft-tissue defects ranged from 10×7cm to 15×7cm, and the length of bone defects ranged from 6 to 8cm.
               
                  Results
                  The length of fibular grafts ranged from 7 to 8.5cm, and the size of skin flaps ranged from 11×8cm to 16×8cm. All flaps survived completely. Complications occurred in two patients. One suffered moderate venous congestion and the flap survived without intervention. The other one sustained re-infection. Debridement was performed and the wound healed uneventfully. Follow-up ranged from 8 to 32 months. Bone union occurred at an average of 12 weeks, and the skin flaps showed good cosmetic results. No serous donor-site complications occurred.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The pedicled fibular flap transfer could avoid anastomosis complications and preserve healthy limb. It is a good option for reconstruction of complex defects in foot.High-energy foot trauma frequently causes open fractures or comminution of the metatarsal bones and compromise of dorsal soft tissue. The inherent paucity of local skin and muscle renders the violated foot easily susceptible to infection, resulting in complex tissue defects. Although amputation is a viable selection, a reconstructive procedure that provides a functional foot would be recommended The free fibular osteocutaneous flap is a revolutionized method for repairing complex defects in extremity and head and neck, due to its distinct advantages of appropriate length of vascularized bone graft, reliable skin paddle and acceptable donor-site morbidity Considering both the outcome and the safety of operations for patients, a procedure with lesser risk and more manageable is generally preferred by surgeons From July 2005 to April 2013, four patients with composite soft-tissue and bone defects in foot were treated by pedicled fibular flap transfers. All patients were male with an average age of 37 years (range from 29 to 43 years). The causes of injury include two motor vehicle accidents, and two crush injuries. The composite defects were located in the first metatarsal bone and medial cuneiform bone in two patients, in the fourth metatarsal bone in one patient, and in the second to fourth metatarsal bones in one patient. The size of soft-tissue defects ranged from 10 Before definitive reconstruction, radical debridement was performed to remove all grossly contaminated or nonviable, necrotic tissue, followed by wound conditioning of negative-pressure wound therapy. When a clean and stable wound was obtained ( The procedure was performed with the patient supine and with the ipsilateral leg flexed approximately 45 degrees at the knee. A pedicled fibular flap matching the composite defects was outlined in the ipsilateral lower leg. The pivot point of the flap was usually set at 6 Raising the pedicled fibular flap was similar to that of free flap. Briefly, the anterior border of the outlined skin paddle was incised, and carried down to the deep fascia. The flap was then raised in the subfascial plane to the posterior septum. Carefully identify the septocutaneous perforators supplying the skin paddle. Incising along the posterior border of the skin island, and tracing the perforator used for nourish the skin paddle back to its origin. Then the peroneus longus muscle was sharply dissected off the fibula, and ostotomies were performed with wire saws distally and proximally. The bone graft was retracted and rotated to facilitate dissection. All muscles were detached from the bone, and pedicle of peroneal artery was delicately dissected towards the pivot point ( Immobilization and bed rest were usually maintained for 5 days, and the foot was elevated above the level of the heart to improve drainage. Special medications included antibiotics, analgesics, and anticoagulant medication such as low-molecular-weight heparin. Flap monitoring was conducted to exclude tension and perfusion failure secondary to haematoma, swelling or external compression. All four flaps survived completely, though two of them sustained complications postoperatively. One patient suffered moderate venous congestion and the flap survived without intervention. Re-infection occurred in the other patient. A secondary surgery of debridement was performed and the wound healed uneventfully (See Section case report). The length of fibular grafts ranged from 7 to 8.5 A 34-year-old male was referred to us with open comminuted foot fractures due to a crush injury one month after initial injury. After debridement, composite defects occurred including the first metatarsal bone, medial cuneiform bone, and their soft-tissue coverage ( A 43-year-old male sustained a crush injury to the dorsum of his right foot, resulting in open fractures of the first to third metatarsal bones and vascular compromise to the third to fifth toes. Initially, the patient was treated at another institution with provisional stabilization and active dress changing. After 1 week, the wound was aggravated by infection and necrosis of regional soft-tissue ( Serial debridement was performed to remove the necrotic tissue and control local infection. On completion of debridement, third to fifth toes were amputated, and composite defects occurred involving soft-tissue defect on the dorsal foot measuring 10 The foot consisting of 28 bones plays an important role in standing and gait The advance of free osteocutaneous flap transfer has dramatically altered the management of composite defects involving bone and soft-tissue in foot. The vascularized bone graft could fill the bone defect, and the skin paddle could provide definitive soft-tissue coverage simultaneously. Yazar There is no doubt that the free osteocutaneous flaps, especially the fibular flap, represent excellent options for one-stage reconstruction of complex defects in extremities Compared with free fibular flap transfer, the pedicled transfer has distinct advantages for reconstruction of composite foot defects. First of all, microvascular anastomoses is avoided, which could prevent re-exploration or total flap loss caused by circulatory compromise. In our cases, all flaps completely, and bone union occurred with long-term follow-up. Even re-infection occurred in case 3, the circulation of the flap was not compromised. Second, because no vessels are needed for anastomoses, the anterior or posterior tibial vessels in the injured foot are preserved, which could further reduce the foot morbidity. Third, as a pedicled flap, postoperative care and flap monitoring are less strict than those of free flaps. We usually monitor the flap every 4–6 The main disadvantage of pedicled fibular flap is venous congestion, the common problem of a reflow–flow flap. Every effort should be made to prevent flap congestion into flap necrosis. The most important measure is to inset the pedicle of the composite flap and that of the componential flap without tension. Any torsion, kinking or compression of the pedicles may aggravate congestion postoperatively. A relative disadvantage is the requirement for detailed flap planning and experience of pedicle dissection. The main contraindication of this pedicle flap is accompanying injuries to the ipsilateral lower leg, such as fibular fracture. In addition, if the peroneal artery is the only artery supplying the foot, a free fibular flap is preferred. The pedicled fibular flap transfer does not need microvascular anastomoses, and can largely reduce complications caused by circulatory compromise. It is an excellent choice for one-stage reconstruction of composite bone and soft tissue defects in foot. Preparation of the manuscript, participator of the surgery and patients’ follow-up: Chun-Yang Wang; Participator of the operations: Pei Han and Sheng-Di Lu; Designer of the chimeric flap involved in the manuscript and the main operator of the surgery: Yi-Min Chai; Participator of patients’ follow-up: Wan-Run Zhong. We declaimed that there are no disclosures or conflicts of interest for any authors. This work was supported by grants from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: