Several samples of magnesium fluoro-germanate doped with 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Mn
                              
                              
                                 4
                                 +
                              
                           
                        
                      were prepared by solid state synthesis with a different water vapor content in the synthesis atmosphere. A significant decrease in quantum yield and emission intensity was observed with the increase in water vapor content during synthesis. Although there was little effect on the emission spectra, the changes in excitation spectra indicate the dominance of magnesium germanate instead of magnesium fluoro-germanate at high water vapor content. X-ray diffraction (XRD) results show that the pure phase was only achieved with the least amount of water vapor. Refinement of XRD data estimates the quantities of different phases present. The effect on the grain size and morphology is also remarkable, as demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy imaging. The reason behind the changes is discussed in detail. The temperature dependence of the photoluminescence spectra was measured between room temperature and 500 °C where the luminescence is quenched to nearly 3% of its initial value.Magnesium fluoro-germanate doped with Magnesium fluoro-germanate is one of the most investigated thermographic phosphors due to its detectable photoluminescence (PL) emission output even at high temperatures up to 800 K and its usefulness for both intensity-ratio and time-resolved methods [ Since the discovery of manganese doped magnesium germanate phosphor in 1947 by Williams [ Although there are many investigations carried out to measure the effect of humidity on the long-term performance of different phosphors after their synthesis [ A number of magnesium fluoro-germanate samples doped with The required water vapor content in the tube furnace was achieved by controlling the relative flow of dry and fully water saturated air. The relative humidity (RH) and temperature of the air leaving the furnace were measured using HYT-221 sensor by IST (Innovative Sensor Technology, Switzerland). Absolute humidity was then calculated from RH and temperature data by Bolton equations [ The samples of Jasco FP8500 spectrofluorometer was used for the measurement of PL and photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectra; both quantities were measured with a resolution of 1 nm. The XRD was done on EMPYREAN XRD POWDER/SAXS from PANalytical company with The relative PL intensity was measured by using a 365 nm UV LED as the excitation source and the emission was detected by multiple photodiodes to average out the scattering effects. Temperature-dependent PL was measured using a self-designed resistive heating system, a 75 mW 405 nm laser for excitation and a fiber-coupled Ocean Optics QEPro spectrometer for capturing the emission spectra. The detailed description of relative intensity measurement and high-temperature PL setup is mentioned in our previous paper [ Variation of emission intensity with respect to water vapor content during the synthesis is presented in The XRD patterns of the prepared samples are shown in Both As As it is not possible to assess the quantitative presence of different compounds by simple XRD search-match software, refinement of XRD data is done by FullProf software to quantify the phases present in the samples. Due to the overlap of Structural parameters of all the samples are very well refined except MGO-0.12 which is indicated by a large value of  The PLE spectra, normalized at 418 nm, are shown in The following reaction shows the content ratio of individual compounds for producing However, conversion of The PL emission of magnesium fluoro-germanate doped with To further assess the effect on composition and morphology, SEM along with EDX was carried out. EDX results indicate a noticeable decrease in fluorine and a corresponding increase in the atomic percentage of oxygen with increased humidity. The atomic percentage values of Mg and Ge show randomness in all the samples although there should be a linear change where atomic percent should be affected as two atoms of fluorine in MgF SEM images in The PL emission spectra of MGO-0.12 sample at temperatures between the room temperature and 496 °C are shown in The synthesis of Mn The contributions from the authors are given below;  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is financially supported by