The objective of this work is to test dry jigging, operated with air, to eliminate pyrite nodules and liberated clays from Candiota coal. Candiota mine is the biggest Brazilian Coal deposit, which is beneficiated for fueling a thermoelectric plant. This coal presents a high degree of liberated pyrite in a wide range of densities. Hence, gravity separation of pyrite appears apparently obvious. However, any wet treatment results difficult due to the high porosity of the material as a consequence of its low rank. For that reason, dry jigging was proved instead with encouraging results. Samples from the upper layer of the seam, which had around 1.8% sulfur and about 51% ash, appeared after jigging with about 0.7% sulfur and near 47% ash. After these results, pilot jigs are planned to install at the plant.Brazilian coal represents 65% of non-renewable energy reserves, which amount to 3.1 billion measured tons Candiota coal presents the following basic characteristics High contents of ashes and fines Low liberation degree of organic matter Elevated pyritic sulfur concentrations in the high density fractions indicate a high level of liberation of the pyrite High porosity The aim of this study is to use dry jigging to get a coal having low concentration of sulfur, clays and fines (< Samples were obtained from Candiota mine, located in Candiota Borough, South of Brazil. The coal deposit presents two coal strata separated by inorganic material. Samples were collected from the upper and lower strata, to find out if coal properties varied from one stratum to the other. The sampling procedure was the following: Around 7300 t were mined out from both superior as well as from inferior strata. Then, near 1800 kg were sampled out from each. Each sample was ground, to less than 50 mm size, and quartered several times to reduce the mass to about 300 kg for each stratum. Then, they were sent to Rio Grande do Sul Federal University (UFRGS) to be analyzed. In addition, about 1500 kg of each stratum was sent to Aachen Technical University in Germany where tests of dry jigging were carried out. Samples were sieved on the following set of meshes: 50.8 mm, 25.4 mm, 19.1 mm, 12.7 mm, 2.0 mm, 1.0 mm and 0.1 mm. Ash and sulfur (total, pyritic, sulfated and organic) analysis were carried out on each fraction, as well as calorific value. The results are shown in It can be seen from the table that, in both strata, ash contents are very similar for all size fractions. Except for three values, ash grades appeared robustly above 50%. The highest content, around 65%, is observed in fraction sizes smaller than 0.1 mm. However, the mass in this fraction is relatively small; hence, separation of this part would not change coal quality in a significant way. As a matter of fact, 5% difference observed from top and bottom layers make as little as 0.1% difference in total ash grade if removed. On the other hand, maximum sulfur contents are seen in middle size samples. In effect, 2.91% and 2.62% total sulfur in bottom and top strata were found respectively in the − Sink and float tests were carried out to determine quality of coal by density ranges between 1.3 g/cm  On the other hand, on same graphs, for comparison purpose, a simulated sample was calculated adding up all density ranges below a selected range and total sulfur (%) were plotted for the composite. On the figure, sulfur grades below a density range (called S From both graphs, it can be concluded that it is possible to reduce sulfur grade with little loss of coal. However, content of ashes can be reduced moderately, as may be seen from From these figures, it is clearly seen that as density increases, ash content increases also almost linearly, reaching values up to near 85% in both seams (black bars). However, if simulation is carried out for composites below a certain density value, the ash contents get almost constant for densities equal or greater than 2.0 g/cm With sinks and floats results, Henry–Renhardt washability curves were plotted as shown in From near gravity curves ( From these results, gravimetric separation by dry jigging was tested All air jig The Air Jig was designed in a closed structure, which distributes air uniformly through an oscillatory bed. Particle separation in the pneumatic jig results from an air pulsing flow, which produces a stratification of fed particles. While the dense bed of material formed in the bottom of the bed moves toward openings, the top layer, containing light particles, keep moving on top of the slow densest particles bed, being removed in the opposite extreme of the equipment. The powder created by air pulsation is absorbed and recovered by means of pneumatic cyclones and sleeve filters. The overflow is carried out through a star gate using a radiometer to control automatically the discharge of tails. The jig can keep constant a reserve layer of high-density material close to the star gate avoiding product contamination in the final section of the bed. A bed of sunken product makes a barrier for low-density material, which remains stratified above, minimizing imperfections (mixtures of heavy and light material). A schematic draw can be seen in The extraction of dense product is carried out with the help of a star gate type valve, similarly to those used in some water jigs produced nowadays. It was possible to reduce ashes significantly with dry jigging. The waste product showed above 60% ash. However, the most significant result was the reduction of sulfur, which drop to 50% of the feed. With these results, it is possible to produce better coal yet if another ash reduction is carried out by size fraction as was discussed above where 44% ash was possible. Using air jigs sulfur content from Candiota Coal was reduced considerably. This type of process is not applied at present. With it, better functioning of electrostatic precipitators it is expected due to reduction of ash content. As a consequence, low emission of fly ashes will result. Also, it is expected a low generation of sulfur contaminants due to small content of this contaminant in its products. The cost of sulfur reduction will be cheaper than washing combustion gases. High added value products will be produced and high calorific value of purified coal will be obtained.