Challenges arising from the task to quantify DNA from genetically modified organisms (GMO) in composite and processed foods are reviewed. Examples for distortion of the quantification of GMO due to differences in particle size compositions and heat-induced DNA degradation are discussed. Ligation-dependent probe amplification is presented as a novel approach to tackle the issue of the increasing number of GMO to be screened and quantified. The use of hybrid molecules as easily accessible synthetic DNA-standards for quantitative screening of GMO via real-time PCR is described.The use of GMO and GMO-derived products as foods or food ingredients is subject to regulatory oversight in a number of countries ( Official methods for the event-specific detection and quantification of material derived from authorized transgenic crops are provided by the European Commission's Reference Laboratory. Although these methods represent valuable tools, the experience gained from surveillance testing of GMO shows that laboratories have to cope with major analytical challenges. This review will focus on latest developments and future perspectives of the following issues: (i) quantification of GMO in composite foods, (ii) GMO analysis of processed products, (iii) the challenge arising from the increasing number of GMO to be screened, and (iv) the lack of reference materials. Industrially produced foods are usually composed of various ingredients. Different ingredients derived from the same GM crop may possess different properties. For example, mixtures of corn milling fractions with different particle size distributions are used in industrial applications (bakery or extrusion products) to regulate important functional and sensory characteristics. Appropriate particle size distributions of the meal and flour mixtures add important functional characteristics to the products and are generally obtained by recombining the previously sieved fractions ( These data demonstrate that relative GMO quantifications may be significantly distorted if the analyzed food contains fractions with different particle size distributions. Especially, if the presence of GMO is limited to one of the fractions, proportions of DNA extracted from both fractions would not reflect the actual weight proportions of GM material contained in the food sample. Food manufacturing involves a number of processing steps that may negatively affect the performance of GMO detection methods. Fragmentation of DNA may be initiated by grinding and milling owing to shear forces and hydrolysis by nucleases. It is primarily linked to processes carried out at low pH and increases dramatically if these are performed in combination with thermal treatment ( Currently used methods for the relative quantification of recombinant DNA are based on real-time PCR ( Recent studies assessed to what extent minor differences in the lengths of the targeted sequences of recombinant and reference genes occurring in these methods may cause different stability towards thermal stress and consequently distortions in the results of relative quantification ( In a similar approach, a mixture of maize grits with a defined proportion of GMO-derived material (10%) was used in a lab-scaled process for the production of ethanol. This example was chosen because it comprises a series of processes potentially contributing to DNA degradation (mechanical stress, enzymatic hydrolyses, microbial fermentation, thermal treatment). The starting material as well samples from the stages of mashing, enzymatic liquefaction and saccharification, mash fermentation and mash distillation were analyzed using three different real-time PCR systems ( In order to meet the challenge of the steadily increasing number of GMO, various multiplex assays have been developed, allowing the simultaneous detection of several GMO in a single PCR reaction ( One of the latest developments in multiplex approaches for quantitative analysis is the technique of ligation-dependent probe amplification (LPA). Originally, ligation-dependent PCR has been applied to the relative quantification of DNA in the field of medical diagnostics ( The use of one pair of universal primers in the LPA method avoids one of the major difficulties of multiplex PCR applications, being the complexity of amplification reaction because of the use of multiple pairs of primers. In contrast to multiplex PCR reactions, whose subsequent extensibility is limited, the application of this novel approach offers great flexibility due to its modular system that can be complemented with further probes to broaden the range of target sequences. The use of synthetic oligonucleotides as probes and the employment of classical thermocycler and detection methods enable the implementation of the technique in commonly equipped laboratories. Detection using capillary gel electrophoresis via laser-induced fluorescence (CGE-LIF) represents a very sensitive and rapid separation and detection approach in automated manner. Different amplicons can be distinguished by size using either labelled PCR primers or DNA intercalating dyes. The better sensitivity and resolution of CGE-LIF compared to agarose gel electrophoresis has been demonstrated ( Currently, the LPA-approach allows the screening of seven different targets in a one-tube assay ( The steadily increasing number of transgenic crop lines worldwide demands the implementation of appropriate systems for the detection and quantification of a broad spectrum of GMO. This requires the availability of respective certified reference standard materials. Taking into consideration that the vast majority of transgenic crops have not been submitted (and are not foreseen) for authorization in the EU, the investigation of the occurrence of material derived from non-authorized GMO in the food and feed chain represents a principal task for surveillance authorities. One of the most challenging problems is given by the hesitant development of reference standards for qualitative and/or quantitative analyses. Commercially available reference standards do not cover the entire spectrum of authorized GMO and there is (per se) a complete lack of reference material for the analysis of non-authorized transgenic crops. Novel analytical strategies are based on the design of synthetic DNA-standards in combination with the set-up of respective real-time PCR systems for the quantitative screening of construct-specific sequences ( Two real-time PCR assays were designed for the purpose of quantitative screening. The assays allow the simultaneous detection of construct-specific junction regions in transgenic rapeseed lines (P-35S/ As illustrated in The applicability of dilution series of the hybrid molecules as quantification standards in real-time PCR was demonstrated by their performance in a concentration range between 10 This analytical strategy represents a valuable tool for purposes of surveillance testing of GMO in food and feed products. The application of construct-specific real-time PCR assays allow the detection of a broad spectrum of GMO at a moderate level of specificity in order to avoid false positive results, such as expected in the case of the detection of regulatory sequences or gene coding regions alone. Data gained from the performance assessment of the assays described deliver important criteria for future method development and for the design of validation studies. Especially in regard to the establishment of standardized international protocols for the quantitative analysis of GMO in foods, validation studies cannot be restricted to the assessment of trueness and precision in (unprocessed) certified reference materials, since such performance parameters may not be unconditionally transferable to results obtained from the analysis of composed and/or processed samples. Therefore, procedures for the validation of quantitative assays for the surveillance testing of products within the food chain must include experiments demonstrating that neither food composition nor processing will result in an alteration of relative quantification results. Future standard protocols for the determination of GMO contents in processed products should target recombinant and taxon-specific sequences of nearly equal lengths. Otherwise, the scope of the analytical approaches should be clearly limited to the determination of GMO contents in unprocessed samples. In combination with synthetic quantification standards, quantitative screening assays can be used to gain important information about the compositions of samples. The application of such assays will contribute to avoid the unnecessary application of event-specific quantification methods, e.g. given the case that results of quantitative screening predict only traces of recombinant DNA to be present in a sample, or if the delivered copy numbers of the reference gene are not sufficient to allow a statistically secured quantification of the recombinant DNA.