We read one of the articles published in October 2017 edition of your journal by Sternberg et al., titled “A double-plating approach to distal femur fracture: a clinical study” and studied all its aspects in detail [ We commend the authors for their application of this novel idea and getting the desired results. However we will like to raise a few important points and seek some clarifications for the same. Firstly, in the methodology section, the authors mention that they included type A3 and C3 fractures according to the AO classification [ Secondly, in the first non union case of the 92 year old female with A3 type of fracture, we can see medial defect and comminution. Also the authors recommend meticulous medial dissection for the buttress plate. All this will compromise the soft tissue vascularity and could hamper union in such cases. Also whether or not bone grafting was done, needs to be mentioned. Thirdly, we find no mention about the type of plate used for medial side. Was it a pre contoured plate or something else? What do the authors recommend? Also the type of screws, they have used proximal to the fracture site requires a mention; e.g., do they plate A1 fractures, that are non comminuted in a complete locking mode or they use compression screws to compress the fracture site and hold the plate close to the bone. Using only the locking screws, could make the construct too stiff and hamper union [ The authors also talk about poor bone quality in the patients, but there is no objective assessment of the bone marrow density in any patient. Have they assumed that older patients as a rule have osteoporosis? The final query on our part is regarding the periprosthetic fractures. What was the approach used by the authors in those cases? Total knee arthroplasty is commonly done by a midline approach, so what was the approach they used. In the surgical technique, they mention usage of dual incision universally in all the included cases. Was it the same for the periprosthetic fractures too? Why did not they use the same midline scar for the approach, that was previously used for the arthroplasty? We will like to convey that we appreciate the work done in this study, but the lack of control group is a serious limitation that is unacknowledged. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.