Polymeric plasticized membranes (PPM) are a new perspective to solve the stability problems of supported liquid membranes to perform the simultaneous separation, concentration and purification of valuable species from aqueous solutions.
                  Cellulose triacetate (CTA) membranes containing the crown ether dibenzo-18-crown-6 (DB18C6) as a fixed carrier were prepared and their performance tested for the transport of copper(II) ions. This study showed that PPM properties were influenced by the membrane composition. The transport studies revealed that diffusion rate was dependent on film thickness, the presence of a plasticizer, 2-nitrophenyloctylether, which plays also a critical role on the membrane physical characteristics (especially malleability) and the quantity of fixed crown ether. Porosimetry analyses showed conversely to other works with different carriers that all the membranes prepared are not porous for all membrane compositions. However, SEM analysis revealed a porous texture when the quantity of crown ether is higher than that of CTA. FTIR, X-ray and TGA characterizations showed that all the constituents of the membrane remain unaltered within the membrane without chemical interactions between them (no presence of new bonds in the FTIR spectra). Hence, transport mechanism of the copper(II) ions seems to be a jumping from site to site.Facilitated transport through liquid membranes is an attractive method for simultaneous separation, concentration and purification of species of interest from aqueous systems but it suffers from several technological problems such as membrane instability and leaching of the membrane components into aqueous phases Polymer membranes made of CTA with grafted crown ether groups have been reported by Flyes et al. Copper(II) Sulphate, Chloroform, CTA and 2-Nitrophenyl Octyl Ether (2NPOE) were analytical grade reagents purchased from Fluka. The carrier dibenzo-18-crown-6 (DB18C6) was a product of Aldrich. The reagent for copper analysis was used as kits purchased from Carlo Erba Reagents (Italy). All reagents were used as received without further purification. The membranes were prepared according to the following procedure: a chloroform solution (15 ml) containing CTA or CTA and 2NPOE, or CTA, 2NPOE and DB18C6 was placed in an 8.5-cm-diameter (surface=56.72 cm The transport cell used for metal ions transport experiments was a classical cell used in supported liquid membranes transport. It consisted of two glass compartments, with a maximum capacity of 30 ml each one, separated by the PPM. Each compartment, the feed containing the metal solution, and the strip solution, containing double-distilled water were pumped from flasks of 130 ml capacity and circulated in continuous flow using a peristaltic pump at 4 rps, a speed which was previously determined as enough to minimize the thickness diffusion boundary layers. The global system worked in a batch mode whereas the PPM module in continuous flux. Feed and strip phases, respectively, were circulated with equal flow rates of 5 ml/s. The exposed membrane area was 4.9 cm Metal concentration was determined by withdrawing aliquots of 1 ml each from the feed and strip solutions at different time intervals and analysing by visible absorption spectrophotometry (UV–visible spectrophotometer Shimadzu UV-1601) by using the specific kit for copper. Mass flux The porosity tests were realized with a capillary flow porometer CFP 1500 AEXL (PMI, USA). The SEM observations were made using a JEOL JSMT-T 330A apparatus. TGA analyses were made using a high-resolution TGA 2950 Thermo Gravimetric Analyzer (Universal Instrument). X-ray data were recorded on a SIEMENS diffractometer. IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 710 spectrophotometer. The film thickness was measured by a micrometer (Mitotoyo, Japan) at least in four different places and by calculating the average value. FTIR analyses of the different membranes and their pure constituents were performed. The analysis and comparison of the obtained spectra (   Reference membranes in absence of the carrier were made to control if CTA and 2NPOE can complex copper ions and participate to the transport mechanism. Membranes were prepared by dissolving only a quantity of CTA in chloroform. Plasticizers play an important role in the behavior of PPM membranes  As we have deduced before, the addition of a plasticizer is very important to obtain membranes with better physical characteristics. However, will plasticizer, which is no more than the classical solvents which generally play the role of the supported organic liquid phase in the polymer matrix of SLMs, solubilize the carrier and give rise to a sort of a SLM? Or will it intervene solely in the physical characteristics and the carrier will crystallize inside the polymer matrix to create a sort of molecular channel to allow the jumping of the metal ions from site to site?   Copper flux was measured as a function of membrane thickness. This experiment was performed as follows. Six portions of 0.03 g of CTA, 0.2 ml of 2NPOE and 0.05 g of DB18C6 (giving membranes containing 0.53 mg/cm A PPM membrane containing dibenzo-18-crown-6 (DB18C6) as carrier and 2-nitrophenyloctyl ether (NPOE) as a plasticizer was developed. It was characterized using chemical techniques as well as Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR), X–ray Diffraction, Thermogravimetry (TGA) and Scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The effect of optimal membrane composition on copper (ion) transport was studied. The obtained results showed a performance of this new kind of membranes affected by the membrane composition. The optimal values of the various membrane components, for a good performance of the transport process, were: 0.53 mg/cm This approach opens large perspectives for utilizing the carrier-mediated transport technique in the treatment of hydrometallurgical solutions as these membranes have shown to be very stable as compared to SLM of similar carrier concentration Dr. Gherrou is thankful to the European Union (TEMPUS-MEDA section) for the award of a senior research fellowship (Grant N° IMG-3-DZ1018) for carrying this work.