Solid particles present in high-pressure homogenization processes damage the equipment, especially the orifices. So far the orifices have to be exchanged frequently causing increase of cost and decrease of efficiency. Modifications in orifice geometry or material as well as in the composition of the fluid may help to reduce abrasion. Therefore, a method to quantify wear in a homogenization orifice in a fast and cheap way is required. This method also has to be applicable if the particles are nano-sized. In this work an abrasion quotient Q
                     A is presented as a quantitative measure for erosion. It is calculated by the volume flow rate of water through the orifice before and after the passage of an abrasive fluid consisting of nanoparticles suspended in a fluid. The reproducibility and sensitivity of this method is investigated. The effect of the properties of particles suspended freely or encapsulated in water on the abrasion quotient has been measured. The new method shows that results are consistent with literature. These results give an interesting starting point to improve the durability of high-pressure homogenization equipment.High-pressure homogenization is a common method used to break up emulsion droplets, e.g. in food, cosmetic or pharmaceutical industry. In the dairy industry, high pressure homogenization is an essential processing step. It is crucial for improving product properties by decreasing fat globule sizes below 1 One challenge in high-pressure homogenization is the durability of the equipment. In general, there are two mechanisms that cause wear in high-pressure processes. The first is cavitation, the formation of cavities and their subsequent implosion, and the second is abrasion caused by particles present in the homogenized fluid. Whereas cavitation is a well investigated phenomenon in high-pressure homogenization, little is known about the effects of particles, especially nanoparticles, on the equipment. Specifically the orifices are reported to be extremely affected by nanoparticles Modifications in orifice geometry or material as well as in the composition of the fluid may help to reduce abrasion and hence production costs. For a target approach in modifying material or geometries, a method to quantify wear in a homogenization orifice in a fast and cheap way is required. In this article a literature overview on the possibilities to measure wear is given. We then present a new method for quantifying the abrasive effect on high-pressure homogenization orifices. With this method we investigate the effect of several product and process related parameters. First results concerning the influence of particle characteristics on the abrasion are shown and compared with published data on abrasion in high pressure homogenization. Caused by high velocities and subsequent low static pressure, cavities can form if the vapor pressure of the liquid homogenized is higher than the static pressure. Dissolved gases may also evaporate and form small bubbles. These cavities implode when the static pressure increases above the vapor pressure. Resulting pressure fluctuations and micro-jets may cause abrasion to material being close to the imploding cavities Cavitation, however, also has positive aspects. It may help in comminution, dispersion, the break-up of agglomerates, or emulsification: it has been suggested to enhance the fragmentation of droplets or particle agglomerates [ The basic mechanisms of wear caused by particles have not been understood completely to date. Several parameters affect the erosion rate (e.g., impact angle and speed, shape and size, concentration, physical properties) Only particles, which interact with the surface of the equipment, cause abrasion. The dimensionless Stokes-number In general higher solid concentrations lead to higher abrasion as more particles strike the surface of the target material Several authors report an increase in wear with an increase in particle size Concerning the material impacted by particles, a distinction is made in the literature between hard-brittle and soft-ductile mechanisms of wear. Hard-brittle materials show mostly sliding wear and low angle impact fatigue cracking; soft-ductile materials are characterized by a combination of sliding wear, low impact angle wear through microscale deforming, cutting, plowing and work hardening The impact angle is defined as the angle between the direction of the particle and the surface. Concerning the impact angle hard-brittle and soft ductile materials show different behaviors: whereas for ductile materials the highest erosion rates are measured for an angle of approx. 30°, brittle materials show the lowest resistance against erosion at an impact angle of about 90° The velocity of the carrier fluid and the velocity of the particle significantly affect erosion with higher velocities causing a higher erosion rate The viscosity of the suspending liquid is also reported to have an influence on abrasion. Shah et al. Zhao et al. The sand particles in the water act as cavitation nuclei and the critical cavitation pressure of the fluid is thus higher than that of pure water and therefore more cavitation occurs. Collapsing cavities create microjets and change the fluid flow direction. Therefore the particle velocity and the impact angle are increased which increases erosive effects. Cavitation weakens the surface by causing pits and leads to increased abrasion as the impacting particles can remove a greater amount of material. Madadnia et al. Regarding other processes, different methods to quantify wear on process units were published. Llewellyn et al. To our knowledge only few data have been published concerning quantification of wear in high-pressure valves or orifices. Schuchmann and Sauter The difficulty in quantifying wear is that methods such as weighing or analyzing microscopic pictures give reliable and statistically reproducible values only for significant wear. Regarding high-pressure homogenization the valve geometries are very small (down to orifice diameters below 100 As is already known that smallest changes in orifice diameter or geometry have a significant impact on the volume flow this parameter is qualified to act as a marker for abrasion. The volume flow rate is established in most of the existing high pressure processing lines, making its determination cheap, fast and easy to apply. To cope with deviations in manufacturing and obtain reproducible results without needing a large number of experiments, a new parameter, the abrasion quotient A schematic of the system setup (a) and orifice geometry (b) is depicted in Particle suspensions were conveyed through the orifice at varying pressure and concentrations. Particles were chosen in order to vary both the size and the density of the material, as these characteristics are predicted to have an influence on wear by theory. The properties of the particles used are given in To ensure the encapsulation of the particles in the lipophilic phase, the particles had to be surface-modified (Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, e.g. by methacrylic acid-3-trimethoxysilane (MPS)). Based on Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and Raster Electron Microscopy (REM) pictures, the location of the modified particles in the two-phase system was determined (see The concentration of the particles in the suspensions or suspo-emulsions was varied between 5% and 34%. In the abrasion experiments, these suspensions or suspo-emulsions were conveyed through the high pressure orifice at a pressure of 900 Jensen et al. Consequently we used a different approach. In order to eliminate the influence of the orifice geometry or fluid characteristic we first measured the pressure-dependent volume flow through each orifice with a standard fluid (water). After having determined this curve, the abrasive fluid of interest is conveyed through the orifice at a constant pressure (here 900  In As  Another possible explanation for the increased wear caused by Aerosil 200V is their irregular particle shape. As shown in As expected theoretically, increasing density of the particles leads to an increased abrasion quotient In some applications, nanoparticles are not suspended in the continuous media as particles, but encapsulated in a second phase. For example, in the production of core–shell-nanoparticles (CSN) by miniemulsion polymerization, the nanoparticles to be encapsulated are suspended in a monomer phase which itself is then emulsified via high pressure homogenization. When silica particles (being modified to have hydrophobic surfaces) are encapsulated in a monomer phase (here methyl methacrylate) no difference could be observed in the wear of the high pressure orifice compared to silica particles without any liquid organic layer. The abrasion coefficient at 500 A method to measure quantitatively the effect of abrasion caused by micron- or nano-sized particles and cavitation on high-pressure homogenization orifices has been developed. For this, pressure-dependent volume flow rates of water through the nozzle were measured before and after the passage of a certain amount of an abrasive liquid, and set in relation. The resulting abrasion quotient In further work the abrasion quotient will be used to improve the lifetime of high-pressure homogenization orifices. This could either be achieved by the application of different orifice materials for increased durability. The optimization of the orifice geometry to reach less abrasive impact angles of the particles is another possibility. Further the variation of intensity and location of cavitation by different geometries or the application of back pressures to reduce cavitation will be investigated. Finally the simultaneous emulsification and mixing geometry, with which the passage of the particles through the orifice can be avoided without compromising homogenization efficiency, is an option that will be considered We are grateful to Caroline Wagner and Katharina Landfester at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz for the modification of the silica nanoparticles and for providing the TEM-micrographs. Further we gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the