Titanium metal is produced in several locations around the globe, about 222,000 tons were produced in 2017, and the global capacity is estimated to be much larger at about 280,000 tons. Most the production is conducted in China, with the US and Russia as larger producers. The process of reduction of titanium tetrachloride uses magnesium (Kroll process), the Hunter process using sodium as a reductant is also practices. This chapter discussed the production of titanium sponge from titanium tetrachloride, with a brief description of the processes used to generate and purify titanium tetrachloride. Once titanium sponge is produced it is remelted to produce alloys for use in aircraft, chemical manufacture, medical and other uses.Titanium metal is produced in the US at three facilities: PCC/Timet in Henderson, NV, Allegheny Technologies (ATI), at Rowley UT (Now idle), and Honeywell Electronic Materials in Salt Lake City. Both the PCC and ATI facilities are large-scale production facilities, while the Honeywell facility produces metal for electronic applications, and has much lower capacity. The ATI and Timet facilities use the Kroll process, while Honeywell uses the Hunter process. Ferrotitanium is also produced by RTI International Metals (Canton, OH), and Global Titanium (Detroit, MI). About 10,000 tons of ferrotitanium were produced by these two firms in 2012. Ferrotitanium is also produced as byproduct in the production of titanium sponge, however, iron has to be added to meet the 40%–70% Ti required for commercial grades of ferrotitanium. US titanium metal production in 2017 is shown in Most US production (72%) is used in aerospace, aircraft and aircraft engines. Titanium is not reactive with composite materials used in new commercial aircraft, and as a result titanium metal used in commercial aircraft is expected to increase. In Titanium sponge has been produced since the early 1940s as described by WJ Kroll In 2008 TIMET, TOHO, RMI and ATI all began to investigate if new production of sponge would be warranted to meet the increasing demand. TOHO completed construction of a new sponge plant in Japan, on a brownfield site (Wakamatsu) The sponge market did not expand as much as some producers had expected. While the production of aerospace-grade sponge is secure in the US, lower grade materials can still be used for alloying work in stainless steels and non-aerospace markets; this has suppressed the price margins that US producers can achieve, resulting in the closing of all US producers in sponge except for TIMET. The titanium ore mineral is either rutile beach sands or ilmenite rock ores, or mineral sands whose composition is not primarily rutile such as monazite These mineral sands are not pure, since minerals such as monazite, ilmenite, zircon and others can be present. In a mineral sands mine most of these other minerals are separated by use of gravity and electrostatic separation methods to produce a higher-grade mineral sand. Typical analysis of mineral sands for TiCl Ilmenite, FeTiO The DuPont Chloride There are other processes used to produce TiO The Lurgi process The threefold nature of titanium production: TiCl For the production of titanium it is first necessary to produce titanium tetrachloride. Titanium tetrachloride is produced for metal production and for conversion to TiO The titanium producers can either purchase TiCl The significant impurities from the conversion of rutile to TiCl Some aluminum chloride is present from direct reduction of refractories in the carbo-chlorinator, some from the rutile. Iron and vanadium chlorides can be removed by either reaction with H Once produced the titanium tetrachloride is stored in steel tanks, with an inert gas padding. Padding is necessary to prevent any air entering into the tank as the water content in air will react with the titanium tetrachloride to form TiO Titanium is produced commercially by metallothermic reduction. The first metallothermic process used a sealed retort with titanium tetrachloride and This process was first reported on in the early 1910s by Hunter The use of sodium metal as a reductant produces sodium chloride in the reduction process: The process is exothermic and spontaneous at operating temperature. The sodium chloride in this process is not recycled back into a Downs cell The sodium reduction of titanium tetrachloride is also used in the Armstrong process In the development of the Kroll process, magnesium is used as the reductant for titanium tetrachloride. The resulting magnesium chloride is produced as shown in the reaction below: The reduction process is exothermic, providing enough heat to keep magnesium chloride molten. The magnesium chloride is produced at about Some of the reduction of titanium tetrachloride takes place in the gas phase as magnesium has a significant vapor pressure, resulting in partial reduction of TiCl The titanium dichloride can then be reduced spontaneously to titanium tetrachloride and titanium. This is an exothermic reaction: In the presence of steel or stainless steel used in the retort, this exothermic reaction can result in the formation of an iron-titanium phase with a relatively low melting point. This reaction is thought to be a major contributor to the deposition of iron in titanium during reduction. Two processes for the production of sponge by the Kroll method were developed, the magnesium reduced acid leach process and vacuum distillation process. Both were developed at the same time in the 1950s during the beginning of the titanium industry. Each has some merit; the market place now favors the vacuum distillation (VDP) process as the MRAL process produced more acid wastes and was not as economical in the conservation of magnesium values in the reduction process. The VDP process has several variations, including how the distillation process is conducted, size of retorts and materials of construction. In this process solid ingots of magnesium are used as the reductant. Typically the charge weight of magnesium was about 1000 Once the reactor was loaded with magnesium, and sealed, then it was placed into a furnace. The furnace can be either electrically or natural gas fired. The titanium tetrachloride lines and gas pad lines are connected, the retort is heated to operating temperature (about 800 The MRAL reactors were internally clad with titanium metal, this prevented any of the iron or nickel in the stainless steel retort from contaminating the titanium sponge produced. Low nickel and iron content of titanium is necessary in some aerospace applications since nickel and to some extent iron can allow for creep of the titanium alloys when used at the extremes of temperature and stress. Once the reduction process was completed then the reactor with sponge charge was allowed to cool. Cooling of the change is necessary in all titanium production as hot titanium sponge can discolor when in contact with air. In extreme cases, or when an air leak occurs in the sponge retort, titanium nitride can form. Titanium nitride is a high melting refractory compound, if incorporated into a part it can cause failure of parts under high stress. Titanium nitride is brown-black in color, while oxides of titanium can have a verity of colors, since titanium has very high solubility of oxide, grays to blacks can be formed, while pure rutile is white. Once the retort had cooled, the weld used to seal the lid to the retort is ground off. The retort was then bored out to remove the sponge. This is accomplished by tilting the retort on the side, rotating it while a tool is used to remove the contents. The boring operation takes placed in a controlled atmosphere room where the dew point of the air was lowered to about −40°F. This is necessary since the magnesium chloride entrapped in the sponge is hygroscopic. The boring process was monitored for sparks as The titanium sponge after boring was crushed to about ½ inch size and then leached. About 25% of the magnesium chloride produced is not recovered by tapping, this was leached out and not recovered. The leaching process used a nitric, hydrochloric and citric acid solution, this dissolved the magnesium chloride and magnesium metal still present in the sponge. The leaching process produced a NO After drying the sponge is inspected visually. Sponge is placed as a monolayer on a moving conveyor belt, inspectors then removed discolored (black, browns) and other foreign matter from the sponge. Other foreign material can also enter the sponge stream from the crushing process. The discolored sponge fragments are then tested for nitrogen by a combustion analyzer. The level of magnesium chloride in the sponge is also measured, this can be done by collection of 100–200 The overall process flow sheet for the production of titanium can be constructed based on typical rutile grades of about 98% TiO The vacuum distillation process was developed in parallel to the MRAL process. In this process initially only stainless steel retorts were used. This was required because of the strength of material of construction requirements for the distillation process. The process has three phases: Reduction, distillation and cool down. In the VDP process the first set is retort preparation, in the TOHO/Timet process a push plate is installed at the bottom of the retort. A small access port is located at the bottom of the retort that is welded shut during operation. Once the internal furniture is installed the retort is loaded into the heating station and the lid is installed. The lid in these retorts are fitting with an internal radiation shield to keep some of the heat off the inside of the lid. Once the lid has been secured, using bolts the retort is purged of air. The retort is then heated to above the melting point of magnesium (650 During the reduction process magnesium chloride is produced. The molten magnesium chloride is removed by pressurizing the retort and forcing the molten salt up through a J-shaped tube; the magnesium chloride is then returned to the magnesium smelter for conversion to magnesium and chlorine. Several taps are necessary since the volume of magnesium chloride is about four times as the much as the magnesium charge. The magnesium is typically tapped at about 800–900 Once the reduction has been completed based on the mass of titanium tetrachloride added then the final amount of magnesium and magnesium chloride is forced out of the retort by pressure. This mixed solution is allowed to separate based on density and difference and the large interfacial tension between the phases ( The magnesium can then be used in another reduction, this shows one of the advantages of this process - the amount of make-up magnesium is reduced from about 25% in the MRAL process to about 1%–2% in the VDP process. Similarly the yield of magnesium chloride for conversion is about 98%, along with yield of chlorine for the conversion of rutile to The distillation process is then conducted by moving the retort to a distillation furnace. The distillation furnace is different than the reduction furnace and cooling furnace in that the annular space between the furnace heating elements and retort can be evaculated. This is necessary since the application of vacuum on the retort to distill the magnesium chloride and magnesium at 1000–1050 A process flow chart in the production of titanium by this method is shown in The distillation process can also be conducted by direct connection of the distillation vessel to the load retort. In this process the top flanges of each vessel are connected directly, with a spacer. Vacuum is applied to the two vessels, the capture vessel is located on top of the stack, and the lower In the VDP and VSMPO process the sponge mass remains in the vessel after distillation. To remove the sponge the retort is loaded vertically and the bottom access plate removed by torch-cutting. Using a hydraulic ram, the push plate installed in the vessel pushed up through the vessel where is can the hauled out using special tools or wire rope wrapped around the sponge mass. It is important that the sponge mass is removed vertically as this prevents any contamination from the floor contacting the sponge mass. Once removed (the whole nine ton mass) is lowered and placed on cradles to prevent any contact with the floor. In some applications the floor is composed of titanium plates, this is easy to clean and prevents contamination of the sponge. The Fray-Farthing-Chen (FFC) process was first proposed and operated at Cambridge University The sponge masses as produced by vacuum distillation have to be prepared before melting. The nine ton mass of sponge has to be crushed to about 12 Dust generation in the crushing process is a very important aspect of operation. Control of the dust by collection and washing of equipment on a periodic basis is very important to reduce the risks of fire in the processing of sponge. Care has to be taken to avoid working on equipment when dust present as titanium metal fires are difficult to extinguish; a class D extinguisher or rock salt are used to suppress the first. The high temperature of the fire and the low melting point of iron-titanium eutectic can result in melting of equipment, supports or piping in these plants if a fire does occur. The core of the sponge mass has the lowest level of metal contamination. To harvest the material for applications that need low iron and low nickel levels, it is necessary to ‘core’ the mass. This is done in several ways; the mass can be upended and the guillotine blade can be used to remove thick layers of outer skin, or chisels can be used to remove the outer layers. Control of the lot by separation during the crushing campaign is used to separate the high-purity products from the normal grades of sponge. Control of the nickel level in the magnesium used in the reduction is also important. Removal of as much stainless steel in piping, retorts and metal reservoirs is also important, as nickel in the magnesium will be incorporated into the sponge. Small concentrations of nickel in magnesium can take a long time to be purged from the process. Control of the quality of magnesium used for make up in the VDP process is as important, as some magnesium can be contaminated with nickel during production. Iron is not as significant an issue as its solubility in magnesium is low.