Sn-based lithium-ion battery (LIB) anodes have a lower risk of lithium dendrite formation and a higher storage capacity of 993 mAh g−1 vs. 372 mAh g−1 compared to carbon-based anodes. Alloying Sn with Cu can reduce the reaction stresses in the anode, and Cu6Sn5 is therefore a promising candidate material to replace carbon-based anodes. However, the separation of Cu during the second stage of the lithiation reaction results in slow kinetics and degrades the cyclability of the anodes. This study proposes an effective method to inhibit the separation of Cu via the addition of Ni. Ni occupies the Cu positions in the Cu6Sn5 crystal structures to form (Cu, Ni)6Sn5, and therefore alters the crystal structure of the anode, leading to the formation of superstructures. As a result, Ni partially blocks the diffusion pathways of Li and therefore inhibits the Cu separation reaction, while the superstructure provides additional Li storage sites to increase the capacity of the anodes. Ni also refines the grain size of Cu6Sn5, leading to faster kinetics. The reaction mechanisms of the modified anodes are confirmed by in-situ synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction and ex-situ high voltage transmission electron microscopy.In recent years, rechargeable Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have found extensive applications in modern technologies, especially in portable devices and electric vehicles, replacing their traditional competitors like nickel-cadmium batteries and nickel metal hydride batteries. The rise of LIBs is mainly due to their high energy densities and good cycling performances. Carbon-based anodes are the most common anodes in commercial LIBs. However, safety concerns due to lithium metal dendrite formation on these anodes which may lead to short circuits and fires is creating demand for intrinsically safer anode materials. Furthermore, the maximum theoretical energy capacity of carbon-based anodes of 372 mAh g Extensive studies of Sn-based anodes [ This paper demonstrates the effect of Ni additions (by introducing Ni to the molten Sn-rich alloy) in enhancing the performance and altering the Li reaction mechanisms of anodes manufactured via the in-situ Cu The effect of Ni on the electrical charge/discharge properties and on Li dendrite growth has been investigated in mechanically ball-milled Cu, Sn and Ni powdered samples [ The lithiation of Cu The second reaction happens below 0.1 V. Better cyclic performances can be achieved by only lithiating the electrode to 0.2 V, avoiding the Sn/Cu separation in Equation This work attempts to modify the reaction mechanisms of the Cu In Sections A Sn-10 wt%Ni master alloy was prepared by melting appropriate amounts of Sn and Ni in an induction furnace, and casting the melt into small ingots. Sn alloy samples of the compositions shown in The Sn alloy sheets SA1-4 were used to directly form Cu To study the Ni content variations in the resultant Cu The pristine, low-Ni and high-Ni anodes were assembled into 2032 coin cells with Li as a counter electrode and 1 M LiPF In-situ synchrotron XRPD measurements with cycling of the modified 2032 coin cell [ Samples for ex-situ UHV-TEM were prepared by lithiating and delithiating the pristine, low-Ni and high-Ni samples to the conditions detailed in SEM images of the etched samples for each composition in Compared to the pristine electrode, the low-Ni electrode has finer Cu Some of the fine Cu EDS spectra of all four electrodes were obtained by EDS mapping at a low magnification. Two maps were scanned for both the medium and high-Ni electrodes. The medium-Ni electrode shows segregation of IMC morphologies at different areas, for example the IMCs on the left half of The average Ni contents in the EDS maps are plotted in To further analyse the local Ni content variations in samples, point EDS analyses were carried out at higher magnifications with FEI SCIOS field emission SEM with higher resolutions. The Ni content variations of phases in the low-Ni and high-Ni electrodes are presented in Similarly, significant Ni content variations were observed for the Cu In the following sections, the electrode samples will be represented by their averaged Ni contents measured at low magnifications, i.e. the pristine electrode contains no Ni, the low-Ni electrode contains 1.1 wt% Ni, the medium-Ni electrode contains 2.9 wt% Ni, and the high-Ni electrode contains 7.5 wt% Ni. The discharge capacities of the low-Ni and the high-Ni samples are shown in On the other hand, the significant loss of performance in the high-Ni electrode may be due to four reasons: Loss of active material, as the floating Cu The hexagonal rod structure may be more difficult for the electrolyte to fully wet; Edge effects may cause the Li-ions to concentrate at the tips of the hexagonal rods [ The close packed facets of the hexagonal rod [ The electrochemical behaviour of the pristine Cu Similar to the pristine electrode, the drop in performance in the Ni modified electrodes during the second and third cycles as observed in The lithiation and delithiation voltage plateaus of the Ni modified electrodes are generally similar to the pristine Cu Upon further lithiation, the Ni modified samples also show a second voltage plateau below 0.1 V like the pristine electrode. This second plateau is associated with the reaction in Equation The Coulombic efficiencies of the pristine and low-Ni electrodes improved to 94–98% after the first cycle. The high-Ni electrode showed Coulombic efficiencies of around 91% in the second and third cycle, before achieving Coulombic efficiencies between 95 and 98% after the third cycle. The activated pristine electrode showed two extra small plateaus around 0.65 V and 0.55 V related to the formation of Li The long discharge plateau associated with Equation On the delithiation curves, two plateaus are also perceived for the Ni modified samples, though they are far less distinctive compared to those in the pristine sample, making it difficult to determine the plateau voltage. Synchrotron XRPD patterns of the fresh and activated pristine, low-Ni and high-Ni electrodes are shown in Secondly, for the Ni modified samples, instead of having two satellite peaks as observed in the pristine sample [ Thirdly, while the Furthermore, monoclinic Finally, as reported for the pristine sample, the tall and narrow XRPD peaks for the fresh Ni modified samples suggest that they have large crystallite sizes. On the other hand, the peaks of the activated samples are broader and shorter, which is typical of nano-sized crystallites [ The lithiation and delithiation reactions of Ni modified samples were expected to be similar to the pristine Cu In all three electrodes, the heights of the As depicted in During delithiation, these reactions are reversed. The remaining Cu The XRPD patterns also suggest that the formation of Li For the high-Ni electrode, the formation of Li The small sharp peaks at 16.0°, 18.6°, 19.1°, 20.5°, 23.3° and 23.5° are from the trapped floating monoclinic Cu The vol% of monoclinic and hexagonal Cu The calculations show that fresh samples have much larger crystallite sizes than the activated samples, especially for Upon activation, crystallite sizes of the interface For  The diffraction rings in This work demonstrates that the addition of Ni can improve the capacity of Cu Smaller Cu The formation of superstructures which act as additional storage sites for Li-ion; Altered electrochemical reactions of the anode with Li, preventing the separation of Cu during lithiation, and thereby improving cyclability of the anode. The prevention of the second reaction is achieved by the addition of Ni to the Cu A further increase in Ni content results in a change of morphology of the Cu With these discoveries, this paper provides the foundation to help direct future design of Cu The synchrotron XRPD experiment was conducted at the Australian Synchrotron on the Powder Diffraction beamline under proposal No. AS172/PD/12140. The author would like to thank Mr. Hiroshi Maeno, Kyushu University (KU), for the technical support with the UHV-TEM. The author also acknowledges the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by the None.