Wear resistant steels are commonly categorized by their hardness, and in the case of quenched wear resistant steels, their Brinell hardness grades are widely considered almost as standards. In this study, the abrasive wear performance of 15 commercially available 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels from all over the world were tested with granite gravel in high stress conditions. The aim was to evaluate the real wear performance of nominally similar steels. Also properties such as hardness, hardness profiles, microstructures and chemical compositions of the steels were studied and reasons for the differences in their wear performance further discussed. In terms of mass loss, over 50% differences were recorded in the abrasive wear performance of the studied steels. Variations in the chemical compositions were linked to the auto-tempered microstructures of the steels, and the microstructural characteristics were further linked to their ultimate wear behavior.The commercial quenched wear resistant steels are commonly categorized by their Brinell hardness, e.g., as a 400 HB grade or a 500 HB grade steel. The hardness grades are considered almost as standards and as a guarantee of their wear performance. There is, however, a huge range of steels offered in each of the hardness categories, which makes a comparative study of nominally similar products worthwhile. There are only few published studies related to the comparison of the actual wear performance of steels within the different hardness categories. Studies of the material properties, i.e. mainly hardness, which are affecting the wear performance of the steels, have been widely published The total cost of abrasive wear in industrial applications is estimated to be up to 4% of the gross national product in the industrialized countries. In particular, the industrial applications handling loose soil, rocks or different minerals have to deal with the wear problems caused by abrasion In this work, the abrasive wear properties of commercial 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels were tested to obtain a better understanding of the consistency of their wear performance. In total 15 different trade names from manufacturers all over the world were included in the study. The testing method simulated heavy abrasive wear in rock crushing and mineral processing, which are typical applications for the quenched wear resistant steels. Properties such as hardness, hardness profiles, microstructures and chemical compositions of commercial 400 HB grade quenched wear steels were studied and reasons for the differences in their wear performance are further discussed. Fifteen 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels were tested with the crushing pin-on-disk high stress abrasion wear tester The test method is based on the pin-on-disk principle but without a direct pin-to-disk contact. The pin with a 36 Five of the fifteen wear tested steels were selected for a closer examination. The selection was based on the overall performance and initial surface hardness of the materials. Thus, steels with the lowest and highest mass losses and hardness values were selected. The tested steels had a nominally similar alloying and the same microstructure and hardness, i.e., they were all quenched martensitic steels from the low-alloyed carbon steel group. Sheet thickness was 10 Before the tests, one millimeter was machined off from the sample surfaces to get rid of the decarburized layer. The surface hardness was measured from six points over the test surface. The hardness measurements were done in Vickers scale, where 420 HV corresponds to 400 HB. Moreover, the hardness profiles of the cross-sections were measured from the untested and tested samples. The microstructures of the steels, the wear surfaces and the wear surface cross-sections were characterized by optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Nital was used for etching. Between the nominally similar 400 HB steels some substantial wear performance differences were observed. For example, the variation in the initial surface hardness values was more than 25%, and in the wear tests the differences in the mass losses were as high as 53%. On the other hand, the mass loss of the hardest steel was not the lowest, and the steel with the lowest hardness did not have the worst abrasive wear performance.  After the wear tests, the wear surfaces were studied with optical and scanning electron microscopy. For steel B, which showed the biggest scatter in the mass loss, all three wear surfaces were a little bit different in terms of surface scratching. In the most worn sample, long scratches were found all around the surface, while in the least worn sample only about a quarter of the wear surface contained such clearly visible scratches. The SEM study showed that the scratches in steel A were fairly shallow, whereas in steel E the scratches were generally more distinct and deeper.  The roughness of the wear surfaces were analyzed with an optical profilometer. Both Ra and Rq values were determined because they are different measures of the surface profile. The Ra value, i.e., the average of the absolute values, is the most commonly used, but it may not describe the wear surfaces in the best possible manner. Instead, the Rq value, i.e., the root mean square value of the surface profile, is more sensitive to the high peaks and low valleys typical to a wear surface.  The hardness profiles of the steels shown in The chemical compositions presented in The results of the calculations are shown in Also the carbon equivalent values were calculated using two different formulas. The first one, denoted as “C  Although it is difficult to delineate the parent austenite from the Nital etched microstructures, steels B, D and E evidently have the largest parent austenite grain sizes. General differences, however, can be easily seen between the steels, for example that steel A has the most homogenous microstructure and that steel B contains the finest white martensite structure. The steels with the highest hardness values, i.e., A and C, have the shortest martensite laths, which also appear rather thick. The surface deformations, changes in the microstructures, and microhardness values were determined from the wear surface cross-sections. For all steels, the surface layers were heavily deformed and the martensite laths were mechanically fibered. The thickness of the visibly deformed layer varied from some micrometers to about 60 The clearest difference in the deformation behavior of the studied steels was in their ability to deform plastically and in the average thickness of the deformed layer. In addition to the optical micrographs presented in  This study has revealed significant differences in the heavy abrasive wear performance of nominally similar 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels. The wear rate of steel A, which had a 430 HV (~410 HB) surface hardness, was 31% lower than that of the 450 HV steel C, and even 53% lower than that of the 400 HV steel E. Consequently, if a wear resistant steel is changed to another nominally similar steel (with the same HB grade), the risk of unexpected failure of the wear part is evident. Noticeable differences between steels belonging to the same hardness category or grade could be observed in the chemical compositions and microstructures as well as in the mechanical behavior on the wear surface. Although it has become evident that the surface hardness or the hardness profile are not sufficient factors to explain the wear test results, a closer examination of both of these factors can offer some explanations. The wear performance of quenched steels usually depends on the concentration of their main alloying elements, i.e., carbon, molybdenum and boron. These elements are important for the quenched wear resistant steels, as they either raise the hardness, like carbon, or more importantly enhance the hardenability of the steel, like molybdenum and boron Steel A had the highest boron and combined nickel–molybdenum contents and the lowest wear rate. Nickel–molybdenum as a combination has a larger effect on the hardenability of the steel than either one of the elements alone. In low-carbon steels, boron has the biggest effect on the hardenability as a single alloying element, even in small quantities. Boron promotes the martensitic transformation by delaying the ferrite–pearlite transformation Steel E with the worst wear performance contained the least amount of boron protectors and not at all molybdenum, and obviously therefore exhibited the poorest hardenability of the studied steels. The large amount of white martensite in its microstructure supports this conclusion. Steels A and C had similar hardness, but the grain size of steel C was larger and it also contained more of the brittle white martensite. The reason for this can be the aluminum and silicon content, as steel C contained substantially more aluminum and at the same time the least amount of silicon compared with the other studied steels. Aluminum and also nickel have been reported to increase the stacking fault energy of austenite and thereby to hinder the martensite formation. Silicon, on the other hand, decreases the stacking fault energy Furthermore, there were also some differences in the total amounts of the alloying elements. Generally all alloying elements either decrease the Features of the martensitic transformation, such as the As a summary of the role of the chemical composition, the wear resistant steels need a sufficient amount of carbon and boron and a high combined nickel–molybdenum level to show the required hardenability. Moreover, sufficient ductility is also needed from the steels used in abrasive conditions. The required properties can be obtained by good auto-temperability and proper manufacturing methods that produce a homogenous martensitic microstructure with low amounts of fine grained white martensite, like in steels A and B. In abrasive wear conditions, the common engineering surface roughness values, Ra and Rq, depend inversely on the average surface hardness measured before the wear testing. Similar results related to impact-abrasion wear have also been presented In the worn samples studied in this work, the deformation depth visible in optical microscopy was low, at highest only about 60 The surface structures were mechanically fibered in all steels, but clear differences in the degree of fibering and the amount of deformation could be observed. Mechanical fibering, and the anisotropic properties it creates, are often ignored with engineering steels. However, in abrasive wear, the stresses are more or less perpendicular to the fibering direction, i.e., perpendicular to the surface, which according to Hosford Hardell et al. It appears that in heavy abrasive wear the surface needs the ability to withstand multidirectional and repeated deformations. Steels A and B performed exceptionally well in such conditions. In contrast to this, in steels C, D and E the intense plastic deformation led to a highly work hardened thin surface layer and/or formation of a tribolayer. Both of these will increase the surface hardness, but such hard surface layers can increase the wear resistance only if the subsurface layers can support them sufficiently. Heino et al. As a summary, the initial surface hardness is not so decisive when the abrasive wear causes marked plastic deformation on the surface of the material. At least equally important is the steel’s ability to retain its ductility during abrasive wear, in particular in rock crushing and other highly abrasive mineral processing applications. This was especially evident when steels B and C were compared with each other. The initial motivation for this study was quite practical, i.e., to reveal the possible differences in the wear performance of nominally similar 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels commonly used by industry in various wear related applications. In the study, the abrasive wear performance was experimentally determined for 15 different commercially available 400 HB grade steels, five of which were then selected for a closer examination. As abrasive wear covers about two thirds of the industrial wear problems, this kind of a comparative study is of significant practical importance for the steel producing and using industries. The results of this work can be utilized, for example, in various mineral handling applications, such as crushing and transportation of minerals. The main observation was that the nominally similar 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels do not perform equally under heavy abrasive wear, and hardness alone is not an accurate predictor of the steel’s wear performance. Alloying and manufacturing of the steel and thus its microstructure and hardness profile have a significant effect particularly on the work hardening and mechanical behavior of the steel during abrasion, leading to different wear performances under such conditions. Good abrasive wear performance in applications dealing with natural minerals requires certain hardness, but also sufficient ductility of the contact surface is needed, even after substantial work hardening. If the surface becomes too brittle, the wear rate increases rapidly. Furthermore, in the cases when the deformation zone does not offer smooth transition between the wear surface and the base material, the wear rates tend to become higher. Based on the results of this work, the abrasive wear life of nominally similar 400 HB grade quenched wear resistant steels can vary markedly, which should be taken into account in the materials selection processes. The work has been done within the FIMECC DEMAPP program funded by