This study provides direct experimental evidence of magnesium (Mg) isotope fractionation between an aqueous fluid and magnesite during its congruent dissolution, precipitation and at equilibrium. Closed-system batch reactor experiments were performed at temperatures from 120 to 200°C and at 15 or 30bar CO2 pressure. During congruent magnesite dissolution the fluid became enriched in isotopically heavy Mg, with a steady-state δ
                     26Mgfluid composition that was 0.4‰ higher than the dissolving magnesite at 15bar of CO2 pressure and 0.15‰ higher at 30bar of CO2 pressure. Magnesite precipitation was provoked by increasing the reactor temperature after equilibrium had been attained via dissolution. Rayleigh isotope fractionation effects were observed immediately after the reactor temperature was increased and rapid magnesite precipitation occurred. However, isotopic exchange continued as the system equilibrated, eradicating this Rayleigh signal. The equilibrium 26Mg/24Mg fractionation factors (α
                     eqm) for the magnesite-fluid system were found to be 0.99881 at 150°C and 0.99912 at 200°C. Taken together, these observations (1) support the theoretical hypothesis that mineral-fluid equilibrium is dynamic (i.e. dissolution and precipitation occur at equal, non-zero rates at equilibrium), and (2) indicate that isotopes will continue to exchange and equilibrate even if the mineral surfaces and co-existing fluids are in chemical equilibrium. The fact that isotopes continue to exchange at chemical equilibrium will tend to eradicate both kinetic and paleo-environmental isotopic signatures, and the degree to which such signatures are completely eradicated depends on how deep into the surface the isotopic exchange process penetrates.One of the fundamental concepts of equilibrium is that it is dynamic. At equilibrium both the forward and reverse reactions occur at equal rates, such that the net overall reaction is zero. This concept has been used with success to describe the dissolution rates of major rock forming mineral and glasses through the application of transition state theory (e.g. It is commonly assumed that isotopic fractionation does not occur during congruent dissolution (e.g. The present study also provides insight into metal isotope fractionation during carbonate dissolution and precipitation. To date, most work on metal isotope fractionation in carbonates has focussed on the behaviour of calcium (Ca) ( Because Mg directly substitutes for Ca within the carbonate lattice, Mg may be expected to fractionate isotopically in a manner similar to that observed by Ca. Magnesium has three stable isotopes ( The application of the Ca and Mg isotope systems as paleo-environmental proxies (e.g. The closed-system experiments reported in this study are described in detail by Pure magnesite seeds were produced by placing ∼20 Magnesite dissolution/precipitation experiments were performed in 400 Fluid phase pH measurements were performed at 25 The Mg concentration of each sample was measured by flame Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) with an analytical uncertainty of ∼1% and a detection limit of 6 Mg separation was achieved using the cationic exchange resin Bio-Rad 200–400 mesh AG50W-X12, with 1 All isotopic analyses were performed on the Thermo-Finnigan ‘Neptune’ MC-ICP-MS at Géosciences Environnement Toulouse. Samples were introduced to the Ar Plasma in 2% aqueous HNO The measured concentrations of Mg in the reactive aqueous fluid during the experiments performed in this study are listed in All measured Evidence that magnesite dissolution was congruent during the initial attainment of steady-state in each experiments has been presented by Assuming that isotopic equilibrium is achieved between the fluid and surface of the dissolving magnesite, the thickness of the isotopically equilibrated surface layer can be calculated. Mass conservation requires The thicknesses of the ‘isotopically equilibrated surface layers’ produced by magnesite dissolution in these experiments was calculated by adopting The evolution of the fluid isotopic composition following the temperature drop in experiment M8 is particularly interesting as it tracks the re-equilibration of Mg during the dissolution of the precipitated magnesite ( The increase in reactor temperature following attainment of the initial chemical steady-state provoked magnesite precipitation and Mg isotope fractionation. The degree to which this isotopic fractionation was influenced by kinetic factors is shown in Insight into the processes controlling isotopic fractionation can be obtained from Data from all three experiments suggest that isotopic equilibrium was ultimately attained as the magnesite surface approached chemical equilibrium with the fluid. The equilibrium fractionation factors ( A comparison of the Mg isotope equilibrium fractionation factors for magnesite determined in this study with those theoretically calculated by density-functional electronic structure models ( The results of this study demonstrate that the transfer of isotopes to and from a mineral surface is unidirectional at far-from-equilibrium conditions but bidirectional at near-to-chemical equilibrium conditions. These observations have a number of significant consequences for the preservation of isotopic signatures in water–rock systems. First, these observations suggest that preservation of kinetic isotope signatures may be a rare occurrence in natural systems; they will only be preserved in incomplete or unidirectional reactions and it is uncommon that high degrees of undersaturation or supersaturation are maintained in natural processes (large disequilibria in water–rock systems tend to be erased as minerals dissolve and precipitate). Consequently natural kinetic isotope effects should only be preserved in rare cases, such as persistent strong disequilibria in soil solutions, or where a precipitating mineral is instantaneously isolated from the growth solution. This contrasts with many laboratory experiments, where flow and other reactors can maintain a fluid at far-from-chemical equilibrium conditions for extended time periods. The results presented above also demonstrate that isotopic equilibration between a mineral and its co-existing fluid continues at chemical equilibrium. The degree to which this may eradicate a paleo-environmental isotopic signature depends on how deep below the mineral surface this continued isotopic equilibration penetrates. We estimate that the isotopically equilibrated surface layer on magnesite developed to a thicknesses of tens of unit cells over the ∼10 Magnesium (Mg) isotopes were found to fractionate in a manner similar to calcium (Ca) isotopes during the precipitation of magnesite and calcite, respectively, with lighter Mg isotopes being preferentially incorporated into the solid phase during the linear growth of magnesite. The equilibrium fractionation factors ( We gratefully acknowledge Alain Castillo and Jean-Claude Harrichoury for technical assistance with the experimental work, Carole Causserand with the Mg-concentration analyses, Carole Boucayrand, Jérôme Chemleff and Rémi Meyer regarding the isotopic analyses and Frédéric Candaulap and Aurelie Lanzanova for the ICP-MS analyses. The manuscript benefited from discussions and support from colleagues at the Géosciences Environnement Toulouse, with particular thanks to Oleg Pokrovsky and Kevin Burton. The work was supported by the European Community through the Mineral Nucleation and Growth Kinetics Research Training Network (MRTN-CT-2006-035488) and the Mineral–Fluid Interface Reactivity Early Stage Training Network (MEST-CT-2005-021120). Assessment of fractionation effects during repeated passes through the ion exchange columns for four sample types: Basalt (BCR); Seawater (IAPSO); Mg standard (OUMg); Carbonate (JDol-1). Repeated passes of the seawater, carbonate and the Mg standard gave values indistinguishable from each other (within analytical uncertainty), demonstrating that no isotopic fractionation of Mg occurred during the purification protocol and confirming a 100% Mg yield. Significant differences were observed with the repeated basalt analyses, however, and are thought to reflect interference effects caused by incomplete removal of Ti. This is contrary to the findings of Reproducibility of Mg isotope standards DSM, CAM and OUMg, and the dolomitic carbonate standard JDol-1 for analytical sessions covering the period during which the sample measurements in this study were made. The reproducibility of JDol-1 implies a long-term sample