The reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic (RP-HPLC) behavior of some newly synthesized hydroxythioxanthone derivatives using binary acetonitrile–water mixtures as mobile phase has been examined. First, the variation in the retention time of each molecule as a function of mobile phase properties was studied by Kamlet–Taft solvatochromic equations. Then, the influences of molecular structure of the hydroxythioxanthone derivatives on their retention time in various mobile phase mixtures were investigated by quantitative structure–property relationship (QSPR) analysis. Finally, a unified model containing both the molecular structure parameters and mobile phase properties was developed to describe the chromatographic behavior of the systems studied. Among the solvent properties, polarity/polarizability parameter (π
                     *) and hydrogen-bond basicity (β), and among the solute properties, the most positive local charge (MPC), the sum of positive charges on hydrogen atoms contributing in hydrogen bonding (SPCH) and lipophilicity index (log
                     P) were identified as controlling factors in the RP-HPLC behavior of hydroxythioxanthone derivatives in actonitrile–water binary solvents.Thioxanthone derivatives have been extensively studied owing to their medicinal properties such as antihistaminic, antiparasitic, neuroleptic, and antitumor activities Chromatographic techniques, especially thin-layer chromatography (TLC) Hydroorganic solvent mixtures are widely used in many branches of chemistry, ranging from reaction media for synthesis to electrochemistry, and from hydrometallurgy to liquid chromatography as mobile phases On the other hand, studying the quantitative effects of molecular structure on the retention behavior of solutes (i.e., quantitative structure–property relationships, QSPR, or quantitative structure–retention relationships, QSRR) in different chromatographic systems is of prime importance in chromatographic studies However, literature reports on the simultaneous studies of the effects of both mobile phase composition and molecular structure on the retention mechanism in RP-HPLC is quite sparse. By using such studies, a deeper knowledge about the solute–mobile phase interactions will also be obtained. In this context, the objective of this article was modeling of the RP-HPLC retention behavior of 18 newly synthesized hydroxythioxanthone derivatives ( HPLC grade acetonitrile (Merck) and deionized water mixtures were used as mobile phase (mole fractions of 0.2–0.95 of acetonitrile). The structure of hydroxythioxanthone derivatives used in this study is represented in The HPLC apparatus consisted of a PU-2080 plus delivery system (Jasco, Japan), equipped with a UV-2070 plus detector (Jacso, Japan), set at 280 A 10 The effect of solvent composition on the retention time was investigated for each thioxantone derivative, separately. In the case of each molecule, a multilinear model based on the general equation of Kamlet and co-workers A linear interpolation was used to estimate solvatochromic parameters for solvent compositions whose values were not reported. The solvatochromic parameters are listed in The chemical structure of molecules was constructed using Hyperchem package (Version 7, Hypercube Inc.). The Different molecular descriptors were calculated using Hyperchem and Gaussian 98 packages. Physichochemical properties such as molecular volume (V), molecular surface area (SA), lipophobicity index (log In the case of each mixed solvent as mobile phase, separate QSPR models were developed to make a connection between solutes’ structure and retention time in a specified mobile phase composition. Multiple linear regressions with stepwise selection of variables of SPSS software was used to find the most convenient QSPR model for each solvent composition. For each solvent composition, the matrix of predictor variables was the calculated descriptors data matrix ( In another trial, it was attempted to find a unified QSPR model for all mobile phase compositions. To do so, the vector of the capacity factor of the solutes in each mobile phase composition ( The molecular structures of the thioxantone derivatives investigated in this study are listed in A Finepak SIL C18 endcapped stationary phase with a very low metal content was found suitable. Using this stationary phase, all peaks were symmetrical ( The recorded chromatograms of molecule T1 in different mole fractions of acetonitrile are shown in The retention time data were collected in a matrix, whose rows and columns included the solute and solvent composition data, respectively. These data were used to derive quantitative relationships between both retention time and solvent composition and retention time and solute structure. Preliminary studies showed that logarithmic transformation of capacity factor (log  The presence of On the other hand, the coefficients of In QSPR studies, a single dependent or predictor variable is necessary for each molecule of data set. However, in this study we have a series of capacity factors (i.e. 16 numbers) for each molecule belonging to 16 different mobile phase compositions. Therefore, for the sake of simplicity in the case of each mobile phase composition, separate QSRR models were obtained. According to the results of previous section, the solute acidity and polarity are significant in their retention behavior in the chromatographic system under study. Therefore, attempts were made to calculate descriptors describing these types of interactions. We mainly focused on the electronic (including HOMO and LUMO energies, dipole moments, and partial atomic charges) and physicochemical parameters (including lipophilicity index, log When the most convenient subsets of descriptors were selected for each mobile phase composition, we interestingly found that the structure–retention relationships in all compositions could be described by models containing the same descriptors. The unified model was in the form of log Interestingly, the statistical significance of the QSRR models in mobile phases with lower acetonitrile content is higher than those compositions with high amounts of acetonitrile. Two reasons can be given for this observation. First, the retention times or capacity factors of a series of solutes are smaller in acetonitrile rich solvents in comparison with solvents having higher water content. Therefore, relative errors in measuring retention times are higher in acetonitrile rich solvents. Consequently, higher residual errors and lower modeling performances are expected. Accordingly, the resulted errors can be attributed to uncertainty in response measurement not to the models lack of fit. The second reason for higher residual errors in acetonitrile rich solvents can be related to the fact that solute–solvent interactions in acetonitrile rich binary solvents may be complicated and more extra terms should be considered. Among the solute descriptors appeared in the QSRR models, the sum of positive charges on hydrogen atoms contributing in hydrogen bonding (SPCH) can be related to the hydrogen-bond acidity of the solutes. More positive charge on a hydrogen atom increases its ability for hydrogen-bonding. Therefore, molecules having higher SPCH can have stronger interactions with mobile phase and, consequently, they will elute with higher speed. This is in close agreement with the negative coefficient of this parameter, which describes solutes with higher SPCH have lower retention times. The absolute value of SPCH coefficient gives a measure of the degree of acid–base interaction between solute and solvent. The plot of this value against the acetonitrile mole fraction is represented in The positive coefficients of most positive charge (MPC) and lipophilicity index (log The presence of log At the last step in development of quantitative models for characterization of the RP-HPLC behavior of the studied thioxantone derivatives, attempts were made to obtain a model considering the effects of both solvent composition and solute chemical structure. As it was mentioned in the experimental section, the data set in this case is composed of 272 data points of capacity factors (17 solutes in 16 mobile phase), among which 200 samples were used in model development step (calibration phase) and the rest was used to evaluate model prediction ability. Random design was used for data classification. Multi linear regression (MLR) with stepwise selection of variables resulted in the following equation: Obviously, this equation represents very high statistical quality with very good generalization and stability measured by leave-one-out and leave-10-out cross-validation correlation coefficient (i.e., Eq. In this work, multi linear regression was used to find those properties of acetonitrile–water mixtures which affect the retention time of several novel hydroxythioxantone derivatives in RP-HPLC. The polarity/polarizability parameter (