The changes in the elemental composition of the clinoptilolite-rich tuff from Oaxaca (México) produced by treatment with acid phosphate solutions at pH values from 0 to 6 was investigated as well as the behavior of the cation species from the clinoptilolite-rich tuff in relation to the dealumination of this zeolitic material. The elemental composition of the natural zeolite was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy. According to the experimental data, the pH of the phosphate solutions influence the final elemental composition of the clinoptilolite-rich tuff and the dealumination of this material at pH 0 and 70 °C is around 30 wt.%. The concentration of Na and K from the clinoptilolite-rich tuff varies according to the concentration of aluminum present in this material after the acid phosphate treatment and their behavior depends on the nature of each chemical species.One problem in the phosphate industry at the moment is purification of phosphoric acid. It contains a variety of impurities that are present in the raw phosphoric rock. The benefit of this material through the humid processes consists in the treatment of the phosphoric rock with sulfuric acid. For this treatment calcium sulphate and phosphoric acid are obtained. Nevertheless, in order to make phosphoric acid for use in applications other than fertilizers it must be purified beyond the initial acid extraction process because of lixiviable ions such as iron, cadmium, calcium, magnesium, vanadium and aluminum ( Natural zeolites are becoming more and more important for the removal of contaminant substances such as heavy metals, because of their capacity for ion exchange, adsorption and selectivity as well as its thermal and mechanical properties ( The chemical modification of zeolites by acid can increase both porosity and the capacity of adsorption. However, not only adsorption capacity of the material is altered, but acid treatment could also alter the secondary porosity and the crystalline network of the zeolite. It is necessary to investigate the chemical changes produced by the acidic treatment of zeolites in order to verify that the desired improvements occur without altering properties of interest for the final application, particularly in the phosphoric acid industry. Therefore, the aim of this work was to evaluate the elemental composition of the untreated and treated natural zeolite with acid phosphate solutions over a pH interval between 0 and 6 in order to know the effect of the acidic media on the leaching of the cations from the zeolitic structure. The behavior of the cationic species from the natural zeolite as a function of the dealumination of the zeolitic material after the acid phosphate treatments in this work was also considered. Natural zeolite from the state of Oaxaca (NZO), located between the parallels 97°13′ W and 17°14′ N, was collected in rock form. Samples of this zeolitic rock were crushed and sieved to obtain a grain size of 10 mesh. The average grain size had a diameter of 1.7 mm. This material presents a specific surface area of 12.58 The phosphoric acid (PA) used in this work was 85% pure reagent grade. The components of this reagent are shown in An aqueous solution of pH 0 was prepared with this phosphoric acid with a ratio 1:1. The sodium phosphate solutions were prepared based on the phosphate production as follows: 600 mL of phosphoric acid solutions at pH 0 were put into a glass reactor with a heat cover and aliquots of 800,980 or 1200 mL of 5 M sodium hydroxide solution was slowly added with agitation (150 rpm) and heating at 70 °C to obtain the phosphate solutions at pH 2, 4 and 6, respectively. In this work, these solutions are named as SP2, SP4 and SP6 ( 1 g samples of NZO were treated with phosphate solutions that had pH values between 0 and 6, maintaining a liquid–solid ratio of 10:1, at a temperature of 70 °C with mechanical agitation for 24 h. These samples were denoted as NZO The principal elements (Si, Al, Na, K, Ca, Mg and Fe) composing the different zeolitic samples were determined by complete acid digestion of these materials using a mixture of fluoric, chloric and perchloric acids in a ratio of 1:1:1, in a microwave stove with close atmosphere. A Perkin Elmer 3100® atomic absorption spectrometer was used to quantify each element. The phosphate solutions obtained at the end of the NZO rock treatment were analyzed by atomic absorption for aluminum quantification. An aliquot was taken from the sample, and then digested with hydrochloric acid and a few drops of nitric acid. Deionized water was added to a final volume of 50 mL. The aluminum concentration was determined by atomic absorption at a wavelength of 309.3 nm. Clinoptilolite is commonly defined by the general formula (Na, K, Ca All structural determinations of clinoptilolite confirm that (Si, Al)O Although silicon variability is found between the different treated zeolitic samples with phosphate solutions, the experimental error suggests that there is not a significant difference in the content of this element in the samples (25 wt.%, considering an experimental error of 5%). Nevertheless, a remarkable leaching of aluminum from the natural zeolite treated with a phosphate solution at 70 °C is observed at pH 0: 3.6 wt.% aluminum for NZO The sodium concentration in the zeolitic samples after treatment with the phosphate solution at pH 0 is much less than when the zeolite is treated with a solution at pH 2, the last being similar to the concentration of sodium found in zeolitic rock without treatment ( Calcium shows a remarkable decrease in the zeolitic samples treated with acid solutions at pH values between 2 and 4, being less significant at pH 6 as compared to the calcium concentration in the material without treatment ( Potassium concentration in zeolite notably diminishes after acid treatment of the zeolitic material at pH values 0 and 2, in comparison with the NZO, however at pH values of 4 and 6 ( Iron is a natural component of zeolites and several authors report iron as a mineral, such as Fe Another element found in the clinoptilolite-rich tuff is magnesium which occupies the M4 ion exchange sites from the zeolite network. Its concentration in zeolitic rock is low (< It was found by One important aspect to consider when treating zeolitic material with an acid media is that there is no leaching of aluminum because the structural characteristics of the zeolites as well as their ion exchange properties depend on it. When the natural zeolite is treated with a phosphate solution at pH 0, there is a greater leaching of aluminum in the zeolitic material (33.7 wt.%) and at pH 6 we observed less dealumination in the zeolite (< The sodium and potassium concentration from the zeolitic material changes after the treatment with acid phosphate solutions at pH 0 to 6 as a consequence of the dealumination of the zeolite, as can be seen in The treatment of zeolitic rock from Oaxaca with phosphate solutions modifies their characteristics depending on the acidity of the aqueous media. Na, Ca and K extra-framework ions leached mostly from clinoptilolite-rich tuff treated at pH 0 and 70 °C. The zeolitic dealumination also happens in these conditions. Fe associated with the zeolitic rock was leached at pH values of 0 and 2. At pH 4 or 6, the concentration of aluminum, calcium and potassium are similar to natural zeolite without treatment, but the concentration of sodium increases in the phosphate media. The concentration of sodium and potassium depends on the concentration of aluminum present in the natural zeolite and the corresponding behavior is described according to the nature of the species involved. The authors acknowledge financial support provided by CONACYT (Project 46219) and are grateful to Dr. Pedro Bosch and Technician of the Chemistry Department.