The leaching rate of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) in H2SO4 solutions depends on the redox potential determined by the concentration ratio of Fe3+ to Fe2+, and the rate is higher at redox potentials below a critical value (critical potential). In actual leaching systems, different metal ions are released from coexisting minerals to the aqueous phase. The present study investigated the effects of coexisting metal ions on the critical potential of chalcopyrite leaching.
                  Shaking-flask leaching experiments were carried out with 0.1 g of ground chalcopyrite and 10 cm3 of 0.1 kmol m−3 H2SO4 containing 0.1 kmol m−3 Fe2+ and 0.001 kmol m−3 of the metal ions at 298 K in air. The initial redox potential was adjusted by adding Fe3+, and the amount of Cu extracted after 24 h was investigated as a function of the potential. The results indicate that the critical potential increases by the addition of Ag+ or Bi3+ but is not affected by Pd2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Ni2+, Co2+, or Mn2+. The results were interpreted by a reaction model assuming the formation of intermediate Cu2S due to the reduction of chalcopyrite and subsequent oxidation of the Cu2S at potentials below the critical potential. Catalytic effects of metal ions on chalcopyrite leaching are also discussed based on the experimental results and the proposed model.In the past decades, dump and heap leaching of low-grade copper ore, combined with solvent-extraction/electro-winning methods, have become important in copper production, because of low capital requirements and operation costs. However, this hydrometallurgical process has not been fully successful, due to the extremely slow leaching kinetics of a common copper source, chalcopyrite (CuFeS In dump and heap leaching, sulfuric acid solution is used as the leaching solution and chalcopyrite is oxidized by Fe The relation between the redox potential and chalcopyrite leaching rate is complex and similar to the active–passive behavior observed in the oxidation process of metals like iron. With increasing potential, the leaching rate increases to reach a maximum and then suddenly decreases, and the leaching rate is little dependent on the potential above a critical value (critical potential) ( In previous studies ( In actual leaching systems, different metal ions are released from the gangue minerals in the copper ore, and coexist in the aqueous phase. It may be that other metal ions affect the critical potential of chalcopyrite leaching similar to the effect of Ag A ground chalcopyrite (median stokes diameter on weight basis, 5.5 μm) was used in the leaching experiments. Details of the sample preparation were provided elsewhere ( Except where otherwise mentioned, leaching solutions were 0.1 kmol m The leaching solutions were prepared by mixing stock solutions of metal salts and sulfuric acid to obtain the desired concentrations of the components. In most cases, the stock solutions of metal salts were obtained by dissolving the metal salts in diluted sulfuric acid at room temperature, but PdSO During the preparation of the leaching solutions containing Ag Leaching experiments were performed with 50 cm Leach residues for X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis were prepared with experiments using 500 cm   The initial and final concentrations of Pd  Similar to Ag  As mentioned in the previous sections, chalcopyrite leaching in sulfuric acid solutions depends on the redox potential and the leaching rate is higher at redox potentials below a critical value. It was also found that the critical potential increases with coexisting Ag The model assumes that the anodic dissolution of chalcopyrite at the redox potentials above the critical value is according to At redox potentials below the critical potential, chalcopyrite leaching is assumed to be due to a two-step reaction: the formation of intermediate Cu In the leaching system composed of a pure chalcopyrite and H To avoid confusion, the critical potential defined by Eq. A previous paper ( The critical potential (equilibrium potential) for this reaction is A similar approach is used to evaluate the effects of the other metal ions on the critical potential of chalcopyrite leaching, i.e. it is assumed that the H For divalent metal ions, M For the trivalent Bi The calculated values of The critical potentials for various metal ions were calculated with Eqs. The critical potentials with Ag As above, the observed effects of Cd As described in In the equilibrium state, the relation between metal ion activity ( From a thermodynamic viewpoint, the critical potential with Pd In the model, Cu As above, there is no direct evidence of the presence of the intermediate Cu It has been reported that metal ions such as Ag  The above interpretation may be a possible explanation for the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. As shown in the present study, however, even in the absence of PO It has also been reported that Hg It is known that Hg The above interpretations of the catalytic effects of metal ions on bioleaching of chalcopyrite are not supported by experimental evidence, and must be substantiated by future investigations. However, the model proposed in the present study does explain the effect of various coexisting metal ions on chalcopyrite leaching and would be useful to predict the redox potential range suitable for chalcopyrite oxidation in actual heap or dump leaching situations. The effects of coexisting metal ions on the critical potential of chalcopyrite leaching were investigated by shaking-flask leaching experiments with 0.1 kmol m