Recent studies have shown that varying the distribution of a set volume of air to a flotation bank significantly affects the performance of the bank. To date, however, the volume of air to be distributed has usually been arbitrarily set as that added with the ‘as found’ air rates, the typical operating air rates; not necessarily an optimum.
                  Studies examining the effect of different total air additions, at a constant distribution, have shown the addition maximising air recovery typically yields the best performance. Air recovery is the fraction of the air added to a cell which overflows the lip of the cell as unburst bubbles and shows a peak with respect to cell aeration.
                  In this work three experimental case studies are presented to examine of the role of aeration in flotation performance, with the aim of developing a generic technique to determine both the required total air addition and distribution of air to a bank of flotation cells.
                  The first case study compares performance at three different total air additions. The air addition which gave the Peak Air Recovery (PAR) also gave the highest mineral recovery. Thus air recovery optimisation yields the optimum total air addition to a flotation bank. In the second case study the air recovery was optimised from each cell in a bank individually. The PAR air addition once more gave the highest mineral recovery from the bank. Therefore, air recovery optimisation determines the optimum total air addition to a bank and also provides a distribution for that air. The third case study compares a profile based on the PAR air rates with other distributions of the same total air. The results show the profile based on the PAR air rates gave a significantly higher cumulative mineral recovery than other distributions of the same volume of air, for the same cumulative grade.
                  The results of the three case studies show air recovery optimisation of each cell in a bank is a robust and generic technique to simultaneously determine the optimum bank aeration and the optimum distribution of this air within the bank.A given volume of air can be distributed to a bank of flotation cells in a range of different ways. The technique of varying the distribution to obtain improved flotation performance is known as air rate profiling. Many air distribution profiles can be readily imagined, but there are some which are commonly encountered: A balanced distribution profile: all cells in the bank have the same air rate. An increasing distribution profile: a low air rate in the first cell and the air rate is increased proportionally to each cell along the bank. A decreasing distribution profile: the opposite of increasing, a high air rate in the first cell and the air rate is decreased proportionally to each cell down the bank. A parabolic or ‘humped’ distribution profile: a low air rate in the first cell, the air rate is increased to a maximum at the mid point of the bank before being decreased to the end of the bank. The Standard, or “as-found”, distribution profile: is that set by the operator and may, or may not, exhibit a definable structure. Different profiles may ultimately be found to be best for cells operating under different duties, for example as roughers, scavengers or cleaners. Before this can be determined, however, a technique is required to enable the total air addition and the distribution of this air to a bank of cells to be determined efficiently. In this work, following a review of previous work, three case studies are examined in order to develop a robust and generic technique to determine both the optimum air addition to a bank and the optimum distribution of this air. There have been several studies of late ( The studies of  In these studies, however, the volume of air to be distributed was often chosen as the volume of air added with the “as-found” profile set by the operators. In an alternative approach, The concept of a fractional air recovery was introduced by where Air recovery has also been shown to be a non-intrusive measure of froth stability ( The results of the previous studies ( At this point it is worth noting that although froth depth and reagents, especially frother type and addition, are also known to affect air recovery (e.g.  As shown by The resulting flotation performance trends are shown in  The results of this study show air recovery optimisation can be used to determine the total volume of air required for a bank to yield optimum performance. If the total air volume is below this required amount then mineral recovery is lost, while grade is gained, but if the total air volume is greater than the required amount then both grade and recovery are lost. In this case study, preliminary air recovery tests were carried out to determine the PAR air rate for each cell individually. Experiments were then carried out testing three air rate conditions corresponding to air rates below the PAR air rates, the PAR air rates and air rates beyond the PAR air rates. These conditions had the same profile down the bank but added low, intermediate and high volumes of air respectively to the three cells. Experiments were carried out on the first three rougher cells (A–C) of the primary flotation circuit at BRPM in South Africa. These are 90 The air flowrate to each cell was the only variable manipulated during the trials. The air rates were set using plant controls and confirmed by gas velocity measurements. Preliminary tests were performed on each of the three cells across a range of air rates. In these tests only the superficial gas velocity ( In order to determine air recovery, digital video cameras were set up near the lips of both the inner and outer launders above the overflowing froth surface for each of the three cells. Under steady state conditions in each experiment the top surface of the froth was video recorded for off-line analysis using the image analysis software Smartfroth ( Samples of the feed to the bank, and the concentrate and tails for each of the first three cells of the rougher bank were taken in each experiment. In addition, the design of the cells allowed the concentrate mass flowrates to be measured. The solids content of the samples was determined gravimetrically on the plant site, with platinum content being determined by off plant laboratory analysis. A time of at least 90 These tests were performed on all three cells in sequence. For each cell the air rate and air recovery were measured at a range of air rates to find the PAR air rate. Once the PAR air rate had been determined the cell remained operating at that air rate and tests were performed on the next cell. The results of the preliminary tests show a peak in air recovery was obtained for all three cells, In general the cells in the primary rougher bank are operated at air rates higher than the PAR air rates, so the beyond PAR condition could be considered an “as-found” condition. The PAR air rate obtained in this testwork is lower than that found by  The corresponding flotation performance results are shown in These results agree with those of the previous case study ( The results of these two case studies have shown that air recovery optimisation can be used to determine the total air addition to a bank of cells to yield optimum flotation performance. The results of the second case study further show air recovery optimisation can also yield a distribution profile for this optimum volume of air. In the studies so far, however, no comparison has been made between performance with the PAR air rate profile and performance with other profiles adding the same optimum volume of air to the bank. Indeed, in the first two case studies it could be argued that the response is as likely to be related to changes in the flux of bubble surface area in the pulp, In this final case study flotation performance with an air rate profile based on the PAR air rates is compared to flotation performance with three other distribution profiles. All four profiles provided a similar total aeration to the bank allowing for direct comparison, previously reported by   The Stepped and Sawtooth profiles were constrained to use approximately the same total air flowrate to the bank as the Standard profile, and were within 8%. The PAR profile was not so constrained, but fortuitously had a total air flowrate approximately the same as the other three profiles, thus making the direct comparison possible. The flotation performance results for copper are shown in Copper was used, in place of platinum, in this instance to show that the PAR technique influences base metal minerals and PGM minerals in the same way. The total air addition to the bank for the four profiles in this case study is very similar,  Due to the varying air rate profiles down the bank only the results for cell A can be used to assess the effect of aeration on performance. From low to high the air rates on The results on The results of this case study show that different air rate profiles, delivering the same total air as the PAR profile, yield the same cumulative grade by the end of the bank, but a much lower cumulative recovery. Consequently, air recovery optimisation can be used to simultaneously determine both the optimum total air addition and optimum distribution of this air for a bank of cells. Industrial testwork has also been carried out on base metal operations and yielded similar results to those reported here for PGMs. These studies will be reported in future publications. Flotation bank air rate and profile optimisation using the PAR technique yields the highest cumulative mineral recovery from a bank of cells without compromising the concentrate grade. This type of optimisation may therefore appear more applicable to rougher and scavenger cells where high recovery is the focus, than to cleaner cells, where high grades are targeted. In addition, it is recognised that optimisation of one flotation bank does not necessarily mean optimising the entire circuit. Air recovery optimisation is directly related to froth structure and stability, both of which are affected by bubble loading and bubble mobility. It can be expected that the unique operating conditions of each cell, including feed throughput, grade, grind size, reagent concentration, reagent type, air dispersion, bubble size and cell geometries, will yield a unique PAR air rate for each cell and thus a unique PAR profile for each bank. As a consequence, the aim of this paper was not to provide a single air addition and air rate profile to operate all flotation banks at, but to describe a technique to determine efficiently the air addition and air rate profile for a bank of cells. The results presented show air recovery optimisation of each cell in a bank determines the optimum air addition and distribution of air for that bank. If the air addition to a bank of flotation cells is too low then grade is gained but at the expense of recovery. Conversely, if the aeration is too high than both grade and recovery are lost. Operating at the PAR air addition yields the highest mineral recovery, with no negative impact on the concentrate grade. Different distributions of the same volume of air added to a bank with the PAR air rate distribution yield the same cumulative grade as the PAR distribution, but yield a significantly lower cumulative recovery by the end of the bank than a profile based on the PAR air rates. Air recovery optimisation, therefore, is a robust and generic technique to simultaneously determine the optimum total air addition to a bank of cells and the optimum distribution of this air to the bank. This work was supported by funding from Anglo Platinum and the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery. The Peak Air Recovery-based froth flotation optimisation methodology is protected by a PCT-stage patent application, covering most of the countries of the world, with additional protection in Chile and Peru.