Cetrimide was proven to be an effective selective extractant for uranium from phosphoric acid solutions of comparable concentration to the wet process phosphoric acid (WPPA). Several experiments have thus been performed to determine the relevant factors of both uranium extraction and stripping using synthetic phosphoric acid of comparable P2O5 and U concentration to the commercial acid. The obtained optimum conditions have successfully been applied upon the phosphoric acid produced by Abu Zaabal Fertilizers and Chemicals Co. From the stripped liquor using 1M HCl, the stripped uranium from the latter acid was precipitated as ammonium diuranate which was confirmed by XRD analysis. The kinetic model of uranium extraction by cetrimide extractant from phosphoric acid was also studied. The data on the effect of temperature on uranium extraction by cetrimide showed that the enthalpy change is −19kJ/mol indicating its exothermic nature.The need of more specific extractants for the recovery of heavy metals from their solutions has led to the development in the synthesis of new complexion extractants. In other words, it has to be mentioned that extraction of metals from their aqueous solutions and the corresponding separation methods have lately gained an increasing importance through transfer of metal ions from an aqueous to an organic liquid phase (solvent extraction). In the present work, cetrimide was used as a new extractant for the selective recovery of uranium from phosphoric acid. Phosphate ores are mainly used (80%) in fertilizer production. The remaining 20% of phosphate ores is being utilized for the production of detergents, metal surface treatment reagents, chemicals for food industry and other phosphorus compounds. Phosphoric acid is actually considered as an important alternate or secondary source of uranium where the world resources of phosphate ores are estimated to be about 18,000 Although uranium recovery from WPPA by solvent extraction techniques is a proven technology and has commercially been applied on a limited scale, however, the actual market conditions make it marginally economic. Increasing uranium prices and/or technological improvements of the process might indeed result in better economics. Three industrial solvent extraction processes have been applied; namely DEHPA/TOPO [di-(2-ethyl hexyl) phosphoric acid/trioctyl phosphine oxide] and the OPAP [octyl phenyl acid phosphate] processes developed by the Oak Ridge National lab (USA) while the OPPA [octyl pyrophosphoric acid] process has been developed by the Dow Company. According to the IAEA report in 1989, the few plants that are still working are based on the DEHPA/TOPO process. Since then, several research and development activities are continuing along different lines; viz improvement of the DEHPA/TOPO process or development of new liquid–liquid extractants or other processes that might involve solid ion exchanges, liquid membranes, etc. In this regard, it can be mentioned that uranium recovery from phosphoric acid has further been studied through DEHPA with TOPO by In the field of developing new interesting surfactants, it can be cited that both Th (IV) and U(VI) were determined as ternary complexes with methylthymol blue and cetyl dimethyl ethyl ammonium bromide ( The present work has thus been designed to investigate the potentiality of applying commercial cetrimide to selectively extract the uranium metal value from phosphoric acid as a means for its recovery therefrom. For this purpose, several series of extraction and stripping experiments have been performed using a proper synthetic phosphoric acid solution simulating the WPPA (30% P For the analytical works, all the used chemicals and reagents were of A.R. grade while in both extraction and stripping studies of uranium, pure chemicals and reagents were used. The working cetrimide extractant was however of a commercial grade for economic reasons. As mentioned above, the relevant factors affecting uranium extraction and stripping with the study of cetrimide extractant have first been optimized using stimulated synthetic uranium-bearing phosphoric acid solution. The latter assaying 30% P As mentioned above, Abu Zaabal WPPA was used in the present work as a case study upon which the optimum factors obtained for uranium extraction from the synthetic acid would be applied, for this purpose, a sample of the former has kindly been provided by Abu Zaabal Co. and has completely been analyzed for the present work. Uranium extraction from either the synthetic phosphoric acid or that produced by Abu Zaabal Co. was carried out using the cetrimide extractant dissolved in octanol at proper molarities at 25 The relevant solvent extraction factors; namely the alcohol type used as diluents, the extractant concentration, the contact time, the temp., the settling time, the aqueous phase/organic phase (A/O) ratio as well as the effect of some interfering ions on uranium extraction have been properly studied. On the other hand, a loaded solvent sample was prepared for studying the stripping behavior of the extracted uranium. The relevant stripping factors that have also been studied included the type of the stripping agents, the HCl concentration, the contact and the settling time periods besides the temp. as well as the aqueous phase/organic phase (A/O) ratio. In addition, to calculate the number of theoretical stages required for maximum loading and stripping of the solvent phase, the corresponding McCabe–Thiele diagram has been plotted. Abu Zaabal wet process phosphoric acid (WPPA) was subjected to complete chemical analysis for the major components according to Uranium concentration in the different aqueous stream solutions has also been measured by the laser fluorometry technique as mentioned above. In the meantime, the added impurity elements in the corresponding stream solutions have also been determined as mentioned above. To study the type of suitable alcohol for diluting the CTAB, equal volumes of the prepared synthetic phosphoric acid assaying 70 The effect of cetrimide concentration upon uranium extraction efficiency from the 30% synthetic phosphoric acid (70 The replaced Br ions have indeed remained behind in the aqueous solution during the complex formation; a matter which has been confirmed by its precipitation as a yellowish precipitate by adding a AgNO In other words, while the D2EHPA/TOPO extractant mixture extracts uranium from phosphoric acid as a uranyl cation replacing hydrogen, it is herein extracted as an anionic complex. The former reaction can be represented as follows: Thus, TOPO does not participate in the reaction but reinforces the action of D2EHPA synergistically by displacing the equilibrium as shown above. The effect of contact time upon U extraction efficiency from the working acid by CTAB was studied in the range from 1.5 to 20 Under the same experimental condition of 0.001 The settling time after A/O shaking is one of the most important factors affecting the extraction efficiency. This factor was thus studied by mixing equal volumes of the phosphoric acid feed solution (30% P Having realized a uranium extraction efficiency by 0.001  In order to endeavor possible interference of other metal ions in CTAB extraction of U, 4 metal ions that might be associated with U (V, Y and Ce) besides Ca in different concentration (100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 To study the effect of O/A ratio upon uranium extraction from the working synthetic solution using 0.001 For studying the uranium stripping factors, a uranium loaded 0.001 Uranium stripping was then carried out upon the latter at room temperature by shaking equal volumes of the loaded solvent with a suitable stripping solution for a proper contact time. The studied relevant stripping factors involved the effects of the stripping agent, the contact time, the setting time, the temperature as well as the effect of the organic/aqueous phase ratio. Different stripping agents were applied to strip uranium from the loaded 0.001 The effect of HCl concentration on the uranium stripping from the loaded 0.001 The effect of contact time upon U stripping efficiency by 1 The effect of settling time on the stripping efficiency of uranium by 1 To investigate the effect of temperature upon the uranium stripping efficiencies by 1 The effect of O/A ratios upon uranium stripping from the loaded 0.001 In terms of kinetic modeling, the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order equations were used for the mathematical interpretation of the uranium extraction rate from the synthetic 30% phosphoric acid by the commercial cetrimide solution. The pseudo-first-order equation is represented as follows: The pseudo-first-order kinetic model was found to best fit the experimental results of uranium extraction by cetrimide extractant from phosphoric acid with correlation coefficients very close to unity compared to pseudo second-order kinetic model ( The parameters of the pseudo-first order kinetic model for uranium extraction from the working synthetic phosphoric acid with cetrimide extractant in octanol have been calculated and were found as follows: Variations of uranium extraction data with temperature for uranium extraction from the synthetic phosphoric acid by cetrimide were used to calculate the thermodynamic constants including the standard enthalpy (∆H), and the standard entropy (∆S) based on Van't Hoff plot using the following formula:  These values of ΔH and ΔS have then been used to obtain the corresponding free energy (ΔG The negative value of ΔH indicates that the extraction of uranium in this system is an exothermic process and that the reaction becomes more favorable at room temperature. The negative value of ∆G indicates that the extraction reaction is spontaneous. On the other hand, the observed decrease in the negative values of ∆G with elevated temperature implies that the extraction reaction becomes more favorable at room temperatures. As mentioned above, the optimum conditions of U extraction and stripping from the synthetic phosphoric acid have been applied upon uranium extraction from Abu Zaabal wet process phosphoric acid. The chemical composition of the latter has been determined as shown in Extraction process of uranium from Abu Zaabal wet process phosphoric acid was conducted using 0.001 A successful selective extraction procedure for uranium from wet process phosphoric acid has been made possible through application of the cetrimide extractant. Before applying upon the commercial acid of Abu Zaabal Fertilizers and Chemicals Co. (70