Introduction
                  The aim of our study was to identify the risk factors for avascular necrosis of the femoral head (AVN) and fixation failure (FF) after screw osteosynthesis in patients with valgus angulated femoral neck fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  We conducted a retrospective study of 308 patients (mean age, 72.5 years, range, 50–97 years), with a mean follow-up of 21.4 months (range, 12–64 months). The risk for failure in treatment (FIT) associated with patient- and fracture-related factors was evaluated by logistic regression analyses.
               
                  Results
                  FIT was identified in 32 cases (10.3%): 22 cases (7.1%) of AVN and 10 cases (3.2%) of FF. Initial valgus tilt>15° (p=0.023), posterior tilt>15° (p=0.012), and screw sliding distance (p=0.037) were significantly associated with FIT. FIT occurred in 7 patients (5.2%) with B1.2.1 fractures and 17 patients (48.6%) with B1.1.2 fractures (p<0.001). The odds of FIT were 17-fold higher in patients with initial valgus and posterior tilts>15° (B1.1.2) compared to patients with <15° of tilt in both planes (B1.2.1).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The severity of initial deformity predicts AVN and FF in patients with valgus angulated femoral neck fractures. Patients with an initial valgus and posterior tilt>15° are reasonable candidates for primary arthroplasty due to high risk of FIT.The incidence of osteoporosis and fragility fractures has increased tremendously due to the increase in life expectancy. Hip fractures are the most serious consequence of osteoporosis due to their high rate of morbidity and mortality. Hip fractures comprise an estimated 12% of all fractures in adults In their case series of 78 patients with valgus angulated femoral neck fractures treated using conventional screw osteosynthesis, Song et al. The objective of our prospective observational study was to evaluate the risk factors for AVN and FF in patients with valgus angulated femoral neck fractures treated with screw osteosynthesis. Our clinical goal was to provide data to inform selection of the most appropriate initial treatment for valgus angulated femoral neck fractures, osteosynthesis or arthroplasty, depending on the initial fracture classification and patients’ physical condition. This study was approved by our hospital’s institutional review board. During the period from January 2003 to December 2014, the authors have gone through prospectively collected orthopaedic trauma databases in two hospitals, and identified consecutive series of 1638 patients who were admitted to the emergency room for femoral neck fracture, classified as an AO/OTA fracture 31-B. Among these patients, those Surgery was performed on a fracture table under fluoroscopic guidance, with the patient under general or spinal anaesthesia. Fractures were fixed percutaneously using three 7.0 The fracture types were categorized according to the AO/OTA classification. All radiological observations and measurements were based on agreement between two evaluators. Our study group included 124 cases (40.3%) of 31-B1.1 fractures and 184 cases (59.7%) of 31-B1.2 fractures. Thirty-four patients (11%) had sustained a hip fracture on the contralateral side. The bone mineral density (BMD) of the femoral neck on the normal, contralateral, hip was measured, post-surgery, using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (Discovery; Hologic Inc., Bedford, MA, USA), with the T-score used as the measure of BMD for analysis. Patients (n Standard anteroposterior (AP) radiographs of the hip were obtained with both legs positioned in 15° of internal rotation. Lateral radiographs were taken with the opposite hip in flexion and abduction. Angulation at the fracture site was determined from the AP and lateral radiographs by measuring the angulation of the principal trabecular system in the capital fragment, as described for the measurement of the Garden alignment index Patients with and without FIT were compared on the following variables: age, sex, BMI, BMD, fracture classification, ASA classification, history of fracture of the contralateral hip, and sliding distance of the most inferior screw. Between-group differences were evaluated by Mann–Whitney U, Kruskal-Wallis, and chi-squared tests, as appropriate for the data type. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the relationship between the occurrence of FIT and patient-related variables. The 95% confidence interval (CI) of the estimated between-group difference in risk was calculated. All statistical analyses were performed with SAS version 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), with a p The demographic and clinical details of the patient group are presented in Among the 308 cases treated, 32 (10.3%) resulted in FIT, 22 cases with AVN (7.1%) and 10 cases with FF (3.2%). Among the 10 cases of FF, 6 cases of excessive sliding of the most inferior screw with associated femoral neck shortening (distance of sliding of the screw; 10.1–17.22 The associated factors of FIT for identified variables, evaluated by univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses, are reported in When effects of initial valgus deformity and posterior tilt on FIT were analysed by univariate logistic regression analysis, 31-B1.1.2 fractures (i.e., initial valgus and posterior tilt The participants in this study were patients whose initial fractures were partially displaced femoral neck fractures with varying degrees of valgus deformities (31-B1.1 and 31-B1.2). Historically, Garden stage I fracture has referred to a valgus impacted shape. However, not all of the fractures were impacted, based on the observations in this study. So we described them as valgus angulated femoral neck fracture in this study. An angulation greater than 15° causes fractures to become unstable by widening the fracture gap and comminution, which could cause treatment to fail. The Garden classification system In this study, the odds ratio of FIT was higher for an initial posterior tilt An incidence rate of 4–12% for AVN of the femoral head after valgus angulated femoral neck fracture has been reported in the literature The conventional technique for osteosynthesis of femoral neck fractures involves closed reduction, as necessary, and fixation with multiple cannulated screws. Weight bearing after osteosynthesis induces compression across the fracture that favours further contact between the proximal and distal fragments, enhancing stability at the fracture site and fracture healing. However, excessive compression across the fracture site may result in significant shortening of the femoral neck and protrusion of screws in some cases Clement et al. The limitations of our study need to be acknowledged in the interpretation of results. Foremost, we did not conduct a randomized trial but rather an observational study of current treatment options. Moreover, there was inherent bias in the selection of our study group, with patients having severe comorbidity being excluded due to treatment with primary arthroplasty. Most patients (94.1%) in our study group had an ASA class 1 or 2. Finally, we focused only on the occurrence of AVN or FF as FIT and did not consider clinical factors associated with femoral neck shortening or screw protrusion. The other limitation of this study is the fact that only patients who received 3 cannulated screw fixations were selected as subjects. For the treatment of femoral neck fractures, other implants such as sliding hip screws, fixed angle devices, and intramedullary nails could be used instead of a multiple screw fixation. The authors use both sliding hip screws and anti-rotation screws when treating Pauwels type III fractures, especially in young patients. Further studies that compare the failures in treatment of using multiple screw fixation and other implants in 31-B1 fractures are necessary. Among the 31-B1.1.2 cases which had both initial valgus deformity and posterior tilt The authors have no conflict of interest to declare We would like to thank Editage (