This work directly applies the weakest link formulation of cumulative failure probability for synchronized analysis of both size dependence and random variation of particle strength. This approach is justified from two aspects: First, the breakage of brittle particles belongs to brittle fracture, which is commonly described by the weakest-link postulate. Second, the weakest link postulate allows considering different statistical distributions in addition to the Weibull distribution. Eight sets of published breakage strength dada of different sized glass spheres and irregularly shaped grains made of different materials are proven to fall onto a master curve dictated by the weakest link statistics model.Particle comminution and powder granulation refers to the size reduction of a granular product, either as the result of an intentional effort or as an undesirable consequence. This is a topic of significant interest in chemical, pharmaceutical, food, mining, and many other industries Definition and experimental determination of particle strength. The definition and experimental determination of particle strength lays the foundation for evaluating the behavior of particle breakage. Depending on the specific applications, the breakage process of a single particle has been investigated in either quasi-static or impact loading mode. In an impact test, the variation of breakage mode and size distribution of fragmentation with impact speed is of major interest. A threshold impact speed for the occurrence of breakage is usually determined as an index of the dynamic resistance to breakage for specific particle properties in terms of particle size and mineralogy. The breakage behavior of an individual particle at static loading condition is usually studied on a symmetrical compression setup with the axially symmetrical compressive forces Statistical distribution of particle strength. The breakage of a brittle particle possesses the common features of brittle fracture, namely the inherent scatter of strength and the size effect of strength. The scatter of strength is meant by the inherent variation of breakage strength values measured from a population of particles made of nominally same material with nominally same geometrical shape and size under the same compressive loading condition, due to the random distribution of microdefects residing in a particle in terms of their spatial location, orientation, size and shape. This inherent variation makes the statistical characterization of particle strength as the method of choice for particle breakage assessment. The size effect denotes the dependence of particle strength on both the shape and the size of a particle. For a spherical particle, it is feasible to partition the inherent variation of particle strength and the size effect. However, for irregularly-shaped particles, this becomes impractical. Nevertheless, due to the lack of alternative means, statistical characterization of the breakage strength of irregularly-shaped particles has become an indispensable tool. Predominately, the distribution of particle strength has been described by the two- or three- parameter Weibull statistics as below Despite its popularity, the resultant Weibull parameters ( The weakest link postulate has been commonly adopted in the development of statistical approaches to brittle fracture. It allows taking into account different types of statistical distributions including Weibull statistics. This work directly resorts to the weakest-link formulation for the cumulative failure probability to explore an approach to statistical description and prediction of particle strength distribution. The reader is referred to As schematically illustrated in The combination of Eqs. When In principle, For the maximum principal tensile stress criterion For the normal tensile stress criterion Apart from the effect of microcrack orientation dictated by the specific microscopic fracture criterion The key takeaway from Eq. First, if g(S) follows the power law distribution, Due to Eq. Substitution of Eq. Note that Eq. Second, if f(a) for microcrack size distribution obeys the power law function, where The corresponding expressions of cumulative probability P(V) are also complex. Third, if where Substitution of Eq. Eq. The third example clearly demonstrates that Weibull statistics (Eqs. The weakest-link formulation for cumulative failure probability due to brittle fracture does provide physical insights about the detailed knowledge needed for a comprehensive characterization of particle breakage. However, as demonstrated above, there are huge difficulties in properly choosing a microscopic fracture criterion and the PDF ( where It allows utilizing multiple strength datasets of different specimen size to perform statistical characterization of particle strength. This is superior to the conventional practice of using a strength dataset obtained from a group of same-sized specimens for statistical evaluation, which often ends up with specimen size dependent statistical parameters, e.g., Weibull parameters m and σ It observes and lives with the fact that the exact microscopic fracture criterion and microcrack distribution function Note that the one-to-one correlation between Compressive loading involves much more complex stress states inside a particle than uniaxial tension of a single fiber. But the physical argument on microscopic fracture mechanism-induced complexity (in terms of microscopic fracture criterion and microcrack distribution function) to the statistical characterization of fracture strength should still apply. In addition, some other statistical distributions have also been used for modeling strength of different materials, such as the Gumbel distribution for the minimum in Over the years, many researches have published valuable breakage strength datasets for different sized particles. These third-party strength data can provide fair justification to the idea embodied in Eq. In this section, we'll evaluate the breakage strength of regularly-shaped particles. Glass spheres are perfect examples. The first example is drawn from the work of Rozenblat et al As another example, Huang et al For the examples of irregularly shaped particles analyzed below, the reader is referred to the corresponding references for detailed description of the materials. Our focus here is on strength analysis. McDowell and Amonii Rozenblat et al Nad et al At the end of this section, we want to emphasize that our major purpose is to check if the expected “master curve” for the The thought process is as follows: First, the breakage of a brittle particle falls into the category of brittle fracture. Second, the weakest-link postulate is commonly adopted in statistical modeling of brittle fracture. Third, the weakest-link statistics allows considering different microdefect distributions in a particle, with Weibull statistics being its specific case. Different weakest-link statistical formulations have been explored in Due to these considerations, it is meaningful to directly resort to the weakest-link statistics, rather than stick with Weibull statistics as its subset, to understand the size dependence and the random distribution of the breakage strength of brittle particles. This is particularly attractive for irregularly-shaped particles. It is of great interest to know that if there is a specific regime of shape irregularity in terms of sphericity and roundness, within which the size effect of particle strength can be characterized by the proposed compound parameter involving particle volume and the cumulative probability, regardless of the specific distribution of microdefects and the exact microscopic fracture criterion. Therefore, this work directly applies the weakest link model to seek a synchronized statistical characterization of both the size dependence and the random variation of the breakage strength of a single particle. The following conclusions are drawn: By analyzing the published strength data sets for the ideal glass spheres and for the irregularly-shaped particles, we have shown convincing correlation between the compound parameter Although both datasets end up with being described well by two-parameter Weibull model, in principle, the approach itself does not reject other statistical distributions, as exemplified by Eqs. Despite the “master curve” characteristic we have shown with the presented data reanalysis, we do notice that some irregularly shaped particles, e.g. soil particles in This project was founded by the According to Particularly, in uniaxial tension (σ In comparison, under the maximum principal tensile stress criterion