Buildings or structures consist of materials that are joined to form functional composites to which a wide variety of “surface coatings” is added. Debonding of such composites is necessary to ensure high-quality, material-specific recycling processes. This paper describes tests of the debonding behavior of gypsum plaster and tiles that were attached to various types of concrete or wall materials such as brickwork, calcium silica blocks, or autoclaved aerated concrete. Selective heating with subsequent bond failure was achieved by exposing the interfacial layer of the materials to microwave-active substances. In all specimens subjected to this process, the finishing material was successfully separated from its base by microwave heating. No debonding was achieved in specimens without interfacial switching layer. Laboratory results were confirmed by tests performed using an in-plant demonstrator unit. In these tests, large fragments of gypsum plaster detached from the actual wall materials, which remained undamaged. Tiles also lost their adhesive bond to their base without damaging the latter.Buildings or structures are composed of materials that are joined together to form functional composites to which a wide variety of “surface coatings” is added. To ensure recycling and reuse, it would be desirable to apply appropriate methods to completely dismantle such combinated materials and to separate the single components from each other either during demolition or in the course of subsequent reprocessing at the recycling plant. This approach would create the basis for achieving material-specific recycling and reuse, including feeding back the material into the primary product. Mechanical comminution is the conventional method used to separate the materials of composites from each other: Jaw and impact crushers are used for this purpose during processing of demolition waste. One of the disadvantages of this method is that it does not achieve complete separation of composite materials, particularly if the components of the composite exhibit a similar comminution behavior due to similar material characteristics, such as density or strength. Another drawback is that a significant amount of fines is generated that cannot yet be put to appropriate use. One of the options to achieve a high degree of separation, whilst preventing the involvement of disruptive fine particle sizes, is to apply a targeted composite debonding process to induce failure along the interfacial layers of the components. Related methods were previously developed in the field of adhesive technology, where they are referred to as “debonding on demand” Microwaves are electromagnetic oscillations ranging from 300 Microwaves are used in heating systems in many different sectors, ranging from the food industry to microwave sintering of ceramics. Dielectric constants are used to describe the behavior of materials in the microwave field. The characteristic material parameter with respect to the material's absorption capacity is the permittivity ε (dielectric function), which is expressed as a complex-valued parameter in ε ε Pertinent literature However, rather than assessing materials on the basis of their dielectric properties, it is more appropriate to study them with respect to the temperature trend depending on the duration of the treatment if materials are exposed to a certain amount of microwave energy. Haque The surface temperature of the material is generally used as variable for assessing measured temperatures. Any considerations regarding its core temperature induced by microwave exposure would have to take in account the specimen's shape and thermal conductivity. For instance, it was shown for a cylindrical basalt specimen with a diameter of 50 In the processing of mineral raw materials, the potential offered by microwave treatment is primarily seen in the weakening of the mineral structure that can be achieved by applying this method. Microwave pre-treatment leads to beneficial effects with respect to subsequent comminution and separation of materials. The related review articles The majority of the tests performed on building materials uses microwave technologies to investigate concrete, ranging from the cement production to the recycling stage. The overview published by Buttress producing cement clinker in a microwave oven; curing/post treating of concrete; measuring moisture as well as conducting research into microstructures; drilling and cutting as well as surface finishing of concrete; comminuting concrete at the end of its life-cycle. In the field of recycling, microwaves can be used to remove contaminated surface layers. More specifically, this method can be applied to concretes from nuclear power plant components whose surface layers contain radionuclides. This is where the removal process needs to ensure dust mitigation. Microwave treatment causes vaporization of water inside the pores of the concrete, which leads to tensile stresses at the impermeable structure producing various types of damage, including spalling. Yasunaka et al. Akbarnezhad Among other applications, microwave radiation used to prepare composite materials for separation could enable removable adhesive bonds Ahn In a research project jointly conducted by several institutions, the debonding of composites by microwave-induced interfacial failure was studied with a focus on two aspects: Disintegration of concrete by comminution along the aggregate-cement paste interfacial layers Debonding of multi-layer structural arrangements involving plaster or tiles attached to supporting materials. Parallel with the above tests to investigate the necessity of treating interfacial layers, the project partners also developed two “microwave ovens”, i.e. both a mobile and a stationary system that enabled treatment of the composite in-plant (at the recycling plant) and in-place (on the construction site). In the following sections of this paper, gypsum plaster attached to a load-bearing wall and tiles adhered to a variety of bases are used to describe the debonding process applied to multi-layer structural arrangements. Pertinent literature states that gypsum materials and tiles are microwave-transparent  Gypsum plasters are modified with the addition of susceptors that act as microwave-active additives so that their bonding behavior is enhanced (  Debonding occurs at an additionally introduced “interfacial switching layer” located between the gypsum plaster and its base (  Tiles provide three options for application: adding susceptors directly to the tile adhesive or applying additional interfacial switching layers either directly to the base, which may consist of various building materials, or to the back of the tile. The tests presented in this paper concentrated on applying interfacial switching layers according to the arrangement shown in Irrespective of the specific case, the characteristics of materials and composites must not undergo significant modifications. Materials that form the supporting structure or base layer should be heated to the smallest possible extent. To verify feasibility of the individual cases, a multi-stage program was devised to quantify the reactions of additives, commercially available mortars, plasters, and other solid construction materials and finishing materials to microwave radiation. The first step involved investigations of the microwave coupling behavior of different susceptors that were either taken from the literature or derived from own observations and that were potentially suitable as additives to gypsum plasters or for the interfacial switching layer. In the second step, tests on commercially available grout mortars and tile adhesives as well as various solid building materials such as concrete, brickwork, minerally bound wall materials, natural stone etc. were performed. The results obtained from these tests were used to choose specimens from support materials to which gypsum plaster or tiles were applied. The contact surfaces between the materials were designed so that the debonding was expected. The bonding behavior of investigated additives and building materials was assessed indirectly as a function of the surface temperature. For this purpose, identical test specimens with dimensions of 40 Specimens used for the investigations on susceptors consisted of calcium sulfate dihydrate, which is microwave-transparent. Prior to producing the prisms (with a water/gypsum ratio of 0.6), a certain amount of susceptors were added to the gypsum used to fabricate the dihydrate prisms. Prisms were stored at the laboratory until they reached equilibrium moisture. Specimens should be identical in terms of porosity and total water content. Variable parameters include the type and quantity of the susceptor whose influence has to be determined. Prisms produced from tile adhesives or building materials were dried to mass constancy prior to microwave treatment. Debonding tests to separate multi-layer composites according to An infrared camera, mounted outside the process chamber, was used to perform temperature measurements in a discontinuous pattern at 60-second increments in the first 10 Besides temperature measurements, the mass loss of tested specimens due to heating and the specimens' bulk densities prior to and after treatment were determined. Tested susceptors included various types of graphites, graphenes, iron oxides, and silicon carbides as well as a variety of additives whose composition or results of earlier research were likely to lead to effective microwave absorption. 5 Specimens, to which graphite was added, achieved the highest temperature levels (i.e. up to 600 One of the investigated graphene varieties also triggered a temperature increase. Prisms with added magnetite also exhibited a market temperature increase. Hematite-containing prisms were comparable to the reference material without susceptor addition. No effect was found for other additives, including SiC.  The loss of mass that occurs as a function of the surface temperature steadily rises in line with the temperature increase ( Dehydration causes drop of the specimen strength until they are completely disintegrated. However, relatively long treatment periods of up to 20 Tested materials differed greatly in terms of their behavior under microwave exposure. Hard-burnt bricks, basalt, and granite heated up strongly whereas only a minor heating effect was found for soft-burnt bricks, calcium silica brick, autoclaved aerated concrete, concrete with the exception of porous concrete, tiles, and terracotta as well as the two investigated sandstone varieties ( Large differences were also found with respect to the loss of mass caused by microwave treatment ( In the literature, various types of failure that occur during treatment of rock or concrete in the microwave oven are described According to the above results, it is relatively easy to remove gypsum plaster from a supporting base if the plaster is modified by adding a susceptor, as shown in The second option of debonding gypsum plaster from its base is to apply an interfacial switching layer, which acts as a predetermined breaking point under microwave exposure. This option does not change the color of the gypsum plaster. Successful debonding was demonstrated for all test specimens. Only minor amounts of up to 20% of gypsum plaster remained on the base and were debonded in a subsequent treatment step. Depending on the material, complete debonding required a mean treatment duration between 100 Tile removal tests also demonstrated successful debonding in all cases, irrespective of the interfacial switching layer being located directly on the building material or on the tile. Complete and smooth separation was achieved, accompanied by an audible sound. The required mean treatment duration ranged from 62 to 76 First tests with an in-plant demonstrator unit were carried out. The tiles and the gypsum plaster were separated from the base material in all cases, if the interfacial switching layer was applicated. Composite materials such as those used in contemporary buildings can make it difficult to recycle construction waste and demolition debris. Experimental tests were thus conceived to verify if and to what extent microwave treatment would be suitable for debonding such composites. Several varieties of gypsum plaster and tiles applied to concrete or wall materials were used for this purpose. An interfacial switching layer located between the supporting and finishing materials absorbs microwaves, which causes its temperature to increase. It was found that the separation cannot be realized by the temperature rise alone. In addition, an expansion must take place at the interfacial switching layer, which may be achieved by further additives. A multi-stage test program found that certain types of graphite are well-suited to creating such a interfacial switching layer. These graphites were used in the plaster debonding tests. Plaster was added after their application to the wall surface. In the tile tests, the interfacial switching layer was applied either directly to the base or to the surface of the tile adhesive. In all specimens prepared, the finishing material was successfully debonded from its base in the course of microwave treatment. No debonding was achieved in specimens without added interfacial switching layer. Laboratory results were consistently confirmed by tests performed on an in-plant demonstrator unit. Large fragments of gypsum plaster detached from the wall materials, which remained undamaged. Tiles also lost their adhesive bond to their base and were held in place merely by the pointing mortar. Supporting layers were not damaged. Next research steps will concentrate on the development of additional interfacial switching interfacial layer designs as well as the installation of an in-place demonstrator unit suitable for use directly in buildings. This project is being funded as part of the “r