Galena and reference quartz were artificially added into the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution to clarify the role of galena on thiosulfate leaching of gold. The effects of galena on thiosulfate decomposition and gold leaching and the possible effect mechanisms were studied by the thermodynamic calculation, leaching tests, SEM-EDS and XPS analyses. Results showed that from the onset of gold leaching, the leaching kinetics was restricted severely in the presence of galena. This is caused by the fact that galena is easily oxidized by copper(II) and the dissolved oxygen, thus the mixed slurry potentials initially experienced a significant decline to relatively stable lower levels of 230–240mV which are nearly 50mV lower than that of the quartz slurry. This is disadvantageous to gold leaching and results in undesirable gold dissolutions during the process. The results suggest that the decrease of slurry potentials from the presence of galena is the principal cause of a reduction in the gold leaching rate.Due to the increasing environmental concerns over cyanidation in the extractive metallurgy of gold, considerable attention has been dedicated to the study of alternative non-cyanide lixiviants for gold leaching. Thiosulfate, one of the most promising of these alternatives to cyanide, has been recognized as a potentially viable alternative lixiviant because it is nontoxic and inexpensive, and it can generate relatively strong gold complexes and promptly leach gold ores when catalyzed by cupric ions ( Since gold leaching has been increasingly focused on complex gold ores, the successful application of gold leaching with thiosulfate is determined not only by the dissolution behavior of gold, but also by the impacts of the associated minerals ( The presence of pyrite, arsenopyrite and hematite could significantly diminish the dissolution of gold and catalyze the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate to polythionates with oxygen present ( However, few attempts have been made to study the effects of galena on thiosulfate leaching of gold, and previous studies are summarized in Obviously, the presence of galena was not favorable for gold leaching with thiosulfate ( The samples of galena and quartz were obtained from Mineral Specimen Supplies, Wuhan, China. After being dry-milled in a planetary ceramic ball mill, the particle size of each sample was milled to 100% -44 Gold foil (Au 99.99%, thickness 0.2 The gold foils were polished by the abrasive papers of 800, 2000 and 4000 grid sequentially. Then they were washed in turn with nitric acid, acetone and de-ionized water. Finally, after being cleaned in de-ionized water by ultrasonic cleaning and dried with lint-free paper, a new gold foil surface was prepared before each leaching test. Afterwards, 200 The concentrations of gold in solutions were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrum (AA-6800, SHIMADZU). The thiosulfate concentration was determined by an iodometric method. Aiming to eliminate the effects of cupric-ammonia complex and sulfite on the iodine titration, certain amounts of EDTA-2Na and formaldehyde water were added prior to the titration with the indicator Vitex. A platinum electrode was used to measure the mixed potential (or redox potential) of solution with a double-junction reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl). All potentials were given with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). Morphological studies on leached gold foils were carried out on SEM coupled with EDS (JSM-6360LV). XPS (ESCALAB250Xi, Thermo Fisher) was used to identify the surface species on the leached gold foils. XPS was carried out with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray at 1486.6 The E-pH diagram of Pb-S-H The species of sulfates including HSO  Because of the metastability of thiosulfate and the possible intermediate dissolution products of galena, the selection of sulfate species including HSO Galena is dissolvable in thiosulfate solutions and may produce some lead precipitates as shown in Further, The above thermodynamic analysis demonstrates that galena can be easily oxidized to become 2PbO·PbSO Quartz was used as the reference ore considering its inert property in thiosulfate solutions with copper present ( The effects of galena and quartz on thiosulfate consumption are presented in When the content of galena and quartz were both 5 In the ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching system, the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate is closely linked to the mixed slurry potential. So the mixed potentials during the gold leaching with thiosulfate were also measured and the results are presented in As seen from As mentioned in Section 3.2.1, lower mixed slurry potentials will lead to the decline of oxidizing capacity of thiosulfate solutions, which is not favorable for gold thiosulfate leaching. So, the effects of galena on gold dissolution in thiosulfate solutions were also investigated as illustrated in  Moreover, when the contents of minerals were both 5 So, in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions, the effect of galena is two folded. On the one hand, it accelerated the thiosulfate decomposition by a small rise possibly because of its semi-conductive property. On the other hand, the presence of galena could noticeably lower the mixed potential of the slurry from its oxidation by extra oxidants of copper(II) and dissolved oxygen. Thus the gold leaching with thiosulfate was inevitably affected. In order to investigate the impact of galena on gold thiosulfate leaching, the morphology and the preliminary elemental composition of leached gold foil surfaces were conducted by SEM-EDS analysis (see Comparing A passivation film seemed to form on the gold surface. Accordingly, the EDS spectra of different sites at the leached gold foil surface (see Aiming to further investigate the possible composition of passivation products on gold surfaces, XPS analysis was used to record the spectra of S 2p, Cu 2p and Pb 4f for the leached gold surface in the presence of 5 The XPS spectra of S 2p for gold surfaces after thiosulfate leaching are shown in The Cu 2p spectra were also recorded (see After adding galena, possible Pb species on the surface of leached gold foil are also indicated by the Pb 4f spectrum. As seen from In association with the results of leaching tests, the thiosulfate decomposition prompted by galena is insignificant, and more importantly, the gold leaching in thiosulfate solutions in the presence of galena is impeded significantly from the onset of the leaching. This means that the increased thiosulfate decomposition and the passivation of gold surface are not the principal causes for the much lower gold leaching rates. Instead, galena could reduce the mixed potential of the slurry initially and then render it stable at lower levels during the leaching of gold, which is the cause of a low gold leaching rate. In the copper-ammonia-thiosulfate leaching system, galena could limitedly accelerate the decomposition of thiosulfate possibly because of the semi-conductive property. In the presence of galena, thiosulfate decomposed considerably only at the initial stage, but with the extension of gold leaching, no significant difference of thiosulfate decomposition was presented comparing with that in the quartz slurry. However, the leaching tests and SEM-EDS analyses clearly indicated that the gold thiosulfate leaching was hindered greatly in the presence of galena. The gold dissolution declined substantially as the content of galena increased. In the presence of less than 5 Based on the thermodynamic calculations and XPS analyses, a passivation film is likely to be formed on the gold surface. It may build up and passivate the gold leaching as thiosulfate leaching progresses. More importantly, however, galena is thermodynamically unstable during the thiosulfate leaching, being easily oxidized by copper(II) and the dissolved oxygen and decreasing the potential of the mixed slurry to much lower levels from that at the start of the leaching. Prolonged leaching tests in the presence of 5 In summary, during the thiosulfate leaching of gold, galena has a limited effect on accelerating the thiosulfate decomposition and may cause a passivation film on the gold face. However, it is largely because of the effect of galena on lowering the potential of the mixed slurries that the leaching of gold with thiosulfate is substantially inhibited. Financial supports from the 