During the acid leaching of uranium, gangue–reagent interactions have both negative and positive consequences. Gangue dissolution increases reagent costs, and in some cases can prevent the economic acid leaching of an ore, but can also increase uranium mineral exposure and improve recoveries. Due to rapid dissolution kinetics, the acid consumption characteristics of the various carbonate species are readily predicted, however the same is not true of silicate gangue. Due to factors including slower leach rates, incongruent dissolution, parabolic kinetics, and surface area, pH and temperature dependence, the gangue acid consumption characteristics of silicate minerals are significantly more complex. A detailed mineralogical investigation and acid leach tests were conducted on sandstone-hosted uranium ore samples. The dissolution characteristics of the more common gangue phases were determined. The study demonstrated that gangue–reagent interactions can be predicted from mineralogical data, thus reducing technical risk during processing.Uranium ores are processed by either an acid or an alkali leach ( The major advantage of being able to model gangue acid consumptions from mineralogy (rather than simply performing a leach test), is that a model can be used to generate data for a range of possible conditions, while separate leach tests would be necessary for each condition of interest. The availability of mineralogical data also makes it possible to identify other potential mineralogical problems, such as clays. In addition to contributing to acid consumptions, the dissolution of gangue minerals can aid in the recovery of valuable metals ( The gangue–reagent interactions that occur during the acid leaching of U, were investigated in order to understand their effect on reagent consumption and U dissolution. Samples were obtained from two Karoo-aged U occurrences. One sample was obtained from a U prospect within the main Karoo basin (sample MKB1) and three others (samples RAO, OAO and MSO) were obtained from the Kayelekera mine in Malawi. Due to the rapid dissolution of carbonates, these minerals are typically considered to consume their stoichiometrically equivalent amount of acid during U leaching ( Several factors influence the dissolution characteristics of minerals. The following factors influence the rate of mineral dissolution: mineral composition, time, temperature, pH, surface area and incongruent dissolution ( Since minerals dissolve at a finite rate, the extent of dissolution is a function of time. However, the rate of dissolution can also vary with time. Generally two stages are seen during dissolution, (1) an initial more rapid rate which gradually slows to (2) steady-state dissolution ( The rate of mineral dissolution is considered to vary with temperature according to the Arrhenius equation ( Dissolution rates are typically normalised to the surface area of the mineral ( In addition to temperature and mineral surface area dependence, the release rate of an element from a dissolving mineral is influence by incongruent dissolution. Incongruent dissolution describes the case where elemental release rates are not proportional to the stoichiometry of the mineral ( Sulphuric acid is typically used to achieve the low pH required for acid U leaching ( During acid leaching hexavalent U minerals tend to dissolve readily, while tetravalent U minerals require oxidation to the hexavalent state prior to dissolution ( In order to understand the response of the gangue minerals during leaching, the head samples underwent detailed mineralogical characterisation prior to acid leaching. The samples were milled to the desired grind using a laboratory scale rod mill. All of the samples were milled to a P Both the head and leach residue samples were analysed by XRD and QEMScan bulk mineralogical analysis (BMA), to identify and quantify the gangue minerals present, and determine the mean grain size and degree of exposure of each gangue phase. The XRD analyses were performed using the guidelines of QEMScan BMA analyses, conducted according the methods described by The BMA data was also used to determine the textural characteristics of the gangue. BMA analyses are more rapid and cost effective than other QEMScan techniques and therefore more readily applied to variability studies. For this reason the BMA was chosen over particle map analysis (PMA). However, BMA analyses are more prone to stereological bias than two dimensional scans, such as PMA ( The U mineral characterisation was performed by QEMScan trace mineral search (TMS) using the same instruments used for the BMA analyses. The mineral identification was validated by manual scanning electron microscopy with associated energy dispersive X-ray analysis. The batch acid leach tests were conducted using the guidelines given by the IAEA (1980 and 1990). Approximately 2 The leaches were performed at a solid to liquid ratio of 1:1, in 5 A one hour preconditioning period was used. During this time the pH was controlled, but no attempt was made to maintain the redox potential ( Slurry samples were taken after 1, 3, 8 and 24 Based on the results of the XRD analyses and the ICP-OES analyses of the pregnant leach solution (PLS), the rates of decay of the various mineral phases were determined. In general the ICP-OES results were favoured over the XRD data due to their greater precision. However, in the cases of minerals which did not contain unique elements, it was necessary to use the XRD data. Fortunately these minerals were characterised by rapid dissolution and for this reason the error in the XRD data was small when compared to the decrease in concentration in each time interval. In general the rates were modelled on the leach tests of the MKB1 sample and then tested against the Kayelekera samples. However, this was not possible for smectite and illite, which do not occur in the MKB1 sample. An exponential decay function was used to account for the decrease in the rate of dissolution of the various mineral phases with time (Eq. Where this approximation was not valid, it was necessary to develop a function to predict the steady state rate. The relationship between pH and the steady state dissolution of many minerals is approximately parabolic (at least at the low pH used in acid U leaching), for example Taking the definite integral of Eq. Because most rates are surface area normalised, multiplying Eq. Due to the complex mineralogy of the samples, geometric surface areas were chosen over the BET method. For most minerals a spherical model was applied, where the stereologically corrected mean grain size (from the QEMScan data) was used to estimate the surface area of the sample, according to Eq. The spherical assumption was considered too simple to reliably model the phyllosilicates. Based on the work of The surface areas calculated using either Using published dissolution studies that included both grain size and BET surface area data, the surface roughness of each mineral was calculated. It was found, based on the published data, that the roughness of many minerals is a function of the grain size. Therefore based on the data from several studies, linear relationships between grain size and surface roughness were established. Such detailed surface area data was not available for zeolite and so a simple geometric surface area was used for laumontite. Because the QEMScan does not readily distinguish grain boundaries of very fine adjacent grains of the same mineral, it was not possible to determine surface areas for illite and smectite. A surface area of 42 The amount of acid consumed in the dissolution of a mineral depends on the composition of the mineral. Eqs. Eqs. It was not possible to treat the tectosilicates with this simple approach. Feldspar release rates were determined using the relative release ratios of Manganese dioxide is the second reagent used in the U leaches. The dissolution of this reagent also consumes acid according to Eq. In this case free acid concentration refers to the acid that remains in solution to maintain the low pH needed for U dissolution. Eq. Both the Debye–Hückel and the Davies method are based on the ionic strength of the solution, which is a function of solution composition. The dissolution data obtained using Eq. In addition to the activity coefficient, it is also necessary to consider the second acid dissociation of sulphuric acid. The higher the acid consumption of the ore, the more An Excel-based model was developed that considers the dissolution of each major mineral phase, the MnO The XRD and BMA analyses produced very comparable gangue mineral abundances and the composition of each sample is given in Stereologically corrected grain sizes indicate that in each sample, quartz is the coarsest phase, followed by plagioclase and then K-feldspar in the Kayelekera samples. In the MKB1 sample calcite is the second coarsest phase (at both grinds). Estimated specific surface areas were needed for the surface area normalisation of the rates. These values (calculated from the grain size data) are presented in The MKB1 sample had a head grade of 208 The U deportments of MKB1 and OAO are similar ( The exposure and association characteristics of each sample are summarised in The exposures of OAO and MSO were both high, with ∼92% of grains in OAO and ∼94% in MSO showing some degree of exposure. X-ray diffractograms showing changes in the gangue mineralogy, in response to acid leaching, are given in The most noticeable changes in the mineralogy of the MKB1 sample ( Variation in the smectite peak shape and position were the only changes seen in the residues of OAO ( The U dissolutions at the end of the 24 In the MKB1 leaches, Tests A and C showed very similar dissolutions, with progressively lower dissolution in B and D. The Kayelekera dissolutions were all above 80%, with dissolutions increasing from OAO through RAO to MSO. However, examination of the dissolution curves ( Using the results of the Fe The modelled dissolutions of the various gangue phases are shown in The variables and a measure of fit, comparing the modelled and measured dissolution data for each mineral (except smectite and illite), are given in The results of the measured acid consumptions, compared with those predicted by the model are shown in A comparison of the MKB1 exposure data ( The U minerals in OAO and MSO both had very high degrees of exposure (>91%), but the final U dissolution in these samples was less than 89%. The maximum dissolution in both of these samples was not achieved at 24 Both of these samples contain smectite. XRD analysis of the leach residues show a progressive collapse in the interlayer spacing of the smectite from the head sample (at ∼17 OAO and MSO were not the only samples to contain smectite. RAO contained more smectite than OAO, but this sample did not show the same decrease in dissolution in the later stages of the leach. There are two likely reasons. The first is that in RAO ∼20% of the U occurred in grains locked in reactive gangue. This U was released more slowly as time was required to dissolve the gangue. This prevented this leach from developing an early maximum. The second is that the RAO solution contained very high concentrations of other elements, especially Mn from the oxidiser. These elements may have preferentially substituted into the smectite. The dissolution characteristics of several common gangue minerals were determined. These results show that gangue dissolution increases with decreasing pH and grain size. The rate of dissolution of most minerals follows an exponential decay function, from an initially rapid rate to a much slower one as the leach progresses. The dissolution rates of calcite and laumontite are rapid and both phases were completely dissolved, (although laumontite is subject to incongruent dissolution and it is likely that an amorphous Si–Al solid phase is still present in the residues at the end of the leach). Chlorite dissolution was also rapid, but not as rapid as that of calcite or laumontite. Depending on the pH and specific surface area, between about 7% and 47% of the contained chlorite can dissolve within the duration of an acid leach. Muscovite dissolution was much slower and only about 12% dissolved at pH 0.97. While the feldspars do dissolve, the rate of this dissolution was very slow. Neither plagioclase nor K-feldspar showed more than 2% dissolution. Considering both the rate at which gangue phases dissolve, and the amount of acid they consume during dissolution, carbonates are the most aggressive gangue acid consumers, followed by laumontite (although this phase does not occur in many U deposits) and chlorite. Muscovite, smectite and illite were moderate acid consumers, while only minor dissolution of plagioclase and K-feldspar dissolved. The dissolution characteristics of these minerals can be used both in assessing the reagent consumption of an ore and the effect of U mineral texture (particularly exposure and association) on U dissolution. The following conclusions can be drawn from the results of this study: The dissolution of gangue minerals can result in substantial increases in U mineral dissolution. The presence of smectite can result in the loss of U from solution as the leach progresses. High concentrations of zeolite in the ore can also be deleterious both increasing acid consumption and causing gelling of the PLS. It is possible to estimate the percentage U dissolution, during acid leaching, from QEMScan TMS data. For a non-refractory ore, at moderate conditions (pH ∼1.5, 35–40° Provided detailed data are available, it is possible to use mineralogical data to predict the acid dissolution characteristics of gangue minerals with reasonable accuracy. These predictions can be used in conjunction with free acid calculations to predict the acid consumption characteristics of the ore. To estimate the gangue acid consumption of a particular ore, the values in The authors would like to thank Paladin Energy for contributing most of the U ore used in this study and SGS South Africa for sponsoring instrument and batch reactor time. The advice of Johan O’ Connell, Louis Coetzee, Maria Klaas and Annegret Lombard is also greatly appreciated.