Bioleaching of copper from the flue dust of the Sarcheshmeh copper smelter has been investigated. A series of continuous tests were carried out in two-stages of airlift bioreactors inoculated with the acidophilic, iron and sulfur oxidizing bacteria, initially derived from acid mine drainage. The effects of different parameters such as pulp density, retention time and temperature on the mesophile bioleach performance of the copper sulfide rich dust were evaluated after pre-leaching with dilute acid. Pulp densities of 2% and 4% gave the same oxidation–reduction potential in both reactors. However, increasing the average pulp density to 7% generated an unstable oxidation–reduction potential in the first bioreactor at 34 °C. Overall copper extractions calculated for 2%, 4% and 7% pulp densities were 90%, 89% and 86% with mean retention times of 2.7, 4 and 5 days, respectively. The process is net acid consuming and has the potential for further development and feasibility studies.Two similar reverberatory and three converter furnaces are operating at the Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. Gas and dust produced by the furnaces are sent to balloon flues (for recycling coarse dust) and electrostatic filters (for recycling fine dust). About 50 tonnes/day of dust that contain about 36% copper are generated from the smelting furnaces. At present, the dust is recycled to the furnaces that reduces their efficiencies and increases the required energy for the smelting; furthermore, it damages the refractory bricks and imposes a circular load on the furnaces. A previous study showed that the Sarcheshmeh copper flue dusts mostly consisted of secondary copper sulfide minerals ( Most of the secondary copper sulfides can be bioleached using mesophilic bacterial cultures ( Bioleaching and bio-oxidation are best performed in a continuous mode of operation in which the productivity per unit volume per unit time is high and reactor volumes are low. The types of reactors that have been studied are the stirred tank reactor, the percolation column, the pachuca tank, the airlift column and some special designs such as rotary reactors ( The purpose of this research was to assess copper bioleaching in the laboratory using a continuous two-stage airlift bioreactor with Sarcheshmeh smelter flue dust. Samples were taken from the reverberatory and converter furnaces dust collectors over a seven-day period in proportion to their production. Chemical and mineralogical compositions of the representative dust sample are presented in Previously isolated species of The mixed culture was used in adaptation experiments in which the bacteria gradually acclimatized themselves to different pre-leached dust concentrations as sole energy source. The isolates were adapted and grown with gradually increased concentrations of pre-leached dust up to 7% (w/v) in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL of nutrients and bacteria over two months. Cultures were incubated at 32 °C in a temperature-controlled orbital shaker (Innova 4200 model, New Brunswick Scientific Company, USA) at 150 rpm. The pH was adjusted and controlled to pH 1.8 by adding concentrated sulfuric acid, and bacterial growth was monitored by measuring the oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) using a pH/Eh meter (Metrohm model 826). The adapted bacteria were sub-cultured at 32 °C in 9K medium at pH 1.8 and were used in the subsequent experiments. Shake flask experiments with different pulp densities showed higher recoveries of copper in flasks with bacteria than without bacteria ( The laboratory-scale tests were carried out in a two-stage continuously operated glass water-jacketed airlift reactor (6.2 L) with internal loop ( The tests were started in batch mode in the first reactor by introducing 2% pre-leached dust in 9K nutrient medium at pH 1.8 and 32 °C, and inoculated with 10% mixed adapted bacteria. The second reactor was started on day 12 in the same manner. The system operated in batch mode until the ORP in both reactors reached its maximum level (about 660 mV vs. Ag/AgCl electrode). Then the feed pump was turned on to start continuous mode operation. A series of continuous tests were carried out to assess the effects of retention times, feed solid concentrations and temperatures on the dust bioleaching. To ensure that steady state condition was established, each test was allowed to run for at least 4–5 times the total retention time. The progress of the bacterial leaching was monitored by daily measurement of pH and ORP values, as well as copper and iron analyses of solutions and final leached residues. During the experiments, pH was adjusted and controlled below 1.8 in the first reactor by addition of concentrated sulfuric acid and subsequently dropped to 1.2–1.4 in the second reactor. To investigate whether higher copper leaching yields could be obtained by leaching at higher temperatures, an experiment was performed at 34, 37 and 38 °C with the average feed pulp density 7% (w/v) and 5 days mean retention time. A summary of all the experimental conditions during 150 days is presented in During the 150 days of operation, the variables studied were the feed solid concentration, the overall retention time and temperature. The corresponding ORP levels and copper and iron concentrations over the reaction period are presented in The tests were carried out without condensers during the first 15 days in batch mode and very high evaporation was observed. During the batch mode, the ORP values increased from 270 and 370 mV in the first and second reactors to approximately 660 and 675 mV, respectively. This increase was mirrored by an increase in the concentration of Cu and Fe in solution. The batch test showed that > After starting the continuous operation mode on the 20th day with an average feed solids concentration 2% (w/v) and the mean retention time 7.3 days, some instability was observed in the ORP of both stages of reactors, but it became stable to a lower level (620–645 mV). The copper and iron concentrations in the outlet solution were 6.8 g/L Cu and 0.92 g/L Fe, that gave overall extractions of 99% Cu and 28% Fe. On the 31st day, the mean overall retention time was reduced to 2.7 days causing the ORP of the first and second stage reactors to decrease slightly to 600 and 630 mV, respectively and the overall copper extraction to decrease to 90% Cu. On the 53rd day the average feed solid concentrations and the mean overall retention time were increased to 4% (w/v) and 4 days causing the ORP values to rise in the first and second stage reactors but with similar overall copper and iron extraction ( Slightly higher copper and iron extractions were obtained from day 116 onwards by raising the temperature first to 37 °C and then to 38 °C. The ORP of the first reactor was stable at 38 °C around 600 mV and remained high at 640 mV in the second reactor. Towards the end of the run, solids accumulation (11%) occurred in the stage 2 reactor. The accumulation of solids together with the effect of evaporation explains the very high copper concentrations observed in stage 2 from days 95 to 115 ( According to microscopic observations of bacteria, the proportions of bacterial types in continuous-flow bioleaching airlifts are different depending on the feed pulp density, temperature, and the reactors. As expected, During continuous mode operation, the ORP in the second reactor was more stable than the first reactor. The bacteria could readily regenerate ferric ion from ferrous ion. In the first reactor, the rate of ferric ion regeneration and the rate of ferric ion consumption by sulfide oxidation are equal, hence high ORP values of 600 mV were observed. In the first reactor, the secondary copper sulfides would be expected to oxidize rapidly to completion, and any copper leached in excess of this amount, can be attributed to chalcopyrite leaching. The second reactor was operating at higher ORP, particularly at lower feed pulp densities, and the predominant reactions are expected to be the oxidation of the pyrite and residual chalcopyrite. The data for the first reactor also showed that the ORP decreased with decreasing mean retention time. This could be explained by a decrease in cell concentration as the mean retention time approached the retention time at which the cells would wash out of the reactor. So ORP is the most sensitive parameter to the changes of process variables that affect growth and oxidative activities of the bacterial cells — especially at higher pulp density (7% w/v) and at lower temperatures (34 °C). It was also noticed that the ORP remained high and the pH low when the bacteria were performing well. The highest pH values (around pH 2–2.5) were measured in the first reactor (2–2.5), which decreased in the second reactor to 1.3–1.9. Pyrite oxidation was insignificant in the first reactor but occurred in the second reactor at the higher ORP values, producing acid. Consequently, the pH was controlled in the first reactor below pH 1.8 by the addition of sulfuric acid but from day 90 onwards, sulfuric acid was only added to the feed tank to control the pH. Although the oxidation of the sulfides is producing acid during bioleaching, the copper flue dust bioleaching is net acid consuming (0.53 kg sulfuric acid/kg dust). Most of the acid consumption is due to the neutralization of limestone present in the dust. Acid is also consumed during ferrous ion oxidation, which is produced during the initial chemical leaching of the sulfide minerals with ferric ion. Addition of copper sulfide concentrate to the copper flue dust would be an appropriate way to increase acid production through bioleaching and decrease the net acid consumption. A mesophilic, iron–sulfur oxidizing bacterial mixed culture was isolated from acid mine drainage liquor of natural sulfide ore and was subsequently adapted to high solids and copper concentrations. The bacterial culture was used in a laboratory two-stage continuously operated airlift reactor over a period of 150 days, treating an acid pre-leached copper sulfide flue dust. An increase in bioleaching intensity (i.e. a shortened retention time or increased feed pulp density) was detrimental to copper recovery. The ORP in the reactors decreased with increasing feed pulp densities and increased with increasing temperature. Overall, copper extractions from average pulp densities of 2%, 4%, and 7% were 90%, 89%, and 86% with mean retention times of 2.7, 4 and 5 days at 32 °C, respectively. At 38 °C, copper extraction from 7% pulp density increased to 91% after 5 days mean retention time. The results show that bioleaching copper flue dust with mixed mesophilic bacteria in airlift bioreactors is promising and warrants further development. This paper is published with the permission of National Iranian Copper Industries Company. The various contributions to this work by members of the R&D Division of National Iranian Copper Industries Company are gratefully acknowledged.