Metal adsorption and surface charge determinations were performed previously on well-characterised Sphagnum and Carex peat samples. The aim of this investigation was to determine metal adsorption from complex wastewaters onto these peat samples and compare it to the adsorption onto peat granules, clinoptilolite, glauconite and a flue dust from steel production. A sulphide mine leachate, a landfill leachate and a laundry wastewater were chosen, giving a variation in pH, ionic strength, total organic carbon and concentrations of metals. Metal adsorption was determined in batch and column experiments. The wastewater composition was of great importance for metal removal efficiency, mainly due to the difference in dominating metal species. In the sulphide mine leachate, containing free metal ions, a high metal adsorption was observed onto both peat and inorganic adsorbents. In the landfill leachate the metals formed carbonate and organic complexes and a low metal removal was achieved. Contrary to the leachates, the laundry wastewater contained suspended particles. The high amount of metals removed, 80% of the Cu and 30–60% of the Zn concentration, was probably withdrawn bound to the particle fraction. The highest removal of metal ions was obtained in the sulphide mine leachate with Carex peat, removing 97–99% of the Zn and 85–100% of the Cu content. The Sphagnum peat sample removed 37–77% of the Zn and 80–100% of the Cu content. The differences found between Sphagnum and Carex peat were attributed to the original chemistry of the plant material and the habitat conditions at the time of peat formation. Generally, the combination of glauconite or clinoptilolite with the peat samples in column experiments gave a minor improvement in metal removal.Sources of heavy metal contamination can be found in landfills and mine waste deposits, from which metals can leach for very long periods of time. Peat is a cheap product which is available in many areas, and which has the ability to adsorb heavy metals. Metal adsorption from municipal, industrial and mine deposits onto peat have been investigated previously Fine dust, produced in large quantities in the steel production at SSAB in Luleå, has been found to be a potential adsorbent for metals. Copper, lead, zinc, cadmium and chromium were removed from solutions by surface adsorption in the pH range 5.5–11.5 Metal adsorption  Inorganic adsorbents included for comparison with the peat were clinoptilolite, glauconite and a residue from steel production at SSAB in Luleå. The SSAB residue consists of flue dust collected in scrubbers in the wet gas cleaning plants. About 84 The wastewaters used were leachate from an industrial landfill, leachate from a mining area, and wastewater from a laundry ( Adsorbent and wastewater were mixed in batch experiments in acid-washed 250 In the column experiments a glass column, i.d. 30 Metal concentrations were measured with ICP-AES or ICP-MS technique after acidification with nitric acid (1 Calculations of the speciation of Cu, Zn, Ni, Cd and Pb in the wastewaters were performed using the chemical equilibrium model WHAM-W According to the speciation calculations, the metal ions are mainly found as aquo complexes (‘free metal ions’), M The total metal removal varied between the different wastewaters tested ( In the sulphide mine leachate, where the metal ion occurred to a high extent as free ions, a high removal of Cu was reached with all adsorbents tested according to Generally, a rather low metal removal was achieved in the landfill leachate ( In the laundry wastewater, a high Cu removal and a lower Zn removal was achieved with the peat samples, while the inorganic samples gave a high Zn removal and a low Cu removal ( The In the landfill leachate, the Cu concentration was reduced by 20% after treatment with The metal ions mainly occurred as free metal ions in the sulphide mine leachate according to the speciation calculated ( A higher Zn removal was obtained with In this study, poorly humified Adsorption isotherms for Cu, Zn, Ni, Cd and Fe in mixture were determined previously The calculation of the speciation of Cu and Zn in the landfill leachate showed that most of the metals in the leachate occurred as carbonate complexes or were bound to the organic fraction in the leachate. The carbonate complexes formed were to a high extent positively charged ( In the column experiment, Zn was initially released from the In the column experiment a slightly higher total cation adsorption was reached onto In the laundry wastewater the metal ions formed carbonate and hydroxide complexes according to the calculation ( The wastewater composition was of great importance for metal removal efficiency, mainly due to the metal speciation. A high degree of metal removal was reached in the sulphide mine leachate, containing mainly free metal ions. A rather high metal removal rate was also reached in the laundry wastewater. The metal ions were probably removed bound to particles withdrawn from the wastewater. The lowest metal removal, and a release of metals initially bound to the adsorbents, occurred in the landfill leachate. A high ionic strength and the metals forming carbonate and organic complexes could explain the result achieved. Generally, the combination of glauconite or clinoptilolite with the peat samples gave a minor improvement in metal removal in column experiments. The total amount of cations adsorbed in column experiments with landfill leachate agreed rather well with the maximum adsorption determined in previous studies. The previously recorded higher increase of metal adsorption onto The wastewater composition was of great importance for metal removal efficiency, mainly explained by the calculated metal speciation. A high metal removal was achieved in the sulphide mine leachate, where the metal ions to a large extent occurred as free ions. The peat samples decreased the pH in the leachate, The heavy metal ions in the landfill leachate were to a large extent complex-bound due to a high pH, carbonate and TOC concentration. A low metal removal was achieved. The leachate, high in ionic strength, also seems to have dissolved metal initially bound to the adsorbents. A high metal removal was reached in the laundry wastewater, which was high in pH and TOC concentration. The metals were probably bound to suspended particles and withdrawn during the filtration operation. A rather high metal removal from wastewater was generally found using peat as the adsorbent compared to the inorganic adsorbents investigated. Only minor improvement, or no improvement, was observed when peat was combined with clinoptilolite or glauconite in column experiments. Valuable comments from Lars Lövgren on the calculation of metal species in the wastewater are gratefully acknowledged. Financial support was provided by the Swedish Waste Research Council and the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.