Molybdenum is the most important by-product of Chile's copper mining industry, and during the last decade gained international relevance because of its high price At mining deposits, copper and molybdenum are extracted together and then separated in a process consisting of several stages of flotation using sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS) as key reagent. However, environmental issues related to the potential emissions of toxic hydrosulfide gas (H2S), and bad odors make necessary the development of new environmentally friendly processes that incorporate non-toxic reagents. In this work, we hypothesize that a selective separation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite by flotation can be achieved by using lignosulfonates instead of NaHS. This approach was evaluated by testing the effect of lignosulfonates, produced by reacting kraft lignin with sodium sulfite and formaldehyde, and commercially available lignosulfonates, on molybdenite and chalcopyrite flotation. Chemical characterization of lignosulfonates was performed by determination of molecular mass, elemental analysis, fourier transform infrared, and mass spectroscopy with inductively coupled plasma. Also, interactions between molybdenite and lignosulfonates were studied through measurements of electrophoretic mobility. The main conclusions of the work are that molybdenite flotation can be depressed by the action of lignosulfonates, and such depressing effect increases with pH because of the interactions between lignosulfonates with the metallic calcium sites existing on the surface of the mineral particles. The experimental results also indicate that lignosulfonates can depress chalcopyrite flotation when sodium isopropyl xanthate is used as a collector, but this effect can be completely mitigated by using potassium amyl xanthate as a collector, thus, making it possible the potential separation of both minerals.Separation of copper sulfides from molybdenite is commonly achieved through a two-stage flotation process. In the first stage the flotation of copper sulfides and molybdenite is promoted to generate a bulk concentrate, which is then treated in a second stage with sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH) at dosages of 2.5–3.0 Ansari and Pawlik [ The use of lignosulfonates as flotation reagent was also investigated in other applications. Kelebek et al. [ The main objective of this work is to investigate the use of low molecular weight lignosulfonates, obtained by sulphomethylation of kraft lignin, as depressants of molybdenite. Kraft lignosulfonates (KLS) were produced by reacting kraft lignin with sodium sulfite and formaldehyde, and their performance as molybdenite depressants was compared with that of commercially available lignosulfonates (CLS) of higher molecular weights. The effect of different copper collectors on the flotation of chalcopyrite in the presence of lignosulfonates is also studied in order to look for options to avoid the depressing effect of lignosulfonates on chalcopyrite. The study considered the use of 7 samples of KLS, which were prepared by sulphomethylation of kraft lignin precipitated from a black liquor obtained from cellulose pulp plant that processed radiata pine. Precipitation started by reducing the pH of the kraft liquor to 2 with sulfuric acid (20%) at 60 Additionally, 2 high molecular weight samples of CLS provided by Sigma Aldrich, i.e., a sugared sodium lignosulfonate (CLS-1), and a calcium lignosulfonate (CLS-2) were tested in the study. Elemental analyses of the lignosulfonate samples for S, C, H, and N were done in a FISON 1108 elemental analyzer. The procedure consisted in weighing 2 The average molar masses of the lignosulfonates samples were measured using a UV/Gel permeation chromatography equipment (Shimadzu). In the procedure 30mg of each lignosulfonate sample are weighed and mixed in a Falcon tube with 4 FTIR spectra of lignosulfonates were obtained using a Nexus WQF-510 The concentration of calcium and sodium were measured using an Optima 5300 DV ICP-OES of PerkinElmer. Samples of 0.2 The sample of chalcopyrite used in the study was provided by Ward's Natural Science Establishment as mineralized rock specimens. The concentration of chalcopyrite in the sample obtained by XRD was 98.9% with minor amounts of quartz (0.8%) and pyrite (0.3%). The concentrations of Cu, Fe and S obtained by atomic absorption were 34.3, 30.4, and 35.2 respectively. For flotation tests, chalcopyrite was ground to the size range 75–150 The flotation of molybdenite and chalcopyrite at different lignosulfonate concentrations (KLS and CLS) was evaluated through micro-flotation experiments in a 150 The interactions between molybdenite and lignosulfonates were studied through measurements of electrophoretic mobility using a Zetacompact Z9000 from CAD instrument. These measurements were performed using - 20     The effect of the presence of lignosulfonates KLS-6, KLS-7, CLS-1, and CLS-2 on the flotation of chalcopyrite was also evaluated. Samples KLS-6 and KLS-7 were selected as they showed extreme effects on molybdenite flotation. The results are presented in   Lignosulfonates are anionic polyelectrolytes whose structural conformation is defined by the presence of carboxylic, sulfonic and phenolic groups. The degree of dissociation of these functional groups is a function of pH and defines the anionic character of these polyelectrolytes, in particular the presence of carboxylic groups which dissociates over a wide range of pH. Although, the mechanisms proposed to explain the interactions between lignosulfonates and mineral surfaces are in general of electrostatic nature, other non-electrostatic mechanisms such as hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions were also proposed [  To better understand the interactions between lignosulfonates and molybdenite, measurements of electrophoretic mobility distributions presented in The analysis of results indicates that the interaction between lignosulfonates (KLS and CLS) and molybdenite is mainly explained by adsorption on metallic sites existing on the surface of the mineral particles at alkaline pH. However, it was previously proposed that calcium ions can also enhanced lignosulfonate adsorption on mineral particles in the alkaline range by the reduction of the lateral repulsive interactions between molecules [ The assessment of the effect of lignosulfonates on chalcopyrite flotation indicates a strong depression of chalcopyrite in the presence of KLS and CLS, and that this depressing effect decays at higher pH values ( The results presented in Another subject that is interesting to discuss refers to the relationship between the molecular weight of lignosulfonates and their depressing effect on molybdenite. As shown in  Molybdenite flotation can be depressed by lignosulfonates obtained through a sulphomethylation process of kraft lignin. The depressing effect increases with pH when lime is used as pH modifier. The results indicate that the interaction between lignosulfonates and molybdenite can be explained by the adsorption on metallic calcium sites existing on the mineral surface. Besides, reduction of lateral repulsive interactions between lignosulfonate molecules, caused by the presence of calcium ions in the alkaline pH range, also promotes adsorption on molybdenite particles. Chalcopyrite flotation using SIPX as collector is strongly depressed in the presence of KLS and CLS. However, it can be completely restored using potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) as collector. Apparently, the long chain of PAX prevents lignosulfonates from being adsorbed onto chalcopyrite. Results of the study indicate that the molecular weight of lignosulfonates is not necessarily the most important variable to explain the adsorption of these molecules on molybdenite, but also the degree of anionicity. The KLS generate an effect similar to CLS even though their molecular weights are only of the order of 1000 The authors acknowledge the financial support of