Calcium looping cycle is considered as one of the most promising post combustion CO2 capture technologies that can curb CO2 emissions from power plants fired with fossil fuel. However the presence of SO2 and steam in the flue gas leads to the sulfation of CaO-based sorbents, and thus reduces the sorbents’ capacity for CO2 capture. In this study, the effect of sorbent sulfation during both carbonation and calcination stage on the cyclic CO2 capture performance was investigated. The results showed that the reaction time, SO2 concentrations and steam greatly influenced the capacity of CaO-based sorbent. The sulfation degree of the sorbent decreased with the reduction of carbonation and calcination time per cycle. High SO2 concentration present with steam led to a rapid loss in capacity of the sorbent within a few cycles. Furthermore, the synthetic sorbent derived from a sol–gel process had much higher cyclic CO2 capture capacities than natural limestone sorbent whether in conditions without SO2 or with SO2 and steam. Microscopic images showed that after multiple cycles in the presence of SO2 and steam, the porous structure of the synthetic sorbent could be retained while limestone experienced serious pore blockage and agglomeration of grains.sulphation conversion degree,% mass of sample during reaction recorded by TGA, g mass of sample after the initial calcination, g mole mass of CaO, g/mol mole mass of SO mole mass of SO mass percentage of CaO in the initial calcined sample, % cycle number CO cumulative SO maximum mass lossof sample in mass of sample after Calcium looping cycle is considered as one of the most promising post combustion CO However, there are still some difficulties for this process before its application for large scale CO The other difficulty for the calcium looping technology is sulfation of the CaO-based sorbents. Fossil fuels almost always contain some sulfur, so SO Previous works focused on the simultaneous CO This study is an extension of the previous work. In this work we prepared a CaO-based sorbent with high reactivity by a sol–gel process and investigated the sorbent sulfation in both carbonation and calcination stage in a fixed bed. A further comparison on the cyclic carbonation and sulfation performance between natural limestone sorbent and the synthetic sorbent was tested. The effect of different reaction conditions on the CO The preparation of CaO-based sorbent from sol–gel process (denoted as SG CaO) was as described in our previous study The simplified schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Cyclic CO The testing procedure of sulfation behavior in a single cycle is as follows: Firstly, about 5 The microstructure of the calcined samples was investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM; SIRION200, FEI, Inc.) with 5 Our previous studies showed that reaction time greatly influenced sulfation degree of CaO-based sorbent in the presence of SO To investigate chemical components of the SG CaO after 80 For all three cases in Steam will be present in combustion flue gas in carbonator and calcinator, however, there is no work in the literature on the influence of steam during both carbonation and calcination processes on the carbonation and sulfation of CaO-based sorbents. Because the sulfur content differs in different fossil fuels, the SO In order to make a comparison between synthetic CaO-based sorbent and natural limestone sorbent, cyclic CO  Since the sulfation rate of SG CaO was much faster than that of limestone, the rate of loss in reactivity caused by the formed CaSO The different carbonation and sulfation behavior of the CaO-based sorbents should be due to the different morphological and porous structures of the sorbents. The morphology of SG CaO and limestone sorbent after initial calcination and 20 cycles in the presence of SO  In summary, the sorbent derived from sol–gel process is a promising sorbent if the sulfur concentration is low in the gas. In the case of high SO The effect of sorbent sulfation during carbonation and calcination stage on the cyclic performance of CaO-based sorbents was investigated in this work. The results suggest that carbonation and calcination time should be as short as practically possible and it is better to desulfurize the flue gas before the calcium looping cycle. If SO The authors are grateful to the financial supports from