Fractures of the distal radius are common. They represent a broad range of injuries, from insufficiency fractures in osteoporosis to high-energy multifragmentary fractures in young adults. The restoration of specific radiological anatomical parameters is associated with a better outcome and a reduced risk of developing degenerative joint disease.
                  Treatment method depends on fracture stability; stable fractures may be amenable to manipulation and casting. Unstable fractures or fractures with depressed articular fragments require surgery. Techniques include casting, manipulation and casting, K-wire fixation, external fixation, open reduction and fixation using plates (icluding volar locking plates). Paediatric fractures may be greenstick or displaced physeal injuries which often require manipulation under anaesthesia before casting. The complications of distal radius fractures include acute carpal tunnel syndrome.Fractures of the distal radius represent one-sixth of long-bone fractures, and have three distribution peaks:  children aged 5–14 years men aged <50 years (typically due to road traffic accidents or sports activity; often the more severe intra-articular fractures) women aged >40 years with insufficiency-type fractures (caused by lower-energy trauma associated with osteoporosis; often extra-articular fractures). Several classification systems exist for this large spectrum of injuries. The AO classification encompasses all fracture types and is validated (see WEBSITE). The distal radius has complex articulations with the scaphoid and lunate at the radio-carpal joint, and with the ulna at the distal radio-ulnar joint. The restoration of four crucial anatomical parameters is linked with good outcome—disruption of these affects joint mechanics, which can lead to pain and degenerative joint disease.      The goal of treatment is to restore a pain-free, functioning wrist joint. The choice of treatment depends on:  fracture pattern fracture stability patient factors (e.g. general health, functional requirements). Displaced, depressed articular fragments are not reducible by ligamentotaxis and cannot be treated by casting alone (e.g. ‘die punch’ injury in which the articular lunate facet is impacted into the metaphyseal bone). Closed reduction techniques and casting are suited only to the stable, dorsally displaced extra-articular fractures (Colles’ type) which are common ( Using suitable local or regional anaesthesia, the displaced fragment is disimpacted with exaggeration of the deformity and with axial traction. The subsequent reduction is held with a moulded below-elbow plaster of Paris cast or slab. Immediate post-reduction radiographs are taken, and the manipulated fracture requires radiographic follow-up at one and two weeks to detect late displacement; the cast can be removed at 5–6 weeks. Physiotherapy may be required to rehabilitate the stiff wrist. Fractures that displace after manipulation are unstable and usually require surgical intervention.   unstable or comminuted fractures intra-articular fractures with displacement open fractures associated carpal bone fracture failed conservative management injury to the contralateral upper limb floating elbow.  K-wires can be deployed across a fracture line (‘extra focal’) or placed into the fracture and used to lever out and buttress fragments (‘intra focal’ (Kapandji) technique). The sharp ends of the K-wires must engage a stable cortex. In general, at least two wires are required to provide adequate stability. Wires can be buried or left outside the skin, and require cast protection; K-wires do not allow early mobilization. They are removed in clinic at about four weeks. The infection rate is about 30%, usually superficial, which can be treated with co-amoxiclav (p.o.).    radius to metacarpal (bridging the joint) radius to radius (not bridging the joint) if the fracture is not too distal.   The volar (Henry) approach has historically been used for simple buttress plates for volar shear (Barton’s) fractures and for volar bending (Smith’s) fractures. The flexor pollicis longus tendon may be ruptured if the plate is positioned too prominently. The dorsal approach is used for reversed Barton’s shear fractures. It has the advantage of a relatively easy soft tissue dissection, but there are frequent problems with prominent hardware that can cause irritation to the extensor tendon and rupture of extensor pollicis longus.    degree of invasiveness risk of infection risk of tendon rupture cost.    