Osteoporosis is the most common metabolic bone disease and its prevalence is expected to increase in the aging population. Peak bone mass, a key predictor of osteoporosis and fractures, is to a degree determined 
                        in utero
                     . Interventions at early stages of foetal development by optimising the health and well-being of the mother and later in childhood, have been shown to increase bone mass. Treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis is aimed at reducing fracture risk and bisphosphonates remain the mainstay of anti-resorptive therapy. Denosumab, a monoclonal antibody against RANKL, is an alternative for patients intolerant of or with contraindications to bisphosphonates. Anti-fracture efficacy of anti-resorptives by far outweighs the small risk of atypical fractures associated with long-term use. Anabolic treatment with teriparatide, is reserved for severe osteoporosis. Novel agents: monoclonal anti-sclerostin antibody, romosozumab and specific cathepsin-K inhibitor, odanacatib are in clinical trials and expected to enter clinical use in the near future. Careful history (including estimation of dietary calcium intake) Clinical examination Laboratory blood tests: full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, or plasma viscosity, or C-reactive protein, serum calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, protein immunoelectrophoresis, 25(OH)Vitamin D, endomysial and/or tissue transglutaminase (TTG) antibodies, bone turnover markers (if available) Laboratory urine tests: Bence-Jones protein, 24 hour urine collection for calcium excretion (if indicated, eg in malabsorption) Bone densitometry (with lateral vertebral fracture assessment, VFA, if available) Lateral radiographs of thoracic and lumbar spine (if indicated, e.g. VFA not available) Calculation of fracture risk probability (e.g. Fracture Risk Assessment Tool, FRAX) Osteoporosis is characterised by low bone mass and deterioration in bone architecture which predispose to fragility fractures. Approximately 2 million women in the UK and 200 million women worldwide are affected and the prevalence is expected to rise as the population ages. The annual cost of osteoporotic fractures is over £2 billion and predicted to treble within the next 25 years. Approximately 80% of the cost relates to hip fractures, which carry the highest morbidity and mortality. A 50-year-old woman has an approximately 50% lifetime risk of suffering an osteoporotic fracture and pre-existing fractures increase the risk of subsequent fractures. The diagnosis of osteoporosis is usually made on the basis of the bone mineral density (BMD) of the lumbar spine and hip measured by dual-emission X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA). In a peri- or post-menopausal woman a T-score ≤−2.5 (at least 2.5 standard deviations below the average BMD of a young woman) defines osteoporosis according to the World Health Organisation (WHO). A T-score between −1 and −2.5 signifies osteopenia. In young premenopausal women with a T-score ≤−2.5 (unless still growing and have not achieved peak bone mass) the diagnosis of osteoporosis can be made in the presence of a chronic disease known to affect bone metabolism (inflammatory, metabolic or gonadal insufficiency). Otherwise the BMD is assessed by Z-scores (age-correlated) and Z-scores ≤−2 and >−2 define BMD below and within the expected range for age respectively. Although BMD is the main determinant of bone strength, other skeletal and non-skeletal factors contribute to the overall fracture risk and a number of these are included in the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX), commonly used in clinical practice. Typical assessments and procedures necessary in investigating suspected osteoporosis are listed in The aim of treatment of osteoporosis is to reduce moderate and high fracture risk. FRAX ( A number of non-pharmacological and pharmacological interventions are available and being developed and their use is based on the understanding of the pathophysiology of bone homeostasis. Bone is a dynamic tissue, which undergoes renewal in the process of bone remodelling, key for bone repair. The bone remodelling cycle is initiated by bone-resorbing cells, osteoclasts and completed by bone-forming cells, osteoblasts (which by the end of the process are embedded in bone matrix and become osteocytes). Osteoclasts secrete hydrochloric acid and cathepsin-K, which dissolve bone mineral and collagen respectively. The C-terminal cross-linking telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX) is a breakdown product of type-1 collagen (the most abundant collagen in bone), detectable in the serum and urine and serves as a bone resorption marker. A common bone formation marker is the procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP). At a molecular level, osteoclastogenesis is initiated by stimulation of the receptor activator of nuclear factor-κ B (RANK), expressed on pre-osteoclasts, with its ligand (RANKL), expressed primarily by osteoblasts and osteocytes. An endogenous soluble RANKL-decoy receptor, osteoprotegerin (OPG) inhibits osteoclastogenesis by blocking RANKL. Osteoblast differentiation and bone formation is triggered by the activation of the Wnt-signalling pathway, which is controlled by two endogenous Wnt-antagonists: sclerostin expressed by osteocytes and dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1) mainly expressed by osteocytes and osteoblasts. Epigenetic factors influence bone remodelling and micro RNAs (miRNAs): miR-21, miR-23a, miR-24, miR-100 and miR-125b are elevated in patients with osteoporotic fractures, thus being attractive candidates to become disease-specific biomarkers and predictors of fracture risk in the future. Peak bone mass (PBM), achieved by age 30, is a key predictor of osteoporotic fractures at older age and evidence suggests that PBM is to a degree determined Mineralisation of the foetal skeleton is mostly achieved in the third trimester, which is reflected by increased maternal calcium intestinal absorption. Thus low maternal calcium intake and/or suboptimal vitamin D status may be a risk for low bone mass in neonates and later in childhood. A longitudinal study of nearly 200 children showed that low maternal 25(OH)D during late pregnancy was associated with reduced whole-body and lumbar spine bone mineral content (BMC) in their children at the age of 9. Other risk factors included low maternal height and preconception weight, low fat stores, smoking and lower social class. Accumulation of bone mineral during childhood and adolescence is governed by heredity and modifiable factors including diet, smoking, endocrine status and physical exercise. A recent prospective controlled study of over 2500 Swedish children aged 6 to 9 demonstrated that 40 minutes of daily physical activity, introduced as part of routine play (running and jumping) at school over 6 years significantly improved bone mass and bone size in girls without affecting the fracture risk. As low rate age-related bone loss may already begin after the age of 30 in parallel to the decline in muscle mass, a healthy lifestyle (regular weight bearing exercise, healthy diet) is important. Recent evidence suggests that soluble dietary fibre significantly changes the gut microbiome and improves intestinal calcium absorption. Low BMI is a known risk factor for osteoporosis, however obesity is associated with a higher rate of vitamin D deficiency and may also predispose to fragility fractures. Thus maintenance of an ideal BMI should be encouraged. In the elderly, falls are a significant risk factor for fragility fractures and single- and multifactorial fall prevention strategies reduce this risk. These include individual assessment and modification of risk factors for falling such as poor mobility, dizziness-inducing medication, postural hypotension, vision impairment, foot problems, inadequate footwear, tripping hazards and the fear of falling. Multi-component exercise programs applied on an individual or group basis (e.g. Tai-Chi) have been shown to reduce the risk of falling. An optimal dietary calcium intake is important for the attainment of PBM and maintenance of optimal BMD. Calcium-rich foods include dairy products, green vegetables and fish. The recommended daily dietary calcium allowance (RDA) for adolescents and women ≤50 (including pregnant and breastfeeding) is 1300 mg and 1000 mg with the tolerable upper level (UL) intake of 3000 mg and 2500 mg respectively according to the US Institute of Medicine (IOM). For postmenopausal women calcium RDA and UL are 1200 mg and 2000 mg respectively. In clinic dietary calcium intake is estimated with dietary questionnaires and if low a higher dietary intake or calcium supplementation is recommended. Vitamin D is essential for maintaining calcium and phosphate homeostasis. The active form of vitamin D increases intestinal calcium and phosphate absorption, osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and renal calcium re-absorption. Low vitamin D causes rickets in children and impairment of bone mineralization or osteomalacia in adults. Vitamin D is synthesised in the skin during exposure to the UVB light, but many factors (higher latitude, overcast sky, air pollution, dark and/or aged skin, clothing, sun-blocks) diminish this process. In the UK between October and April virtually no vitamin D is synthesised in the skin and one relies on vitamin D stores accumulated in summer and dietary intake. The main dietary sources of vitamin D are oily fish, however an average diet alone provides only approximately 10–20% of vitamin D requirement. Vitamin D needs two hydroxylation steps to become metabolically active. The first step takes place in the liver, where the 25-hydroxylase converts vitamin D to 25(OH)Vitamin D [25(OH)D], serum concentration of which is used to determine vitamin D status. The second step takes place in the kidneys, where 25(OH)D is converted to 1,25(OH) Opinions differ with regard to the ‘normal’ concentration of 25(OH)D. The US IOM guidelines based on a population model of vitamin D deficiency prevention for 97.5% of the population propose that 25(OH)D of 50 nmol/Litre (20 ng/mL) is sufficient. However most authorities agree that the optimal 25(OH)D for bone health is ≥75 nmol/Litre (30 ng/mL), as at this concentration the parathyroid hormone (PTH) is at its nadir, intestinal calcium absorption at its optimum, the risk of falls and fractures is least and bone mineralization defects are absent. According to the US Endocrine Society recommendations, based on a medical model taking into account both skeletal and extraskeletal effects of vitamin D, the ideal 25(OH)D is: 100 nmol/Litre (40 ng/mL)–150 nmol/Litre (60 ng/mL). Indeed, equatorial Maasai warriors, who spend the day outdoors have an average 25(OH)D of 110 nmol/Litre (44 ng/mL). The European Society for Clinical and Economic Aspects of Osteoporosis and Osteoarthritis (ESCEO) recommends achieving 25(OH)D of 50 nmol/Litre (20 ng/mL) at a population level and in patients with osteoporosis, and 75 nmol/Litre (30 ng/mL) in the frail elderly. Vitamin D deficiency (defined as serum 25(OH)D ≤ 25 nmol/Litre [10 ng/mL]) and insufficiency (defined as serum 25(OH)D of 25–75 nmol/Litre [10–30 ng/mL]) is widespread and it has been estimated that over 50% of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis receiving treatment may have suboptimal vitamin D status. A recent Diet and Nutrition Survey suggests that up to 25% of people in the UK have vitamin D deficiency. As VDR is widely expressed and many tissues possess 1α-hydroxylase activity, compromised vitamin D status can have widespread consequences. Thus vitamin D deficiency has been associated not only with osteoporosis, osteopenia and osteomalacia, but also with propensity to falls due to weakening of muscles and many other disorders including complications of pregnancy. Pregnant and breastfeeding women are particularly prone to developing vitamin D deficiency due to enhanced vitamin D metabolism. The US IOM recommends a vitamin D3 dietary daily allowance of 600 international units (IU) increasing to 800 IU after the age of 70 with the UL of 4000 IU assuming minimal sun exposure. However a higher daily vitamin D3 intake for patients at risk of vitamin D deficiency may be necessary according to the guidelines of the US Endocrine Society: for adolescents and for women aged >19 years (including pregnant and breastfeeding) 600–1000 IU and 1500–2000 IU respectively (UL of 4000 IU and 10 000 IU respectively). The effects of vitamin D (+/− calcium) supplements on BMD and fracture risk have been extensively studied with inconsistent results, possibly due to different methodology, diet, sun exposure and bioavailability of the compounds used. The strongest evidence supporting the beneficial role of vitamin D-supplementation comes from the randomised controlled trial (RCT) of over 3000 healthy ambulatory elderly women from residential homes and sheltered accommodation, who were given 800 IU of vitamin D3 and 1.2 g calcium or a double placebo for 18 months. The treatment group has shown a 2.7% increase in the hip BMD, a 43% reduction in hip fractures and a 32% reduction in non-vertebral fractures. To date at least 12 meta-analyses of trials (including RCTs) examining the impact of vitamin D supplementation on skeletal outcomes (BMD, fracture reduction), have been carried out with varied results. Overall a picture emerges of a positive effect of vitamin D supplementation on fracture risk reduction especially when given at least at a minimum daily dose of 800 IU and especially in the ≥65 years old. In clinical practice patients with low 25(OH)D (and optimal dietary calcium intake) require pure vitamin D supplementation and a number of products for oral administration have been licensed in the UK including Fultium D3 (800 and 3200 IU), Desunin (800 IU) and InVita D3 (25 000 IU). For treatment of vitamin D deficiency a common regime would be: Fultium D3 or Desunin 3200 IU daily for 3 months and thereafter 800 IU daily long-term. InvitaD3 can be given at a dose of 50 000 IU weekly for 6 weeks and thereafter 25 000 IU monthly long-term. In 2012 the Chief Medical Officers for the UK recommended Vitamin D 400 IU supplements to population groups at risk of vitamin D deficiency (pregnant and breastfeeding women, people aged ≥65 and individuals with low exposure to the sun). The most important contributing factor to post-menopausal bone loss is the drop in oestrogen, which induces RANKL-expression and osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. Increased bone loss associated with decreasing serum oestradiol and increasing FSH may start already 2–3 years before the last menses and accelerated bone loss continues for up to 5–10 years. Oestrogen replacement (hormone replacement therapy, HRT) suppresses osteoclast activity. The effectiveness of HRT (conjugated equine estrogen 0.625 mg/d and medroxyprogesterone acetate 2.5 mg/d) in reducing fracture risk (vertebral, hip and other osteoporotic fracture by 34%, 34% and 23% respectively) was established by the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) study of over 16 000 postmenopausal women. However, due to increased incidence of breast cancer, cardiovascular and venous thromboembolic events (VTE), the study was prematurely terminated after 5 years. Another WHI study of over 6 years duration of unopposed oestrogen replacement in over 10 000 postmenopausal women with prior hysterectomy confirmed a reduction in hip and vertebral fractures by nearly 40%, but demonstrated an increased risk for strokes (although suggested a decreased risk for breast cancer). Subsequently the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) advised against the use of HRT for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in women over the age of 50. In the US the North American Menopause Society recommends HRT for treatment of menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis prevention at the lowest effective dose in order to minimise risk. In the UK HRT is currently indicated for women suffering from menopausal symptoms rather than as bone protection. However, evidence suggests that in women with early menopause, benefits of HRT may outweigh the risks. The National Osteoporosis Society (NOS) recommends HRT for women with early menopause until the age of around 50 in order to avoid bone loss. Treatment with HRT can be continued until the age of 60 in the absence of risk factors for breast cancer, cardiovascular disease and VTE. Before commencing HRT the risks and benefits should be clearly explained. Withdrawal of HRT results in bone loss. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have an agonist effect on the estrogen receptor (ER) in bone and an antagonist effect on the ER in breast and brain tissue. The effect on the uterus can be neutral (raloxifene), or antagonistic in the presence of oestrogen (bazedoxifene). Raloxifene 60 mg daily reduces vertebral (but not non-vertebral) fracture risk by 30% over 3 years as demonstrated by the Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation (MORE) study. Raloxifene is associated with an increased risk of VTE and menopausal symptoms and it suppresses bone turnover to a lesser degree than oestrogens. Consequently it tends to be considered for treatment of asymptomatic postmenopausal women with a relatively lower spinal as compared to hip BMD, in the absence of risk factors for VTE. Raloxifene is contraindicated in pre-menopausal women, as it competes with oestrogen for the ER with consequent bone loss. NICE recommends raloxifene in secondary prevention of osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women with contraindications to, or intolerant of bisphosphonates. The use of raloxifene can be extended to postmenopausal women at high risk of breast cancer in keeping with the recent NICE recommendations. Bazedoxifene reduces vertebral fractures by 40% according to a 3-year study of over 7 000 postmenopausal women and has a sustained effect for up to 7 years of treatment. A post hoc sub-group analysis of women at high fracture risk demonstrated a non-vertebral fracture risk reduction by about 50% and 34% over 3 and 5 years respectively. Bazedoxifene does not stimulate the endometrium, but is associated with increased vasomotor symptoms, leg cramps and VTE. Bazedoxifene has been approved for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis in the EU. Tissue selective estrogen complex (TSEC) therapy combining bazedoxifene with conjugated estrogens (BZA/CE) has undergone five phase 3 Selective oestrogens, Menopause and Response to Therapy (SMART) trials demonstrating safety of this combination with low rates of endometrial hyperplasia (<1%), significant reduction of the incidence of hot flushes and improvement in vaginal dryness. BZA/CE was not associated with an increased incidence of thromboembolic or breast-related adverse events. BZA/CE suppressed bone turnover markers, significantly improved BMD in the lumbar spine and hip over 2 years and could be an attractive option for postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and menopausal symptoms. Bisphosphonates are the treatment of choice for osteoporosis and the most widely prescribed anti-resorptives, having been in clinical use since the late 1960s. Bisphosphonates, synthetic analogues of naturally occurring inorganic pyrophosphate have a strong binding affinity for mineral and bind especially at sites of active bone resorption and new bone formation, where they become covered by newly formed bone. Osteoclasts ingest the exposed mineral-bound bisphosphonates, which inhibit their function and survival with consequent inhibition of bone resorption. Nowadays mostly amino-bisphosphonates (containing a nitrogen atom): alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, pamidronate and zoledronate are in clinical use due to their high potency. Bisphosphonate-mediated inhibition of bone resorption leads (in the process of coupling) to reduced bone formation (thus both bone resorption and formation markers decrease during treatment). However, overall in osteoporosis this restores the balance between otherwise increased bone resorption as compared to bone formation and allows for more complete mineralisation of existing (although reduced) bone tissue mass as reflected by an increase in BMD. The potency of bisphosphonates depends on their ability to inhibit osteoclast enzymes and their skeletal-binding affinity, which in turn affects their skeletal retention. Zoledronate has the highest binding affinity and in decreasing order: alendronate, ibandronate and risedronate the lowest. Bisphosphonates with the highest binding affinity can be retained by the skeleton for years with a prolonged inhibitory effect on bone turnover. Thus bisphosphonate use is generally contraindicated in pre-menopausal women of childbearing potential and avoided in pregnancy. Animal studies have shown that bisphosphonates cross the placenta and accumulate in the foetal skeleton, however their effect on the human foetus is unknown and normal pregnancy outcomes have been reported in women treated with bisphosphonates before and during pregnancy. Bisphosphonates can be given orally or intravenously. As absorption of amino-bisphosphonates given orally is low and even in ideal conditions less than 1%, the drug has to be administered with plain water, after an overnight fast, and followed by 30–60 minutes with nothing else by mouth except plain water. In addition patients must remain upright in order to prevent any gastro-oesophageal reflux, which may cause oesophageal irritation. As adhering to these complex instructions can be problematic especially in the elderly, compliance with the treatment can be poor. In an effort to obviate the need for fasting a new combination of delayed-release risedronate (risedronate within pH-sensitive enteric coating delaying the release of the active compound until it reaches the small intestine) and EDTA (a well-established chelating agent) preparation has been developed and launched in the US, Canada and Australia under the brand names of Atelvia, Actonel DR and Actonel EC respectively. This new drug can be administered after breakfast with no need for fasting. A one year non-inferiority trial has demonstrated its effectiveness in increasing the BMD to the same rate as risedronate. Approximately 50% of the absorbed bisphosphonate dose binds to bone and 50% is excreted by the kidneys. Manufacturers do not recommend their use if creatinine clearance is <30–35 ml/min due to lack of clinical experience. There is a low risk of acute renal failure in patients receiving i.v. bisphosphonates, which can be reduced by adequate hydration prior to infusion. Alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate and zoledronate reduce the risk of vertebral fractures in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis by 40–70% over 3 years as compared with placebo. Alendronate, risedronate and zoledronate also reduce the risk of non-vertebral and hip fractures. However ibandronate, has been shown to reduce the risk of non-vertebral fractures only in a sub-group of women at high risk of fractures and has not been proven to reduce the risk of hip fractures. Currently the bisphosphonate of choice in prevention and treatment of osteoporosis is alendronate, due to its proven efficacy and low cost. The most common side effects of oral bisphosphonates are mild upper gastrointestinal symptoms and patients with impaired swallowing should not be prescribed oral bisphosphonates. The usual i.v. bisphosphonate of choice is zoledronate, given at 5 mg at yearly intervals for 3–6 years. The main side-effect is an acute-phase reaction (fever, myalgia, lymphopenia, elevated CRP) due to pro-inflammatory cytokine (TNFα, interferon-γ and IL-6) release by an activated sub-set of T-cells, which may occur in over 50% patients after the first infusion. Acetaminophen is recommended prior to and for approximately 2 days after the infusion. Subsequent infusions usually cause a milder acute phase reaction if any. Hypocalcaemia may occur, thus it is important to ensure that patients are vitamin D replete and have adequate calcium intake. Due to bisphosphonate-induced long-term suppression of bone turnover, which impairs the natural mechanism of bone repair, concerns have been raised with regard to potentially increased risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and atypical fractures. ONJ is defined as exposure of necrotic bone in the oral cavity, not healing for 6–8 weeks. Most bisphosphonate-associated ONJ cases (95%) have occurred after invasive dental procedures in oncology patients receiving high doses i.v. given in addition to chemotherapy (ONJ risk up to 15%). The estimated rate of bisphosphonate-associated ONJ in patients with osteoporosis is very low and ranges between 1:1000 and 1:263 000 patient-years. As the causality between bisphosphonate use and ONJ is unproven and the benefit of fracture risk reduction by far outweighs the small risk, the American Dental Association does not recommend routine cessation of bisphosphonate treatment before a dental procedure. However patients should be informed of the ONJ risk estimated at worst at 0.1% and advised to maintain good oral hygiene. Atypical femoral fractures (sub-trochanteric or diaphyseal, which originate in the lateral cortex, at the site of high tensional stresses) are rare, and account for about 1% of all femoral fractures. In order for a femoral fracture to be classed as ‘atypical’ 4 out of 5 major diagnostic criteria of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) have to be met. These are: occurrence after minimal/no trauma, transverse/oblique orientation of the fracture line, medial bony spike, minimal/no comminution and localised peri- or endo-steal thickening of the lateral cortex at the fracture site. Incomplete fractures involve only the lateral cortex. Minor supportive (non-diagnostic) features include: prodromal pain in the groin or thigh, generalised increase in cortical thickness of the diaphysis, bilateral incomplete or complete femoral diaphyseal fractures and delayed healing. Two large population-based retrospective studies of over 15 000 and 12 000 femoral fractures from the US and Sweden respectively revealed an increased risk for atypical fractures in bisphosphonate users, which increased with the duration of use, however the absolute risk was very small and much lower than the risk of osteoporotic fractures. The estimated risk in the American population increased from 1.78 in 100 000 patient-years, when treated for 2 years to 113.1 in 100 000 patient-years when treated for >8 years. In the Swedish population the estimated risk was 1.8 in 10 000 patient-years ≤2 years of treatment and 8.4 in 10 000 patients-years when treated for >2 years with an absolute risk of about 5 in 10 000 patient-years (95% CI 4–7). An analysis of 90 million hospital discharge records from between 1996 and 2007 in the US suggested that for every sub-trochanteric fracture (both typical and atypical) in bisphosphonate users 100 hip fractures were prevented (in addition to non-hip fractures) confirming that the benefit by far outweighs the risk. However, in view of the above considerations it is currently unclear how long bisphosphonates should be continued for, in order to maximise the benefit and minimise the risks. The only clinical trial data comparing the fracture risk in patients who continue with these who discontinue treatment come from two RCTs: the Fracture Intervention Trial (FIT) Long-Term Extension (FLEX) Trial and the HORIZON-PFT extension trial. The FLEX Trial demonstrated a significantly reduced risk (RR 0.45 [95% CI 0.24–0.85]) for new clinical vertebral fractures (but not morphometric vertebral or non-vertebral fractures) after treatment with alendronate for 10 years as compared with 5 years followed by 5 years of placebo. In the latter arm, a gradual increase in bone turnover markers was observed over the 5-year placebo period, however they remained suppressed at the end of the trial. Furthermore, in the 10-year treatment group a significant reduction of non-vertebral fracture risk was seen in the sub-group with a femoral neck T-score ≤−2.5 (RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.26–0.96), suggesting that patients who remain at high fracture risk after 5 years treatment would benefit from an additional 5 years. In the HORIZON-PFT extension trial, the incidence of morphometric vertebral fractures was significantly lower (OR 0.51, 95% CI: 0.26–0.95) after 6 years of treatment with Zoledronate as compared to 3 years followed by placebo. There were no differences between groups with regard to other fractures. On the other hand, a small RCT of risedronate or placebo for 3 years with follow-up for an additional year confirmed a prolonged anti-fracture effect of the drug lasting for at least a year after discontinuation, in spite of a gradual reduction in BMD mirrored by an increase in bone turnover markers, which reached the level of the former placebo group by the end of the trial. By the end of 4 years the original treatment group had a 46% lower incidence of morphometric vertebral fractures as compared with the former placebo group. In view of limited evidence to guide the decision-making about the timing and duration of bisphosphonate treatment individualised approach based upon patient's current fracture risk is recommended. Most authorities agree that the treatment with oral bisphosphonates beyond 5 years and i.v. zoledronate beyond 3 years is justified in patients with osteoporosis with previous fragility fractures who remain at high risk of fracture. In patients with no prior fragility fractures and at moderate risk of fracture, a ‘drug holiday’ after 3–5 years of bisphosphonates (oral or iv) may be considered. In patients at low risk of fragility fractures treatment is not justified. If after 10 years of treatment with bisphosphonates fracture risk remains high some consider an interval treatment with raloxifene or teriparatide. Denosumab is a fully human anti-RANKL monoclonal antibody, which blocks RANKL, thereby inhibiting osteoclastogenesis. The dose licensed for treatment of osteoporosis is 60 mg subcutaneously at 6-monthly intervals. As its clearance occurs through the reticuloendothelial system, it can be given to patients with renal impairment, however there is an increased risk of hypocalcemia especially in severe renal failure. In women with postmenopausal osteoporosis denosumab significantly increased BMD and reduced vertebral, hip and non-vertebral fracture risk by 68%, 40% and 20% respectively after 3 years when compared with placebo in the Fracture Reduction Evaluation of Denosumab in Osteoporosis every 6 Months (FREEDOM) trial. A In contrast to bisphosphonates, which bind to bone and exert a prolonged anti-resorptive effect, denosumab is eliminated relatively quickly and its anti-resorptive effect is fully reversible. However, upon discontinuation of treatment with denosumab for two years, a rebound increase of bone turnover markers is observed after three months of missing the dose (i.e. nine months after the last dose), which persists for up to two years. This is mirrored by a decline in denosumab-induced BMD gain and return to baseline values already within a year of discontinuation of treatment. However re-treatment with denosumab results in rapid suppression of bone turnover markers and a BMD gain, which within a year is comparable to values achieved after 4 years of continuous treatment. Denosumab given continuously induces on-going BMD gain (after eight years: 16.5% and 6.8% for the spine and total hip respectively). Denosumab has a good safety profile with clinical data available for 9 years of use. In the phase 3 FREEDOM trial a higher number of cases with cellulitis were reported in patients taking denosumab as compared with placebo (0.3% vs <0.1%), although the absolute risk was very low and the overall incidence of infections was no different. There have been two cases of atypical fractures in phase 3 of the extension of the FREEDOM trial (rate between 1:10 000 and 1:1000). Rare cases of ONJ have also been reported. So far no neutralising antibodies or resistance to treatment has been observed. Prior to and during the treatment with denosumab it is important to ensure that patients are vitamin D replete and have an adequate intake of calcium in order to avoid the risk of hypocalcaemia. In the UK denosumab is recommended by NICE for primary prevention of osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women if bisphosphonates are contraindicated, depending on the BMD readings and independent clinical risk factors. In secondary prevention denosumab is recommended in patients who are intolerant of or have contraindications to bisphosphonates. As denosumab is relatively easy to administer and has very few side effects, after initiation in specialist centres continued administration is frequently undertaken locally by GP practices. Strontium ranelate (SR) contains two atoms of strontium (atomic weight twice heavier than calcium) and ranelic acid. SR combines antiresorptive and anabolic activity and may dissociate bone resorption from bone formation as suggested by decreased bone resorption and increased bone formation markers' concentration during treatment. The exact mechanism of action of SR however remains to be elucidated. SR reduced vertebral fractures by 49% after one year (41% after three years) and increased the lumbar, femoral neck and total hip BMD by 14.4%, 8.3% and 9.8% respectively (which in part may be due to increased X-ray absorption of strontium compared with calcium) after three years of treatment in post-menopausal women in the Spinal Osteoporosis Therapeutic Intervention (SOTI) trial. The Treatment of Peripheral Osteoporosis (TROPOS) study showed a reduction of non-vertebral fractures by 19% and hip fractures of 36% in the sub-group of women at high risk of hip fracture after three years of treatment. An open-label 5-year extension of the SOTI and TROPOS studies demonstrated continuous increase in BMD and anti-fracture efficacy for 10 years. As the intestinal absorption is reduced by food (due to calcium competing with strontium), SR is given orally at night after a 2 hour fast, at a dose of 2 g. The most common side effects include nausea and diarrhoea, which usually subside with continuous use, but it is common practice to reduce the dose for the first few weeks of treatment. SR is contraindicated in patients with risk factors for thromboembolic disease in view of a small increase of VTE observed after pooling the SOTI and TROPOS trial data. The most recent safety review of the newest RCT data by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) indicated a higher incidence of myocardial infarction (OR: 1.6, 95% CI: 1.07–2.38) in users. Thus, as of 2014 the MHRA and EMA restricted the use of SR to patients with severe osteoporosis at high fracture risk with contraindications to other agents and recommends that SR must not be given to patients with uncontrolled hypertension and current/past history of ischaemic heart disease, peripheral arterial disease and/or cerebrovascular disease. The risk of developing cardiovascular disease should be assessed before and regularly during treatment. Severe allergic reactions to SR are very rare, but include the drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS-syndrome), therefore patients developing a rash must discontinue the treatment immediately and seek medical assessment. Intermittent administration of low-dose parathyroid hormone (PTH) or its N-terminal analogues has an anabolic effect on bone and not only does it enhance new bone formation, but also improves bone architecture and strength. PTH stimulates osteoblasts directly through the PTH-1 receptor and indirectly through down regulation of sclerostin expression and up regulation of the synthesis of insulin growth factor-1, which leads to increased osteoblastogenesis and function. Two PTH derivatives have been approved for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis in Europe: teriparatide (PTH 1-34) and PTH 1-84, whereas only teriparatide has the FDA approval for use in the US. Teriparatide at a dose of 20 μg s.c. daily injections for 24 months is licensed for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Teriparatide increased the lumbar and femoral BMD by about 9% and 3% respectively and reduced the fracture risk by 65% and 54% in vertebral and non-vertebral sites respectively after 21 months in an RCT of over 1600 postmenopausal women. The number of hip fractures in the treatment group was lower, but a significant fracture risk reduction was not demonstrated possibly due to small numbers. NICE recommends teriparatide for secondary prevention of fractures in women who cannot receive treatment with bisphosphonates and/or strontium ranelate, and fulfil certain criteria dependent on age, T-score and fracture number. PTH peptides can rarely cause transient hypercalcaemia, which has been reported more commonly with PTH 1-84. Due to the pro-mitogenic effect they are contraindicated in metabolic bone diseases other than osteoporosis, in skeletal malignancy and in patients with a history of skeletal irradiation. As discontinuation of teriparatide leads to rapid decline of BMD, an antiresorptive is usually considered afterwards. A monoclonal anti-sclerostin antibody, romosozumab, has been recently assessed in a phase 2 randomised, placebo-controlled parallel group study of postmenopausal women with low BMD, which demonstrated rapid increases in the spine, total hip and femoral neck BMD reaching 11.3%, 4.1% and 3.7% respectively after 12 months of treatment at a dose of 210 mg s.c. at monthly intervals. These BMD gains were significantly greater at all sites as compared with alendronate or teriparatide. Results of the phase 3 trial currently under way are awaited and romosozumab is expected to provide an attractive anabolic treatment option for patients with osteoporosis in the near future. A selective cathepsin-K inhibitor, odanacatib has been developed and results of a large phase 3 Long-term Odanacatib Fracture Trial (LOFT), involving almost 17 000 postmenopausal women were announced recently demonstrating a significant progressive increase in BMD of the spine and hip of 11.2% and 9.5% respectively and reduction in morphometric vertebral, hip and non-vertebral fracture risk of 54%, 47% and 23% respectively after 5 years of treatment. It is expected that odanacatib will soon enter clinical use. Odanacatib suppresses the antiresorptive action of osteoclasts without affecting their viability or cross-talk with osteoblasts allowing for new bone formation. Despite significant advances made in the diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis, not only does it remain a health problem and an economic burden, but its prevalence is predicted to increase with the ageing population. There is a plethora of treatments available including antiresorptive and anabolic agents, however their long term use is generally time limited. Thus it is becoming clear that in order to tackle the growing public health problem of osteoporosis preventive interventions need to be considered very early on and as early as  Risk of developing osteoporosis is to a high degree determined Optimal maternal nutrition and vitamin D status are key to optimal skeletal development of the foetus and attainment of peak bone mass in early adulthood Anti-resorptive treatment of osteoporosis is effective in reducing the risk of fragility fractures and by far outweighs the small risk of atypical fractures associated with long-term therapy