We report on a microcosm experiment to test the impact of manipulating collembolan biomass on the composition and ecological functions of soil biota. Three different treatments were established corresponding to low, ambient or high biomass of Collembola. After 10 weeks, the biomasses of predators were significantly correlated to the collembolan biomass introduced within the microcosms. Non-predatory groups were not impacted by the different treatments. Microbial biomass and carbon mineralisation were both significantly highest in the Ambient treatment at the end of the experiment. These show the importance of trophic interactions as short-term driver of soil communities and of changes in soil carbon mineralisation. Our results also suggest that ecological processes within clumps of Collembola will be affected by their numbers showing highly non-linear ecosystem function effects.Recently, several studies highlighted severe modifications of soil faunal assemblage structure under future possible perturbations derived from climatic change scenarios To do so, in a microcosm experiment, we manipulated the biomass of Collembola, a central component of soil food webs. Collembola have substantial effects on soil system by altering microbial activities -How manipulation of the collembolan biomass will impact other levels of the soil food web? -Will this affect the below-ground carbon mineralisation? The experiment was conducted in microcosms (7.5 cm diameter and 11 cm height) using soil (L and A horizons) and living organisms originated from a 62-year-old beech stand located close to Leinefelde (51 20′N, 10 22′E, Germany) at an altitude of 200 m asl. The parent material is limestone with loess deposit of varying depth. Soils vary over a short distance between loamy-clay Eutric Cambisols on limestone to loamy to clay-loamy Luvisols (FAO classification) on loess, presenting features of hydromorphy at 60–70 cm soil depth. The humus form is always a Mull. Annual precipitation and mean air temperature are 720 mm and +7 °C, respectively. The mean pH H2O of the L and the A horizons are 6.2 and 5.3, respectively. A more detailed description of the site, including values of environmental and community parameters are given in a previous study Three different treatments were established corresponding to three different biomasses of Collembola defined as half, once, and twice the natural collembolan biomass from the 62-year-old beech stand. Further in the text these three treatments will be abbreviated to Low, Ambient and High, respectively. The Ambient treatment corresponds to the control. In parallel to the addition of Collembola, other groups of the decomposer food web were also introduced in the microcosms. Microflora, Nematoda, oribatid and predatory mites, Enchytraeidae, Chilopoda, and Diplopoda were inoculated with a biomass representative of their natural biomass at the beech site Microflora was re-inoculated prior to any other groups, by adding “soil extract”. This inoculum was produced by stirring a sample combining the L and A layers in distilled water and afterwards filtrating the suspension through a cloth with a 5 μm mesh size All taxa except Collembola were extracted from the same amount of freshly collected litter and soil material corresponding to the amount of substrate in the microcosm (approximately 140 g DW). Extraction of Enchytraeidae was done following the O'Connor's wet-funnel-technique Extraction of arthropods (Collembola, Acari, diplopods, and chilopods) was performed by means of a modified Kempson-extractor Each treatment (Low, Ambient and High) comprised six replicates, incubated in November 2002 in a climatic chamber under constant climatic conditions (temperature: 12 °C; daily light/dark 12/12 h), for a period of ten weeks. Soil moisture was adjusted to 60% of the soil water holding capacity and kept at this level for the duration of the experiment. At the end of the incubation period, arthropods were extracted in a modified Kempson-extractor (see above). At the end of the experiment, the dry weight of each taxa, except Collembola, was assessed by a precision balance after drying them for 48 h at 65 °C and keeping them in desiccators with silica gel. The Collembola were weighed alive as at the start of the experiment. A conversion factor was used to calculate the dry weight of Collembola from their fresh weight Furthermore, microbial biomass (Cmic) was determined at the end of the experiment using the fumigation–extraction-method A two-ways ANOVA was used to assess the impact of the factor “treatment” and “time” on collembolan biomasses, using microcosm as replicates. One-way ANOVAs were used to assess the impact of the factor “treatment” on both microbial (Cmic and Cmin) and faunal parameters (oribatid and predatory mites, enchytraeids, diplopods, and chilopods) at the end of the experiment. When necessary, data were transformed prior to analysis in order to ensure additivity of variances. Comparisons among means following ANOVAs were achieved a posteriori by the Tukey HSD test. Finally, correlations between parameters were achieved using non-parametric Spearman Rank Order The collembolan biomass was affected by both factors “treatment” and “time” as well as by their interaction ( Biomass of saprophagous and microphytophagous taxa (i.e. Enchytraeidae, Oribatida and Diplopoda) were not affected by the factor “treatment” ( Cmic, only monitored at the end of the experiment, was significantly influenced by the factor “treatment” ( Results of our study revealed the importance of biotic interactions as driver of food web structure and functioning. Within a complex food web, manipulating the biomass of a single group strongly impacted the food web structure affecting both lower and higher trophic levels at a short time scale. These modifications consequently resulted in changes of the soil carbon potential mineralisation. Furthermore, different group-specific reactions were recorded according to the level of collembolan biomass. Collembola are known to be clumped and thus within a normal set of soil faunal collections it is routine to find a factor of 4 + variation in their numbers in successive samples. Therefore our results suggest that ecological processes within clumps will be affected by the numbers of Collembola. It also suggests consideration of a family of messy non-linear models where randomly located aggregations of Collembola show highly non-linear ecosystem function effects. Non-predatory groups (Diplopoda, Enchytraeidae and Oribatida) rather seemed indifferent to the biomass-level of Collembola during the course of the experiment. No direct trophic relationship exists between those groups and springtails. Previous studies suggested strong competition for food resources between Enchytraeidae and microarthropods At short-term time scale, magnitude of modifications engendered into soil fauna assemblages by direct trophic interactions appeared to be much higher than modifications engendered through other direct or indirect biotic interactions (e.g. competition, facilitation, mutualism). Our results, however, must be extrapolated carefully, because as it is inherent with microcosm experiment, we created artificial conditions by recreating an incomplete soil food web. Though we tried to minimize this bias by introducing many taxa belonging to different functional groups or trophic guilds, adding earthworms in our microcosms could partly modify the outcome of the study due to strong engineering impacts. Increasing the collembolan biomass led to a reduction of soil respiration, a measure of microbial activity, supporting the density-dependent influence of grazing by invertebrates on microbial activity. For example, intermediate levels of fungal grazing by Collembola can stimulate fungal growth and promote soil respiration, whereas overgrazing can depress fungal populations, causing a decline in rates of carbon mineralisation The positive relationship found between microbial biomass and microbial activity was unexpected as both parameters often showed different patterns of variations Finally, an interesting result is the fact that performance of the ecosystem was higher in the treatment reflecting the “natural biomass” of the soil biota assemblages. Increasing or decreasing collembolan biomass had negative effects on mineralization process as if biomass of soil organisms encountered at the forest site we sampled was optimal for nutrients release to the system. This would suggest an effective and strong above-belowground connection to sustain the ecosystem development To conclude, this experiment provides evidence that the ecosystem functioning is highly sensitive to slight biomass variations of a group from an intermediate trophic level. Biotic relationships, in particular trophic ones, were shown to strongly regulate soil biota functioning in a short-term experiment under controlled conditions. Further investigations are needed in order to evaluate the long-term consequences of such soil organisms' assemblage modifications. It seems of high relevance if we wish to extrapolate the potential outcome of global change modifications. This, especially to ameliorate models which aimed at predicting the fate of ecosystem processes (e.g. turnover of carbon or nitrogen) based on food web performance. The study was carried out within the context of the multidisciplinary FORCAST project funded by the