Preservation of the soft tissue is of particular importance in the care of pilon fractures. Improper soft tissue management has been attributed to high rates of nonunion, nerve injury, and failures ( Initial temporary external fixation combined with limited exposures for internal fixation (2-stage technique) at a later date allows for less disruption of the soft tissue envelope, leading to a decrease in complications associated with traditional open approaches. This may be achieved through relatively “small incisions” extending from the pole of the malleolus to the metaphyseal fracture(s), although these incisions can still be quite long, especially when significant articular reconstruction and/or bone grafting is required. Other descriptions include “limited approach” or “minimally invasive”; and this differs from a true percutaneous approach. With the advent of locking plate technology, surgeons have successfully managed a variety of fractures though smaller incisions to introduce the plate(s)—the percutaneous approach. Unlike traditional plating methods, locking plates do not rely on frictional forces between the plate/bone interface to achieve compression and stability. This allows for less damage to the periosteal blood supply, which may theoretically decrease the incidence of delayed or nonunion, soft tissue complications, and possibly secondary loss of fixation ( Initial operative management may involve a single-stage approach ( Plate fixation of the pilon component should be performed when soft tissue edema is decreased. The fibular fracture is fixated with standard plating techniques and not the focus of this techniques manuscript. The pilon component is percutaneously fixated with a contoured locking plate. The medial tibial plate is introduced through an approximately 3.5-cm anteromedial incision, or longer depending on surgeon skill level or comfort ( Postoperative care includes keeping the patient non–weight bearing for 8 weeks or longer depending on the clinical situation. A removable cam walker may be placed to allow for early range of motion, all depending on the on the degree of comminution and stability of the construct. Using a “true” percutaneous approach combined with newer generation locking plates for the treatment of certain pilon fractures may decrease complications associated with disruption of the soft tissue envelope and associated osseous complications and allow for quicker return to function. This technique may prove to be advantageous when compared to more traditional open methods. The percutaneous locking plate approach is probably best suited for closed noncomminuted metadiaphyseal pilon fractures with minimal articular surface involvement and when bone grafting of the metaphysis is not necessary. This approach is not ideal for every pilon fracture and surgeons should have the significant experience with pilon fracture management before attempting this approach.