Logistic regression was utilised to calculate the probability that a particular pillar of a given geometry (width to height ratio) and a known stress condition (strength to stress ratio) will be stable. The stable-failure boundary was also determined. The logistic regression was also used to calculate and draw isoprobability contours. These contours represent the probability of stability of coal pillars based on the probability function for each stability class and are a valuable design tool in quantifying the instability probability of coal pillars.Pillars in underground coal mines are mainly designed to ensure the protection of roadways and entries. Pillars stability is consequently the most important factor that must be guaranteed through the entire life of mine that can be years or even decades long. Pillar stability can be analysed by a number of methods that are generally based on the ratio between the pillar strength and pillar load that is expressed in Factor of Safety ( The strength characteristics of coal pillars has been studied by many researchers and the subject has been well discussed in the literature, for examples Two coal pillar strength approaches based on a tentative empirical failure criterion for coal seams were proposed A new coal pillar strength equation was developed and tested, along with existing equations, against 23 failed and 20 stable case studies Alternative methods of coal pillar strength estimation using numerical modelling with strain softening constitutive behaviour of coal were also provided. The numerical models implemented in the researches were three dimensional finite difference Furthermore, it was found that the In this paper, a statistical approach based on real stable and failed cases of coal pillars was suggested. As pillar stability was only defined as stable or failed, logistic regression was utilised because the method is suitable for categorical dependent variables. Logistic regression is a statistical modelling technique where the dependent variable ( For theoretical mathematical reasons, logistic regression is based on a linear model for the natural logarithm of the odds in favour of The log-odds, as defined above is also known as the logit transformation of If there is a sample of It is mathematically easier to work with the log of Eq. To find the values of In linear regression, the likelihood equations are linear in the unknown parameters and easily solved. In logistic regression, the expressions in Eq. Coal pillar case histories have been compiled by As pillar stability is theoretically governed by the width to height ratio and strength to stress ratios, the logistic regression analysis conducted in this paper was based on these two ratios. The strengths of pillars in Pillar stresses in Theoretically, a pillar with The logistic regression model from pillar stability data was developed with the independent variables of The probability of stability for each pillar can be calculated and compared to the actual stability, as depicted in The logistic regression determines the orientation of the stable-failure boundary line that can be used to separate the different stability categories. Determination of the position of this boundary was conducted following the similar approach to that was used in determining the stable-failure and failure-caving boundaries for block caving mines Using the probability of probability value 0.215, the stable-failure boundary line was then determined. Referring to the logistic parameters given in Eq. It should be noted that Eq. Although stability zones can be defined statistically, a number of case histories might be reported to wrong zones. This is to be expected given the inherent variability of rock masses, data that can be somewhat subjective, and measurement and observational errors. Isoprobability contours were proposed to account for the uncertainties inherent within the design limits of the Mathew Stability Graph Isoprobability contours are lines of equal probability of a given stability outcome that can be drawn onto the stability graph For a desired probability value, the probability of stability value is determined from the graph in  The logistic regression model for predicting the probability of stability of a coal pillar for given geometry (width to height ratio) and stress condition (strength to stress ratio) has been developed. The model prediction is close to the actual stability data, where the model predicts all stable cases correctly and 13 out of 14 failure cases. A coal pillar stability chart has been constructed. A stable-failure boundary line, which will have the same proportion of mismatched points either side of the line, has also been defined and plotted on the stability chart. Isoprobability contours for stable pillars have been developed, which allow the probabilities of risk associated with pillar stability to be determined and presented directly on the stability graph. The contours are a valuable measure of the reliability of the stability zone boundary and allow the statistical meaning of the stability boundaries to be quantified in terms of probable stability outcomes. The use of the contours must be in conjunction with different conditions experienced at mine sites, which define the risk level of acceptance and consequently the choice of isoprobability contour.