Many factors influence the efficiency of chewing, including dental state, bite force, body size, age, gender, salivary flow rate, jaw movements, temporomandibular disorders (TMDs), and occlusal area of the post canine teeth. In addition, tooth wear may alter masticatory performance. The wear process is complex and includes both the chemical factor of erosion and the mechanical factors of attrition and abrasion. Generally, severe and pathological wear has a multifactorial etiology. Tooth wear alters the morphology of the teeth because tooth substance is lost, which can influence the height of vertical dimension of occlusion (VDO) and can affect patients' function, comfort, esthetics, and quality of life. The effect of tooth wear on masticatory performance was measured using a comminution test. The 52 participants (40 men and 12 women, mean age 40 years) had varying degrees of tooth wear, were at least age 18 years and mentally competent, had a maximum of 1 diastema in the posterior area, and had an ASA score of at least 3. Measures of performance included tooth wear index (TWI) judged on a scale from 0 to 4, dental state, bite force measurements, and masticatory performance. The last consisted of a masticatory efficiency test consisting of comminution of artificial test food made of polysiloxane impression material. Mean post canine TWI score was 2.2. The average number of occlusal units per participant was 11.9, and mean bite force was 369 N. Masticatory performance, which was defined as the median particle size (X50) after 20 chewing strokes, for the entire group was 4.2. A small but significant decrease between successive X50 scores averaged 0.26. The duplicate measurement error (DME) was 0.34. The reliability of the mean X50 score was 0.966. Multiple regression analysis confirmed that post canine TWI score had no significant influence on masticatory performance. In addition, no significant effect on X50 was related to age, gender, bite force, or number of occlusal units. No significant relationship was found between the degree of tooth wear of posterior teeth and the median particle size (X50). It should be noted that the results could be impacted by the fact that more men than women were referred for severe tooth wear problems. This could reflect the fact that men consume more acidic drinks than women and perhaps suffer greater erosive tooth wear. The degree of tooth wear of these individuals did not have any effect on masticatory performance. However, future studies may be needed to investigate the impact of occlusal contact area on masticatory function in patients with different degrees of tooth wear, as well as the possible influence of the alteration of occlusal contact area after full rehabilitation of the dentition of patients with tooth wear.