The comminution of coarse forest biomass into fine products suitable to feed pulverized fuel burners could be an efficient way to produce usable renewable energy in the short term. However, size reduction of lignocellulosic forest materials is an intensive operation that requires energy. Pulverized fuel burners suitable for biomass usually require that the biomass fuel meet certain particle size specifications. In the present work, the specifications for the comminuted product are set as 95% by weight passing a 1000 μm mesh and 12% weight passing a 125 μm mesh. Three different forest biomasses, namely poplar chips, pine chips and pine bark, have been selected for size reduction study. Four different types of open-circuit processes have been designed and assayed utilizing a pilot plant comprising two hammermills, one screener and one dynamic air separator, in order to obtain the desired fineness for the product. The biomass raw materials and the products obtained have been characterized and the electrical energy requirements recorded. The process consisting of a primary grinding with 4 mm screen size, followed by selection with a dynamic air separator and secondary grinding of the separator reject, has been identified as the process most suitable for obtaining the desired product. The extrapolation to a full-scale plant for processing 10 o.d. t h−1 gives estimated energy requirements of 120, 150 and 35 kW h o.d. t−1 for poplar chips, pine chips and pine bark, respectively, with initial moisture contents between 10% and 15% (w.b.).Biomass combustion in pulverized fuel burners, either in biomass plants or in co-combustion with fossil fuels in conventional power installations, is an option with high market potential in the medium and long term due to its efficiency. However, the energy costs related to the pulverization of biomasses, especially lignocellulosic ones, is a major drawback relative to other combustion technologies. For this reason, it is necessary to define, evaluate and optimize processes of particle size reduction with the goal of obtaining a product appropriate for combustion under specified conditions. Lignocellulosic biomass, due to its solid nature and chemical composition, is currently the most widely utilized biofuel in thermochemical conversion processes. Among the many combustion technologies existing on the world market, pulverized fuel burning is probably the one most utilized for solid fuels and, in particular, for coal. According to the IEA Clean Coal Centre There are significant differences between the particle sizes utilized for pulverized biomass and for coal. In general, burners for biomass dust (e.g. wood powder) require particle sizes below 1000 μm The utilization of pulverized biomass in utility installations is still very low, but has increased significantly in recent decades. An example is the Gelderland Power station in Holland Pulverized biomass has been traditionally used as fuel in some wood industries, such as the particle board industry, in which the production of powder from sanding board surfaces is important. In Spain, two new 16 MWe power plants have been built to burn pulverized olive husks as fuel. The olive husks are subjected to a combination of grinding and screening operations in order to obtain a product with 99% by weight of particles smaller than 1000 μm As for coal, the combustion of pulverized biomass could become more and more attractive due to its advantages relative to classical biomass combustion systems such as grate firing and fluidized bed firing. The capacity to perform quick changes in the heat load to attend to sudden variations in boiler demands, the low percentage of unburned particles and the high homogeneity of the fuel which allows better control of combustion are the main positive aspects of pulverized firing. However, it is necessary to minimize the energy costs involved in the comminution operations required to meet particle size specifications. This is an important drawback for most of the forest biomass resources whose composition is based on lignocellulosic fibres forming tough and elastic substances (wood, straw, bagasse, etc.) difficult to grind. In particular, the energy requirements reported for pulverizing lignocellulosic biomasses Pulverizing strategies for ores and coal have been widely studied and many manuals, handbooks and treatises are available Particle size limits for the comminuted products have been fixed based on the literature consulted, although future research on pulverized biomass combustion may indicate more accurate limits for different biomass materials. The limits used in this paper are: at least 95% by weight of the dry matter has to pass through a 1000 μm mesh and at least 12% by weight of the dry matter has to pass through a 125 μm mesh. Because of the great variety of forest species and wood wastes, the selection of representative materials is not an easy task. The criteria used in this work for selecting biomasses were chosen to take into account the behaviour of the biomasses under grinding, which behaviour is a consequence of the physical and mechanical properties of the matter. On the other hand, it is also important to evaluate candidate biomasses in terms of their potential for energy utilization. Three forest biomasses have been selected based on their great abundance and their different grinding properties, namely: Poplar chips from short rotation plantations ( Pine chips from logging residues obtained in a clear cut ( Crushed pine bark from a sawmill debarker ( The first (short rotation poplar) is a promising perennial crop the cultivation and production aspects of which have been widely studied. In Spain, productivities between 15 and 25 o.d. t ha The facility utilized in the comminution experiments is a pilot plant consisting of the following elements ( Primary grinder: this is a single bearing horizontal axis hammermill with a drive of 11 kW power and 3000 rpm rotation speed. The grinding chamber is surrounded by a closed exchangeable perforated screen with an inner diameter of 485 mm. The feeding of the biomass is from the front side of the chamber, parallel to the rotor axis. The number of hammers is 24 and the peripheral velocity is 71.47 m s Secondary grinder: this is a double bearing horizontal axis hammermill with a drive of 15 kW power and 3000 rpm rotation speed. The exchangeable insert screen has an opening in the upper part to allow the material to be fed into the chamber perpendicularly to the rotor axis. The rotor carries 20 hammers that reach a peripheral velocity of 94.25 m s Vibratory screener: this consists of a sloped exchangeable perforated plate. The plate is inclined 20% with respect to the horizontal plane. An eccentric arm connected to a rotary axis driven by a 0.75 kW motor transmits the vibrations. Dynamic air separator: this is a Sturtevant type classifier, with an inner diameter of 800 mm and an inside turbine driven by a 4 kW motor with a speed variable between 0 and 1500 rpm. Ancillary equipment such as conveyors (screw and belt type), bins, bridge breakers, etc. Data loggers. The plant is equipped with a data logging system that retrieves every 10 s the main process variables, namely electrical values such as volts, amperes and cos Grinding control. The control of the grinders is performed by changing the feeder speed using a PID (proportional integral and differential) controller that reads the current (amperes) consumed by the grinder drive and changes biomass inlet flow in order to get the value of electric current fixed at a set point. The three biomasses utilized were conditioned prior to the experiments in order to obtain bulk materials with a moisture content between 10% and 15% w.b. For this purpose, the materials were piled up and moved every 2 weeks in order to get homogeneous moisture contents. In addition, oversize particles were removed with a disk screener in order to avoid further problems in the feeding devices at the pilot plant. There are basically two kinds of comminution processes that can be used for pulverizing solid materials, the so-called open and closed circuit processes. In an open circuit process, a particle passes by a given mill only one time, whereas in a closed circuit process, a particle can be passed by a given mill the number of times necessary to obtain the desired size. In the present work, four different types of open circuit processes have been studied for application to the three biomasses selected. The studied processes are described as follows: Process A: grinding in the primary grinder with different screen pore sizes. Process B: grinding in the primary grinder with different screen pore sizes followed by grinding in the secondary grinder with 1.5 mm screen pore size. Process C: grinding in the primary grinder with different screen pore sizes followed by screening with 1.5 pore size and grinding of the screener reject in the secondary grinder with 1.5 mm screen pore size. Process D: grinding in the primary grinder with different screen pore sizes followed by classification in the dynamic separator and grinding of the separator reject in the secondary grinder with 1.5 mm screen pore size. Each process is a combination of single tasks called basic operations that are performed by the main elements of the plant (grinders, screener and separator). Each basic operation is analysed separately within each process and is considered an experimental unit, i.e. an experiment. The general procedure for the basic operations (experiments) consists of processing a single batch of the previously conditioned biomass contained in a big bag (approximately 1.2 m Samples are taken from the different flows produced in each experiment. In order to obtain representative samples, increments of 0.5 kg are taken from each 50 kg flow (1% of the total weight processed). The different increments of each flow fraction are mixed and transferred to polyethylene bags that are sealed and delivered to the laboratory. Each flow fraction has a single analytical sample. The samples have been analysed for moisture content, bulk density and particle size distribution. The procedures used in making each analysis are described below. Moisture determinations have been based on the standards: The method used for the determination of bulk density is based on the standard ASTM E 873-82: Particle size distribution was determined by sieve analysis based on the standard: ASTM E-821-81; Pile of 400 mm tray: 63, 32, 16, 8, 4; 2, 1; 0.5, 0.25, 0.125 (mm) Pile of 200 mm tray 2, 1.60, 1.25, 1, 0.71, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.063 (mm) The 400 mm sieving pile was used for the coarser fractions obtained from intermediate experiments and for the raw biomasses. The 200 mm screen pile was utilized for the finer fractions obtained as part of the end product. The samples used for sieving were increments of the oven-dried samples stabilized at laboratory temperatures. The quantities utilized were between 400 and 500 g for the 400 mm tray and between 50 and 60 g for the 200 mm tray. In the last one, the sieving was carried out in two operations each using half the weight. The vibration times used were 2.5 min for coarser samples, 5 min for intermediate samples and 10 min for finer samples. The principal variables recorded during the experiments were: Duration Vacuum pressures downwards in the grinding chamber (mm H Electric current (amperes) consumed in the main motors : hammermills, screener and separator Rotating speed of the separator motor Differential pressure in the venturi inlet of the dynamic separator (mm H Weight values of the bins Global electrical values of the plant: voltage (volts), current (amperes), power factor (cos The values used to evaluate the experiments are the arithmetic means of the variables recorded during the experiments except in the case of accumulated variables such as bin weight and energy requirement. The mean values obtained for the variables together with the analytical results are used to calculate the following parameters that will be used for the characterization of the experiments. Flow parameters: in the hammermills the flow is evaluated as the dry matter weight processed per unit of time and power used in the motor (kg h Energy parameters: the work realized by the machine is expressed in terms of the specific active electric energy used by the motor per unit (metric tons) of oven-dried weight biomass (kW h o.d. t Particle size parameters: these parameters are used to characterize the particulate fractions of the different processes and are obtained from the particle size distributions. The arithmetic mean diameter, also called weight or mass mean diameter of the distribution, is calculated using the formula The reduction ratio is the relation between the initial and final arithmetic mean diameters. The notation used is the following: Other particle parameters utilized are the percentage by weight of particles that pass the 1000 μm mesh (the notation used is In order to evaluate the proposed processes, the different parameters evaluated for the basic operations are weighted against the oven dry weight fraction of final product generated in the operation obtaining the values of the parameters for each process. The characteristics of the final product are evaluated by weighting the characteristics of the different end fractions obtained during in the basic operations. As can be seen in In the screener, the pore size used was 1.5 mm as this is the largest size with which there may be obtained a screened product having the desired fineness. The 2 mm pore size plate was previously tested and discarded as the fraction of oversized particles contained in the screened fraction exceeded the marked limits. The product fineness at the separator is controlled by modifying three variables: the solid feed rate, the velocity of the pneumatic flow and the rotational speed of the internal turbine. Once the product flow has reached the desired fineness, these variables are kept constant during the rest of the experiment. The physical and granulometric characteristics of the raw biomasses are summarized as follows: the moisture content was kept between 10% and 15% (w.b.) in all batches processed. These limits were fixed in order to obtain results as comparable as possible. The mean moisture content was 11.89% for poplar chips, 14.25% for pine chips and 13.24% for pine bark. Greater differences were found for the bulk density: 148.75 kg m The raw materials show typically asymmetric distributions caused by the presence of larger amounts of fine compared to oversized particles. As already mentioned, the products of the comminution processes have to meet two conditions, namely: more than 95% by weight of the product has to pass the 1000 μm mesh and more than 12% has to pass the 125 μm mesh. In this sense, the evaluation of the particle size parameters is the first step in determining the best process. The second step is the analysis, for the processes acceptable in terms of the product particle size, of the flow and energy parameters that will allow the delineation of the optimal process. For the processes consisting of a single grinding (processes type A), only process A1 that uses a 1.5 mm screen size is considered. The rest of the type A processes yield products with coarse particles that are far from meeting the specifications. The results indicate that the particle size objectives, in particular the weight of the product that passes through the 125 μm mesh, are not reached in any process assayed. The process that yields a product with the finest particle sizes is (Pf The results show an important increase in the bulk density of the end product in relation to the raw material. The average value of this parameter for the comminuted product is 225 o.d. kg m The moisture content shows a clear decrease (approximately 30%) in the comminuted products relative to the raw material: from 11.8% w.b. in the raw material to an average of 8.1% w.b. in the comminuted products. The highest reduction ratio R is obtained for process D1 (27.95). This value indicates how many times smaller the arithmetic mean diameter ( The results obtained for pine chips indicate better fulfilment of the particle size objectives than for poplar chips. The first objective of 95% by weight of product passing the 1000 μm mesh ( The increase of the bulk density due to comminution is important. An average of 27% is gained with respect to the initial bulk density. Although this increase is not as important as for poplar chips (50%), the average final densities are still much higher with the pine product than with the poplar product (328.76 o.d. kg m The decrease of the moisture content parameter during the comminution processes is higher with pine chips than with poplar chips (34.18% w.b. and 31.62% w.b., respectively). The higher initial moisture content in pine chips and the lower throughputs achieved in the hammermills seems to be responsible for the larger moisture reductions. The average reduction ratio obtained for pine chips ( The results obtained for pine bark indicate that the production of fine particles is higher than for poplar chips and pine chips. The particle size objectives are met in all cases except for A2, B3 and B4, in which the limit of The increase of the bulk density obtained after the comminution process is significant (50%) and comparable to the increase obtained with poplar. However, the reduction of the moisture content is very low (9% w.b.) compared to that obtained with either poplar chips (32% w.b.) or pine chips (34% w.b.). The short residence times achieved with pine bark cause less moisture loss. As was mentioned in the experimental part, the total flow obtained in the different basic operations is referred to a machine power unit. These flow values are interesting from the point of view of scaling up to larger installations. The total feeding flow to the hammermills is split into two flow fractions ( The specific feed rates obtained in the primary grinder are very sensitive to the pore sizes for the three biomasses processed. Pine bark shows the highest yields: from 42.38 o.d. kg h The flow results show in general, for all processes, higher yields with poplar chips than with pine chips and much higher yields still with pine bark. Although both poplar chips and pine chips are woody materials with fibrous constitution, the physical and particle size differences between them are patent; pine chips have higher bulk densities and higher particle sizes (see In the classifying devices (screener and separator), the highest separation yields are obtained in the processes C1 (with screener) and D1 (with separator). The reason for these higher yields is that these processes use the finest pre-ground material (primary grinding with 4 mm pore size). The product retained by the screener in process C1 is 34% for poplar chips, 39% for pine chips and 40% for pine bark. The values obtained in process D1 are 20% for poplar chips, 14% for pine chips and 23% for pine bark. References in the literature about the energy requirements for the comminution of biomass materials are scarce. In Perry (Chemical Engineering Handbook) The specific electric energy demanded by the basic operations in each process assayed for the three biomasses is shown in The mean energy requirements obtained were 85.4, 118.5 and 19.7 kW h o.d. t The results reflect the great differences in the energy required by the three biomasses. This is a consequence of their unlike physical and mechanical properties. Woody biomasses such as pine chips and poplar chips presented similar behaviours but greater requirements were recorded for pine chips due to bulk densities, moisture contents and mean particle sizes higher than in poplar chips. Pine bark showed very different behaviour with much lower requirements than for woody biomasses. This behaviour results from its brittle nature which makes the bark appropriate for fine grinding. The electricity used in bark comminution and reported in this work is comparable to the electricity consumed in pulverizing anthracite coal in a closed circuit ball mill, i.e. 20 kW h t The first step in the selection of the best comminution process for each biomass is to identify which processes' products fulfil the particle size objectives of 95% by weight passing the 1000 μm screen and 12% by weight passing the 125 μm screen. For poplar chips, it has not been possible to fulfil the As can be seen in The use of a single grinding operation presents operational risks that should be taken into account. The possibility of overloading the hammermill motor is very high, especially when loading with pine chips. In the primary grinder utilized in the experiments, the nominal working current has been fixed at 15 A. The risk of overloading is considered very high when the electric current increases above 25 A and the grinding regime becomes unstable for currents above 20 A. In poplar chips, the value of 25 A was surpassed only one time in 20 min of operation in the case of 1.5 mm screen; however, the grinding regime was quite unstable when the 1.5 mm was used. When higher screens sizes were used with poplar chips (4, 6 and 8 mm), the grinding performance was good. In the case of pine chips the grinding behaviour was worse than with poplar chips. When 1.5 mm screen size was used, the 25 A was surpassed nine times in 45 min and there were also 37 peaks above 20 A. In general, the grinding regime with pine was quite unstable even for the higher screen sizes. This behaviour is a consequence of two factors: the pine chips have a percentage of oversized particles higher than have poplar chips–namely, 25.3% and 8.5%, respectively, retained in the 32 mm mesh ( Taking into account the above discussion, the process of type A consisting of a single grinding operation is considered inadequate due to the high risk of overloading the hammermill and the unsteadiness of the grinding regime, especially for pine chips. As mentioned above, it was not possible to grind pine bark directly with a 1.5 mm screen and the 2 mm screen did not permit obtaining the product with the required fineness. Process B1 produced valid products for pine chips and processes B1 and B2 produced valid products for pine bark. In these processes, the primary grinding required the lower screen size (4 mm for pine chips and 4.6 mm for pine bark). The content of fine particles (weight of product passing the 1000 mm mesh) in the product after primary grinding with 4 mm was very high (52.22% for pine chips and 60.35% for pine bark). Having a high content of fine particles in the pre-ground material makes the secondary grinding more difficult. The reason is that there is too much product needing to pass through the 1.5 mm pores of the hammermill screen and the risk of blinding is very high. This behaviour was evident during the operation of the secondary grinder, especially with pine bark, for which the production of fine particles is very quick due to the brittleness of this biomass. The above considerations rule out a process of type B as the optimal process for any of the biomasses studied. Consequently, further discussion concentrates on selecting from processes of type C or D the process most suitable for each biomass. The processes that generated a valid product (depicted in In conclusion, the process that seems to give the best performance in terms of fineness is the process D1 consisting of a primary grinding using a 4 mm screen, followed by a separation and a secondary grinding of oversized material rejected by the separator. This process should be appropriate for the three biomasses assayed. However, the type C process could also be suitable for pine bark ( A basic design of a full-scale plant for comminution of 10 o.d. t In order to give an order of magnitude for the total electric energy requirement per unit of mass processed of the full-scale plant, some assumptions have been made to evaluate the energy used in the auxiliary equipment of the plant. In a plant that uses air separation, the most significant auxiliary equipment are the fans needed to convey the material pneumatically and to create the necessary vacuum pressure inside the hammermills. Based on the balanced configuration of the pilot plant utilized in this work, the power estimated for fans would be 15% of the power installed for grinding, and the power needed for the rest of auxiliary equipment (conveyors, valves, compressor, electric, control devices, etc.) is estimated as 15–20% of the grinding power installed. The electric energy needed by the auxiliary equipment will be between 30% and 40% greater than the basic requirement indicated above for poplar chips and pine chips and between 50% and 70% greater than the basic requirement indicated for pine bark. In absolute terms, the total electric energy requirements of a plant producing 10 o.d. t h According to the results obtained, the following conclusions have been reached. In the open circuit processes assayed, the production of a fine product has been possible using two hammermills, one screener and one dynamic separator for dry forest biomasses. Most processes yield products with more than 95% by weight of product passing the 1000 μm mesh; however, the 12% by weight of product passing the 125 μm mesh is barely reached in certain processes, especially for poplar chips and pine chips. Both a secondary grinder and a screener have been used with 1.5 mm perforated plate for selecting pore size. Lower pore sizes presented a higher risk of blinding and have not been considered in this work. Processes consisting of single grinding (process A) or double grinding without intermediate selection of particles (process B) have been discarded for different reasons. Process A utilizing 1.5 mm screen size induced high risks of motor overload with poplar and pine chips and of screen blinding with bark. Process B generated unsteadiness and blinding problems in the secondary grinding due to an elevated proportion of fine particles ready to leave the milling chamber simultaneously. The process that has given the best performance in terms of fineness is process D1 consisting of a primary grinding using a 4 mm screen, followed by a separation and a secondary grinding of oversized material rejected by the separator. This process should be appropriate for the three biomasses assayed. However, the process of type C could also be suitable for the pine bark yielding products valid unless screen blinding has been detected, and periodic cleaning of the screener perforated plate is necessary during the experiments. Concerning biomass characteristics, it is important to note that the increase of the bulk density of the pulverized product is relevant. This increase was on average 50% for poplar chips (from 150 o.d. kg m The extrapolation of the pilot plant results for process D1 to a full-scale plant with a capacity of 10 o.d. t h  Moisture content (% w.b.) Initial moisture content (% w.b.) Final moisture content (% w.b.) Initial arithmetic mean diameter (mm) Final arithmetic mean diameter (mm) Bulk density (o.d. kg m Initial bulk density (o.d. kg m Final bulk density (o.d. kg m Initial weight of material passing the 1000 μm screen (% w.b.) Final weight of material passing the 1000 μm screen (% w.b.) Initial weight of material passing the 125 μm screen (% w.b.) Final weight of material passing the 125 μm screen (% w.b.) Specific electric energy (kW h o.d. t Reduction ratio Standard deviation Oven dry Wet basis Bucket weight (in bulk density estimation) Weight of the bucket fill with the sample (in bulk density estimation) Weight of wet sample (in moisture estimation) Weight of dry sample (in moisture estimation)