A laboratory procedure for the production of a ceramic capillary filter from a high-silica glaze was described and its filtration response was tested in dead-end and periodic vacuum filtration modes with suspensions containing micron and sub-micron clay particles obtained from a ceramic factory wastewater stream. The same glaze raw material ground to two different levels of fineness was used for the production of the porous ceramic substrate and its surface coating. The coating particulate sol was deposited onto the substrate by the filtration technique. The filter substrate and the coating were sintered at relatively lower temperatures (950–980 °C) than conventional ceramic sintering. The filter indicated a non-clogging behavior in both of the filtration modes, and proved a potential for filtering large volumes of dilute clay slurries by periodic filtration operations.The development of ceramic capillary filters with micro-pores (∼1.5–2 μm) having hydrophilic surfaces has led to energy-efficient vacuum or pressurized filtration schemes in the mining and chemical industries ( Most ceramic filters are currently made of high-quality powders of aluminum oxide and silicon oxide, and require relatively high sintering temperatures (1200 °C). Low-cost ceramic filter media produced from inexpensive natural ceramic powders, with desirable structural properties, may enhance wider use of ceramic filters in wastewater liquid/solid separation. This paper presents: (i) a laboratory procedure for the production of a ceramic capillary filter medium from low-cost ceramic powders; and (ii) its filtration response in dead-end (conventional cake filtration) and periodic (interrupted thin-cake formation) filtration modes, with the use of artificially prepared clay wastewater samples. The custom-made ceramic filter used in this study consisted of a cylindrical filter body (substrate) and a surface coating. The surface coating performed the capillary filtration and the substrate served as a support. Both the substrate and the coating were compounded from the same blend of conventional ceramic raw materials (quartz, clay, Na-feldspar and leaded glass frit). This ceramic blend was basically a high-silica glaze (66.67% SiO The substrate body of the filter was produced from a coarse-ground (−270 μm) batch of the ceramic blend. This coarse blend was pressed under 20 MPa and sintered at 980 °C for 1 h to provide sufficient mechanical strength. A hollow cylindrical substrate with one open end was manufactured from the sintered ceramic. The cylindrical substrate was of 1 cm diameter and 2.6 cm length and provided a net filtering area of 8.7 cm The microstructure of the ceramic filter produced as such was investigated by the scanning electron microscope (SEM). Proving that the produced ceramic filter works effectively on waste clay slurries was the subject of the filtration experiments. For this purpose, a wastewater sample of slightly alkaline nature (pH=8.3±0.2) was collected from a kaolin processing plant and dried to recover the particles contained in it. These particles were then re-dispersed in tap water to generate three test samples of 3%, 5%, and 11% mass concentrations of solids, with their pH re-adjusted to that of the original sample. The particles in the test samples had a surface-mean diameter of 3.61 μm, 83% of the particles being finer than 5 μm and 41% finer than 1 μm. The test samples were filtered through the ceramic capillary filter in conventional cake filtration and periodic filtration modes. A schematic layout of the filtration experimental set-up is shown in In dead-end filtration mode, test slurry samples were filtered for a predetermined run time, varied from 1 to 10 min, during which the y-valve was kept closed (  The above equation has been derived on the basis of the assumption that In dead-end filtration, resistance to liquid flow increases as the cake builds up, leading to reduced filtrate flux. Periodic filtration seems to be an advantageous technique to increase the liquid separation capacity. To test the response of the ceramic filter to cyclic operations of thin cake formation followed by cake discharge, filtration experiments in accordance with the previously described two methods of periodic filtration were carried out. As a result of the non-clogging behavior of the ceramic filter medium, the periodic filtration mode of operation proved to be very favorable for increasing the liquid separation capacity with dilute, clay feed suspensions. The dead-end filtration mode in 10 min of continuous cake formation was capable of separating only 0.105 m This study shows that it is possible to prepare a low-cost ceramic capillary filter from a high-silica glaze consisting of quartz, clay, feldspar and leaded frit glass. The filter has some superior filtration properties; it supplies clear liquid without pore clogging or blocking during filtration, and it is amenable to cleaning by backflushing with filtrate and compressed air. As such, the ceramic filter may have a potential for use in wastewater filtration, but requires further investigation into its structural and chemical stability characteristics on a long-term testing basis. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the Turkish State Planning Organization under the project DPT-96K120630.