The Merensky Reef of the Bushveld Complex of South Africa is marked by prominent lateral and vertical variations in its geology, platinum group element grade distribution and platinum group mineralogy. At Bafokeng Rasimone Platinum Mine on the western limb of the complex eleven distinct Merensky Reef facies have been identified. The reef facies show different mineral processing behaviour. Detailed geometallurgical characterisation of three reef facies (FW 1A contact, FW 3 pothole and pothole edge reef facies) at Bafokeng Rasimone Platinum Mine has been carried out in an attempt to understand differences in flotation performance. Results illustrate that the FW 1A contact facies has the best Pt and Pd grades and recoveries in the flotation concentrates and the pothole edge facies has the worst. The differences are related not only to mineralogical and textural characteristics of the platinum group minerals and base metal sulphides in the different facies, but also pertain to the geological position and the mineralogy of the host rocks that are introduced as dilution to achieve a realistic mining cut.Bafokeng Rasimone Platinum Mine (BRPM) is located on the Western Limb of the Bushveld Complex, 30 The Merensky Reef is mined from three incline shafts at BRPM, namely North, South and D Shaft. After production commenced at BRPM differences were found between the estimated recoveries and the actual recoveries achieved. This is related to the highly variable nature of the Merensky Reef, an observation well documented at other mining operations in the Bushveld Complex, with different reef types and footwall (FW) lithologies exceeding important controls on grade and processing characteristics ( On a regional scale, two facies are distinguished for the Merensky Reef on the Western Limb of the Bushveld Complex, namely the Rustenburg facies south of the Pilanesberg Alkaline Complex and the Swartklip facies to the north ( The most prominent structural feature at BRPM that controls the geology of the Merensky Reef is the abundance of potholes ( The geological and mineralogical variations of the Merensky Reef between defined facies have been well documented (e.g. In this study, three of the eleven Merensky Reef facies at BRPM ( FW 1A contact facies: Developed at the highest stratigraphic elevation and consists of a chromitite stringer that is 2 FW 3 pothole facies: Occurs within a regional pothole that settled stratigraphically on the FW 3 norite; both normal (∼20 Pothole edge facies: Found on pothole edges where one reef facies transitions into another by rolling down and cutting across the FW. No PFP is developed and a chromitite stringer may be present. The FW varies along strike and in this studied example is the FW 3 norite. All three reef facies have the basal pyroxenite of the Merensky Cyclic Unit (MCU) as their hanging wall (HW). The sampling and sample preparation methodology is summarised as a flow sheet in All sample preparation was done at Anglo American Technical Solutions – Research in Crown Mines, Johannesburg, South Africa. Samples were crushed to minus 3.3 For the flotation composites the ten samples comprising each reef section, represented by minus 3.3 The milled product of the 1 Automated SEM analyses were done on the polished carbon coated blocks of the high 4E (sum of Pt, Pd, Rh and Au concentrations) grade zones of the underground channel samples (8 samples; To characterise the platinum group minerals (PGM) a sparse phase search measurement (termed light sparse phase liberation or SPL-Lt measurement on the MLA software) was conducted on 12–14 polished blocks per sample. For the flotation feeds, the measurement only mapped particles that contain grains with a BSE grey level of above 145. For the minus 3.3 All GXMAP and SPL-Lt measurements were mineralogically classified using a standard file containing 242 EDS spectra developed specifically for MLA measurements on the Merensky Reef. The 242 EDS spectra were grouped by their mineral chemistry (primary grouping; All flotation test work was done in the flotation laboratory of Anglo American Technical Solutions – Research using a standard bench top single cell froth flotation approach to simulate a rougher test. The goal was not to optimize the flotation but rather to compare the performance of the different reef facies under the same flotation conditions. Water was added so that the slurry was diluted to 33% solid content. Scraping was done to collect 5 concentrates for each facies at the same time intervals over 30 For each underground channel sample a minus 3.3 The milled flotation feeds and the five flotation concentrates for each facies were analysed for 4E, Cu, Ni and S at Anglo American Technical Solutions – Research. The 4E contents were obtained by ICP-MS following silver collection fire assay. S content was obtained using a Leco furnace. The Cu and Ni contents were obtained by ICP-MS following complete fusion using peroxide. The vertical distribution of the 4E elements (hereafter referred to as the grade distribution) in the sampled Merensky Reef facies at BRPM is very different for each and has been used as a distinguishing characteristic in defining the different facies ( From the primary grouping that was exported to the mineral database, secondary and tertiary groups have been created to simplify data presentation ( The modal mineralogy of the flotation feed composites of the studied reef facies show increasing abundances of pyroxenes (44.6–68.2 When looking at the grain size distribution of PGM ( Sulphide liberation by particle composition in the flotation feeds ( The PGM in the flotation feed composites of the studied Merensky Reef facies are ∼50% or less liberated ( When looking at individual PGM groups, the PGE-tellurides show better liberation than the PGE-sulphides in the FW 1A contact ( Bulk chemical assays of the flotation feeds show that the FW 1A contact, FW 3 pothole and pothole edge facies have 4E head grades of 5.2, 4.3 and 7.1 The pothole edge facies has the highest overall Cu and Ni grade and recovery in the flotation concentrates ( The pothole edge facies has the highest solids recovery (hereafter referred to as mass pull) as flotation progresses ( The minerals targeted for recovery during Merensky Reef flotation are the base metal sulphides and PGM, whereas the recovery of non-PGM and -sulphide minerals (hereafter called gangue minerals) will lead to concentrate dilution. The discussion aims to identify the geological, mineralogical and mining factors that govern the varying flotation performance of the sulphides and PGM as well as concentrate dilution in the studied Merensky Reef facies at BRPM. Cu and Ni grades and recoveries ( Using an average Ni content of 31.55 Pyrrhotite (Fe The highest cumulative grade of Cu and Ni in the flotation concentrates of the pothole edge facies is explained by the abundances of pentlandite and chalcopyrite in its flotation feed ( The flotation performance of pentlandite can have a significant influence on the grade and recovery of Pd, since pentlandite in the Merensky Reef can carry significant concentrations of Pd in solid solution ( The FW 1A contact facies has the best flotation performance with regards to Pt and Pd of the studied Merensky Reef facies at BRPM, followed by the FW 3 pothole and then the pothole edge facies ( Studies on the floatability of PGM are limited. A flotation study on the UG 2 Reef of the Bushveld Complex of South Africa conducted by A high percentage of unliberated PGM in the FW 1A contact facies occur in liberated BMS particles ( In the FW 3 pothole and pothole edge facies the unliberated PGM show higher associations with silicates ( The poorer liberation of PGM and the higher association with silicates rather than sulphides ( The 4E grade distribution ( The higher cumulative percentage mass pull in the pothole edge and FW 3 pothole reef facies ( There are two reasons for the higher abundances of pyroxenes in the flotation feeds of the pothole edge and FW 3 pothole facies when compared to the FW 1A contact facies. The first reason can be related to the geology of the FW in the different facies. The FW 3 norite present in the FW 3 pothole ( Dilution by alteration silicates (hydrated silicates; This study has demonstrated that the geologically different FW 1A contact, FW 3 pothole and pothole edge Merensky Reef facies at BRPM show different mineral processing behaviours with regards to froth flotation, with the FW 1A contact facies showing the best Pt and Pd grades and recoveries and the pothole edge facies showing the worst. What was also demonstrated is that good sulphide flotation does not necessarily translate to good PGM flotation, as seen in the FW 3 pothole facies, making it a dangerous assumption that PGM are associated with sulphides and remain so after milling. The main contributing factors to flotation performance were successfully determined through geometallurgical characterisation and can be summarised as follows: Sulphide mineralogy and textures: Chalcopyrite and pentlandite recover at higher rates than pyrrhotite. A coarser and interstitial rather than disseminated and intrasilicate sulphide texture will lead to higher associations with PGM, better liberation and better recoveries. Pentlandite can potentially have a larger control on Pd recovery than discrete PGM due to solid solution Pd in pentlandite. PGM associations: PGM will be well recovered when they are fully liberated or associated with liberated chalcopyrite and pentlandite, whereas associations with silicates, especially plagioclase, will lead to slower recoveries and ultimately increased losses. Grade distribution: A vertically wider 4E grade distribution that continues into the FW is associated with finer PGM and sulphide mineralisation as well as higher association with and locking in plagioclase, leading to poorer liberation and recovery. Reef geology: Norite FW introduces more pyroxene into the flotation feed than an anorthosite FW, leading to higher mass pull and grade dilution in the concentrate. Mining cut: A mining cut that incorporates more pyroxenite HW introduces more pyroxene into the flotation feed, also leading to higher mass pull and grade dilution in the concentrate. By assessing the abovementioned factors for other Merensky Reef facies across the Bushveld Complex, milling and flotation performance may be predicted and recovery conditions optimised for different reef facies types. Anglo Platinum and Royal Bafokeng Platinum are thanked for their financial and logistical support and permission to publish. Anglo American Technical Solutions is thanked for financial and research support as well as access to facilities. The PPM research group at the Department of Geology, University of Johannesburg and the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) are thanked for financial support. This project is also supported with funds granted to K.S. Viljoen under the South African Department of Science and Technology Research Chairs initiative, administered by the National Research Foundation. For their help in collecting the underground channel samples the following BRPM staff members are thanked: Ayo Akinwotu, Karin Barnard, Sifiso Gwala, Ward Martin, Prinushka Moodley, Eric Pheko, Alexander Steinberg and Jaco Vermeulen. For their help in the sample preparation, flotation work and MLA analyses the following staff members at Anglo American Technical Solutions are thanked: Solomon Dhlamini, Karlien Duarte, Peter Hey, Rejoice Mashau, Doug Phillips, Headman Rasmen and Braam Smit.