Dilute sulfuric acid was used to pretreat eucalyptus chips prior to enzymatic hydrolysis. After both pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis processes. Attention is paid to sugar recovery. The maximum total sugars yield (combined xylose and glucose, 47.69g/100g raw material, representing 82% of total sugars in the eucalyptus biomass) was obtained at 160°C, 0.75% acid concentration and 10min residence time, which is consider to be the best reasonable conditions for the dilute acid pretreatment of eucalyptus, corresponding concentrations of acetic acid, HMF, and furfural in the prehydrolysate were about 2.01g/L, 0.13g/L and 1.37g/L, respectively. Under this optimal pretreatment condition, the acid-insoluble lignin recovery in the insoluble solid resulting from enzymatic hydrolysis, was 22.7g/100g raw material, representing 80% of acid-insoluble lignin in the eucalyptus biomass.Due to a lack of resource sustainability of fossil fuels as well as negative environmental effects from emissions, research is being done to find a liquid fuel for use as a gasoline replacement ( The natural structures of lignocellulosic materials make it hard for microorganism to utilize this material to produce ethanol. Therefore, efficient pretreatment method is needed so that sequential enzymatic hydrolysis gives maximal sugar productivity and at the same time any loss of sugar is minimized ( The objective of this work is to identify the optimum conditions for the dilute acid pretreatment of eucalyptus, which was evaluated by the xylose plus glucose, both from dilute sulphuric acid pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis. In addition, there is a further analysis of insoluble solid resulting from enzymatic hydrolysis, found that most of the acid insoluble lignin can be recycled in the enzymatic hydrolysis residues. Finally, it also report a material balances for dilute acid pretreatments at 160 The eucalyptus chips used in this study was provided by a local factory near LongYan, FuJian, China. The raw materials were air-dried and then milled to give a size less than 5 Dilute acid pretreatment was performed in a laboratory scale stirred autoclave. The reactor has a total volume of 1 The enzymatic hydrolysis was then performed in 250 The constituent of raw materials was determined by a standard analysis procedure of biomass composition, which was modified by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) analytic methods ( All liquid samples from the pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis tests were filtered using a 0.45   In addition, some furan byproducts from the conversion of sugars, such as furfural and HMF (hydroxymethylfurfural), were observed in the prehydrolysate after pretreatment. Acetic acid was also detected in prehydrolysate and believed to be generated from the release of the acetyl groups present in the hemicelluloses. These byproducts as mentioned above may have an inhibitory effect on the growth of xylose-fermenting microorganisms and reduce ethanol production.    After the enzymatic hydrolysis, the insoluble solid resulting from enzymatic hydrolysis were treated with 72% (w/w) H All of the available sugars from the biomass must be considered for fermentation into ethanol in order to make cellulosic biomass a feasible choice for ethanol production (  The maximum total sugars yield (combined xylose and glucose, 47.69 The authors thank Genencor, Inc. (Jiangsu, China) for providing enzymes for this research. This research was supported financially by the Science and Technology Department of Guangdong Province, China (No. 2010y1-C071), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21176095), and the Major Research Projects of Guangdong Province, China (No. 2011A090200006).