The utilization of low-grade aluminous materials to produce alumina by the sinter process has been attracted attention as high-grade bauxite ores are diminishing. The sinter process has strict desilication requirement for the precipitation of high quality Al(OH)3. The knowledge of the behavior and solubility of calcium silicates is highly significant for reducing the amount of silica entered into the liquor. For this reason, the solubility of dicalcium silicate (belite), a main silicon-bearing solids, in the NaOH, mixed NaOH–NaAl(OH)4 and NaOH–NaAl(OH)4–Na2CO3 solutions was determined at temperatures from 303.2 to 343.2K. Co-precipitates from the reaction between calcium and silicate in the CaCl2–Na2SiO3–NaOH solution were calcined at 1200°C for 4h to obtain belite. It was found that solubility in 0.5–4molL−1 NaOH solutions increases with increasing NaOH concentration and decreases with temperature increment. Solubility of belite in the NaOH–NaAl(OH)4 and NaOH–NaAl(OH)4–Na2CO3 solutions demonstrated to increase with the addition of Al(OH)3 and Na2CO3. The mixed-solvent electrolyte (MSE) model embedded in OLI software was employed to predict the solubility of belite based on the characterization of solid phases with reasonable agreement. This work provides a meaningful knowledge for the clinker dissolution and desilication operation in the sinter process.The lime sinter process and its variants are still widely used for the production of alumina from low-grade (high silica) bauxites in spite of its high energy consumption ( A major concern in the development of sinter process is the optimization of the variables involved in the leaching step to provide high recovery of alumina and avoid the dissolution of calcium silicates as less as possible. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to investigate the effect of factors including temperature, the concentration of NaOH, Al(OH) The purpose of this work is to determine and model the solubility of belite in NaOH, mixed NaOH–NaAl(OH) Analytical-grade NaOH, Na The synthesis process of belite consists of two steps: the first was the co-precipitation of calcium–silicate in CaCl The second was the calcination of the generated hydrated precursor to obtain belite. The reaction for the formation of belite may be written as: Co-precipitation was carried out in a 2 The obtained hydrated precursors and belite samples were stored in a desiccator and subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis. The stoichiometry of the belite sample was checked by chemical analysis where the sample was calcined with NaOH followed by digestion in HCl solutions. The concentrations of Ca and Si were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The solubility tests were carried out using dissolution method in a similar way that the literature ( The concentration of SiO For belite, the dissolution reaction can be expressed as ( The thermodynamic equilibrium constant for reaction (1) is The proper accounting of solution chemistry is required for thermodynamic modeling of electrolyte solutions. Prior to any solubility calculation, the equilibrium constants and activity coefficient should be known. The equilibrium constant ( where In this work, the mixed solvent electrolyte (MSE) model ( The MSE model is constructed by splitting the excess Gibbs energy, which represents the non-ideality of an electrolyte solution, into three terms:  The belite sample obtained after the calcination of the hydrated precursor at 1200 Belite solubility in 0.5–4 The effect of Al(OH) To investigate the influence of Na According to the above results, the concentration of silica in the pregnant liquor could reach more than 3 Some solids after solubility determinations were examined by XRD for a better understanding of the solubility behavior of belite in the investigated solutions. It can be observed in The amount of phases of the equilibrated solids was roughly estimated by the Rietveld method using the XRD patterns. The crystal structure data of the selected phase were retrieved from the American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database. As can be seen in Aiming to model the solubility of belite in the NaOH–NaAl(OH) The calculated data (OLI ESP, Version 8.3) are plotted as lines in The presented model only includes CaSiO In all cases, the solubility is increased with increasing NaOH, Al(OH) The support of the