Clostridium tyrobutyricum is well documented as a fermentation strain for the production of butyric acid. In this work, using high-energy carbon heavy ion irradiated C. tyrobutyricum, then butyric acid fermentation using glucose or alkali and acid pretreatments of Eucommia ulmoides Oliv. as a carbon source was carried out. Initially, the modes at pH 5.7–6.5 and 37°C were compared using a model medium containing glucose as a carbon source. When the 72gL−1 glucose concentration was found to be the highest yield, the maximum butyric acid production from glucose increased significantly, from 24gL−1 for the wild type strains to 37gL−1 for the strain irradiated at 126AMeV and a dose of 35Gy and a 107
                     ions/pulse. By feeding 100gL−1 acid pretreatments of E. ulmoides Oliv. into the fermentations, butyrate yields (5.8gL−1) and butyrate/acetate (B/A) ratio (4.32) were achieved.Butyrate as a renewable resource has become an increasingly attractive alternative to petroleum-based fuels because of the increasing costs for petroleum-based raw materials, public concern about the environmental pollution caused by the petrochemical industry, and consumers’ preference for bio-based natural ingredients such as additives for increasing fruit fragrance and aromatic compounds for production of perfumes ( Butyrate can also be bioconverted to butanol by the fermentation action of certain strains of bacteria ( Strain improvement by mutagenesis and selection is a highly developed technique which plays a central role in the commercial development of microbial fermentation processes. At present, not only have mutagenic sources such as neutrons, ultraviolet light, α-rays, γ-rays and lasers been developed and successfully employed to acquire various sorts of valuable strains but novel sources are still under development with the aim to obtain a wider mutation spectrum and a higher ratio of mutation ( To our knowledge, It is also known that To the extent of our knowledge, measurements of the butyric acid levels produced by The lyophilized cells were diluted in sterile water, inoculated onto solid medium, and then incubated in an anaerobic jar at 37 The experiment was performed at the Cancer Therapy Terminal of the Heavy Ion Research Facility at Lanzhou (HIRFL). The upgraded accelerator system of HIRFL consists of Sector Focus Cyclotron (SFC), Separated Sector Cyclotron (SSC), the main Cooling Storage Ring (CSRm), and the experimental Cooling Storage Ring (CSRe). The high-energy For irradiation experiments, strains cell were grown in flasks (12 In which the The irradiated cells were spread onto TAP agar plates for isolation of single colonies. Single colonies were isolated at random from the TAP agar plates and transferred in 150 After irradiation, part of the frozen (stored in 30% glycerin at −80 The dried Cell density was analyzed by measuring the optical density (OD) of cell suspension at 600  To further investigate the specific effect of irradiation on the cell growth profiles (based on OD It is noted that acetic acid production leveled off much sooner than butyric acid in the fermentation. The fermentations were stopped when glucose was no longer consumed by the cells due to inhibition by butyric acid. However, the mutants showed a better tolerance to butyric acid, as indicated by the higher final butyrate concentration attained in the fermentations with the mutants than with the wild type. Compared with the wild type by OD After confirming butyric acid production from glucose, Comparison of the effects of butyrate production by irradiated In this work, the result suggests that high-energy carbon heavy ion irradiation can improve and enhance the productivity of This study was supported by the The principal author gratefully acknowledges the Project Sponsored by the