The aim of this work was to study the continuous mineralization of antipyrine present in a synthetic municipal wastewater effluent (SE) in a semi-industrial UV/solar compound parabolic collector (CPC) plant using a homogeneous photo-Fenton oxidation assisted with ferrioxalate. Under the selected continuous operating conditions ([H2O2]=750ppm, [Fe]=12ppm, pH=2.7, and [(COOH)2·2H2O]=66.2ppm, flowrate=1200L/h, 77% of TOC is removed when treating an aqueous synthetic effluent containing 50ppm of antipyrine. The use of artificial UV lamps together with solar radiation increases mineralization up to 88%.
                  Determination of the hydrogen peroxide consumed and remaining in the water revealed that 4.7mol of H2O2 were consumed per each mol of total organic carbon removed from solution.
                  The operational costs due to the consumption of reagents and catalysts were calculated from the optimal conditions. The results showed that the ferrioxalate-assisted solar photo-Fenton process was economically feasible with no electric consumption due to the use of photovoltaic panels. Under optimal conditions, a total cost of 2.78cent€/g TOC removed (1.56€/m3) was calculated.A recent research showed the regular presence of over seventy anthropogenic individual pollutants, some of which are encountered in relatively high amounts in a Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) receiving urban wastewater An effective tertiary treatment technology is thus required to ensure a safe use for reclaimed wastewater. The available technologies include oxidation processes alone or combined with nanofiltration or reverse osmosis In a previous research, the mineralization of an aqueous solution of antipyrine using a solar photocatalytic oxidation process assisted with ferrioxalate was evaluated in a small (2 The aim of this paper is to study the industrial applicability if this technique. To this end, the operation was carried out continuously and treating a synthetic municipal wastewater effluent (SE) in a semi-industrial UV/solar compound parabolic collector (CPC) plant. Optimal conditions were found based on experimental tests performed using a factorial design and neural networks (NNs) fittings. Finally, true operation costs were calculated to test if the process could be competitive on an industrial scale. The synergistic effect between the individual processes and the consumption of H Finally, the use of artificial UV radiation was tested in order to improve the mineralization process and also to study the viability of the industrial application of this process in cloudy days (with low UV–A solar power). Antipyrine (99%) was obtained from Acros. Although 50 Analytical grade ferrous sulfate (FeSO The chemical composition of the synthetic municipal wastewater treatment plant effluent (SE) was adapted of OECD Guidelines for Testing of Chemicals However, in the presence of K The CPC consisted of a continuously stirred tank solar reactor (1500 Fort the combined experiment, a 152 The evolution of the H Before data analysis was done, all samples were withdrawn from the reactor for H The residence time distribution (RTD) curve can be used as a diagnostic tool for ascertaining features of flow patterns in reactors In this work RTD has been calculated for different flow rates using a dye as a tracer. Methylene blue was injected into the CPC reactor as a step function, and the outlet stream was monitored as a function of time using an UV spectrophotometer. From the results of these experiments, RTD and mean residence time were determined for different flow rates ( The curves obtained in our system, especially at high flow rates, are quite similar to ideal flow with a slightly dead volume. These data allow design calculations for the system and also help us to conduct a series of experiments and find the right time for sample analysis. A central-composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effects of three variables: the initial concentrations of H The response function was the degree of mineralization at the outlet. The design process consisted of three series of experiments: a factorial design with 2 selection of the axial distance of the star points (codified values replicates of the central point (three experiments). The complete experimental design and additional experiments performed to obtain the optimal conditions are shown in The neural network (NN) applied in this work was solved with two neurons, using a simple exponential activation function and a solution strategy based on a back-propagation algorithm. Parameters were fitted using the Solver tool in a custom spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel using a nonlinear fitting method. Further details can be found in the literature Finally, a measure of the saliency of the input variables was performed based on the connection weights of the neural networks. This study analyzed the relevance of each variable with respect to the others (expressed as percentages). The experimental results obtained for the mineralization constant were fitted with NNs, resulting in an average error of less than 7%. The equation and fitting parameters are shown in The results of a saliency analysis on the input variables for each neural network (%) are also shown in The equations and parameters in The results indicated that mineralization continuously increased with increasing peroxide concentration (as more HO On the other hand, increasing the concentration of Fe(II) improves the mineralization constant value via the following reaction: An excess of Fe (II) for high hydrogen peroxide concentrations probably reduces the amount of HO Maximum degradation is achieved under the following conditions: [H  The molar ratio Fe/oxalic acid was kept in 3, assuming that due to ferrioxalte chemistry, [Fe(III)(C Additional experiments (25–28 in On the other hand the negative effect of an excess of oxalic acid on the mineralization process (ratio>3) can be due to CO Neither temperature nor UV–A solar power could be controlled during the experiments because these variables depend upon climatic conditions; however, temperature and UV–A solar power were measured during the reaction, and their average values were included in the fitting. According to data in  Several tests were performed under the optimal selected conditions to determine the relative effect of each process and the synergistic effect of the different techniques on the overall ferrioxalate assisted solar photo-Fenton technique (Experiments 29 to 31 in This expected synergism between different techniques can be attributed to the fact that the use of ferrioxalates using solar light allows for the use of a higher portion of the solar spectrum during the degradation of organic pollutants, as already reported in the literature Finally, two ultimate experiments (32, 33 in  The use of a combined process (artificial UV radiation+solar radiation, exp. 34) enhances the efficiency of the mineralization process from 77% to 88%. Thus, this artificial help could be used in not sunny days to improve results. Moreover, the use of these UV lamps does not produce additional electricity costs due to the energy self-sufficiency of the plant because of the presence of photovoltaic panels. Thus, to test the viability of both the solar process and the combined one, the operating cost for treating a synthetic effluent using a ferrioxalate-assisted photo-Fenton process in the semi-industrial CPC plant was evaluated. The operating costs considered in the economic study are related to the consumption of chemicals (reagents and catalysts). The prices of materials (reagents and catalyst) used for calculating the costs are shown in  This cost can be compared with similar processes already tested in literature Degradation of pure antipyrine in water using a novel sono-photocatalytic process with artificial UV–light al lab scale. Operational costs due to the consumption of electrical energy, reagents and catalysts were 6.8 Degradation of pure antipyrine using a ferrioxalate-assisted photo-Fenton process in a small solar CPC unit (2 However, the conditions studied here closely resemble a real process, since a semi-industrial plant has been used and a synthetic WWTP effluent has been treated instead of pure antipyrine, so conclusions of this research are relevant. The use of a friendly environmental process (solar/H The use of artificial UV lamps together with solar radiation increases mineralization up to 88%. Determination of the hydrogen peroxide consumed and remaining in the water revealed that 4.7 The operating cost for treating a synthetic effluent using a ferrioxalate-assisted photo-Fenton process in a solar CPC semi-industrial pilot plant is 2.78 Financial support from