Hematite and quartz present in banded iron ore are intimately associated with one another and require fine grinding for the liberation of mineral particles. The influence of the thickness of bands on the liberation and flotation response of banded hematite quartzite (BHQ) ore is investigated. A computer program is developed to predict the liberation of banded iron ores based on different patterns of banding. It is found that the phase which is distributed in thick bands is better liberated compared to thin bands. QEMSCAN studies on BHQ samples have shown similar trends. The direct and reverse flotation behavior of the BHQ ore using oleic acid and dodecylamine respectively was determined. In reverse flotation, 64.4% Fe at 59% recovery could be obtained from an ore having thick quartz bands, whereas under identical conditions, only 60.6% Fe at 64.8% recovery could be obtained with thin bands. In the case of direct flotation, it is possible to achieve 63.8% Fe at 50.7% recovery for the ores with a thick quartz band and 62.7% Fe at 58.1% recovery for the thin band.The main objective of any mineral beneficiation process is to split the feed material into concentrate and tailings streams by exploiting the difference in physico-chemical properties between the desired and undesired mineral components. Such processes are continuously improved to deal with the complexity of ore in terms of complex intergrowth and fine dispersion of mineral phases. Typically separation processes follow liberation. Liberation of minerals from a texturally complex ore requires very fine grinding. In general, breaking the particles to smaller size increases liberation and in the limit maximum liberation occurs when the particle size reaches the grain size. The process of breakage is energy consuming and poses problems in downstream operation. Therefore, a thorough knowledge of the liberation behavior of an ore allows one to predict the performance of the ore during a separation operation which may also lead to an improvement of the design of processing plants. Liberation has several implications in the context of mineral processing. In flotation, buoyancy and gravitational forces determine how an individual particle would float after the surface is made hydrophobic; several other factors such as mineral liberation, crystal structure, etc., have equally significant effects. For example, the structure of silicates present in certain types of low grade iron ores—banded hematite quartzite (BHQ) and banded hematite jasper (BHJ), plays an important role in attaining mineral liberation which subsequently influences the recovery of hematite by flotation. It is observed that in spite of the similarity in ore composition, BHQ ore is easier to float in comparison to BHJ ore ( During mining of hematite ores, large quantities of low grade banded ores such as BHQ, BHJ, and BMQ are generated and these lie unused at the mine sites due to a lack of suitable beneficiation technology. The beneficiation of low grade banded iron ores has now become mandatory due to a depletion of high grade ores. Many iron ore companies in India are now considering setting up beneficiation plants to recover the iron values from banded ores. The challenge is that the banded ores are liberated at fine sizes—below 100 It is known that the liberation characteristic of any ore is intimately related to the mineralogical texture. In general, the better the liberation, the higher is the recovery of minerals in any mineral separation technique. Therefore, mineral liberation is one of the key factors that influence mineral or metal recovery. Liberation is particularly important in the context of banded ores, which has not been investigated so far. We have made an attempt to study the liberation of BHQ ore that has a visible difference in the thickness of quartz bands. A computer program based on a simple geometric concept has been developed to carry out the simulation of the liberation pattern of minerals present in the BHQ ore. A similar work by  Based on the geometric concept of cubical fracture, a Java based computer simulation program using In a given simulation run, the input to the simulation program is the size of the cubical fracture grid and the angle of imposition about three orthogonal axes along the cube edges e.g. X, Y, and Z of the ore body. The output of the program gives the number of black, white, and locked particles. As a typical case, we consider a cube shaped ore having an edge size/length of 100 units and the ore constitutes of 45% of the black phase by volume. The texture comprises of 9 black strips alternating with white strips. All the strips were evenly distributed and the volume of the cube was kept constant. In each simulation, the grid is imposed with a fixed orientation with respect to X, Y, and Z axes. The ore body fractures with the imposition of the grid. This action is repeated several times by varying the orientation. Then the average volumetric grade of a particle with respect to either black or white phases is determined. In this manner, the grade of the particles as well as the corresponding number of particles of that grade is determined. Also the number of liberated particles of either type is determined. The simulation progresses not only by varying the orientation of the fracture grid but also the size of the grid. In this manner a statistical estimate of the liberation spectrum is obtained. A typical liberation spectrum is shown in In order to quantitatively predict the extent of the liberation of the banded ore, we follow Furthermore, liberation of The computer program developed for the liberation study of the banded ores was used to determine the effect of the thickness of the bands. In this case the band thickness of the black phase was varied. We posed the following question: how would the liberation pattern of the black phase change when the thickness of the bands of the same phase varies? We considered five cases: a) 10 bands having 5 Further simulations were carried out to predict the liberation pattern of the banded ore, when the volume of the secondary (black) phase increases while the band thickness is kept constant. The band thickness was kept constant at 10 units, whereas the number of bands was varied from 1 to 5 which accounts for the volumetric grade of the black phase from 10 to 50%. As evident from Two types of BHQ ore with different quartz band widths were sampled. The ones with a thick quartz band (~ The X-ray diffraction studies of the samples were carried out by a Philips X-ray diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation to investigate different mineral phases present in the two samples. The samples were also examined by FTIR spectra (Shimadzu FTIR, IR Prestige-21) using KBr as the reference to know the difference of band positions between BHQ-1 and BHQ-2. Microscopic analysis was carried out to identify different mineral phases and their association with each other. Liberation studies were carried out by QEMSCAN. It is an automated mineral liberation analyzer which gives complete mineralogical information of the ores and rocks (modal analysis, mineral liberation, size, shape, mineral association, grade-recovery data, etc.). The representative samples were crushed to below 100 In order to ascertain the flotation response of the BHQ ore, direct as well as reverse flotation was carried out. For the flotation study, lumps of BHQ-1 and BHQ-2 were ground separately to below 100 The grinding behavior of the ore was also analyzed by carrying out Bond's work index of the thick and thin banded iron ore samples. Furthermore, grinding tests of the two samples were carried out under identical conditions in a standard ball mill. The microphotographs of the thin and thick band sample are shown in Bond's grindability index of the two BHQ samples as carried out by the standard method was found to be 8.1 and 10.2 The modal analysis of the samples was carried out after grinding both the samples to below 100 It is well known that valuable and gangue minerals are randomly distributed in the ore body. Hence it becomes essential to crush and grind the ore to liberate the valuable mineral from the unwanted phases before applying any mineral processing technique. In our case, both the samples i.e., BHQ-1 and BHQ-2 were subjected to the same intervals of grinding time followed by flotation studies. It may be mentioned that the BHQ-1 sample used for flotation contained 37% Fe, whereas BHQ-2 contained 39% of Fe. The results of the flotation studies of thick and thin banded ores as a function of dodecylamine concentration are shown in Direct flotation studies were conducted using oleic acid as the collector at natural pH. Sodium silicate (150 A computer program was developed to determine the volumetric grade distribution of a banded ore consisting of two phases. A cube shaped banded ore was numerically generated and was allowed to break by applying a cubical fracture grid. The broken mass was analyzed to estimate the number of free and locked particles as well as their grade in order to generate the liberation pattern. The simulation results were validated using a proven model available in literature. We could draw the following inferences from the simulation results: (i) a mineral phase is more liberated if it is distributed in thick bands, (ii) liberation is dependent on the number of bands and, (iii) the finer the grid size the better is the liberation. The simulation results are also supported by QEMSCAN analysis. As per the QEMSCAN results, quartz present in BHQ ore samples is better liberated when it is distributed as thick bands. The flotation results show that more iron values can be recovered in thick banded ore by reverse flotation. This way it was possible to achieve 64.4% Fe from a thick banded ore compared to 60.6% Fe from a thin banded ore under identical conditions. This study is likely to have an impact for the mineral processing industries which are gearing up to utilize BHQ ore in a massive way.