The preparation of high-grade schleelite concentrates from calcite containing ores despite significant research progress remains an important commercial challenge. In this study, Fe(II) was selected as an assistant depressant and combined with sodium silicate (SS) to improve the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite. Micro-flotation experiments of the individual minerals and artificially mixed minerals using oleic acid as a collector were conducted to evaluate the selective depression effect of the SS/Fe(II) depressant (the mixture of SS and Fe(II)). The results showed that the depressant mixture had a better selective depression effect on calcite than SS alone, and the optimum mass ratio of SS to ferrous sulphate was 4:1. Flotation tests using ore from a commercial mine showed that a concentrate with a WO3 grade of more than 62% and recovery greater than 89% could be achieved using SS/Fe(II) as the depressant. The depression mechanism of the SS/Fe(II) was investigated in detail using zeta potential measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The results showed that silicate species are more likely to adsorb on the surface of calcite and produce a selective depression effect. The improved depression effect could be attributed to the Fe(II), which not only increased the adsorption of the silicate species on the calcite surface, but also improved the formation of polymeric silicate species.Tungsten is a strategically important industrial metal. Scheelite (CaWO Sodium silicate (SS) is the most widely used depressant among the several depressants that have been tested in the flotation of scheelite ores ( Despite the improved separation of scheelite from calcite using metal ions as an assistant depressant, the underpinning mechanism has rarely been studied and is still unclear. In this study, Fe(II) was considered as an assistant depressant, and attempts were made to enhance the selective separation of scheelite from calcite. Micro-flotation, zeta potential measurements, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies were undertaken to better understand the depression mechanisms. The scheelite sample used in the study was obtained from the Malipo mine in Yunnan grading 0.38% WO The scheelite and calcite samples used in the experiments were prepared from handpicked crystals obtained from Malipo deposits in Yunnan, China. They were washed with distilled water, dried, and were then processed in a porcelain ball mill, sieved, and classified to obtain the desired particle size fractions. The particle size range of 19–120 μm was used for micro-flotation and XPS analyses, whereas finer particles (<19 μm) were ground to under 5 μm in an agate mortar. This fine product was used for zeta potential measurements. Optical mineralogical and chemical analyses and the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Bruker AXS, Germany) spectra indicated that the purities of the particles of calcite and scheelite exceeded 96%. The reagents used in the study are listed in Micro-flotation experiments of the individual minerals and artificially mixed minerals were conducted in a mechanical agitation flotation machine with a rotational speed of 1500 rpm. In each test, 4 g of the mineral sample was placed in 40 mL of deionized water. After 1 min of agitation, a freshly prepared NaOH (3 × 10 For the flotation of individual minerals, the flotation recovery was calculated based on the solid weight of the floated mineral. For the flotation of the mixed minerals, the WO The flotation feed (500 g, less than 2 mm) was ground to 81% passing 74 μm using a Φ200 × 400 mm XMB-type steel mill (China) at a pulp density of 60% (by weight). The size distribution and chemical analysis of the flotation feed samples are shown in The zeta potentials of the minerals were measured using a Brookhaven Zetaplus Zeta-Potential Analyzer (USA). First, 50 mg of each mineral sample was added to 30 mL of an aqueous solution with or without the depressants and stirred for 5 min. Then, the pH values were measured and adjusted using a dilute HCl or NaOH solution. The agitated suspension was sampled and transferred to a plastic sample cuvette, after which the zeta-potential was recorded. Each result is the average of three independent measurements and had a typical variation of ±3 mV. The scheelite and calcite samples treated with 500 mg/L SS or SS/Fe(II) at pH 9.5 for 5 min were used in XPS analyses at the ambient temperature. Because the mineral samples with adsorbed depressants were repeatedly rinsed before the XPS measurements, it was reasonable to assume that any loosely adsorbed depressants were washed off from the mineral surfaces. The measurements were made using a Kratos Amicus (England) and a conical anode Mg Kα-ray source. The operating parameters were as follows: operating voltage, 12 kV; power, 180 W; and optimal energy resolution, <0.5 eV. The vacuum pressure in the analysis chamber was 1 × 10 Results from The effects of the SS to ferrous sulphate mixture ratio on the flotation of the scheelite and calcite were examined, and the results are shown in Based on the flotation results of the individual mineral tests, artificially mixed minerals (with a scheelite to calcite mass ratio of one) were prepared to further investigate the separation performance. The flotation test results are presented in The flowsheet of the bench-scale flotation tests is shown in To investigate the action mechanism of the SS/Fe(II) depressant on the surface of the scheelite and calcite, zeta potentials were measured as a function of the pH under the different depressant addition schemes, and the results are shown in In aqueous solution, SS yields numerous silicate species as a function of the pH ( There are three major monomeric species according to the solution pH: Si(OH) In the presence of SS/Fe(II), the zeta potential of scheelite presented a small increase compared with that of scheelite + SS, but was still below that of pure scheelite, indicating the adsorption of Fe(II) might have occurred on the scheelite surface. The same results were obtained for the calcite. It is important to note that compared with scheelite, a much larger decrease in the zeta potential of calcite appeared after the addition of SS or SS/Fe(II). For example, the zeta potential of scheelite + SS/Fe(II) decreased by only 3.09 eV compared with that of pure scheelite at pH 9 ( XPS was used to identify both the chemical compositions and chemical states of the elements on the surfaces of the treated and untreated scheelite and calcite samples, based on the distinctive binding energies of the inner electrons of each element. XPS is a surface sensitive technique that is able to characterize the surface to a depth of less than 10 nm ( As seen in The binding energy peaks of carbon (C), calcium (Ca), and oxygen (O) could be detached on the calcite surface.  For the two calcite samples, obvious Si 2p peaks were observed in each spectrum (  This section discusses how the effects of the SS or SS/Fe(II) on the scheelite surface were investigated using XPS analysis. The results are listed in There are two types of surface active sites present on the calcite and scheelite surfaces, i.e., ≡CO In the aqueous solution of SS, there are a variety of ionic and colloidal species, which mainly depend on the concentration, pH, and SiO  As seen in As seen in  The depressant mixture of SS/Fe(II), with a SS to ferrous sulphate mass ratio of 4:1, exhibited a better selective depression for calcite than SS alone. Laboratory scale test work using a scheelite sample from the Malipo deposit in Yunnan, China demonstrated that a concentrate with a recovery of 89.8% and grade of 62.1% could be achieved by using oleic acid as collector under the following test conditions: SS/Fe(II) at 8.7 kg/t, pH 9–10. XPS results indicated that the depression mechanism of SS was the formation of calcium silicate on the mineral surface. There are many more active sites of ≡Ca The assistant depressant of Fe(II) not only increased the adsorption of silicate species on the calcite surface, but also improved the formation of polymeric silicate species. This was the main reason for the improved depression effect of SS/Fe(II) on calcite. This work was financially supported by the key program of the