A new hydrometallurgical method for the recovery of rare-earth elements and Co from permanent NdFeB magnets by mechanochemically assisted ferric sulfate leaching was developed. The overall process consists of the following steps: (1) activation of the NdFeB magnet powder and ferric sulfate powder by grinding, resulting in a mechanochemical conversion of the metals to their corresponding water-soluble sulfates; (2) recovery of the rare-earth elements and cobalt by leaching the activated powder in water, with sequential removal of the solid residue by filtration; (3) precipitating the rare-earth elements by oxalic acid, removing the mixed rare-earth oxalates by filtration; and (4) calcining the rare-earth oxalates to form the corresponding oxides. This hydrometallurgical process excludes the necessity of using mineral acids or pyrometallurgical pre-treatments steps, avoiding the production of hydrogen gas or pollutants (e.g. NOx or SO2). A low-intensity grinding operation was sufficient to improve both the leaching yield of the rare-earth elements and the selectivity against iron. In addition, the complete leaching process could be carried out at room temperature. The remaining acidic leachate, rich in Fe(II) can be reused after conversion of Fe(II) in Fe(III). In this way, the process consumes only minor amounts of the cheap ferric sulfate, oxalic acid, water and is low energy intensive providing a green and novel perspective for metal recovery from NdFeB magnets.The transition to a low-carbon economy has promoted ‘clean-tech’ applications, such as wind turbines, electric/hybrid cars and electric bikes. All these applications rely on NdFeB permanent magnets, making these magnets one of the largest and fastest growing appliances in the market among all rare-earth elements (REEs). At present, five REEs are considered as critical; Nd, Eu, Tb, Dy and Y ( Multiple recycling routes have been developed for REE recovery from NdFeB magnets including direct re-use, re-sintering, hydrogen decrepitation, pyrometallurgical, solvometallurgical or hydrometallurgical approaches ( Recently, mechanochemistry has been increasingly investigated as alternative to address waste recycling difficulties, such as the refractory character of the waste and large consumption of chemicals ( In this study, an alternative approach to recover valuable metals (REEs and Co) from sintered NdFeB magnets by reaction with a ferric salt is described. Sintered, demagnetized NdFeB magnets were crushed and ground to a smaller particle size, before being subjected to a mechanochemical grinding operation with ferric sulfate. The effect of the mechanochemical grinding operation is explained in terms of mechanism and ferric sulfate consumption. The REEs and Co were leached from the powder mixture with the use of water as lixiviant, resulting in a concentrated REE leachate. Oxalic acid was added to the leachate, after removal of the iron precipitate. The REEs precipitated as a mixed high-purity oxalate salt. The remaining leachate contained H Nickel-coated magnet samples were kindly provided by Magneti Ljubjana – D.D (Slovenia) in bulk. They were industrially rejected and, therefore, never magnetised. Concentrated nitric acid (65 wt%), concentrated sulfuric acid (95–97 wt%) and oxalic acid (>99.0%) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Belgium). Anhydrous iron(III) sulfate (99.999%) was purchased from Honeywell (USA). All chemicals were used as received without further purification. The cylindrical magnets were ground in a disc mill (DM 200, Retsch, Germany) to a particle size of <1600 μm. Further particle size reduction was performed by ball milling (Pulverisette Premium 7, Fritsch, Germany) to a final particle size of < 400 μm. The ball mill was operated using 10 mm grinding balls with a ball-to-powder ratio of 5/1 (g/g) at 800 rpm for 2 min. The chemical composition of the magnet samples was determined after full digestion (in triplicate) of 0.1 g of magnet powder in a 4 M nitric acid solution (3 mL). The acidic solution was prepared by proper dilution in ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ·cm After particle size reduction, the magnet powder (<400 μm) was mixed with anhydrous iron(III) sulfate in ratio of ferric sulfate–magnet between 2/1 and 10/1 to a final mixture of 2 g. This blend was mixed by hand in a 50 mL container to improve the homogeneity, before loading in a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette Premium 7, Fritsch, Germany). The grinding was executed in zirconia grinding bowls (80 mL inner volume, Ø = 47 mm) with 25 grinding balls (Ø = 10 mm) at 400 rpm for 10–60 min, with 10 min pause time for each 10 min of grinding to avoid excessive heat generation. A mortar grinder (Pulverisette 2, Fritsch, Germany) was used for low-energy grinding of the powder mixtures. The mixtures were ground using a zirconia vessel and pestle with a fixed grinding speed of 80 rpm and various (0–90 kPa) downward forces from no downward force to 90 kPa. The vessel was loaded with 4 g of powder with a ferric sulfate–magnet ratio of 4/1 and milled for various time periods (5–60 min). Leaching of the samples was carried out by contacting 0.1 g of sample with ultrapure water (18.2 MΩ·cm Adjustment of the pH of the leach solutions was performed by addition of concentrated sulfuric acid. Different amounts of oxalic acid were added to 4 mL of leaching solution to evaluate the optimal The elemental composition of the ground magnet (<400 μm) is given in Ferric sulfate, which is readily available at low cost, was studied as reactant for a mechanochemical reaction with NdFeB magnets. Ferric sulfate was selected over the use of ferric chloride or nitrate because it is less hygroscopic than the chloride and does not form NO  The feasibility of a solid-solid reaction between ferric sulfate and the magnet under the influence of high shear, compression and impact forces was proven by the first results (3.2). To quantitatively determine the influence of the grinding operation, the samples were subjected to water leaching. An amount of sample (0.1 g) was mixed with 4 mL ultrapure water (L:S = 40) in a 15 mL vial and shaken horizontally at 200 rpm for 24 h at (25.0 ± 1.0) °C. The leaching temperature was fixed at room temperature (25.0 ± 1.0) °C since the water solubility of REE sulfates decreases with increasing temperature ( For the unground material, it is observed that the recovery of REEs and the concentration of iron increase with increasing F:M. Both the recovery of REEs and concentration of Fe show an analogous leaching pattern, suggesting that the leaching behaviour of these metals is similar. For the ground material, a similar but shifted leaching pattern for iron is observed as for the unground material, unlike the recovery of REEs. REE recovery shows a sharp increase with increasing F:M ratio, up to 4/1 where full recovery was achieved. The results of the unground material imply that the exchange reactions (Eqs. The differences between leaching of unground and ground NdFeB magnets is as an effect of the mechanical grinding operation. During the grinding stage Fe(II) was formed according to Eqs. Therefore the higher the conversion rate, the higher the pH as a result of the consumption of Fe(III). Ferric iron is not stable above a pH of 3 to 4, depending on the concentration, and will undergo hydrolysis in water as described in Eq. The release of additional protons during the precipitation reaction via Eq. The higher conversion rate through Eqs. The orange colour is characteristic for iron precipitates such as goethite/lepidocrocite, while the blackish colour suggests a precipitate such as magnetite. The mineralogical phase(s) of the iron precipitate strongly depends on the final pH of the solution with low pH favoring the formation of goethite and lepidocrocite and high pH the formation of magnetite ( After optimization of the chemical reaction conditions, water leaching conditions were examined to reduce the leaching time and the water consumption at a constant leaching temperature of (25.0 ± 1.0) °C. The speed of the leaching experiments was studied by contacting ultrapure water for different time periods with 0.1 g of ground and unground powder mixture with a F/M ratio of 4/1 ( To optimise the water consumption, water leaching was performed with different L:S ratios (40/1–10/1) for mechanochemically ground mixtures (F:M = 4/1) for 24 h ( It has been proven extensively that the high-power intensity grinding can cause intense mechanical stressing on particles and can induce mechanochemical reactions, enhancing hydro- and pyrometallurgical processes ( After leaching, the residues were collected to analyse their mineralogical and chemical composition. The XRD patterns of the solid residues (2/1–4/1) are shown in From the remaining aqueous phase (pH = 4.3), containing REEs, cobalt and iron(II), the REEs should be removed. Precipitation by oxalic acid is the simplest method in comparison to solvent extraction, however, it can lead to a lower purity of the final product and results in a REE oxide mixture. The addition of oxalic acid will induce complexation of the REE producing insoluble oxalates. Due to the presence of remaining Fe(II), addition of oxalate can also lead to the formation of ferrous oxalate which may contaminate the final precipitate. H The remaining solution, rich in Fe(II), can be re-used in the grinding stage after conversion of Fe(II) into Fe(III). Ferric sulfate is typically produced on large scale by treating a solution of sulfuric acid, ferrous sulfate and an oxidizing agent. It was observed that upon addition of oxalic acid, ca. 96% of REEs could be precipitated from the leach solution ( The next step consists of a calcination step, converting the mixed (Nd, Pr, Dy and Tb) oxalate salts to their corresponding oxides. The mineralogical composition of the obtained oxides, after calcination at 900 °C for 5 h, is given in The grinding, leaching and the oxalate precipitation steps were optimized as function of the REE recovery. A complete recycling flowsheet can be found in The overall recycling process can be considered as a simple, ‘green’ and applicable on larger scale. All processing steps were executed at room temperature (25.0 ± 1.0) °C, with the exception of the required calcination step. No mineral acids were used during the leaching stage. In addition, the process can be operated in an almost closed loop. It should be possible to execute the mechanochemical grinding step with industrial mixer/grinder if sufficient compression and shear are applied at a downward force ≥30 kPa. In this paper, a proof-of-principle was given for the recovery of rare-earth elements from end-of-life NdFeB magnets by a mechanochemical leaching method using ferric sulfate. It was shown that ferric sulfate can be used as alternative to mineral acids, resulting in a high leaching yield (>95%) of rare-earth elements and full recovery of cobalt. A grinding operation, prior to leaching, improves the leachability, firstly by activating the powder mixture and secondly by inducing a mechanochemical reaction to the formation of water-soluble REE sulfates. Additionally, it was shown that the grinding operation does not only improve the leaching yield but also induces a higher precipitation rate of iron, thus improving the purity of the leachate. It was demonstrated that high-energy grinding was not required, instead the process can easily be performed by a low-intensity mortar grinder, thus reducing the energy consumption and enabling the possibility for scale up. The whole process consumes only ferric sulfate, water and oxalic acid and produces an iron precipitate (goethite and lepidocrocite), CO This research is supported by an