Nanofibrous biomaterials made of degradable polymers, including poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL), are considered as a potential substrate for populating and differentiating tissue cells. The surface modification of biomaterials is of utmost importance in regulating cell functions. This study examined the effects of an apatite-mineralization of the PCL nanofiber surface on the growth behavior and osteogenic differentiation of rat bone-marrow stromal cells (rBMSCs). BMSCs isolated from adult rats were seeded on the PCL nanofiber with mineralization (PCLnf-M) and without it as a control (PCLnf), and cultured for up to 28 days. Initially (for 1h), the cells adhered better on the PCLnf-M than on the control, showing favorable cell affinity to the mineralized nanofibrous surface. The secretion of collagen by the cells was shown to increase with culturing time on both types of the nanofiber. The cell viability was similar at day 7 but was higher on the control at a prolonged period of day 14. However, the alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity was noticed to significantly higher level on the PCLnf-M than on the control at days 14 and 28. Overall, the surface-mineralized PCL nanofibrous substrate was shown to support the adhesion and growth of BMSCs and to stimulate the differentiation into an osteogenic lineage. This type of nanofibrous sheet is considered to be useful as a matrix for the regeneration and engineering of skeletal tissues.Polymeric nanofibers made by an electrospinning method have attracted considerable interest in tissue regeneration For the repair of hard tissues, such as bones and teeth, many studies on the synthetic polymer nanofibers have been devoted to improve the biological properties Because anchorage-dependent cells initially recognize the outermost surface of a nanofiber, it is believed that the bioactive inorganic composition can be properly tailored upon the surface of the polymer nanofibers. Our recent approach has exploited the polymer surface with a hydroxyapatite bone mineral phase through a series of solution-involved steps Adult bone-marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSCs) are a potential cell source for In this study, the Poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL: Sigma–Aldrich) dissolved to a concentration of 10% w/v in an organic solvent (dichloromethane:ethanol For the isolation of rat bone-marrow-derived stromal cells (BMSCs), the bone marrow was harvested from the excised proximal and distal epiphyses of the femora and tibiae of adult rats (age 4–8 weeks, Korean) by flushing with α-minimum essential medium (α-MEM) using a syringe. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and suspended within a culture flask containing the growth medium (α-MEM plus 2 For the For the adhesion assay, the BMSCs were seeded onto each sample at a density of 5 The cell growth morphology was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Hitachi) after fixing the cells with glutaraldehyde (2.5%), dehydrating them with a graded series of ethanol (75, 90, 95 and 100%), treatment with hexamethyl disilazane and Pt-coating. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM; LSM 510, Carl Zeiss) was used to visualize the cytoskeletal process of the cells. Alexa Fluor 546 phalloidin (Invitrogen A22283) and ProLong The content of collagen present in the cell-nanofiber constructs was measured by means of Sirius red assay, which stains the triple helical collagen fibrils with red dye (Siriusred F3BA; BDH) The osteoblastic differentiation of the BMSCs was observed by determining the alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity. Nanofiber sample prepared with a dimension of 20 The  Isolated rat bone-marrow-derived stromal cells (rBMSCs) were cultured on the mineralized PCL nanofiber (PCLnf-M) and pure PCL nanofiber (PCLnf). The initial adhesion of the cells was assessed at 1 The initial favorable cell adhesion is believed to be followed by further cell spreading and division processes. As shown in The BMSCs grown on the nanofiber substrates were shown to produce collagen, the major extracellular matrix of bone, as shown in The osteoblastic differentiation of the BMSCs was investigated by the activity of AP, as shown in Based on the results on BMSCs adhesion, growth and AP expression, this study showed that the surface-mineralized substrate provided favorable conditions for the BMSCs to adhere to and populate on, and even stimulated them to undergo osteogenic differentiation. In this manner, the surface-mineralized PCL nanofibrous substrate may be used to populate stem cells and modulate them towards an osteogenic pathway, and ultimately as a tissue-engineered construct in bone and tooth structure. Further animal study may also be needed to verify its real applications. The This study was supported by grants from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) funded by MOST (No. R01-2007-000-20183-0) and from the Korea Health 21 R&D Project, Ministry of Health and Welfare (No. A060126).