We have performed a series of molecular dynamics simulations (MDSs) to study the thermal decomposition characteristics of epoxy resin. The effects of temperature and heating rate on the evolution of small molecular products were investigated. The initial reaction temperature increased with the raise in heating rate but the elevated final temperature resulted in decrease of it. However, both raise in final temperature and heating rate shorten the initiation time. ReaxFF MDSs results elucidate that the thermal decomposition of epoxy resin is initiated by the cleavage of ether linkage. The main small molecular products found in our simulations include H2O, CO and H2. Three typical types of mechanisms for the formation of H2O and H2 were observed in simulations, respectively, including radical attacking mechanisms, inter- and intra-molecular elimination, e.g. 1,1-, 1,2- and 1,3-elimination. The information on mechanisms and chemical events during the thermal decomposition processes of epoxy resin agree with the results from previous experiments. The agreement of these results with available experimental observations demonstrates that ReaxFF can provide useful insights into the complicated bulk thermal decomposition of organic materials under extreme conditions at the atomistic level.As a thermosetting composite material, printed circuit boards (PCBs) are composed of epoxy resin, glass fibers and copper foils. Meanwhile, PCBs contain amounts of precious metals, i.e. gold, silver and platinum, which can be recycled and reused. Its recycling and reusing not only bring considerable economic benefits, but also prevent environmental pollution and destruction Until now, the primary disposals of waste PCBs are chemical approaches, i.e. pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy, and physical approaches, i.e. mechanical separation Currently, high-voltage pulse (HVP) technology is approved to be a promising process for waste PCBs treatment. HVP leads to the formation of discharge channels between different materials in PCBs after avalanche ionization of the medium Because of the so rapid elevation of temperature in discharge channels, it is difficult to elucidate the mechanisms and the dominant reaction pathways (RPWs) for the pyrolysis of epoxy resin. Recently, ReaxFF reactive force field The present paper uses ReaxFF MDSs to describe the initial steps of the thermal decomposition of epoxy resin and to investigate the effect of temperature and heating rate on the pyrolysis process and the evolution of the reaction products. Here, ( The ReaxFF program developed by van Duin et al. In order to observe the chemical reactions within a computationally practical simulation time, we chose the elevated temperatures beyond normal experimental conditions, which could change the reaction rates rather than the preferred RPWs The main initial steps of thermal decomposition of epoxy resin observed in ReaxFF-MDSs are displayed in RPWs Furthermore, the radical fragments produced in the initial steps of thermal decomposition attacking the model compound molecules also leads to the decomposition of model compounds by means of chain reactions. Firstly, we investigated the effects of heating rate on the decomposition of epoxy resin and the distribution of dominant products. The equilibrated systems were heated from 300 to 2300 In all cases, model compound molecules decomposed and new fragments formed, but the initiation time varies depending on heating rate. The simulation results show that the model compound molecules start to decompose at ca. 15.7, 6.1 and 4.1 To test the influences of temperature on decomposition of epoxy resin, the equilibrated systems were heated at a rate of 500 As displayed in Because CH  Compared to the formation mechanisms of H For the product CH Using the ReaxFF reactive force field to perform a series of MDSs, we studied the thermal decomposition of epoxy resin under various conditions of temperature and heating rate. We observed that both the temperature and the heating rate strongly affect the decomposition behavior of epoxy resin. Both increase in final temperature and heating rate shorten the initiation time. The initial reaction temperature increases when heating rate is increased at given final temperature, while decreases when final temperature is elevated at given heating rate. The results elucidate that the thermal decomposition of epoxy resin is initiated by ether linkage cleavage. We found CH This research work was supported by