In the shells of the Pelecypods belonging to the Pinnidae family, the calcareous prismatic units of the outer layer are long-standing references for biomineralization studies. To elucidate how the mechanism of prism formation enables both shell elongation and thickness increase, a top-down structural analysis of these classical “simple prisms” has been carried out, taking advantage of shell sampling on actively mineralizing animals. Particular attention was paid to the morphological and structural patterns of the calcareous units sequentially produced at the margins of the growth lamellae. This pre-prismatic part of the shell allows for studying the mineralizing stages not taken into account in prism reconstructions based on samples taken from older areas of the shell. Examination of the microstructural sequence shows that within the actively mineralizing area of the shell, a step-by-step structuring process is continuously running, providing a renewed view of prism formation as it makes obvious the progressive occurrence of their specific patterns. Given the critically endangered status of the species, a better knowledge of the mineralization process associated to shell growth may become handy for future studies aimed at understanding the health status of individuals based on their shell records.The mineral units that built the outer layer of the shell in the Pelecypod family Pinnidae (Leach, 1819) are undoubtedly historical references in the research area dedicated to shell microstructures and biological calcifications. In this family, the shells exhibit a rather uncommon organization: due to the much slower growth of the nacreous internal layer, the calcite outer layer forms the main part of the shell. This is illustrated at best by the large well-known noble pen-shell of the Mediterranean species Although apparently massive when viewed on fractures ( In the first microstructural analyses carried out by However, beyond their remarkably simple morphology, the regular spatial arrangement and crystalline appearance of the mineral phasis, some unusual properties have long suggested that the calcite simple prisms of the Pinnidae may result from a developmental process quite distinct from classical crystallization. The single-crystal behaviour of the calcite in the For instance, after the general acceptance of the cellular theory ( In the early 1980's, new data about the distribution of these organic compounds within the mineralized part of the prisms were obtained at infra-micrometric level by scanning electron microscope (SEM) observations of the calcite prisms of Action of light acidic solutions complemented by fixative mixtures has revealed that the distribution of the intra-prismatic organic component forms a continuous network within the mineral layers, not only between them ( Thirty years later, occurrence of atomic force microscopy (AFM) brought an additional contribution to the knowledge of the infra-micrometric granular structure of the mineral phase within the prisms. While the dissolution process inherent to any etching method prevents obtaining precise information about the relationship between the organic component and the surface of the sub-micrometre-sized grain, this new method allows demonstration of the composite structure of the prism material without any etching. Phase contrast imaging ( Contrasting with the morphological simplicity of the prisms of In this study, a top-down approach to the thin mineralized structures that repeatedly appear at the growing edge of the Living specimens of The samples were collected in the actively mineralizing areas of the shells, each of them comprising two to four of the distal growth lamellae with about 1–3 cm in width. Samples were placed in ethanol/sea water solutions with three concentrations: 30/70 for 6 h, 60/40 for 12 h, then 6/7 days for the last 90/10 mixture. Optical microscopy includes examination in transmission mode (both polarized and non-polarized light) of sections perpendicular or parallel to the surface of the prims. Polarized light microscopy in the reflected (episcopic) mode has been shown of special interest, making crystallinity of prisms visible in polished sections. An Axio Imager D2m (Zeiss) was used with the Archimed software (Microvision). Confocal Z-series stacks of the polished surfaces of the prismatic layer were acquired on a Zeiss LSM 880 point scanning confocal microscope using the Airyscan detector, a 20x Plan-Apochromat, and the 488 nm and 561 nm laser lines. The Zeiss Zen 2.3 software was used to control the microscope, adjust spectral detection and for processing of the Airyscan raw images. Images were also processed using Fiji. Scanning electron microscopy observations were made in secondary (SE) and back-scattered (BSE) observation modes, using different instruments: Philips XL30 SEM, a FEG-FIB-SEM AURIGA 40 Zeiss, a FEI FESEM Quanta F600, and a table top FEI PHENOM Pro X. Polished sections were prepared by using diamond grade suspensions, lightly etched using a weak acidic solution. BSE consists of high-energy electrons reflected or back-scattered out of the specimen. Since atoms with a high atomic number Z have stronger scattering power than light ones, the mineral rich areas appear brighter than zones rich in organic matters. So, such images contain compositional information. Samples were studied using a Nanoscope IIIa multi-mode scanning probe microscope. No coating is required: AFM utilizes an oscillating tip in both height and phase-contrast modes. Resolution of tapping mode is in the few nanometre range. In the phase contrast mode, the image contrast is due to physical interactions between oscillating tip and the studied substrate. Compositional heterogeneity results in difference in interaction, causing phase-lag transcripted into white to black values (an appropriate capability for establishing small scale distribution of organic components within biominerals): a soft material is usually “darker” than a hard material ( At the outer surface of the The early stage of the process is illustrated through close frontal view of the shell ( Between these yellow and green arrow lines, the successive steps of the mineralization sequence producing a growth lamella can be investigated through a reverse examination, from its earliest stages up to formation of the first prisms. Therefore, availability of the mineralized structures produced within this closed compartment enables examination of structures usually not included in microstructural descriptions based on collection specimens of the In the developmental history of a In every composite unit formed by an initial disk and the cementing material, both disk and additional material exhibit identical polarization colours. This shows that in each case the newly secreted calcareous material has adopted the crystallographic orientation of the discoid unit in contact with which it was deposited. That crystallographic orientation of the cementing material was driven by contact with the preexisting disks provides evidence that the calcium carbonate responsible for disk cementation was secreted as an amorphous material (see also below 4.3.2: Prism crystallization). Surprisingly, circular disks can be sometimes observed at the outer surface of the growth lamella, superposed to the polygonal structure ( But in the normal course of shell growth (i.e., without periostracum disruption), these circular disks grown during the transit of the periostracum arrive to the shell margin and contribute to formation of the growing lamella. At the lower part of the growth-scales ( Observed in natural light, this new mineralized area offers a remarkable example of the Voronoi tessellation. This polygonal figure is obtained by joining a series of irregularly distributed points (Delaunay triangulation) and drawing a perpendicular line in the middle of the resulting segments. A classical physical example of such a phenomenon is given by waves from neighbour emitting centres. Occurrence of the new microstructural pattern now visible in the SEM images show that the comparison can be continued when looking at the mineralized structures: a comparable regular arrangement can be found between the centres and the outer boundaries of the underlying mineralized units (  In this present status of shell formation, the morphological patterns of a “simple prism” are now gathered ( More internal areas of the shell show that an additional mechanism becomes active in formation of the prisms: at the difference of In spite of weak irregularities at the individual level, the ridge and groove series are globally parallel to the shell margin (transverse to growth direction of the shell, More surprisingly, the ridge and groove systems seem synchronically produced across adjacent prisms, despite being interrupted by the prism envelopes (yellow bars on Note must be made that with respect to the progressive development of shell microstructure, this stepping process occurs after the formation of the initial prisms based on the Voronoi tessellation, organized around well defined centres ( This series of data provides the first evidence that a coordinated growth mode exists between the prisms of a given shell valve, a pattern clearly linked to the longitudinal extension of the shell. Again, we can find in the Carpenter's work (see By dissolving the polygonal organic framework that maintains the mineral units together (using Na hypochlorite or H On Evidence that the lateral stepping growth of the prisms creates a link between each prism and growth direction of the shell is illustrated in This observation leads to an important conclusion: the oblique substructures viewed from both the external surfaces ( Data provided by the mineralizing area bring substantial changes to the model of the basic layered biomineralization mechanism ensuring elongation of the prism ( a longitudinal stepping growth in the prisms, linked to shell extension ( Comments of the three major ontogenic steps that contribute to formation of the Examination of the With respect to size, shape and position, these circular units are similar to the structures previously described on the periostracum of the In Such similarities and differences in microstructural evolution of prisms between two Pteriomorphid prisms have significant implications regarding interpretation of the prismatic microstructures. Formerly, contribution of the periostracum to mineralization process was described by Contrasting with this interpretation, we have shown that the calcite disks remain independent up to the backward inflexion of the periostracum ( From an overall viewpoint, the periostracal calcification is a well-established property in some Pelecypod families. For instance, needles with various shapes have been described by Species-specific morphology is an intriguing property of Ca-carbonate biominerals because, associated to the single-crystal behaviour of every microstructural unit, this has long suggested existence of a biological control over calcium carbonate crystallization. This hypothesis is reinforced by the presence of a complex organic component associated to biominerals with analytical evidences of taxonomy-linked compositions ( From the study of the calcitic prismatic layers of several species, Remarks must be made that these distinct interpretations are based only on prisms examined from mature parts of the shell: none of them mention the sequential growth mode of the prisms. As a result, they do not take into account the central nodules produced when outer-mantle mineralization begins (cf. 3.2), every prism comprising a central nodule whose structuring influence is assessed by the Voronoi tessellation. Going back to the Carpenter's observations (reported in In the usual simple-prism model, length of the prisms (= thickness of the shell) increases by repeated synchronic deposition of polygonal calcite layers onto prism inner surfaces ( The three-dimensional scheme of This leads to conclude that every individual prism is a three-dimensionally oriented structure, strongly contrasting with common views based on non-biologically driven process. This synchronic deposition of mineral material as schematized in Explanation can be found in To conciliate the common deposition of the calcareous growth units of the shell on its growing edge ( Worth to remind that in any step of prism formation, “crystallization” is by no mean an ion-by-ion crystallization process but a still unexplained mechanism leading to formation of the nanogranular organo-mineral composite: see Figures Examination of the series of structural stages involved in formation of the But taking into account the complex microstructural sequence discovered between the early and final developmental stages of the As a result, the concept of  The outer layer of the First step in the prismatic microstructural sequence consists in establishing the polygonal organic framework characterized by Voronoi tessellation around punctual organic nodules. Early specific calcification of the prisms with radiating patterns is followed by a short series of synchronically produced calcified layers, with distinct crystallographic orientation for every prism. In the following step of the prism developmental process, a distinct mode of calcification is observed. A series of linear depositions occurs synchronically between all the adjacent prisms of the growing area. As crystallographic orientation of this newly deposited material is controlled by the underlying prisms, the previously created prismatic framework is extended. But observation of the resulting substructures in the prisms reveals their individual link to growth direction of the shell. Concomitant formation of the transversal and longitudinal substructures simultaneously ensures the increase of the prism length and shell elongation. As Jean-Pierre Cuif: Conceived and designed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. Oulfa Belhadj, Sergio Trigos-Santos, Patricia Prado: Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. Stephan Borensztajn, Marc Gèze: Performed the experiments. Yannicke Dauphin: Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the paper. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. Authors are grateful to Pr. N. Vicente (Université Paul Cézanne and Institut Océanographique Paul Ricard, Les Embiez, France) who made this investigation possible by allowing sampling on actively mineralizing specimens; digital microscope images were acquired by Dr D. De Franceschi (CR2P, Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris), using a Hirox RH2000 (e-RECOLNAT-ANR-11-INBS-0004 and DIM Ile de France Heritage and ancient materials programs).