The kinetics of the cementation of lead from acidic solutions onto rotating iron discs have been studied over a large range of initial lead ion concentrations, disc rotation speeds and temperatures. The cementation is shown to be a first-order reaction which is diffusion-controlled. The activation energy was found to be 9.6 kJ mol−1. The rate of the reaction is affected by the increase in the electrode surface area with increasing cementation time and initial lead ion concentrations. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was used to estimate the variation of the surface area during cementation.Cementation is the terminology of those spontaneous electrochemical reactions in which a metal ion in the solution is reduced to the metal with the concurrent oxidation of a less noble metal placed in the same solution. This type of reaction is heterogeneous in nature. This technology is usually applied to hydrometallurgy and the treatment of heavy metal pollution problems. Today, a prime concern of the environmental engineer is the removal of small concentrations of toxic substances from wastewater. Lead is one of these toxic substances. Lead is widely used as an industrial raw material for storage battery manufacture, photographic material, matches manufacturing, … Usually, lead is recovered by using chemical precipitation, ion exchange, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis; all of these methods have drawbacks, however. Chemical precipitation requires extremely long settling times. The other methods (ion exchange, reverse osmosis and electrodialysis) require elaborate and expensive equipment and have high operating costs ( The research reported herein examines an alternative procedure for removing lead from wastewater by cementation on a rotating iron disc. The cementation treatment process has several advantages. These include simple control requirement, low energy consumption and recovery of valuable or toxic metals. The main disadvantage is excess less noble metal consumption. In simple terms, the reaction can be represented by The log of the equilibrium constant for the reaction of cementation [ Cementation kinetic laws are currently shown to be first-order versus noble metal ion concentration ( Then for a batch reactor: In many cases ( In fact, when the deposit is smooth (cementation of mercury, To confirm these results, more detailed and systematic studies of the cementation kinetics are conducted with extending the investigation of deposit-structural phenomena using the scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In a recent work ( As a model system a rotating iron electrode was used which is widely adopted in different studies on the kinetics of cementation reactions. In the first part of this paper are presented the kinetic laws observed for a range of disc rotation speeds, of lead ion initial concentrations and temperature. Then, the variation of the surface area during cementation was estimated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Because a cementation reaction is a redox reaction in which the more noble metal (Pb The cementation of Pb A saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE) was used with a Luggin capillary filled with the same solution as the cell. The time-dependence of Pb During cementation, impedance measurements were performed using a frequency response analyser (type Tacussel, Imp/Z.Computer, ZCP130 T) controlled by a microcomputer (Hewlett Packard 250). A three-electrode set up was used for maintaining galvanostatically the direct current to zero. The counter electrode was a platinum plate of 6 cm Cyclic voltammograms were measured using a potentiostat/galvanostat (Tacussel/Radiometer PGP 201) controlled by a microcomputer (Hewlett Packard Vectra 250) through an electrochemical interface (Voltamaster 1). For these experiments, lead deposition was performed using a lead substrate (purity 99.998%) and the electrode potential was swept from the rest potential at a scan rate of 1 mV/s. The lead-bearing solution was prepared using reagent-grade lead nitrate and its pH value (pH=2) was controlled by adding sulphuric acid for lower lead-ion concentrations and hydrochloric acid for higher lead-ion concentrations, to prevent sulphate precipitation. The type of anion does not affect cementation kinetics ( One of the most commonly used methods for establishing whether the rate of a heterogeneous reaction is mass transfer (diffusion) limited is to observe the reaction rate as the disc rotation speed is changed. Firstly, it is apparent that the kinetics of the cementation of Pb In The effect of initial lead concentration was studied at 10, 30, 50 and 70 mg dm  The values of the cementation rate Such results agree with an electrode surface area which increases with increasing In the same way, it is reported in the literature that the surface deposit was found to both enhance and diminish the rate constant, depending on the nature of the deposit (  Similar plots were obtained during cementation with different Pb After 1 h of cementation, the values of It is clear that the ratio The corrosion potential ( It can be seen that the potential rises rapidly in the first 5–10 min and then remains stable on a plate. The final potential value is a function of the used parameters ( Corrosion potential ( When the cathodic half reaction (Pb From equalities We can explain this increasing of the corrosion potential during the cementation by the increasing of the ratio The two half-cell reactions of cementation (the reduction of lead ions and the oxidation of iron) were studied separately in the same medium of the cementation in order to better understand the whole cementation phenomenon. The cathodic polarization curves for the reduction of 50 mg dm Similar curves are obtained for the 1000 rpm disc rotation speed at various initial lead ion concentrations. The current increases until the clearly recognizable The anodic oxidation of the iron (in the same solution used in the cementation reaction) was studied to: (i) obtain results which would be relevant to the cementation reaction, especially to show the presence or the absence of passivation which can stop partially or completely the dissolution of the iron, thus blocking the cementation process; and (ii) have an idea on the kinetics of its oxidation. Typical polarization curves are shown in As the imposed potential is made more positive than the rest potential, the metal begins to dissolve, without passivation, and after a certain point, the potential varies linearly with the logarithm of the current density. The potential range explored in these traces is located in the domain of reached potential in the cementation reaction. These logarithmic plots obtained in these conditions show clearly that the kinetics of the oxidation of iron are under activation control. The kinetics of the lead cementation from acidic solutions onto rotating iron disc were determined. The results obtained for the effects of disc rotation speed and temperature on the cementation rate indicate that the mass transport of lead ions is the rate-controlling step in the reaction kinetics. The rate of the cementation reaction is proportional to lead ion concentration. The variations of the electrode surface area have been estimated from the measurements of the electrode capacitance during the cementation process.