Although it is well-known that retrograde transport of urine fills the caeca of birds with fluid and small particles, the function of avian caeca is still not fully understood. We measured mean retention times (MRT) of solute (cobalt-EDTA, Co), small particle (<2mm, chromium-mordanted fibre, Cr) and large particle (8mm, cerium-marked fibre, Ce) markers in geese (Anser anser) and turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo) fed alfalfa pellets ad libitum. Intake did not differ between species. Turkeys had longer MRT for all markers (Co: 10.4 vs. 3.2h; Cr 23.3 vs. 2.9h; Ce 9.5 vs. 2.1h), achieved a higher fibre digestibility, and had a higher calculated dry matter gut fill. Thus, geese and turkeys correspond to the typical dichotomy of good fliers vs. poor fliers/flightless species in avian herbivores. Because uric acid is fermented much faster by microbes than fibre, the ultimate cause of short-MRT digesta retention in avian caeca as in geese is possibly rather uric acid than fibre fermentation. The numerical differences between marker MRT in geese correspond to a colonic separation mechanism that delays the excretion of fluids more than small and again more than large particles. In contrast to geese, turkeys excreted solid and liquid (caecal) faeces. Liquid faeces contained less fibre and more crude protein than solid faeces and accounted for the excretion of 7, 25 and 34% of Ce, Co and Cr markers. Marker excretion patterns and MRT for liquid faeces (Co 15 vs. Cr 50h) suggest that small particles did not simply move in parallel to fluids, but were retained selectively by being trapped in colonic digesta upon expulsion from caeca, with subsequent repeated retrograde transport into caeca with the next batch of urine. Given the absence of coprophagy in birds (in contrast to small mammalian herbivores), such a delay of small (microbial) particle escape from the caeca appears reasonable.The digestion of plant material typically requires a voluminous gut ( For many herbivorous, granivorous and omnivorous birds, retrograde transport of urine (and hence, fluids as well as solute markers) in the colon and into the caeca has been described ( Many studies on the retention of digesta in the avian digestive tract rely on a slaughter technique (e.g. We tested these predictions in two domestic species that are representatives of the two main avian families in which a colonic separation mechanism has been described ( The study was performed in November 2013 in central Switzerland, with approval of the Swiss Cantonal Animal Care and Use Committee Zurich and was carried out under the animal experiment licence no. 142/2011. Ambient temperatures ranged between a maximum of 8 The animals were kept individually for the last 3 Food intake was determined by weighing the offered amount of pelleted food and collecting the leftovers at the next feeding. This took place, at the latest, after 24 We used similar markers as in previous studies with ratites ( Prior to marker feeding, excreta samples were taken for assessing the background levels of Co, Cr and Ce. After marker feeding on day 1 of the experimental period, excreta were sampled at 4 Marker analysis was performed in a similar way as previously described ( Marker excretion patterns were visualized with plots depicting excreta marker concentrations over time ( The marker was assumed to have been excreted completely once the excreta marker concentrations were similar to the background-levels determined in pre-dose excreta samples. For turkeys, MRT were calculated in this manner for hard and caecal excreta either separately or after combining both excreta types, dividing the total amount of marker excreted in a time interval (as calculated by the analyzed marker concentration and the measured excreta amount) by the total of excreta matter in that interval. Additionally, the proportions of each marker excreted via solid and liquid excreta were calculated in this way and plotted against time, to contrast the excretion pattern based on concentrations with the actually excreted amounts. Pooled excreta samples were analyzed for DM, organic matter (OM), NDF, ADL, total ash and crude protein content. The apparent digestibility (aD) for DM, OM and NDF was calculated as the percentage of the respective intake not excreted via excreta ( The indigestible DM gut content (indDMC, kg) and the total DM gut content (DMC, kg) were estimated according to Intraspecific comparisons (such as between different markers) within geese or turkeys were evaluated using repeated-measurements ANOVA with Sidak post hoc tests. Comparisons between species were made with independent sample Although the pelleted food had been produced in one batch, differences between the individual bags led to slight differences in the nutrient composition of the diet fed to geese and turkeys ( The peak of marker excretion was within the first 1 to 4 In geese, solutes were retained longer than small particles, which in turn were retained longer than large particles ( In turkeys, small particles had numerically much higher MRT than solutes and large particles, but the differences were not significant for complete excreta ( The large particle marker was mainly excreted via solid excreta, whereas the solute and especially the small particle marker were excreted also via liquid excreta ( Dry matter and OM digestibility was similar in both species ( The present study confirms the general magnitude of intake, digesta retention times and digestibility previously measured in geese and turkeys. Our goose data on intake, retention time and apparent digestibility of dry matter when fed pelleted lucerne ( Several limitations of the present study must be considered. Given the well-known responsiveness of the avian gastrointestinal tract to changes in diet ( Even though our interpretation of the movement of the small particle fraction focuses on the caeca, in the absence of control via slaughter we cannot exclude the theoretical possibility that selective retention of these small particles occurred in the crop or the gizzard, even though relevant effects on the MRT measurements appear unlikely in our study. Especially with respect to the gizzard, it would appear logical if larger particles were retained in there for a longer time period (until they are reduced in size) as demonstrated in chicken (see below), yet the results of our experiments did not yield indication for that. In the discussion of our results, species-specific characteristics of birds most likely prevent generalized conclusions, which is an important realization in itself. For example, in pigeons ( The different excretion patterns of large particles, small particles and solutes in the geese of our study ( In turkeys, the comparison of liquid and solid excreta, in conjunction with the distinct excretion pattern of the small particle marker, leads to a new hypothesis about the processes regulating caecal emptying and re-filling. As expected, the solute marker was retained longer, probably in the caeca, with a decreasing excretion pattern indicative of a dilution process as the liquid was expelled during caecal contractions and new fluid (from urine) re-filled the caeca ( For particles, we assume that similar to observations in chicken ( From after entering the caeca on, one would expect fluids - represented by the solute marker - and small particles to move in parallel. However, the small particle marker did not show the ‘diluting’ decline over time as the solid marker ( In our view, there are two hypothetical mechanistic explanations for these observations. First, a filtering mechanism could selectively limit the escape of particles from the caeca; this would mean that there is an interplay of morphological valve-like structures and contraction patterns that selectively retains small particles directly at this location. No corresponding observations have been published so far to our knowledge. Nevertheless an intermittent complete emptying would appear necessary to prevent a clogging of the caeca. This hypothesis would appear more likely if one could assume that, prior to caecal emptying, the colon would be also emptied (as suggested by The other possible explanation, requiring the presence of colonic digesta during caecal emptying, is that the filtering of small particles occurs in this digesta matrix, similar to the filter-bed effect that retains small particles in the forestomach of ruminants ( The avian digestive tract has shown, in a variety of digesta passage studies in species with a fundamentally similar digestive anatomy ( We thank Geflügel Gourmet AG for access to geese and turkeys, Heidrun Barleben and Carmen Kunz, Muna Merghani and Elisabeth Wenk for sample analysis, Jeanne Peter Zocher for the drawing of the anatomical pictures, and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. This study was part of project