A mathematical model was developed to study the effect of electromagnetic forces on non-metallic inclusions removal from magnesium melts passing through a channel. The electromagnetic force exerted on the inclusion induced by a DC current field was calculated. In order to compute the velocity field within the channel, the Navier–Stokes equations were solved numerically. The trajectories of the inclusions were calculated using the equations of motion for inclusions. Parametric studies were carried out to evaluate the effect of various parameters on the inclusions removal efficiency.Magnesium, the lightest engineering metal, has received much attention in recent years as a structural material for the aerospace, automotive and electronic industries because of its high specific strength as well as its good castability and machinability Recently electromagnetic separation technique has been considered as a new method to produce metals free from inclusions In the present study, a three dimensional mathematical model was developed to simulate the flow of liquid magnesium in a rectangular channel, in the presence of an electromagnetic force field caused by the passage of a DC current through the channel. The rectangular vertical channel adopted in this study is shown schematically in  In the model, the following assumptions were made: The flow is laminar and developing steady state. The thermo-physical properties of liquid magnesium are constant. The electrical density, The electromagnetic field is not affected by the fluid flow. Based on the above assumptions, the following governing equations were derived from the conservation of mass and momentum for three dimensional steady state Newtonian incompressible flows. The uniform profile for The governing equations (Eqs. Computation of the flow field in the channel allows one to investigate the factors affecting the location of inclusion particles. The motion of a particle in the channel can be predicted on the basis of Newton's second law of motion. There, the forces acting on the particle include drag in steady translation, added mass, gravity, buoyancy and electromagnetic forces:   The inclusion removal efficiency is influenced by various parameters. The removal efficiency was calculated based on the fraction of cross sectional area where entering inclusions reach the sidewalls. For this purpose, the boundary of the area is identified by the numerical solution of Eqs. The effect of current density on the removal efficiency of the inclusion was studied for the magnesium oxide particle with different sizes at a constant inlet velocity ( Another important parameter affecting inclusion removal efficiency is channel size, which is given in The effect of velocity of liquid magnesium on inclusion removal efficiency is given in A mathematical model has been developed to simulate the steady state fluid flow of liquid magnesium in a vertical rectangular channel. The electromagnetic force acting on inclusion particles in magnesium melts was calculated based on a DC current passing through the channel and the induced magnetic field. On the basis of the flow field and electromagnetic force fields, the trajectory of particles was also obtained by numerically solving the equation of motion, taking into account drag, added mass, buoyancy, gravity and electromagnetic forces. The results show that by increasing the current density the melt feels larger electromagnetic force and the particles are pushed towards the channel sidewalls more effectively. It is confirmed that the removal efficiency of inclusions depends effectively on current density, melt inlet velocity and channel size. The removal efficiency increases as current density increases and channel size decreases. The removal efficiency also depends on the inclusion particle size. The removal efficiency for small particles is lower than large particles. It can be increased by decreasing the flow rate of liquid magnesium and the size of the channel or by increasing the length of the channel.