The preliminary results of the application of sulfuric acid baking followed by water leaching for the treatment of arsenopyrite (FeAsS), tennantite (Cu12As4S13), and tetrahedrite (Cu12Sb4S13) have been reported. Baking of pulverized minerals (P100
                     =106μm) at 200°C with a sulfuric acid/mineral powder ratio of 5/3 (g/g) in a muffle furnace for 7h resulted in the transformation of the mentioned minerals to water soluble compounds. Arsenopyrite transformed into FeSO4 and As2O3, both of which are highly soluble in water. Tennantite transformed into CuSO4 and As2O3 whereas tetrahedrite transformed into CuSO4 and Sb2O3. While CuSO4 and As2O3 completely dissolved in water, Sb2O3 did not dissolve, reporting to the leach residue. More than 63% of iron and arsenic from arsenopyrite, and more than 86% of copper from tennantite and tetrahedrite were extracted into water.Arsenic is a notorious toxic element which has several undesirable environmental and health effects. This has caused increased public attention regarding the minimization and control of arsenic released from different industries, one of the most important being the mining industry. In particular, the copper, cobalt/nickel, and gold industries have been targets to increased pressure from environmental agencies to minimize the release of arsenic and other toxic elements. Ironically, the amount of arsenic in copper and gold concentrates has been steadily increasing and is anticipated to increase significantly in the future. This fact combined with the depletion of high-grade resources of these metals and the emergence of lower grade and more complex deposits has compelled the mining industry to intensify research to find alternative treatment options for high-arsenic concentrates. The results of current research at the University of Utah indicated that the acid bake–leach process is a promising alternative for the treatment of enargite concentrates ( Arsenopyrite (Fe Tennantite (Cu Tetrahedrite (Cu The purpose of this paper is to report the preliminary results of sulfuric acid baking and water leaching of arsenopyrite, tennantite and tetrahedrite minerals. Possible sulfuric acid baking reactions for these minerals will be discussed. Arsenopyrite (unknown source), tennantite (Gold Hill, Utah, USA) and tetrahedrite (unknown source) were obtained from the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University of Utah. Each mineral specimen was crushed and ground manually using a ceramic pestle and mortar, to avoid iron contamination from ball milling. The pulverized minerals were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis with a Rigaku D-Max 2000 model instrument. According to the results ( A − The baking experiments were performed in a muffle furnace (Barnstead Thermolyne 1300 model) with the temperature being controlled within ± A porcelain boat (length The ground baked mineral samples were subjected to water leaching experiments in which ~ The results of baking and leaching each mineral specimen will be discussed separately as follows. At the end of baking and cooling, the arsenopyrite underwent a 15.46% weight loss. 72.87% of the baked arsenopyrite was leached in water, which resulted in a solution pH of 1.87 and a solution oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) of 609 The water leaching of the baked arsenopyrite resulted in 64.64% Fe and 63.06% As extractions. This solution is very suitable for ferric arsenate precipitation and arsenic fixation after an oxidation step to produce Fe (III) and As (V) in solution. Considering SO Tennantite experienced a 12.73% weight loss after baking and cooling. 74.18% of the baked tennantite was leached in water, which resulted in a solution pH of 1.81 and a solution ORP of 618 The water leaching of the baked tennantite resulted in 87.13% Fe, 66.94% As, 86.41% Cu, and 2.06% Sb extractions. In fact, this baking procedure can be considered as a selective copper and arsenic extraction route as the bulk of antimony reports into the leach residue. Considering SO Tetrahedrite lost 14.18% of its weight after baking and cooling. 70.06% of the baked tetrahedrite was leached in water, which resulted in a solution pH of 1.85 and a solution ORP of 621 The water leaching of the baked tetrahedrite resulted in 89.31% Fe, 15.40% As, 88.95% Cu, and 1.96% Sb extractions. Copper extraction is highly selective over antimony and arsenic. Considering SO The fact that antimony oxide did not dissolve under the water leaching conditions (pH of 1.85 and a solution ORP of 621 As a result of this preliminary study, it was established that arsenopyrite, tennantite and tetrahedrite respond well to sulfuric acid baking and water leaching treatment. The results are compared in It is evident from Arsenopyrite transformed into ferrous sulfate monohydrate and arsenolite, both of which completely dissolved in water. Tennantite transformed into copper sulfate and arsenolite, while tetrahedrite underwent a transformation into copper sulfate and antimony trioxide. The pH and ORP of the leach solutions were consistently pH Overall, the preliminary results of sulfuric acid baking and water leaching of arsenopyrite, tennantite and tetrahedrite indicate that this process is worthy of further study for these arsenic and antimony-bearing minerals. More importantly, the behavior of gold in the subsequent leaching process is of much interest. It is expected that a thiocyanate leaching procedure would be better suited as the baking and leaching process operates under acidic conditions. Further research is in progress at the University of Utah to optimize the acid bake–leach process for the treatment of the aforementioned minerals. The authors would like to thank the