Tomato and its products are valuable sources of polyphenols, including naringenin chalcone, rutin, quercetin, chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, naringenin, kaempferol-3-rutinoside, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, and kaempferol, which have been reported to have some positive health effects such as reducing the risk of chronic diseases, including cancer, especially prostate cancer, and cardiovascular diseases. These compounds have shown antioxidant properties by quenching reactive oxygen and nitrogen species that play key roles in the formation of chronic diseases. However, the health effects of tomato have been mainly associated with carotenoids and there are a limited number of studies on tomato polyphenols. So, further research unraveling the mechanism of tomato polyphenols on their health-associated effects is necessary. This chapter critically reviews both in vivo and in vitro studies on the effect of tomato polyphenols on chronic diseases.angiotensin converting enzyme adenosine diphosphate American Institute of Nutrition activator protein 1 ascorbate peroxidase cyclic adenosine monophosphate catalase cyclooxygenase 2 C-reactive protein dehydroascorbate reductase European Food Safety Authority epidermal growth factor receptor glutathione reductase human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 human umbilical vein endothelial cells intercellular adhesion molecule 1 insulin like growth factor-1 IkB kinase interleukin International Life Science Institute interferon-γ low density lipoprotein lipoxygenase monocyte chemotactic protein 1 monodehydroascorbate reductase minimal erythema dose matrix metalloproteinase nuclear factor kappa-beta nitric oxide platelet factor 4 peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha reactive oxygen species superoxide dismutase tumor necrosis factor alpha thrombin receptor activator for peptide 6 ultraviolet radiation vascular cell adhesion molecule vascular endothelial growth factor World Health Organization Epidemiological studies have shown that diets rich in fruits and vegetables provide unmatched health benefits. Tomato in particular is one of the most important vegetables worldwide, and its products, including sauce, juice, puree, paste, and diced, canned or dried tomatoes, have been shown to reduce the risk of various chronic diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, several types of cancer, and inflammation. These health-promoting effects of tomato and its processed products are associated with the presence of phytochemicals In this chapter, we have summarized and discussed the potential role of tomato polyphenolics on the prevention of chronic diseases including cardiovascular diseases, several types of cancer, and diabetes. In addition, health-promoting features of tomato polyphenolics, i.e., antioxidant, antiangiogenic, antiinflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral effects, are highlighted. Currently, cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the world regardless of race, ethnicity, or gender A number of epidemiological studies, clinical trials, and animal experiments have demonstrated that polyphenols contribute to the prevention of various degenerative diseases, including cardiovascular diseases. The tomato polyphenols could also contribute to cardiovascular health as their beneficial effects have been reported in several in vivo and in vitro studies. Regarding in vivo studies, it has been shown that consumption of 200 Industrial processing of tomato generates a considerable amount of waste, known as tomato pomace. In a recent study Inhibition of antiangiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) has been considered to be one of the effective therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. In the study of Biswas et al. As indicated previously, in a variety of studies it was demonstrated that water-soluble components of tomatoes are capable of inhibiting platelet aggregation Cancer, no doubt, is one of the major public health problems worldwide. The most common cancers to be diagnosed in men are lung, prostate, and colorectum, whereas lung, breast, and colorectum in women are most common. Moreover, in 2018, 1,735,350 new cancer cases and 609,640 cancer deaths are estimated to occur in the United States Cell growth effects of different tomato waste extracts were evaluated in HeLa (cervix epitheloid carcinoma), MCF7 (breast adenocarcinoma), and MRC-5 (fetal lung) cell lines. In all cell lines, antiproliferative effects were observed at higher concentrations (≥ Although tomatoes and tomato products contain many phytochemicals, the research has mainly focused on lycopene. However, some studies have indicated an increased protective effect when consuming whole tomatoes compared to lycopene alone. Guil-Guerrero et al. Human and animal studies have highlighted the positive effect of consuming tomato and its products on cancer. In the in vivo study of Shirzad et al. Studies related to processing of tomato showed positive effects on the content of phenolic compounds. The increase in the phenolic compounds of the heat-processed tomatoes was explained by the increased amount of bound phytochemicals released from the matrix with thermal processing Overall, both in vivo and in vitro studies highlighted that whole foods and combinations of phytochemicals are more effective in cancer treatments compared to individual polyphenols. Diabetes mellitus is a major endocrine disorder, affecting approximately 5% of the world's population. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that almost 3 million deaths occur annually as a result of diabetes and that there will be 366 million cases of diabetes by the year 2030. Diabetes is characterized by abnormalities in carbohydrate, lipid, and lipoprotein metabolisms, which not only lead to hyperglycemia but also cause many complications such as hyperlipidemia, hyperinsulinemia, hypertension, and atherosclerosis Tomatoes are rich sources of polyphenols, which are reported to exert several biological activities, one of which is antidiabetic activity. The role of tomato polyphenols in prevention of diabetes is mainly studied on a compound basis. For instance, it has been shown that rutin (50 Few studies have investigated the antidiabetic actions of tomato phenolics in processed products. In a recent study Tomatoes contain abundant health-promoting components such as lycopene, provitamin A, ascorbic acid, vitamin E, folate, and flavonoids and health effects are mainly associated with the presence of antioxidants, especially carotenoids, flavonoids, lycopene, and β-carotene, which makes tomato an effective antioxidative food The antioxidants of tomato fruits are commonly classified as hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidants. Hydrophilic antioxidants contain soluble phenolic compounds and vitamin C, which is the most effective antioxidant in plants Phenolic compounds are secondary metabolites known for their antioxidant activity Lodovici et al. Plants can rearrange their antioxidant defense system in order to rapidly neutralize and scavenge ROS, with enzymatic as well as nonenzymatic antioxidants Angiogenesis is the process in which new capillary blood vessels are formed, also called neovascularization; it rarely occurs under normal physiological conditions, except for embryogenesis, corpus luteum formation, and wound healing. Angiogenesis is important for the progressive growth of solid tumors and also permits the shedding of metastatic tumors from the primary site Phenolic acids have a protection against DNA oxidation and antitumor activity against colon carcinogenesis Quercetin's ability to inhibit tumor growth was also studied in vivo Chronic low-grade systematic inflammation seemed to be a central mechanism underlying pathophysiology of metabolic syndrome Phenolic compounds are considered to possess antiinflammatory properties and therefore have been proposed as an alternative natural approach to prevent or treat chronic inflammatory diseases Burton-Freeman et al. Some authors have reported the implication of posttranscriptional regulation of IL-8 and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1) expression by quercetin in airway epithelial cells Tomato juice intake partially returned rat liver to the metabolic pattern of a normal diet from a high-fat diet In nature there are several types of antimicrobial compounds that play an important role in the natural defense of all kinds of living organisms. The antiviral Rauha et al. Jogaiah et al. Juárez et al. Digestion is the key step for delivering nutrients and bioactive substances to the body. The way different food components interact with each other and with digestive enzymes can modify the digestion process and affect human health. Figueiredo-Gonzales et al. Rutin, quercetin, glycosides of quercetin, and resveratrol have been shown to exert intestinal antiinflammatory activity Tomatoes are rich sources of diverse bioactive compounds including lycopene,